
      
         
            
            
            A Defence of the Apologie of
the Churche of Englande,
Conteininge an Anſweare to a certaine
Booke lately ſet foorthe by M.
Hardinge, and Entituled,
A Confutation of &c.
            
            By Iohn Iewel Biſhop
of Sariſburie.
            3. ESDRAE. 4.
            
               Magna eſt Veritas & praeualet.
               Greate is the Truthe, and preuaileth.
            
            
               ET INVENTA EST PERIIT
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Jmprinted at London in Fleeteſtreate,
at the ſigne of the Elephante,
by Henry VVykes.
            Anno 1567. 27. Octobris.
            Cum Gratia & Priuilegio Regiae
Maieſtatis.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOSTE VERTVOVS,
and Noble Princeſſe, Queene Elizabeth, by
the Grace of God, Queene of Englande,
France, and Irelande, Defender
of the Faithe, &c.
            
               IT had benne greatly to be wiſhed,
moſte Gracious Soueraine Lady, that, as
God of his mercie hath geeuen vs, euer ſithence
the firſt time of your Maieſties moſte
happy gouernmente, ſutche ſucceſſe in al ciuile
affaires, ſutche concorde, and quietneſſe
in al Eſtates, as our Fathers ſeldome haue
ſeene before: ſo our hartes with like felicitie
mighte thorowly haue conſented in the profeſsion
of one vndoubted Truthe, and al our
willes, whiche now are ſo violently rente a ſunder, and ſo farre diſtracted,
mighte fully haue ioined togeather in the VVil of God: that al quarrelles,
and contentions ſet aparte, wee might with one mouthe, and one minde glorifie
God, the Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte. How be it, it appeareth by the
continual ſtorie, and whole diſcourſe of the Holy Scriptures, that Almighty
God, of his deepe Iudgements, and ſecrete Prouidence, ſuffreth ſome menne
oftetimes to delite in darkeneſſe, to withſtande the Goſpel, to ſeeke occaſions,
and wilfully to ſette them ſelues againſte the knowledge, and Truthe of
God. I write not this, Moſte Gracious Lady, to thintente to make them
odious in your Maieſties ſighte, that this daie are the procurers of al theſe
troubles. God is hable euen of the harde vnſenſible ſtones to raiſe vp children
vnto Abraham, and to make them the veſſels of his Mercie. Neuertheleſſe,
as S. Paule teacheth vs, ſutche menne there haue benne in times
paſte,1. Timoth. 4. that haue had their Conſciences burnte with hote irons, ſpeakinge and
maineteininge Lies in Hypocriſie:Roman. 1. that haue geeuen them ſelues ouer into
reprobate, and wilful mindes, and haue deſpiſed the VViſedome of God
within them ſelues. And, notwithſtandinge ſutche battailes, and diſſenſions,
ſpecially in the Churche of God, whiche is called the Houſe of Vnitie,
be offenſiue, and greeuous vnto the Godly, and therefore woorke greate hinderance
vnto the dewe paſſage of the Goſpel of Chriſte, yet in the ende the
trouble hereof in Goddes Electe is recompenſed abundantely with greate
aduantage. For Goddes Truthe is mighty, and ſhal preuaile: Dagon ſhal

falle downe headlonge before the Arke: the Darkeneſſe ſhal flee before
the Lighte: and the more fiercely mannes wiſedome ſhal withſtande, the
more glorious ſhal God be in his Victorie.
            But, ſhortely to diſcourſe vnto your Maieſtie the particulare occaſions
hereof from the beginninge, after it had pleaſed Almighty God, at the
firſte entire of your Maieſties Reigne, by a moſte happy exchange, and by
the meanes of your Maieſties moſte Godly trauailes, to reſtoare vnto vs
the Lighte, and comforte of his Goſpel, there was written, and publiſhed
by vs a Litle Booke in the Latine tongue, entitled, An Apologie of the
Churche of Englande, conteininge the whole Subſtance of the Catholique
Faithe, no we profeſſed, and freely preached throughoute al your Maieſties
Dominions: that thereby al foreine Nations might vnderſtande the
conſiderations, and cauſes of your Maieſties dooinges in that behalfe. Thus
in olde times did Quadratus, Melito, Iuſtinus Martyr, Tertullian, and
other Godly, and Learned Fathers, vpon like occaſions, as wel to make
knowen the Truthe of God, and to open the groundes of their Profeſsion,
as alſo to put the Infidels to ſilence, and to ſtoppe the mouthes of the wicked.
            This Apologie, beinge thus written firſte in Latine, and afterwarde,
vpon the comfortable reporte of your Maieſties moſte Godly enterpriſes,
tranſlated into ſundrie other tongues, and ſo made common to the moſte
parte of al Europe, as it hath benne wel allowed of, and liked of the Learned,
and Godly, as it is plaine by their open teſtimonies, touchinge the
ſame, ſo hath it not hitherto, for ought, that maie appeare, benne anywhere
openly reproued, either in Latine, or otherwiſe, either by any one mannes
Priuate writinge, or by the Publique Authoritie of any Nation.
            Onely one M. Hardinge, not longe ſithence your Maieſties ſubiecte,
nowe miſlikinge the preſente ſtate, and reſiante in Louaine, hath of late
taken vpon him, againſte the ſaide Apologie, with the whole Doctrine,
and al the partes of the ſame, to publiſhe an open Confutation, and to offer
the ſame vnto your Maieſtie: wherin he ſheweth him ſelfe ſo vehemente,
and ſo ſharpe, and buſie in findinge faultes, that he doubteth not to
ſeeke quarrelles againſte vs, euen in that wee maineteine the Baptiſme of
Chriſtian Infantes, the proceeding, and Godhedde of the Holy Ghoſte, the
Faithe of the Holy, and Glorious Trinitie, and the General, and Catholique
Profeſsion of the common Creede. Thus, for that he hath once ſeuered
him ſelfe from vs, he beareth nowe the worlde in hande, wee can beleeue
nothinge without an erroure.
            The maigne grounde of his whole plea is this, That the Biſhop of

Rome, what ſo euer it ſhal like him to Determine in Iudgemente,Confu fol. 334. a. can neuer
erre: that he is alwaies vndoubtedly poſſeſſed of Goddes. Holy Sprite:Conful. fol. 285. b. that
at his onely hande wee muſte learne to knowe the VVil of God:Confuta. 324. b. that in his
onely Holineſſe ſtandeth the Vnitie,Confut. 204. b. and ſafetie of the Churche: that who
ſo euer is diuided from him,Confut. 306. b. muſte by iudged an Heretique: and, that without
the obedience of him, there is no hope of Saluation. And yet, as though
it were not ſufficiente for him, ſo vainely to ſoothe a man in open Erroures,
he telleth vs alſo ſadly, and in good earneſt, that the ſame Biſhop is not onely
a Biſhop, but alſo a Kinge: that vnto him belongeth the Authoritie,Confut. fol 280. a. and
righte of bothe Swerdes,Et 305. b. as wel Temporal, as Spiritual: that al Kinges, and
Emperours receiue their whole power at his hande,Confu. fol. 247. b and ought to ſweare
obedience,Confu. fol. 248. b. and Fealtie vnto him. For theſe be his woordes, euen in this
Booke ſo boldely dedicate vnto your Maieſtie:Confu. fol. 178. b. 
               It is a greate eie ſoare,
ſaithe M. Hardinge, to the Miniſters of Antichriſte, to ſee the Vicare
of Chriſte aboue Lordes, and Kinges of this vvorlde, and to
ſee Princes, and Emperours promiſe, and ſvveare obedience vnto
him. And whereas Pope Zacharie by the conſente,Confut at. Folio 178. b. or conſpiracie of the
Nobles of France, depoſed Chilperichus, the true, natural, and liege
Prince of that Realme, and placed Pipinus in his roume, Loe, ſaithe M.
Hardinge, yee muſt needes confeſſe, that this vvas a Diuine povver
in the Pope: for othervviſe he coulde neuer haue donne it.
Thus mutche he eſteemeth the diſhonoures,Confutat. Fol. 182. a. and ouerthrowes of Goddes
Anointed.
            VVhereas alſo Pope Boniface the Eighth, for that he coulde not haue
the Treaſurie of France at his commaundement, endeuoured with al his
bothe Eccleſiaſtical, and VVorldly puiſſance, to remoue Philip the French
Kinge from his eſtate, and vnder his Bulles or Letters Patentes, had conueighed
the ſame ſolemnely vnto Albertus the Kinge of Romaines, M.
Hardinge here telleth your Maieſtie, that al this was very wel donne, to
thintente thereby to fraie the Kinge, and to keepe him in avve, and
to reclaime his minde from diſobedience. Now,Confut. Fol. 182. b. touchinge your
Maieſties moſte Noble Progenitours, the Kinges of this Realme,
whereas wee, as oure loialtie, and allegiance bindeth vs, iuſtely complaine,
that Pope Alexander. 3. by violence, and tyrannie forced Kinge Henrie
the Seconde to ſurrender his Crowne Emperial into the handes of his Legate,
and afterwarde for a certaine ſpace to contente him ſelfe in Priuate
eſtate, to the greate indignation, and griefe of his louinge Subiectes: And
that likewiſe Pope Innocentius the thirde ſturred vp the Nobles, and

Commons of this Realme againſt kinge Iohn, and gaue the Enheritance,
and Poſſeſsion of al his Dominions vnto Ludouicus the Frenche Kinge,
(as for the miſuſinge of your Maieſties moſte deere Father of moſte Noble
Memorie, kinge Henrie the Eighth, for as mutche as the ſmarte
thereof is yet in freſhe remembrance, I wil ſaie nothinge): To theſe, and al
other like Tyrannical iniuries, and iuſte cauſes of griefe, M. Hardinge
ſhortely, and in lighte manner thinketh it ſufficiente to anſweare thus:
VVhat though Kinge Henrie the Seconde vvere il entreated of
Pope Alexander.
               M. Harding. Fol. 340. b. 3? VVhat though Kinge Iohn vvere il entreated
of that Zelous, and Learned Pope Innocentius. 3? VVhat though
Kinge Henrie the Eighth vvere likevviſe entreated of the Popes
in our time? If know right wel, Moſte Souer aine Lady, the goodneſſe
of your Graceous Nature deliteth not in ſutche rehearſalles. Neither doo I
make reporte hereof, for that ſutche thinges ſommetimes haue benne donne:
but for that the ſame thinges euen nowe at this time, either ſo lightely are
excuſed, or ſo boldely are defended. Sutche humble affection, and obedience
theſe menne by their open, and publique VVritinges, teache your Maieſties
true Subiectes to beare towardes their Natural Prince. It ſhal mutche
warrante the honoure and ſafetie of your Roial Eſtate, if your Maieſtie
ſhal ſommetimes remember the diſhonours, and dangers, that other your
Noble Progenitours haue felte before you.
            But concerninge the Maieſtie and right of Kinges, and Emperours,
M. Hardinge telleth vs,M. Harding. Fol. 318. b. 
               They haue their firſte Authoritie by the
Poſitiue Lavve of Nations, and can haue nomore Povver, then the
people hath, of vvhome they take their Temporal luriſdiction:
as if he woulde ſaie, Emperours, and Kinges haue none other righte of
Gouernmente, then it hath pleaſed theire Subiectes by compoſition to allowe
vnto them. Thus he ſaithe, and ſaithe it boldely: as if God him ſelfe had
neuer ſaide,Prouer. 8. 
               Per me Reges Regnant: By mee, and my Authoritie
Kinges beare rule ouer theire Subiectes: Or, as if Chriſte our Saueour
had neuer ſaide vnto Pilate the Lorde Lieutenante,Iohn. 19. 
               Thou ſhouldeſt
haue no Povver ouer mee, vvere it not geeuen thee from
aboue:
               Roman. 13. Or, as if S. Paule had not ſaide, Non eſt poteſtas, niſi a Deo:
There is no povver, but onely from God. And yet further, as if
their whole ſtudie were fully bente to deface the Authoritie, and Maieſtie
of al Princes, euen nowe one of the ſame companie doubteth not to
teache the worlde,Dorman. Fol. 15. 
               That the Pope is the Heade: and Kinges, and Emperours
are the feete: Like as alſo an other of the ſame faction ſaithe,

               The Emperoures Maieſtie is ſo farre inferiour in dignitie to the
Pope,
               Staniſlaus Or
                     •
                  
                  chouius in Ch
                     •
                  
                  maera, Fol. 97. 
               as a Creature is inferiour vnto God. VVee diuiſe not theſe
thinges of malice, Moſte Graceous Lady, but reporte the ſame truely,
as wee finde them proclaimed, and publiſhed this daie by theire vaine, and
dangerous writinges, whiche notwithſtandinge they woulde ſo faine haue
to be taken as Catholique. If this Doctrine maie once take roote, and be
freely receiued emongeſt the Subiectes, it ſhalbe harde for any Prince to
holde his Righte.
            As for your Maieſtie, for that it hath pleaſed Almighty God in his
Mercie, to make you an inſtrumente of his Glorie, as in Olde times he made
many other Godly, and Noble Princes, to refourme his Churche from that
huge, and lotheſome heape of filthe, and rubble, that either b, violence, or
by negligence had benne throwen into it, therefore M. Hardinge euen in
this ſelfe ſame Booke, vnder certaine general threates, chargeth you with
diſordred preſumption, by the example of Ozias the wicked Kinge,M. Harding. Fol. 298. a. 
               vpon
vvhom, as he vntruely ſaithe, God ſente his vengeance for the like.
For be the Abuſes, and Errours of the Churche neuer ſo many, be the falles,
and dangers neuer ſo greate, be the Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes neuer ſo blinde,
yet, by this Doctrine, it maie neuer be lawful for the Prince, be he neuer ſo
learned, or ſo wiſe, or ſo Zelous in Goddes cauſe, to attempte any manner of
Reformation. And therefore thus he ſaithe vnto your Maieſtie, and with
al his ſkil, and cunninge, laboureth to perſwade your Maieſties Subiectes,
if any one, or other happily of ſimplicitie wil beleeue him, that the Godly
Lavves, whiche your Maieſtie hathe geeuen vs to liue vnder, are no
Lavves: that your Parlamentes,
               Confuta. 277. Confut. 328. a. Confuta. 172. b. Reioind. 314. Confut. 87. a. Confut. 269. b. Reioind 42. a. Confut. 43. a. Confut a. 269. a. 323. b. 334. a. 338. a. 348. b. are no Parlamentes: that your Cleregie,
is no Cleregie: Our Sacramentes, no Sacramentes: Our Faithe,
no Faithe. The Churche of Englande, whereof your Maieſtie is the
moſte Principal, and Chiefe, he calleth a Malignante Churche, a Newe
Churche erected by the Diuel, a Babylonical Tower, a Hearde of Antichriſte,
a Temple of Lucifer, a Synogoge, and a Schoole of Sathan, ful of
Robberie, Sacrilege, Schiſme, and Hereſie. And al this he furniſſheth with
ſutche libertie of other vncourteous, and vnſeemely talkes, as if he had benne
purpoſely hired to ſpeake diſhonour of your Maieſties moſt godly dooinges.
            Of al theſe, and other like Tragical fantaſies, for as mutche as he hathe
ſo boldely aduentured to make a preſente vnto your Maieſtie, wee haue
great cauſe to reioiſe in God, for that our controuerſies are brought to be debated
before ſutche a perſonage, as is hable ſo wel, and ſo deepely to vnderſtande
them. For I haue no doubte, but as by your greate Learninge, and

marueilous VViſedome, you ſhal ſoone ſee the difference of our Pleadinges,
ſo of your Maieſties graceous inclination vnto al Godlineſſe, you wil readily
finde out the Falſehedde, and geeue ſentence with the Truthe. Verily,
after that your Maieſtie ſhal haue thorowly conſidered the manifeſt Vntruthes,
and corruptions, togeather with the Abuſes, and Errours of the contrarie
ſide: the VVeakeneſſe of the Cauſe, the Boldeneſſe of the Man, and
the immoderate Bitterneſſe of his ſpeache, I haue good hope, the more aduiſedly
you ſhal beholde it, the leſſe cauſe you ſhal finde, wherefore to like it.
            For the diſcouerie hereof, for my poore portion of Learninge, I haue endeuoured
to doo, that I was hable: And the ſame here I humbly preſente
vnto your Maieſtie, as vnto my moſt Graceous, and Soueraine Liege Lady,
and, as now, the onely Nource, and Mother of the Churche of God
within theſe your Maieſties moſte Noble Dominions. It maie pleaſe your
Maieſtie graceouſly to weighe it, and to iudge of it, not accordinge to the
ſkil, and habilitie of the VVriter, whiche is but ſimple, but accordinge to
the weight, and woorthineſſe of the Cauſe. The poore labours haue benne
mine: the Cauſe is Goddes. The goodneſſe of the one wilbe alwaies hable to
countreuaile the ſimplicitie of the other.
            God euermore enflame, and directe your Maieſtie with his Holy Sprite,
that the Zele of his Houſe maie thorowly deuoure your Graceous harte:
that you maie ſafely walke in the waies of your Father Dauid: that you
maie vtterly abandon al groaues, and Hille Aultars: that you maie liue an
Olde Mother in Iſrael: that you maie ſee an ende of al diſſenſions, and ſtabliſhe
peace, and Vnitie in the Churche of God. Amen.
            
               Your Maieſties moſte Humble
Subiecte, and Faithful
Oratoure,
Iohn Sariſburie.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  I. S.
                  ¶Good Chriſtian Reader, I haue heere ſette before the certaine principal
flowers of M. Hardinges modeſte ſpeache. Taſte no more, than maie wel
like thee. And iudge thereof, as thou ſhalt ſee cauſe.
               
            
            
               M. Hardinge, in the Preface before his Confutation
of the Apologie.
               
                  The manner of writinge, whiche I haue here vſed, in compariſon of our Aduerſaries,
is ſober, ſofte, and gentle, &c. And in reſpecte of theire heate, bitterneſſe,
and railinge, as many telle mee, ouer colde, ſweete, and milde.
               
               Againe, in the ſame Confutation.
               
                  There is no man of Wiſedome, or honeſtie, that woulde with ſo immoderate vpbraidinges,
empaire the eſtimation of his modeſtie. Fol. 300. b.
               
            
            
               M. Hardinge.
               Your Diuelliſhe ſpite. Reioinder.
fol. 18. b.
               Your Diuelliſhe vvickedneſſe.
Reioinder, prefa.
to the Reader.
               Your Diuelliſhe Villanie.
Confuta. fol. 256. b.
               Your railinge vvoordes of
Sathans prompring. Reioinder.
67. 2.
               You are ioined to Sathan.
Sathan your Scholemaiſter.
Reioin. 12. b.
               Yee are moued by the inſtincte
of Sathan. Confuta.
43. b. 255. a.
               Your Father the Diuel.
Conf. 2. a.
               Your Babylonical Tovver.
Confut. 42. a.
               Your Nevve Church ſette
vp by Sathan. Con. 42. a.
               The Diuel hathe you faſte
bounde. Con. 24. a.
               Yee are of the Schole of Sathan.
Con. 69. b.
               Your Sathanical Sprité. Cō
                  futa.
111. b.
               Yee are the Children of the
Diuel. Con. 115. a.
               A Page, a Slaue, a Clavvebacke
of the Diuel. Confuta.
131. a.
               Yee are the limmes of Antichriſte.
Con. 202. a.
               Yee are the practiſed Miniſters
of Antichriſte.
Confu. 195. b.
               Yee haue taken a paterne
from Sathan▪ Con. 323. b.
               Your reprobate Congregation.
Con. 338. a.
               Your Synagoge of Sathan.
Con. 341. b.
               Your confuſe 
                     •
                  entes of Sathan.
Con. 334.
               Your Synagoge of Antichriſt,
and Lucifer. Confuta.
212. b.
               The Heard of Antichriſte.
Confu. 48. a.
               The Nouice of the Diuel.
Confu.
               The Diuel, and his Miniſters.
116. b.
               Yee haue learned of the Diuel.
Con. 128. b.
               Your Father the Diuel.
Confu. 348. b.
               Sathan your Maiſter. Confuta.
348. b.
               Sathans broode. Con. 348.
               He hathe conceiued hatred
by the inſpiration of Sathan.
Con. 288. b.
               Sathan holdethe you captiue.
Con. 342. b.
               The Sptite of Sathan is in
you. 172. a.
               Yee are faſte bounde in Sathans
fetters. Con. 68. a.
               Yee are enimies of Vnitie.
Con. 55. b.
               Enimies of the Sacrifice.
Confu. 67. a.
               Yee are looſe Apoſtates.
Confu. 323.
               Sacrilegious Churcherobbers.
323.
               Theeues. Con. 155. b.
               Abominable. Con. 17
                     •
                  . a.
               Lecherous Lourdaines. 75. b.
               Profane Helhoundes. Confuta.
114. b.
               Deſpiſers of God. C. 131. b.
               Your vvicked, and blaſphemous
Sprite.
               Your darke, and malitious
Soule. Reioind. 104.
               Your hereſies. blaſphemies,
Sathaniſmes.
               Your filthy railinge rabble.
Con. 75. b.
               Coluiniſtes, Sathaniſtes.
Confu. 81. b.
               Your vvicked Chams
                     •
                   broode
114. b.
               Your profane malice. C. 
                     •
                  29. b.
               Your vileneſſe. 135. a.
               Your damnable fide. 135. a.
               Your blaſphemous tongues.
               Your deteſtable blaſphemies
               Your Diuelliſhe rabble. 209. b.
               Your Turkiſhe Huguenotes,
vvoorſe thē Infidels. 282. b
               Your Malignante Churche.
               Your Congregation of Reprobates.
Con. 269. b.
               Your vile hereſies 339. a.
               Your Diuelliſhe ſtouteneſſe
of harte.
               Your Turkiſhe, and Heathenniſhe
harte. 295. b.
               Your Turkiſhe doctrine. ibi.
               Yee bragge Lucifer like. 173. b
               Yee ſpeake villanie.
               Youre quarrel is againſte
Chriſte. Con. 178. b.
               Yee vvould ſaie, if ye durſt,
that Chriſte is the Abomination
of deſolation,
and Antichriſte is the
True God. 194. a.
               VVhen vvere there euer
ſu
                     •
                  che Theeues in the
Churche of God. 201. a.
               
                  
Your Doctrine is Hereſie,
your life is iniquitie, 172. b
               As crafty knaues in a Comedie.
Reioind. 22. a.
               Vaine bragginge, Vanitie,
Scurrilitie, extreme impudencie,
paſsinge madneſſe.
proude vauntinge
Goliathlike. Re. in pre. 2.
               He is a foole. 186.
               Reaſonleſſe, vvitleſſe. Reioind.
192. a.
               Fooliſhe Negatiues. R. pre.
               Thei are Apes. Con. 1. b
They are Aſſes.
               Any ſotte vvould be aſhamed
to make ſutche argumentes.
Con. 51. b.
               He hath on his fooles coate
if he plaie the Viſe vvel,
and Verletlike. Re. 251. b.
               The canker of this falſe doctrine.
Reioind. prefa.
               Falſe Goſpellers. Re. pre.
Vnſhamefaſte. 94. a.
               Impious. Impudente, 123. a.
               Yee are paſte al ſhame. 186. a
               A greate Lier.
               Boldeneſſe in Lieinge.
               Yee Lie for a vantage.
               Your fchole of Lieinge.
               Yee profeſſe Lieinge.
               Falſe Lies.
               Impudente Lies.
               Vaine Lies. Bolde Lies.
               Lovvde Lies. Fovvle Lies.
               Shameleſſe Lies.
               Railinge Lies.
               Manifeſte Lies.
               Notorious Lies.
               Sclaunderous Lies.
               Horrible Lies.
               VVee vvil proclaime you a
Lier. 258. b.
               Your Libertie of lieinge.
               Your Arte of lieinge. 218. b.
               Your Figure of impudente
Lieinge. 253. a.
               Yee be deſperate in youre
Lieinge. 277. b.
               You Lie in the plural number.
303. a.
               And vvhat ſhal I ſaie more
but al is Lies. 255. b.
               Leaue your Railinge. Re.
               VVe like not your Railing.
80. a.
               I leaue your vile eloquence
to your ſelfe. 111. b.
               Your Railinge termes.
               Your vile eloquence.
               Your ſcoldinge tale.
               Your ſpiteful vvoordes.
Con. 149. b.
               Your rancoure. Your ſpite.
               Your filthy Railinges.
               Your vile vpbraidinges.
Con. 175.
               Your Malitious Railinge.
184. b.
               Your falſe cankered ſclau
                     •
                  
                  ders.
184. b.
               Ceaſe your barkinge. Reioind.
prefa. to the R
                     •
                  a.
               The poiſon of your tongue
Reioind. prefa.
               Your droppe of poiſon.
               Your Serpentine tongue.
Reioind. 67. a.
               Sutche crakinge Chalenlengers.
Re. prefa.
               Your Railinge Sprite.
               Spit out your Malice.
               Spit out your poiſon. Reioind.
prefa.
               Your hote raginge Sprite.
Con. 3. a.
               Spit foorthe youre galle.
Confu. 23. a.
               Your Hereſies, and Villanies.
Con. 10. b.
               Your vaine boaſte in vvickedneſſe,
vvrought by
the povver of Sathā. 19. b
               Your filthy railinge rabble.
75. b.
               It liketh your filthy Sprite.
101. a.
               Yee curſed Chananees. 121. b
               VVhat crake ye
                     •
                   128. b.
               The Diuel the Scholemaiſter
of your Malice. 168. a.
               Luther, that filthy Freeze.
192. a.
               your bavvdy Bale. 168b.
               Brentius, that ſhameleſſe
railinge Hereuque. 288. a
               Cough vp the cromme of
your Hereſie. Re. 167. b.
               Cough out that vile poiſon.
Re. 80.
               Your Diuelliſhe Blaſphemie,
and Villanie. 256. b.
               A blaſte of your railinge
Sprite, 266. b.
               Luthers ſtinking ſinke. 42. b
               Zuinglius rabble. 42. b.
               Your vile, ſpiteful, blaſphemous
talke. Re. prefa.
               If there vvere any ſpaike of
ſhame in you. 94. a.
               The ſtinking breath of your
vile vvoordes. m. b.
               This Defēder is like a mad
Dogge. 207. b.
               Your vile, venemous, and
lotheſome ſtuffe, 246. b.
               I vvold I could plucke malice
from your blaſphemous
harte. 292. b.
               VVith ſutche ſpitefulneſſe
of vvoordes, as the Diuel
hathe enrſpired thē vvithal.
Con. 342. b.
               It ſpiteth you, and the Diuel.
279. a.
               Raile, and reuel vvhile yee
vvil. 254. a.
               Yee raue, and crie, out. 177. b.
               The findes of Hel vvere not
yet let looſe, that begate
Lutherians, and Caluiniſtes.
Confu. 183. b.
               The Diuel comminge from
Helle, hathe carried you
avvaie. 225. b.
               In youre hartes the Diuel
hath made his ſhop. 132. a.
               Yee ſhalbe bounde hande
and foote vvith the cordes
of the Diuels clevve.
292. a.
               The Diuel poſſeſſeth you,
and rideth you. 255. a.
               The Sprite of the Diuel is
vvithin you. 255.
               Yee boile in rancoure, and
malice. 269. b.
               Stampe, and rage. Sturdy
dogge eloquence. 42. b.
               Stinte your barking. R. pre.
               The Diuel reigneth in your
hartes. 87. b.
               Maugre the malice of the
diuel, and of al the Sacramentaries.
95. b.
               Your Malice ſeemeth to
paſſe the malice of the
Diuel. Re. prefa.
               Yee barke vvith vvoordes
more vile, then the barkinge
of a dogge. Re.
               Raile vntil youre tongues
burne in your headdes in
Helle fire. 112. a.
               Barke vntil your bellies breake,
yee Helhoundes of
Zvvinglius and Luthers
lit
                     •
                  oure. 178. b.
               VVithout al vvitte, and modeſtie.
Con. 170. b.
               Cunerus petri de Brouwerſha
                  
                     •
                  en.
Paſtor S. Petri Louanij indignus
approbauit. An. 1565.
10. Aprilis.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               M. Hardinge, in his Preface to M. Ievvel
before the Reioinder.
               
                  Vvee ſpare your woorſhippes, and put you in minde of your outrage with more Courteous language.
Againe: I ſeeme to menne of right good diſcretion, rather to offende of lenitie, and ſofteneſſe:
And many doo wiſhe, I had tempered mine inke with ſharper ingredience.
               
               
                  ¶Thus mutche onely out of the Heape. For to laie foorthe al,
it were to make an other Booke.
               
               
                  One demaunded this Queſtion of Zoilus the                                                                                                                                                                                     Railet.
                  Why takeſte thou ſutche pleaſure in ſpeakinge il?
               
               
                  Zoilus made anſweare.
                  Bicauſe, whereas I woulde rather doo it, I am not hable.
               
            
            
               Scoffes, and Scornes.
               M. Hardinge hereof thus reproueth his Aduerſarie.
               
                  Your ſcorneful ſcoffes. Re. prefa.
                  Your Lotheſome ſcoffes. Re. prefa.
                  Your ſcoffinge Sprite. Confu. 19.
                  Yourir keſome cuttes. Re. prefa.
                  Your arte of ſcoffinge. Re. prefa.
                  Your ſcoffinge heade. 284. a.
                  Yee ſauce your vvordes vvith ſcoffes. 29. 76.
                  Yee plaie Hickſcorner. Re. prefa.
                  Yee plaie the Viſe in an Enterlude. Re. pre.
                  Your boieiſhe and Childiſhe diſpoſition.
314. b.
                  Your hoieiſhe ſcoffes. 300. a.
                  Your boieiſhe mockeries. 149. a.
                  Your bitter tvvitinges. ibidem.
               
            
            
               M. Hardinge of him ſelfe.
               Sutche grace in writinge I neither vſe, nor couete, nor haue I it: nor if I had it, ſhoulde I thinke it
meete to vſe. The Truthe of God would not be ſette foorthe with ſcoffes. VVhoſe deſire to vnderſtande
the Truthe is colde, the ſame is to be tuarred vp rather with graue and earneſte exhortations,
then with ſcornes, and mockes. Reioind. In the Preface to the Reader.
               
                  M. Hardinges perfourmance of the ſame.
                  His Miniſterlike talke: vvith
ſomme fadde Hypocrifie.
Re. prefa.
                  His Euāgelical meekeneſſe.
Ful coldely, and demurely
he promiſeth. Re. 18. b.
                  His ſolemne Praier proteſtantelike.
Re. 18. b.
                  His Rhetorical perſuaſions
in pulpite: vvith holy holdinge
vp of handes, and
caſting vp of eies to Heauen.
Re. prefa.
                  His Miniſtringe vvoordes.
Re. 235.
                  His pulpite buzzing. R. pre.
                  His holy Companions. 170. b
                  This bleſſed Brotherhoode.
Confu. 1
                        •
                     . b.
                  Yee ſpeake like a liberal gē
                     tleman.
Con. 284. a.
                  This gaie Rhetorician. Redioind.
prefa.
                  This ioily felovve. 9. a.
                  This ioily Defender. 53. b.
                  This vvoorthy Captaine.
Re. 31. b.
                  This ſubſtantial Doctoure.
Cuckovvlike.
                  His glorious Sermon, prefa.
                  His vvorthy courage. R. pre.
                  He proueth it like a Clerk. 115
                  VVel, and Clerkely reaſoned
forſoothe. 219. a.
                  His foreſaide vvoorſhipful
reaſons. 276. a.
                  His Clerkely provves. 149. b
                  Like propre gētlemen. 140. a
                  Thei haue tried them ſelues
like proper menne. 139 b.
                  Luther your Radix leſſe.
Con. 42. b.
                  Caluine your Patriarke. 
                        •
                     0. a
                  Your greate Rabbine Peter
Martyr. Con. 82. a.
                  Novve come in theſe reuerende
Fathers of our nevve
Clergie. Re. 155. a.
                  Our miniſtring Clergi. 146. a
                  Our miniſtring Prelates. 63. a
                  Our nevve Goſpel Prelates.
                  Our M. Iohn of Sariſburie.
251. b.
                  Hovve ſaie yovve Sir Miniſter
Biſhop? 56. b.
                  The confuſion of your Goliathſhip.
Re. prefa.
                  Yee ſpeake mutche of your
Miniſterſhippes goodneſſe.
170. b.
                  This is falſe, ſauing your Miniſterſhips.
Con. 347. b.
                  Your Superintendenteſhippes.
256. b.
                  Your Maiſterſhips. Re. pre.
                  Your Maſſhippes. 247. a.
               
            
            
               M. Hardinge. Confuta. fol. 209. b.
               Thus wee comme within you Defenders, as it were: and claſpinge with you, wring your weapon
out of your hande: and with the other ende of it ſtrike you downe: As it is not harde to vs, by
learninge to ouerthrowe you. &c.
            
         
         
            
            A Viewe of Vntruthes,
Wherewith M. Hardinge thus chargeth his Aduerſarie.
            
               Ariſtotle beinge once aſked, what a common
Lier gained by his Lieinge, anſweared
thus: That when he telleth Truthe, noman
wil beleeue him. Confuta. 159. a.
               Who ſeeth not, and almoſte feeleth your
Lies? 176.
               When wil yee foreſake the Schoole of Lieinge?
179. a.
               Yee are good in the arte of Lieinge. 218. b.
               Yee haue ſworne to belie al the world. 245. a
               Wee haue taken you tardie in ſo many, and
ſo manifeſte Lies. 159. a.
               Beinge diſpoſed to Lie, he woulde Lie for a
vantage. 157. b.
               Lie ſo longe, as yee liſte. 150. a.
               Al menne doo eſpie your Lieinge. 150. b.
               A ſumpe of Lies. 5. a.
               Carteloades of Lies. 175.
               A man for his Life cannot finde one leafe, in
it without many Lies. 219.
               Lieinge to this felowe is Accidens Inſeparabile.
273. b.
               Make of it, what yee wil. A lie is a lie. 155. b.
               The number of Ʋntruthes, vttered of M.
Jewelles parte, noted, and Confuted by
others, and by mee, amounteth to a thouſande,
and odde. M. Hardinge in the Preface
to the Reader before his Reioinder.
            
            
               The B. of Sarisburie.
               Here, good Chriſtian Reader, I haue thought it needefull, for thy better ſatiſfaction,
to géeue thee a ſhorte viewe of theſe ſo horrible, & ſo ſhameful Vntruthes:
that by a ſewe, thou maiſte be hable, to iudge the better of the reſte.
               
                  A Vievve of Vntruthes.
                  
                     Reioinder, Fol. 1.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     Here appereth ſmal hope,
that M. Hardinge wil
deale plainely in the
reſte, that thus maketh
his firſte entrie
with * a Cauil.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     1. Vntruthe. For it is no Cauil.
The B. of Sariſburie.
                     Whereas the * mater is
knowen, & agreed vpon,
it is great 
                           •
                        olie, to
pike a quarrel vnto the
woorde. The mater is,
what is meante by priuate
Maſſe.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     2. Vntruthe. It is not knowen,
nor agreed vpon.
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     Euery Maſſe, ſaithe M.
Hardinge, is * common,
& none Priuate.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     3. Vntruthe. I ſaie not ſo, but
with addition, whiche maketh
certaine limitation.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     If there be * no Priuate
Maſſe at al, then was
there no priuate Maſſe
in ye primitiue Church:
whiche was my firſte
aſſertion.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     4. Vntruth. It is not ſaide, There
is no Priuate Maſſe at al.
For there is Priuate Maſſe, as
Priuate is taken in an other
ſenſe.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     M. Harding in his. 22. Article,
entreating of the
Accidentes of Breade,
& Wine, &c. calleth that
thinge Priuate, that
is diſputed in opē Audience,
in the hearinge
of fiue hūdred, or moe,
and is ſette abroade to
the knowledge of the
worlde.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     5. Vntruthe. In that place I
ſpeake not hereof, but of M.
Iewelles fine laſte Articles.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     He ſaithe, Theſe maters
were neuer taught in
open Audience, but
Priuately diſputed in
the Schooles.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     6. Vntruthe. I ſaie not ſo, but
otherwiſe.
                  
                  
                     The B of Sariſburie.
                     As for the Maſſe, ſommetimes
he maketh it the
Sacrifice, ſommetime
the * Communion &c.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     7. Vntruthe. I neuer ſaide the
Communion to be the Maſſe.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     If the Sacrifice be common,
why doothe he
géeue it theſe Priuate
Cities, This for the
Liuinge, This for the
Deade, &c?
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     8. Vntruther. I geeue not the Sacrifice
theſe Titles.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     He ſaithe, It is a feaſte, &

therfore it is common.
And thus he ſalueth
one errour wt an other.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     9. Vntruthe. It is no erroure, to
ſaie, The Cōmunion, whiche
is in the Maſſe, is a Feaſte.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     What if ye Prieſtes wille
be, to woorke Necromancie,
or Sorcerie, as
it is reported of Pope
Hildebrande?
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     10. Vntruthe. This is not veported
by any graue, and true
writer: But by them that
flattered the Emperoure of
that time.
                  
                  
                     A Replie.
                     This ſtorie is largely ſet
out by Beno, Cardinale
of the Churche of
Rome. Vrſpergenſis
ſaith, Manifeſtum Necromanticū.
An. 1080.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     What if ye Pieſtes wille
be, to poiſon ſome body,
as Henrie the Emperoure
was poiſoned
in the Communion
Breade?
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     11. Vntruthe. He was not ſo poiſoned:
but died otherwiſe.
                  
                  
                     A Replie.
                     Vrſpergenſis ſaith, Quidam
Religioſus tradidit
Imperatori intoxicatam
Euchariſtiam.
An. 1313. Likewiſe
ſaith Auentinus,
Bap. Egnatius, Supplementum
Chronicor.
Raui. Textor,
Carion. &c.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     Pope Victor was poiſoned
in the Chalice.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     12. Vntruthe. He died otherwiſe.
                  
                  
                     A Replie.
                     
                        He died euen ſo. Reade
Martinus Polonus,
Volaterranus, Matthaeus
Palmerius, Supplementū
Chronicorum,
Faſciculus Temporum,
Raui. Textor,
Anſelmus Rid, Maſſaeus
Cameracenſis,
Vrſperg. Pag. 230.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     Lyra ſaithe, Many miracles
are wrought in the
Churche * to mocke the
people.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     13. Vntruthe. Lyra ſaithe it not.
                     14. Vntruthe, To wocke the people,
is not in Lyra.
                  
                  
                     A Replie.
                     
                        The woordes of Lyra be
very plaine, Aliquando
in Eccleſia fit maxima
deceptio populi
in Miraculis fictis à
Sacerdotibus, vel eis
adhaerētibus, propter
Lucrum: Sommetimes
euen in the Churche the
the people is ſhamefully
deceiued with feined Miracles,
wrought either by
the Prieſtes, or els by their
companions, for lukers
ſake. In Daniel. Ca. 14.
                  
                  
                     The B. of Sariſburie.
                     S. Hierome ſaith, Dominica
Coena omnibus
debet eſſe Cōmunis.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     15. Vntruthe. S, Hierome is not
the Authoure of thoſe briefe
Commentaries.
                  
                  
                     A Replie.
                     Theſ are printed emonge
other S. Hieromes
woorkes, and are commonly
knowen by his
name: but by any other
Anthours name
they are not knowen.
                  
                  Theſe he fiftiene of the firſte horrible greate Lies, that M. Hardinge hath ſo aduiſedly
noted in his Reioinder. It were but loſte laboure to proceede further.
As theſe are, euen ſo are the reſte.
                  Nowe, good Reader, maie it pleaſe thée, to take a prouſe of other Vntruthes, that
after greate trauaile, & ſeekinge, he hath likewiſe founde out in the Apologie.
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte 2. Cap. 4. Diuiſ. 2.
                     The Councel of Carthage prouided,
that no Biſhop ſhoulde be called either
the Higheſt Biſhop, or ye Chiefe
Prieſte.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     1. Here, Sir Defender, yee plaie falſe. Yee are taken
with falſe Dice. Falſe plaie, ſhameful
falſifieinge, falſe teachinge, falſe ſleight,
forginge of Canons, your Lie your falſehedde.
Shame on you Defender. How ſo euer this
Canon be conſtrued, it taketh no place out of
Aphrica: and therefore cannot iuſtely be alleged
againſte the Biſhop of Rome.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     
                        The woordes of the Councel, alleged by

Gratian, are theſe: Primae ſedis Epiſcopus
non appelletur Princeps
Sacerdotum, vel Summus Sacerdos,
vel aliquid huiuſmodi: Sed
tantùm, primae Sedis Epiſcopus. Vniuerſalis
autem nec etiam Romanus
Pontifex appelletur.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte 2 Cap. 12. Diuiſ. 2.
                     Calixtus decreed, that the Conſecration
beinge finiſhed, al the people ſhoulde
Communicate &c.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     2. Vntruthe. This Decree had Relation vnto the
Prieſtes, Deacons, and Subdeacons, and not
vnto the people.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     
                        Here M. Hardinge is ſoone reproued euen
by his owne Doctours, Durandus,
Hugo, Cochlaeus, Clichtoueus.
For thus they ſaie, Omnes olim, tū
Sacerdotes, tum Laici cum Sacrificante
communicabant &c. Hîc vnicum
hac de re Canonem recitabo.
qui Calixto adſcribitur.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte 2. Ca 8. Diuiſ. 2.
                     
                        Gregorius Nazianzenus ſaithe, ſpeakinge
of his owne Father, that a
good, & a diligent Biſhop dooth ſerue
in the Miniſterie neuer the woorſe,
for that he is Married, but rather the
better.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     3. Vntruthe. Yee make manifeſte Lies. Yee vſe
your accuſtomed figure Pſeudologia, whiche is
Lieinge in plaine Engliſhe, &c. How coulde
he ſaie, that a Biſhop ſerueth in the Miniſterie
neuer the woorſe, but rather the better? &c.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     
                        This erroure of M. Hardinges grewe
of Ignorance. For Nazianzenes
woordes be very plaine: Meo Patri
Mater mea, data illi à Deo, non tantùm
Adiutrix facta eſt, ſed etiam
Dux, & Princeps, verbo, facto
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
inducens illum ad res optimas &c.
In pietate non verebatur ſeipſam illi
Magiſtram exhibere. In Epitaphio
Patris.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte 6. Ca. 5▪ Diui. 2.
                     Pope Liberius was a fauourer of the
Arian Heretiques.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     4. Vntruthe. That you ſaie of Liberius is ſtarke
falſe. He neuer fauoured the Arians.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     
                        The Authoure hereof is S. Hierome,
De Eccleſiaſticis Scriptoribus. In
Fortunatiano. And one of M. Hardinges
owne principal Doctoures
ſaithe, De Liberio Papa conſtat fuiſſe
Arianum.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte 6 Ca▪ 5. Diui. 2.
                     Pope Zoſimus corrupted the Councel
of Nice.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     5. Vntruthe. Yee belie Zoſimus: He corrupted not
the Councel of Nice.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     This matter moſte plainely appeareth
by the Recordes of the Councel of
Aphrica.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte 6 Cap 5 Diuiſ. 2.
                     Pope Iohn helde a deteſtable opinion
touchinge the immortalitie of the
Soule.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     6. Vntruthe. That you reporte of Pope Iohn, is
likewiſe moſte falſe. The woorſte that Marſilius,
and Ockam wrote of him, is, that he
taught openly, that the Soules of the luſte ſee
not God, vntil the daie of Iudgemente. That
he had any deteſtable opinion of the Immortalitie
of the Soule, there was no ſutche his
opinion: But it is your falſe ſclaunder: by
whiche your wicked, and deteſtable maltce,
yee imagine to deface the Authoritie of the
Holy See Apoſtolique.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     
                        Gerſon in Sermone Paſchali: Pope
Iohn 22. decreed, that the Soules of
the wicked ſhould not be pouniſhed,
before ye daie of the laſte Iudgement.
Whiche erroure the Vntuerſitie of
Pariſe condemned for Hereſie, and
cauſed the Pope to recante.
                     Concil. Conſtantien. in Appendice.
In primis Quin imò Iohannes Papa.
22. dixit, & pertinaciter credidit,
Animā hominis cum corpore humano
mori▪ & extingui, ad inſtar animalium
brutorum. Dixit
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , mortuum
ſemel, etiam in Nouiſsimo
                     
                     Die, minimè eſſe reſurrecturum.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte 6. Ca. 6. Diui. 1.
                     The Canoniſtes ſale, The Pope can
doo as mutche, as Chriſte him ſelfe
can doo.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     7. Vntruthe. The moſte parte hereof is very falſe,
and ſclaunderous. Mentiris in your Diuinitie
is a Verbe Commune.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     
                        The woordes be moſte manifeſte, & out
of al queſtion: Excepto peccato, Papa
poteſt, quicquid Deus ipſe poteſt.
Extra, De tranſlatione Epiſcopi.
Quanto. Hoſtien.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte 6. Ca. 6. Diui. 1.
                     Somme of them haue ſaide, The Pope
is the Lighte, that is comme into the
worlde: And, who ſo is an il dooer,
fleeth that Lighte.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     8. Vntruthe. If yee were hardely charged, to
ſhewe, where he ſaide it, or, where he wrote
it, yee would be founde a Lier, as in many other
pointes yee are founde already. That he
neuer wrote it in any of his eloquente Italian
Sermons, ſet foorthe in Printe, I am aſſured.
And more hath he not ſet foorthe. Nowe it
remaineth, that yee telle vs, where he ſaithe
ſo or els confeſſe your ſclaunderous Lie.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     In the Oration, that Cornelius the Biſhop
of Bitonto pronounced in the
Councel of Tridente, yee maie finde
theſe woordes: Papa Lux venit in
Mundum: Sed dilexerunt homines
tenebras magis quàm Lucem.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Apologie▪ Parte 4. Ca. 1. Diui. 1.
                     They haue decreed, that a Prieſte,
for Fornication ought not to be remoued
from his Cure.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     9. Vntruthe. This is a foule Lie. And herein theſe
menne moſte ſhamefully haue ſclaundered the
Churche: as, by that I haue ſaide, to any man
it maie appeare.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     
                        But vnto the beſte learned Canoniſtes
it appeareth farre otherwiſe. Panormitane
ſaithe, Hodiè ex Simplici
Fornicatione Clericus non deponitur.
Extra. De Conſangui. &
Affini. Non debet. Likewiſe it is ſolemnely
noted in great letters in the
Margine, Fornicationes cauſa hodiè
nemo eſt deponendus.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte 6. Ca. 14. Diui. 1.
                     In the Councel of Chalcedon the Ciuile
Magiſtrate condēned iiJ. Biſhoppes,
Dioſcorus, Iuuenalis, & Thalaſsius,
for Heretiques, & gaue Iudgemente,
that they ſhoulde be depoſed.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     10. Vntruthe. That al theſe three were condemned
in that Councel▪ wee finde not. Mutche
leſſe. that they were condemned by any Ciuile
Magiſtrate, doo wee finde &c. VVhat is impudencie?
VVhat is licentious Lieinge? VVhat
is deceiteful dealinge, if this be not?
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     
                        Theſe be the woordes, pronounced openly
in the Councel, Videtur nobis
iuſtum eſſe, eidem poenae Dioſcorum
Reuerendum Epiſcopum Alexandriae,
& Iuuenalem Reuerendum
Epiſcopum Hieroſolymorum,
& Thalaſſium Reuerendum Epiſcopum
Caeſariae Cappadociae ſubiacere.
Concil. Chalcedonen. Actione.
1. Pag. 831.
                  
                  
                     Reioinder. Fol. 251. b.
The B. of Sariſburie.
                     M. Harding healpeth it forewarde with
a litle prety falſe tranſlation of his
owne. For, whereas it is written in
the Latine, Cùm benedixiſſet Sācta,
He tranſlateth it thus, When he had
cōſecrated the Sacrament. And likewiſe
theſe woordes, Poſt finem Orationum,
he tranſlateth thus: After he
had donne ye Praier of Conſecration.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     11. Vntruthe. Gentle Reader, conſider, how falſely
M. Iewel demeaneth him ſelfe. Theſe woordes,
Poſt finem Orationum, thou findeſt not at
al in al this 32. Diutiſion. If they be not here,
why reproueth he me for vſinge a prety falſe
tranſlation? This is not a prety, but a groſſe,
and a ſhameleſſe kinde of falſehed, to charge
we with that, whiche here I ſaie not.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     It is in the very next Diuiſion. Therefore

this mater needed nothinge ſo
greate adoo.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte. 2. Ca. 13. Diui. 1.
                     Origen ſaithe, The Breade, whiche is
ſanctified by the Woorde of God, &c.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     12. Vntruthe. Alleginge Origen, Sir Defender,
yee plaie your accuſtomed falſe plaie, corruptinge
his ſentence, and falſifieinge his
woordes. He ſaith, Ille cibus, not, Ille Panis.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     Yet Origen in the ſame place calleth it
ſeuen times, Panis. Therefore this
was but a ſimple mater, to make
ſutche a Tragedie of falſe plaie.
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte. 2. Ca. 1. Diui. 1.
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Although the Mateſtie,
and Godhedde of Chriſte be euerywhere,
yet the Body, wherein he
roſe againe, muſte needes be in one
place.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     13. Vntruthe. S. Auguſtine in that Treatie hath
not that woorde, Oportet, but this woorde,
Poteſt: as the Bookes haue, that be not corrupted
by the mainteiners of that Hereſie.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     
                        Gratian reportinge this place of S. Auguſtine,
vſeth this woorde, Oportet.
Thus he ſaithe in moſte plaine wiſe,
Corpus, in quo Chriſtus reſurrexit,
In Vno loco eſſe Oportet. De
Conſecr. Diſt. 2. Prima. Likewiſe
ſaithe Petrus Lombardus reportinge
the ſame, in Vno loco eſſe
Oportet. Lib. 4. Diſt. 10. Sunt item.
But before them al S. Peter ſaide,
Oportet illum Coelos capere vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
ad tempora reſtitutionis omnium.
Actorum. 3. Theſe, I trowe, were
not the maineteiners of any Hereſie.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Parte. 5. Ca. 3. Diui. 11.
                     The Olde Councel of Carthage commaunded
nothing to be readde in the
Congregation, but the Canonical
Scriptures.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     14. Vntruthe. This Booke is ful of Lies, and
falſified places. This Olde Councel is
newely falſified. The woordes be, Vt praeter
Scripturas Canonicas nihil in Eccleſia
legatur ſub nomine Diuinarum Scripturarum.
It foloweth in the ſame Decree,
Liceat etiam legi Paſsiones Martyrum,
cùm Anniuerſarij dies eorū celebrantur.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     This Obiection is very true: albeit not
greatly to the pourpoſe. For, as the
Decrée cutteth of al ſecrete, or vnlaweful
Scriptures, ſo it ſuffreth nothinge
els to be read in the Churche,
but onely the Paſſions, or deathes of
Martyrs, and that onely vpon the
Martyrs Anniuerſarie: whiche was,
for one Martyr, but onely one daie in
the yeere.
                     Nowe lette M. Hardinge telle
vs, what, and howe mutche there
remained biſide, to bee read in the
Churche, ſauinge onely the Canonical
Scriptures. Howe be it in the
ſame thirde Councel of Carthage,
there bee other woordes founde ſommewhat
plainer, & more pregnante,
then theſe. For in the ſaide Councel
of Carthage, the Councel of Hippo
was abbridged. In whiche Abbridgemente
this Decree is read emōgeſt
others: Scripturae Canonicae in Eccleſia
legendae quae ſunt: & praeter
quas alia nō legantur. Theſe woordes
were abbridged, and authorized in
the ſaide thirde Councel of Carthage:
as it is plaine by the Title of the
ſame: Concilij Hipponenſis Abbreuiationes
factae in Concilio Carthaginenſi
Tertio. In miſtakinge of
whiche woordes I muſte needes confeſſe
mine erroure. For by ouerſight,
I thought, the Councel of Carthage
had benne abbridged in the Councel
of Hippo, as it maie appeare by my
anſweare in this Booke, Fol. 519.
Whereas contrariwiſe, the Councel
of Hippo was abbridged in the Councel
of Carthage. This in deede of my
parte was an erroure. And I thanke
M. Dorman, that hathe geeuen mée
occaſion, better to conſider the ſame.
Notwithſtandinge, as I ſaide before,
the woordes be plaine, Praeter quas
(Scripturas) alia non legantur.
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     The Apologie. Par. 5. Cap. 11. Diui. 
                           •
                        .
                     The Canoniſtes this date vſe to ſaie of
the Pope, that for ſo mutche as he is
Lorde of al benefices, though he ſel
Biſhoprikes, Monaſteries, Benefices,
and Spiritual promotions for monie,
yet he cannot committe Simonie,
though he would neuer ſo faine.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge.
                     15. Vntruthe. VVhereas it is written in Summa
Angelica, In Curia Romana, titulus
De Simonia non habet locum, The ſelfe
ſame Summe vſeth this diſtinction, ſaieinge,
Verum eſt in ijs, quae ſunt Simoniaca de
Iure poſitiuo ſolùm: ſed non in ijs, quae
ſunt Simoniaca de lure Diuino. VVhereby
he meaneth, that concerninge Simonie, whiche
properly is ſo called, the Pope is no leſſe ſubiecte
thereto, then any other man. Thus haue
you ſhamefully belied Summa Angelica.
                  
                  
                     The Replie.
                     Hereby it appeareth, that M. Hardinge
vnderſtādeth not his owne Summa.
For by Simonia de Iure poſitiuo, is
meante the ſale of Biſhoprikes, and
Benefices, &c. whiche, as this Summa
ſaithe, the Pope maie freely ſelle
for monie, without empeachemente
of any manner of Simonie. For beter
proufe whereof Theodoricus
ſaithe, Papa non poteſt committere
Simoniam. Sic tenent Iuriſtae.
                     
                     Quia Simonia excuſatur per Authoritatem
Papae. De Schiſmate inter
Vrban. & Clemen. lib. 2. cap. 32.
An other ſaithe: Papa non committit
Simoniam recipiendo pecuni
                           •
                        m
pro collatione Beneficiorum 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ſhamefully wee belie Summa 
                           ••
                        
                        gelica.
                  
                  
                     16. Vntruthe.
                     In the fourthe parte. 7. chapter, and. 4.
Diuiſion of this Booke, touchinge
that moſt vile, and ſhameful abuſing
of Franciſcus Dandalus Gentleman
of Venice, that was driuen to wallowe
vnder ye Popes table in a chaine
like a Dogge, reported, as M. Hardinge
ſaithe, by Sabellicus in the firſt
Booke of his Seconde Decade: I
haue anſweared, as then I thought,
accordinge to truthe, that Sabellicus
wrote no Decades, but onely Enneades:
as it might appeare by his
woorkes printed either at Baſile by
Heruagius, or otherwhere by any other.
Sithence I vnderſtande, that
there is nowe extante an other Booke
of Sabellicus, by the name of Decades,
ſet foorthe of late at Baſile by
Coelius Secundus Curio, An. 1560.
Vnderſtande thou therefore, good
Reader, that herein I folowed ſutche
Bookes of Sabellicus, as had benne
long abroade, and were wel acquainted
amōg the learned. But that there
ſhould any other newe Booke of Sabellicus
be printed afterwarde, ſpecially
ſo longe after the Authours
death, I coulde not propheſie.
                  
                  Theſe, and ſutche other, good Chriſtian Reader, be our Vntruthes, ſo many
in number, and of ſutche weighte, that M. Hardinge thinketh him ſelfe wel hable
eaſily with the ſame to lode a Carte.Confu. fol 175. a. To al theſe ſo many, and ſo many, ſo horrible,
and ſo blaſphemous Lies, Goddes Holy name be bleſſed, wée maie truely ſaie
with S. Paule,
                     2. Cor. 6. 
                     Tanquam ſeductores: & ecce veraces: Wee are called deceiuers: and
yet wee ſaie the Truthe.
                     
                  
                  How be it, I doo not ſo warrante euery parcel of any my writinges, as though
there were nothinge therein conteined, but might ſafely be iuſtified in al reſpectes,
and againſte al quarrels. Sutche reuerence, by S. Auguſtines iudgemente, wée
ought to géeue onely to the VVoorde of God. Nomans Learninge or memorie
was euer infinite. But of al others, I acknowledge mine to be the weakeſte.
                  If I haue at any time miſtaken either Authoure for Authoure, or Name for
Name, or Chapter for Chapter, or Booke for Booke: as whereas in the allegatiō of
Pope Leo, in ſtéede of theſe woordes, Indiuiduam Vnitatē, I wrote, Indiuiduam
Trinitatem: or, whereas in ſtéede of theſe woordes, Paulinus ad Romanianum, I

wrote, Paulinus ad. Auguſtinum, the ſaide Epiſtle of Paulinus beinge mingled
with a whole Booke of the Epiſtles of S. Auguſtine: Or, if vpon any other like

                        〈◊〉
                     , I haue alleged either Liberius for Athanaſius, or the Arians for the Euty
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , or any one Father, or Doctoure, for an other, ſutche errours, beinge
bolde of malice, were neuer hitherto accoumpted damnable. The beſte Learned
haue oftentimes fallen into them.
                  For prouſe whereof, it were eaſy to ſaie, yt 
                     Cicero, notwithſtanding otherwiſe
a great Learned man, alleged Aiax in ſtéede of Hector, Agamemnon in ſtéede of
Vlyſſes, Eupolis in ſtéede of Ariſtophanes: That Ariſtotle alleged Calypſo in
ſtéede of Circe: That Gratian allegeth Aniceus for Anicetus, Ambroſius for Auguſtinus,
Calixtus for Anacletus, Greeke for Latine, Nevve for Olde: That
Hippolytus allegeth the Apocalyps of S. Iohn in ſtéede of Daniel: That S.
Chryſoſtome nameth Abacuk for Sophonias, and Agar for Sara. If thou be deſirous
to ſée theſe ſeueral errours further proued, it maie pleaſe thee to ſée mine Anſweare
to this ſ, Fol. 362.
                  That in the alleginge of Liberatus I leaſte out this woorde, Quodammodò,
it was onely an Erroure. For why I ſhould of pourpoſe doo it, there was no cauſe:
ſpecially that woorde bearinge in that place no greatter weight. But M. Hardinge
alleginge theſe woordes of S.Augu. in Pſal. 33 
                     Auguſtine, Chriſtus quodammodò ferebatur in
manibus ſuis,
                     
                        M. Hard. in his Anſweare to the Chalenge. Fol. 
                           •
                        08. b. not of erroure, but, as it maie be thought, of ſet pourpoſe, leafte out,
Quodammodò, as knowinge, that in that one woorde reaſted the meaninge of
the whole.
                  Briefely, what ſo euer other like erroure ſhalbe found in any my writinges, I
wil diſcharge bothe my Clerke, and the Compoſitoure, & the Printer of the ſame,
& take the whole vpon mée ſelf. I ſpeake not this for that I thinke, my Booke can
be printed without erroure: for that, in ſutche a number & varietie of allegations,
were ſcarcely poſſible. But if any erroure, what ſo euer, ſhal eſcape, as I doubte
not but there wil many, I proteſte before him, that ſéeth the harte, it walbe wholy
againſte my wil.
                  And yet maie not theſe menne ſo charge others, as if they them ſelues onely
were priuileged, and exempted from al ſutche dangers. M. Hardinge maie remember,
that he him ſelfe in ſtéede of the Prophete Oſee,
                     Confut. 46. a. hath alleged vs the Noble
Ioſua: and,Confuta. 312. b. that by an other like ouerſight, he hath alleged the Eighth Booke
of Socrates Scholaſticus, whereas Socrates neuer wrote but Seuen: As likewiſe
alſo M. Dorman allegeth the Seuenth Booke of the Storie of Theodoretus,
                     Dorman, Fol. 22.
whereas Theodoretus him ſelfe neuer wrote but Fiue. And againe, he fraieth al
Chriſtian Princes with the horrible Examples of the Tvvoo Kinges, as he ſaith,Dorman, Fol. 24.
                     Ozias, and Oza. Yet he might eaſily haue learned, that Oza was a poore Priuate
man, and neuer knowen to be a Kinge. Notwithſtandinge, in one of his late litlewoorthe
Pamflettes, confeſſinge his ouerſight herein, he ſtumbleth into an other
Erroure,Dorman, in his Requeſte. Fol. 13. as fowle, as the firſt, and bewraieth his ignorance more then before. For
nowe he telleth vs, he hath better remembred him ſelfe, that the ſaide Oza was
not a Kinge, but onely a Prophete. And yet yewis, a childe could haue tolde him,
that the ſame Oza was neither King, nor Prophete, but onely a Leuite. Let him
looke better on his bookes, and he ſhal finde it.
                  Howe be it, I woulde not, that either M. Hardinge, or M. Dorman ſhoulde
thinke, that therefore they are here charged with ignorance. Errours wil créepe
bitwéene theire fingers, be thei neuer ſo watcheful. In the heate, and drifte of writinge,
when the minde is wholy occupied, and fully bente to the ſubſtance of the
cauſe, it is an eaſy mater, by ſomme confuſion, one waie, or other, to diſorder a
woorde, or to diſplace a number, as to write either 9. for 6. or, 24. for 42. or ſomme

other like: whiche errour, though it be light in dooing, yet in the reckeninge oftentimes
is very greate. To leaue other Examples, M. Hardinge him ſelfe in his
Confutation of the Apologie,
                     Confut. 47. a. Reioind. Fol. 287. a. in ſtéede of the 22. of Luke, hathe printed the 2. of
Luke. Likewiſe in his Reioinder,
                     Reioind. Fol. 287. a. in ſtéede of theſe woordes, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
he hath printed, and ſente vs quite the contrarie, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
In one Booke of the Newe Teſtamente ſet out at Colaine,
in ſtéede of theſe woordes,1. Corin. 6. 
                     Neque Scortatores Regnum Dei poſſidebunt,
yée ſhal finde it by erroure printed thus, Neque Sacerdotes Regnum Dei poſſidebunt.
To be ſhorte, M. Hardinge in this ſelfe ſame Booke, in ſtéede of theſe
woordes,Confut. 332. a. 
                     Lulled a ſleepe, by erroure hath printed, Lulled a ſheepe. If al ſutche
childiſhe aduantages ſhoulde be taken, then coulde no writer eſcape vncontrolled.
                  Thus, good Chriſtian Reader, by the ſhorte Viewe of theſe fewe Vntruthes,
for ſo it pleaſeth theſe menne to calle them, thou maiſte the better weigh the value
and ſubſtance
                        ••
                      of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
            
            
               Tedious Repetitions.
               M. Hardinges often rehearſal, and doubling of one thing hath forced mee ſommetime
to doo the like. Whiche thing, good Reader, if vnto thee it ſhal ſéeme
ouer weariſome, I praie thee to conſider the occaſion thereof. My meaninge
was onely to doo thee good.
            
         
         
            
            To the Christian Reader.
            
               IT pitieth mee in thy behalfe, good Chriſtian
Reader, to ſée they conſcience thus aſſaulted this daie
with ſo contrarie Doctrines of Religion: and ſpecially
if thou haue a zele to folowe, and ſéeſte not, what:
and wouldeſte faine pleaſe Eod, and knoweſte not,
howe: nor findeſte thée ſelfe ſufficiently armed with
Goddes Holy Sprite: nor hable either to diſcerue thy
meate from poiſon, or to vnwinde thée ſelfe out of
the ſnares.2 Corin. 11. 
               For Satan tranſfourmeth him ſelfe into an
Angel of Light: The wicked is more watcheful, and
vehemente, then the Godly: and Falſehed is oftentimes painted, and vewtified,
and ſhineth more glorious then the Truthe.
            Theſe be the thinges,2. Tim. 2. Matthae. 24. 2. Tim. 2. Iohan. 10. Roman. 8. that, as S. Paule ſaithe, woorke the ſubuerſion of the
Hearers: and by meane whereof, as Chriſte ſaithe, if it were poſsible, the very
Bſecte of God ſhoulde be deceiued. Howe be it, God knoweth his owne: and no
Power can puſſe them out of his hande. God is hable to woorke comforte out of confuſion,
and to force his light to ſhine out of darkeneſſe. Al thinges woorke vnto good
vnto them, that be in Chriſte Ieſu. Be Falſehed neuer ſo freaſhely coloured, yet in
the ende the Truthe wil conquere.
            Notwithſtandinge, God in theſe daies hath ſo amazed the Aduerſaries of his
Goſpel, and hath cauſed them ſo openly, and ſo groſſely to laie abroade their folies,
to the ſight, and face of al the world, that noman nowe, be he neuer ſo ignorante,
can thinke, he maie iuſtely be excuſed. They deale not nowe ſo ſuttelly, as other
Heretiques in old times were woont to doo: thei hide not the lothſomeneſſe of their
errours: they cloke not them ſelues in Shéepeſkinnes: they diſſemble nothinge:
they excuſe nothing: but, without either ſhame of man, or feare of God, they rake
vp thoſe thinges, that before were buried, that themſelues had forſaken, the wiſe
had abhorred, the worlde had lothed. It had benne more policie for them, to haue
yeelded in ſommewhat, and to haue ſtaied in the reſte. So there might haue appeared
ſomme plaineneſie in theire dealinges.
            But this is Goddes iuſte iudgemente, that they, that wilfully withſtande the
Truthe,Eſai. 30. ſhoulde be geeuen ouer to mainteine Lies, as beeinge the Children of Vntruthe,
Children, that wil not heare the Lawe of God.
            
            For trial whereof, I beſeeche thée, good Reader, aduiſedly to peruſe theſe fewe
notes, truely taken out of M. Hardinges late Confutation. Iudge thereof, as
thou ſhalt ſée cauſe. Let no affection, or fantaſie cauſe thinges to ſéeme otherwiſe,
then they be.
            
               The twoo principal Groūdes of this whole Booke are theſe:
               M. Harding. fol. 334. b. 
               Firſt, That the Pope,
although he maie erre by perſonal errour, in his owne Priuate Iudgement, as a man, and as a particulare
Doctour in his owne opinion: yet as he is Pope, as he is the Succeſſour of Peter, as he is
ye Vicare of Chriſte in Earthe, and as he is the Shepheard of the Vniuerſal Churche, in Publique
Judgement, in deliberation, and Definitiue Sentence, he neuer erreth, nor neuer erred, nor neuer
can erre: As if he woulde ſaie, The Pope walkinge in his Galerie is one man: and
fittinge in Conſiſtorie, or in Iudgemente, is an other: Whiche thinge to holde,
Alphonſus de Caſtro ſaithe,
               Alphonſ. lib. 1. Cap. 4. 
               it is mere folie. Yet is this M. Hardinges chiefeſt,
or rather, as I might in manner ſaie, his onely grounde.
            
            
               The Seconde is this,
               Confu. Fol. 16. b. Fol. 261. b. The Churche of Rome is the whole, and onely Catholique
Churche of God: and, who ſo euer is not obediente vnto the ſame, muſte be iudged an 
                  ••
               leretique.
Theſe twoo groundes beinge once wel, and ſurely laied, he maie builde at
pleaſure, what him liſteth.
            
            As for the Pope, the better to countenance his eſtate, he ſaithe, that Peter receiued

thee, I beſéeche thee to conſider, with what indifferente Iudgement M. Harding
woulde haue thée to paſſe bitwéene vs.
            
               Firſte he ſaithe, What ſhould wee ſeeke for Truthe?Reioind. In 
                     〈◊〉
                   Preface to 
                     〈◊〉
                   Reader. * iij * iiij a. * iiij b. ** ij. a. Let vs onely beholde the cuſtome
of the Churche. Againe, What Argumentes, what Aſſegations, what ſhewe of diſproufe
ſo euer he bringe againſte theſe thinges, wee ought to make ſmal accoumpte thereof. Againe,
I would bleſſe mee ſelfe from him, as from the Miniſter of Satan, and as from the Diſciple of
Antichriſte, and as from Goddes open, and profeſſed enimie. Againe, M. Iewelles Replie,
and other like Hereticol Bookes, are vnlawful to be readde, by order of the Churche,
without ſpecial licence: and are vtterly forebidden to be readde, or keapte, vnder paine of Excommunication.
And againe,
               Reioind. In
                     〈◊〉
                   Preface to 
                     〈◊〉
                   Iewel. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . As for the Replie, none other waie wil ſerue, but to throwe al
into the fire.
            Of the other ſide, touching the VVoorde of God, with moſt terrible woordes
he fraieth thée from it, and biddeth thee to conſider of other thinges, and to behold,
I knowe not,Confu
                     •
                  . 212 
                     〈◊〉
                   Reioind. in 
                     〈◊〉
                   Preface to 
                     〈◊〉
                   Reader. what. Yee proſtitute the Scriptures, he ſaith, as Baudes doo their Harlottes,
to the Vngodly, Vnlearned, Raſcal people: Againe, Prentiſes, Light Perſonnes, and
the rifferaffe of the people: And againe, The Vnlearned people were keapte from the
Reading of the Scriptures by the ſpecial prouidence of God, that pretious ſtoanes ſhould not be
throwen before Swine.
               M Har. in his Anſweare, Artic. 15. Diui. 7. In ſutche regarde theſe menne haue, as wel the Holy Scriptures,
as alſo the People of God. The scriptures they reſemble to common
Harlottes, and the vileſte creatures of the ſtewes: The people of God they calle,
Vngodly, Raſcalles, Rifferaffe, and Filthy Svvine.
            
            Thus he ſuffereth thée not to reade, either my poore Booke, whereof thou
ſhouldeſt Iudge: or the Holy VVoorde of God, whereby thou mighteſt he hable
to Iudge: but onely biddeth thée to folowe him, and to ſaie, as he ſaithe: and al is
ſafe. Thus, firſte he blindeth thine eies, and then willeth thee to looke aboute, and
to condemne the thinge,Hierony. in Eſaiam, lib. 9. ca. 30. thou neuer kneweſte. So ſaithe S. Hierome, Iſti tantam
ſibi aſſumunt Authoritatem, vt ſiue dextra doceant, ſiue ſiniſtra, id eſt, ſiue
bona, ſiue mala, nolint Diſcipulos ratione diſcutere, ſed ſe praeceſſores ſequi:
Theſe menne take ſo mutche vpon them ſelues, that, whether they teache with the Right
hande, or with the Lefte, that is to ſaie, whether they teache good thinges, or badde, they
wil not haue theire Hearers, or Learners, to enquire cauſes, wherefore they ſhoulde doo this,
or that: but onely to folowe them, beeing theire Leaders.
               
            
            But beware, I beſéeche, thée, good Chriſtian Reader. A ſimple eie is ſoone beguiled.
It is very courſe Woolle, yt wil take no coloure. It is a deſperate cauſe, yt with
woordes, and eloquence maie not be ſmoothed. Be not deceiued. Remember, of
what maters, and with what Aduerſaries thou haſte to deale. With feace, and
reuerence be careful of thine owne Saluation. Laie downe al affection, and fauoure
of parties. Iudge iuſtely of that ſhalbe alleged. Onleſſe thou knowe, thou
canſte not Iudge: Onleſſe thou heare bothe ſides, thou canſte not knowe. If thou
like ought, knowe, why thou likeſte it. A wiſe man in eche thinge wil ſearche the
cauſe. He, that cannot iudge golde by ſounde, or inſight, yet maie trie it by the
poiſe. If thou canſte not weigh theſe maters, for want of Learninge, yet, ſo
ſenſible, and ſo groſſe they are, thou maiſte féele them with thy fingers. Thou
maiſte ſoone finde a difference bitwéene Golde, and Braſſe: bitweene Iacob, and
Eſau: bitwéene a Face, and a Viſarde: bitweene a fuile Body, and an emptie Shadowe.
            
               Saie not, Thou arte ſettled in thy Beliefe, before thou know it. Vaine Faith,
is no Faithe.Auguſt De Tempore. Sermon 145. Auguſt. in quae
                  
                     •
                  ion. Veter. Teſtamen quaeſt. 43. 
               S. Auguſtines counſel is good: Beleeu: nomore of Chriſte, then
Chriſt hath willed thee to beleeue:
                Nemo de Chriſto credat, niſi, quod de ſe credi voluit
Chriſtus. Likewiſe he ſaithe, Fides ſtulta non prodeſt, ſed obeſt: Fonde
Faith is hurtful, and dooth no good. S.
                Hilarie ſaithe, Non minus eſt, Deum fingere,

quàm negare:Hilar. in Pſal. 1. 
               To diuiſe fanſies of God, it is as horrible, as to ſaie, There is no God.
            
            
               The Anciente Father Tertullian, ſpeakinge of the Enimies of the Croſſe of
Chriſte, that diſdeigned to ſubmitte theire willes to the wil of God, ſaithe thus:
Amant ignorare,
               
               Tertull. in Apologetico. 
               cùm alij gaudeant cognouiſſe. Malunt neſcire, quod iam oderunt.
Adeo' quod neſciunt, praeiudicant id eſſe, quod, ſi ſcirent, odiſſe non poſſent:
They deſire to be ignorante, whereas other folkes deſire to knowe. They woulde not
knowe the Truthe, bicauſe they hate it. (What ſo euer it be) they imagine it to be the ſame
thinge, that they hate. But if they knewe it in deede, thei coulde not hate it. Let Reaſon
leade thee: let Authoritie moue thée: let Truthe enforce thée. The VViſeman
ſaithe,
               Eccleſ. 2. Who ſo feareth the Lorde, wil not be wilful againſte his Woorde. God of his
mercie confounde al Errours: géeue the Victorie to his Truthe: and Glorie to his
Holy name, Amen.
            
            
               From London. 27. Octobris, 1567.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧AN ANSWEARE TO A CERtaine
Booke lately ſet foorth by M. Hardinge,
and entituled, A Confutation of the
Apologie of the Churche of Englande.
            
               The Title of the Apologie.
               AN Apologie, or anſweare in defence of the Churche of Englande,
with a briefe, and plaine declaration of the true
Religion profeſſed, and vſed in the ſame.
               
                  The Confutation by M. Hardinge.
                  Whereas theſe defenders take vpon them the name of the Churche of Englande,The de
                           •
                        enders likened to Eſopes Aſſe. ſettinge forth
thereby a face of auctoritie, they do muche like the Aſſe that Eſope telleth of, whiche, to make the
beaſtes afrayed, had put on him a Lions ſkinne, and therewith ietted abroade terribly. For as the
Lions ſkinne was but lapped about him,The vvonte of all Herctiques. Heretiques likened to Apes. The name and reputation of the Churche chalenged by Heretiques. and grewe not to his bodie: ſo they beinge in deede no liuely
members nor parte of the Churche, couer them ſelues vnder the title and name of the Churche, the rather
to begyle the ſimple. And verely herein they folowe the wonte of all Heretikes. For neuer was
there any ſecte of Heretikes hitherto, whiche hath not claimed to be accōpted and called the Church.
For whiche cauſe of certaine auncient Fathers they haue bene likened to Apes, whoſe propertie is,
though they be Apes, yet to counterfeit men, and to court to ſeeme men. Nouatianus, at ſaithe S.
Cyprian, after the manner of Apes, woulde chalenge to him ſelfe the auctoritie of the Catholike
Churche. And where as himſelfe was not in the Churche, but contrariwiſe a rebell againſt the
Churche,In epiſt, ad Iubainū de Haereticis baptizādis. tooke vpon him to affirme, that al other were Heretikes, and preſumed tovpholde, the Churche
was on his ſide. Irenaeus and Tertullian, who were before him, write, that Heretikes made ſo much
adoo to perſwade,De praeſcript. haeret. that the Churche was amonge them ſelues onely, that they feared not to call the
right beleuinge and Catholike Churche, Hereticall and Schiſmaticall. S. Hilary declaringe how patiently
he demeaned himſelfe towardes the Arians his enemies,Contra Conſtantium. by whome he was banniſshed, writeth,
that in fiue yeares ſpace, whiles he liued in banniſhment, he neuer ſpake nor wrote euill woorde againſt
them,Auguſt. contra epiſt. Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 1. whiche falſely ſaid them ſelues to be the Churche of Chriſte, and were the Synagoge of
Antichriſt. The Donatiſles, againſt whome S. Auguſtine wrote muche, ſaide, that the Chriſtianitie
was quite loſte and gone out of ſo many nations that be in the worlde, and remained onely in Aphrike,
and that the Churche was onely there.Bernard. in cāt. Sermo. 66. In S. Bernardes time alſo the Heretikes who would be called
Apoſtolikes, as they of our time call themſelues Goſpellers, ſaide that they were the Churche.
                  But what meane all Heretikes (maye we iudge) by couetinge ſo muche to be ſeene that whiche
they are not?Apoſtolici. VVhat meane Heretiques by chalenginge vnto them the name and eſtimation of the Churche. Forſooth they meane none other thinge, then their Father the Deuill meaneth, when
he goeth about to begile man. For then what dothe he? vſeth he not this policie, to chaunge his
owggly hewe, and put himſelfe in goodly ſhape of an Angell of light? For he is not vnwittinge,
that if he ſhewed himſelfe in his owne forme, ſuche as he is, that euery one woulde flie from him,
and none lightly woulde be deceiued by him. Heretikes doo the like. Although they hate the
Churche neuer ſo deadly, yet to haue the more oportunitie to hurte it,2. Cor. 11. pretende themſelues to be
of the Churche.The eſtimation and auctoritie of the Church. Lucae. 10. Matth. 18. 1. Tim. 3. Epheſ. 1. Oſeae. 2. Pſalm. 131. Gene. 
                           •
                        . For they be not ignorant, howe greate the auctoritie of the Churche is. Of whoſe
gouernours Chriſte ſaied, he that heareth you, heareth me: and he that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth
me. And againe, Tell the Churche. They conſider in what credite the Churche is with all Chriſten
people: howe they ſtaye themſelues by it, as beinge the pillour and grounde of the truthe: howe they
Loue her, euen as their common Mother, howe they honour it, as the Body and fulnes of Chriſte, as
the ſpouſe of Chriſte through Faithe, accordinge to that is written, I will deſpouſe thee to me in faithe:
As the true Syon, whiche our Lorde hath choſen to be his habitation, and his reſtinge place for euer:
As the ſafe Arke to keepe vs from drowninge in the dangerous Seas of this worlde; out of whiche

noleſſe then once out of the Arke of Noe, is noſaluation. Againe they know the Churche muſt needes
be greatly eſteemed amonge all the godly, for the ſingular promiſer Chriſte hath made to it, that he
would be with it all daies to the ende of the worlde: That he would pray to his father for the holy
Ghoſt to be giuen to it, the ſpirite of truthe to remaine withit for euer. But as Heretikes impugne
the lawe by the woordes of the lawe,In comment. in epiſt, ad Tir. cap. 3. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      S. Ambroſe ſaithe ſo to ouer throwe the Churche, they preſume
to take vnto them the name of the Churche. But what doo 
                        〈◊〉
                      when they are vrged and
wroonge, when by force of argumentes they are ſtraighted, and as it were driuen to the walle? when
it is plainely proued to their face, whiche is ſone done that they be not in, nor of the Churche, ſpecially
beinge of Hereſie openly denounced,The vvonte of the Goſpellers being excommunicate out of the Church. and by iuſt Excommunication cutte of from the Churche? In this
caſe the practiſe of the Goſpellers is, vtterly to ſette the Churche, as taught, and with a hote raging
ſpirite to defie it, and to ſaye, that themſelues be the Catholike Churche, and that the Catholikes be the
Papiſticall Churche, the Churche of Antichriſt, the where of 
                        〈◊〉
                      a deune of Theeues, and I can
not tell what.
               
               
                  The Anſweare by the Biſhop
of Sarisburie.
                  
                     TO anſweare M. Hardinge to euery parcel of his Booke, beinge
ſo longe, it would be too tedious. Wherefore leauinge many his
impertinent ſpeaches, & other vnneceſſarie and waſte woordes,
whiche ſundrie his frendes thinke, he might better haue ſpared,
I wil touche onely ſo mutche thereof, as ſhal beare ſomme ſhewe
of ſubſtance, & may any way ſeeme woorthy to be anſweared.
                  Firſte touchynge the Churche of God, we beleue, and confeſſe al that M. Hardinge
hath here ſaide,1. Timot. 3. Epheſ. 1. or otherwiſe can be ſaide. It is the Piller of the Truthe, the
Body, the Fulneſſe, and Spouſe of Chriſte. Al theſe woordes are vndoubtedly true
and certaine. And therefore, M. Hardinge, you are the more blamewoorthy, that
of the Houſe of God, beyng ſo glorious, haue made a caue of Théeues: & haue turned
the beutie of Sion into the confuſion of Babylon.
                  True it is, that Heretiques haue euermore apparelled them ſelues with the
name of the Churche: as Antichriſte alſo ſhal procure him ſelfe credite vnder the
name of Chriſte. Thus did your Fathers, M. Harding, lōge agoe. They ſaide then,
euen as you ſay now,Iohan. 8. Hierem. 7. Hierem. 18. 
                     We are the Children of Abraham: we are the Euheretours of Goddes
promiſes: we haue the Temple of God, the Temple of God. The Lawe ſhal neuer paſſe frō the
Prieſte, nor counſel from the wiſe, nor the woorde from the prophete. Thus coutinuinge
wilfully in the open breache of Goddes commaundement, neuertheleſſe they cheariſhed
them ſelues then, as you doo nowe, onely with the bare title of the Churche:
in whoſe name what ſo euer credit ye can any wiſe winne, your meaninge is, ſkilfully
to conueigh the ſame ouer wholy to the Churche of Rome: as if that Churche
onely were the Churche of God,De Maior. & Obedi. vnam Sanctam. Diſt. 22. Omnes. & without that there were no hope of Saluation:
And therefore you defende, and holde for trueth, that your Churche hath authoritie
aboue Goddes Woorde. And Pope Nicolas ſaithe, Who ſo denieth the Priuilege, and
Supremacie of the See of Rome, hath renounced the Faithe, and is an Heretique. And thus,
as Leo ſaithe,Leo Epiſt. 83. Ad Palaeſtinos. 
                     Eccleſiae nomine armamini, & contra Eccleſiam dimicatis: Ye arme your
ſelues with the name of the Churche, and yet ye fight againſt the Churche.
                      Likewiſe ſaithe S.
Cyprian,Cypri. De Simplicitate praela. 
                     Diabolus excogitauit nouam fraudem, vt ſub ipſo nominis Chriſtiani titulo
fallat incautos: The Diuel hath diuiſed a new kinde of policie, vnder the very title of the
name of Chriſte to deceiue the ſimple.
                     
                  
                  Nowe concerninge that hote raginge Sprite, wherewith M. Hardinge ſaithe,
the Goſpellers deſte the Churche and ſet it at naught, verily I thinke it a harde
matter for any Goſpeller, be he neuer ſo hote, in ſuche kinde of eloquence to matche

M. Hardinge. Neither yet maye he wel condemne al ſuche, as in the like caſes haue
bene hote,Eſa
                           •
                        . 1. Matth. 3. Matthae. 23. Iohan. 8. & earneſt. Eſay the Prophete ſaithe, O ye Princes of Sodome, and ye people
of Gomorrha:
                      Iohn the Baptiſt ſaithe to the Scribes, and Phariſeis, O ye Serpentes,
ye generation of Vipers, and Adders:
                      Chriſte ſaithe vnto them, Woe be vnto you, ye
Scribes, and Phariſeis, ye hypocrites: Ye are of your Father the Diuel. In theſe eramples
wée ſée, the Sprite of God can ſometimes be hote and earneſt againſt the deceiuers
of the people, and the profeſſed enimies of the Croſſe of Chriſte. Neither
did either Eſay the Prophete, or Iohn the Baptiſte, or Chriſte deſie the Churche of
God, and ſet it at naught, as M. Hardinge imagineth of vs: but rather by theſe
ſeruent ſpeaches vttered the vehement zele, and iuſte griefe, they had conceiued
againſt them, that vnder the name of the Churche abuſed Goddes people, and
defaced the Churche.
                  For they are not al Heretiques, M. Hardinge, that this daie eſpie your groſſe,
and palpable errours, and mourne to God for reformation. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Non debet Ouis pellem ſuam deponere,
                     Auguſt. Lib. 2. De Sermon. Dom
                           •
                        . in monte. 
                     qu
                           •
                        d Lupi aliquando ſe ea contegant: It is no
reaſon, the Sheepe ſhould therefore leaue of his flieſe, for that he ſeeth the Woulfe ſometime
in the ſame apparel.
                      Likewiſe, it is no reaſon, that wée ſhould therfore geue ouer the
right, and enheritance, wée haue in the Churche of God, for that you by intruſion,
and vniuſte meanes haue intituled your ſelues vnto the ſame.Iohan. 5. It behooueth vs rather,
to ſearche the Scriptures, as Chriſte hath aduiſed vs, & thereby to aſſure our
ſelues of the Churche of God. For by this trial onely, and by none other, it maye
be knowen.Ephe. 1. Therfore S. Paule calleth the Churche the Spouſe of Chriſte, for that
ſhe ought in al thinges to geue eare to the voice of the Bridegrooms. Likewiſe he
calleth the Churche the Piller of the Truthe,1. Timo. 3. for that ſhée ſtaieth her ſelfe onely by
the Woorde of God: Without whiche Woorde y• Churche. were it neuer ſo bewtiful.
ſhould be no Churche.Irenae. Lib. 3. Cap. 11. The Ancient Father Irenaeus ſaithe, Columna, & firmamentum
Eccleſiae eſt Euangelium, & Spritus vitae: The Piller and buttreſſe of the Churche is
the Goſpel,
                     
                     Auguſt. De vnita. Eccle. Cap. 3. 
                     and the Sprite of life. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Sunt certi Libri Dominici, quorum
authoritari vtrique conſentimus: Ibi quaeramus Eccleſiam: ibi diſcutiamus cauſam
noſtram: There be certaine Bookes of our Lorde, vnto the authoritie whereof eche parte
agreethe. There let vs ſeeke for the Churche: thereby ſette vs examine and trie our maters.
                     
And againe,Auguſt. in eodē Cap. 
                     Nolo humanis documentis, ſed Diuinis oraculis ſanctam Eccleſiam demō
                        ſtrari:
I wil, ye ſhewe me the holy Churche, not by decrees of menne, but by the woorde of
God.
                     
                     Chryſoſtom. In Opere Imperfecto, Homi. 49. Chryſoſtom. in eadem Homilia. Likewiſe ſaithe Chryſoſtome, Nullo modo cognoſcitur, quae ſit vera Eccleſia
Chriſti, niſi tantummodo' per Scripturas: It can no waye be knowen, what is the Churche,
but onely by the Scriptures.
                      And againe, Chriſtus mandat, vt volentes firmitatem accipere
Verae Fidei, ad nullam rem fugiant, niſi ad Scripturas. Alioqui, ſi ad alia reſpexerint,
Scandalizabuntur, & peribunt, non intelligentes, quae ſit vera Eccleſia. Et per hoc incident
in Abominationē Deſolationis, quae ſtat in Locis Sanctis Eccleſiae: Chriſte commaundeth,
that who ſo wil haue the aſſurance of True Faithe, ſeeke to nothinge els, but vnto the
Scriptures. Otherwiſe, if they looke to any thinge els, they ſhalbe offended, and ſhal periſhe,
not vnderſtanding,
                     
                     Daniel. 9. Matth. 24. 
                     whiche is the True Churche. And by meane here of they ſhal fal into the
Abomination of Deſolation, whiche ſtandeth in the Holy Places of the Churche.
                  
                  By theſe Ancient learned Fathers it is plaine, that the Churche of God is
knowen by Godde
                        •
                      Woorde onely, & none otherwiſe. And therfore M. Hardinge,
you ſo carefully flée the ſame, and condemne it for Hereſie, and often burne it, leſte
thereby the deformities of youre Churche ſhould be knowen.Iohan. 3. For the il dooer fleeth
the light.
                  Nowe, where as it ſo wel liketh M. Hardinge to cal vs al Heretiques, and for
his pleaſures ſake to liken vs to Apes, to Aſſes, and to the Diuel, notwithſtanding
we might ſafely returne the ſame whole, from whence it came, yet I thinke it not

ſéemely, nor greatly to purpoſe to anſweare al ſuche intemperate humours. Salomons
aduiſe is good,Prouerb. 26. Anſweare not folie with like folie. Notwithſtandinge, the
poore ſimple Aſſe, vnto whome wée are compared, was hable ſometime to ſée the
Angel of God,Numer. 22. and to open his mouthe, and to ſpeake, and to reproue the lewde attempte
of Balaam the falſe Prophete. What ſo euer accoumpt it pleaſeth M. Hardinge
to make of vs, by the grace of God wée are that wée are. Yf wée be hable to
beare Chriſte with his Croſſe, it is ſufficient.
                  But who they be, that haue of longe time ietted ſo terribly vnder the Lions
ſkinne, and onely with a painted Viſarde, or emptie name of the Churche, haue feared
al the cattel of the fielde, it is néedeleſſe to ſpeake it: the worlde now ſeeth it: it
can no longer be diſſembled. Euen he, that lately bare him ſelfe as the Lion of the
tribe of Iuda, & called him ſelfeAuguſtinus Steuchus, de Primatu. Kinge of Kinges, andSee the fifthe parte hereof, the 6. Cap. and. 15. Diuiſion. ſaid, he had power ouer the
Angels of God, and amaſed the hartes of the ſimple with the terrour of his Lions
pelte, onely for that he ſate in Peters Chaire is now reuefled and better knowen,
and eſtéemed as he is woorthy: he may nowe iette vp and downe with more eaſe,
and leſſe terrour. And why ſo? Theſe poore Aſſes, whome M. Hardinge ſo muche
diſdeigneth, haue ſtripte of his counterfeite ſkinne, that made him ſo hardy, and
haue cauſed him to appeare euen as he is.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 1.
               It hath bene an olde complainte, euen from the firſt time of the
Patriarkes and Prophetes, and confirmed by the writinges and teſtimonies
of euery age, that the Truthe wandereth here and there as
a ſtraunger in the worlde,Tertull. in Apologetico. & dothe readily finde enimies and ſclaunderers
amongſt thoſe, that knowe her not. Albeit perchaunce this may
ſeeme vnto ſome a thinge harde to be beleeued, I meane to ſuche as
haue ſcante wel and narowly taken heede thereunto, ſpecially ſeing al
mankinde of natures very motion without a teacher doth coueite the
Truthe of their owne accorde: and ſeinge our Saueour Chriſte him
ſelf, when he was on earth, would be called the Truthe, as by a name
moſte fitte to expreſſe al his diuine power. Yet we, whiche haue bene
exerciſed in the holy Scriptures, and whiche haue both reade & ſeene,
what hath happened to al godly menne commonly at al times, what
to the Prophetes, to the Apoſtles, to the Holy Martyres, and what
to Chriſte him ſelfe: with what rebukes, reuilinges, and deſpites
they were continually vexed, whiles they here liued, & that onely for
the Truthes ſake: Wee (I ſaye) doo ſee, that this is not onely no newe
thinge, or harde to be beleued, but that it is a thinge already receiued,
and commonly vſed from age to age. Nay truely, this might ſeeme
muche rather a merueile,Iohan. 8. and beyonde al beliefe, if the Diuel, who is
the Father of lies, & enimie to al Truthe, would now vpon a ſuddaine
chaunge his nature, and hope, that Truthe might otherwiſe be ſuppreſſed,
then by belieinge it: Or that he would beginn
                     •
                   to eſtabliſh his
owne kingdome by vſinge nowe any other practiſes, then the ſame,
whiche he hath euer vſed from the beginninge. For ſince any mans
remembrance, we can ſkante finde one time, either when Religion
did firſt growe, or when it was ſetled, or when it did afreſhe ſpringe
vp againe, wherein Truthe & Innocencie were not by al vnwoorthy
meanes, & moſt deſpitefully intreated. Doubtleſſe the Diuel wel ſeeth,

that ſo longe as truthe is in good ſafetie, him ſelfe cannot be ſafe, nor
yet maintaine his owne eſtate.
               For, letting paſſe the auncient Patriarkes & Prophetes, who, as
we haue ſaid, had no parte of their life free from cōtumelies & ſclaunders:
We knowe, there were certaine in times paſte, whiche ſaide and
commonly Preached,Cornel. Tacit
                        ••
                     . that the olde auncient Iewes (of whome we
make no doubte but they were the woorſhippers of the onely & true
God) did worſhip either a Sowe, or an Aſſe in Goddes ſteede: and that
al the ſame Religion was nothinge els, but ſacrilege, and a plaine
contempt of al godlines. We know alſo, that the Sonne of God, our
Saueour Ieſus Chriſte, when he taught the Truth, was coumpted
a Sorcerer & an Enchaunter, a Samaritane, Beelzebub, a deceiur
of the People, a Drunkarde, & a Glutton. Againe, who woteth not,
what woordes were ſpoken againſt S. Paule, the moſte earneſt and
vehement Preacher, & maintainer of the Truthe? Sometime, that
he was a ſeditious and buſie man, a raiſer of tumultes, a cauſer of rebellion:
ſometime againe, that he was an Heretique: ſometime, that
he was mad: ſometime, that onely vpon ſtrife and ſtomake he was
bothe a blaſphemer of Gods lawe, and a deſpiſer of the Fathers ordinances.
Further who knoweth not, how S. Steuin, after he had
throughly and ſincerely embraced the truthe, and beganne frankly &
ſtoutly to preache and ſet forth the ſame, as he ought to doo, was immediately
called to anſweare for his life, as one that had wickedly vttered
diſdainful and haynous woordes againſt the Lawe, againſt
Moyſes, againſt the Temple, and againſt God? Or who is ignorant,
that in times paſt there were ſome, whiche reproued the holy Scriptures
of falſehed, ſayinge, they conteined thinges bothe contrary, and
quite one againſt an other:Marion, ex Tertul. and howe that the Apoſtles of Chriſte did
ſeuerally diſagree betwixt them ſelues, and that S. Paule did varie
from them al?Aelius, è Lactās. And not to make reherſal of al, for that were an endles
labour,Euſeb. Li. 5. C. 11. who knoweth not, after what ſorte our Fathers were railed
vpon in times paſte,Tertul. in Apologe. whiche firſt began to acknowledge and profeſſe
the name of Chriſte: how they made priuate conſpiracies, deuiſed ſecrete
Counſels againſt the common wealth, and to that ende made
early and priuie meetinges in the darke, killed yonge Babes, fedde
them ſelues with mens fleaſhe, and like ſauage and brute beaſtes, did
drinke their Bloude? In concluſion, how that after they had put out
the candels, they cōmitted Adulterie betwene them ſelues, & without
regarde wrought inceſt one with an other: that Brethern laie with
their Siſters, Sonnes with their Mothers, without any reuerence
of nature or kinne, without ſhame, without difference: and that they
were wicked men without al care of Religion, and without any opinion
of God, being the very enimies of mankinde, vnwoorthy to be
ſuffered in the worlde, and vnwoorthy of life?
               Al theſe thinges were ſpoken in thoſe daies againſt the people of
God, againſt Chriſte Ieſus, againſt Paule, againſt Steuin, and againſt
al them, whoſoeuer they were, whiche at the firſte beginninge
imbraced the truthe of the Goſpel, & were contented to be called by the

name of Chriſtians: whiche was then an hateful name amonge the
common people.Tertull. in Apolo. Cap. 3. And although the thinges whiche they ſaide, were
not true, yet the Diuel thought it ſhould be ſufficient for him, if at the
leaſt he coulde bringe it ſo to paſſe, as they might be beleued for true:
and that the Chriſtians might be brought into a common hatred of
euery bodie, and haue their death and deſtruction ſought of al ſortes.
Herevpon Kinges & Princes beinge ledde then by ſuche perſuaſions,
killed al the Prophetes of God, lettinge none eſcape: Eſay with a
ſawe, Ieremie with ſtones, Daniel with Lions, Amos with an iron
barre, Paule with the ſwerde, and Chriſte vpon the Croſſe: and cō
                  demned
al Chriſtians to impriſonmentes, to tormentes, to the pikes,
to be throwne downe headlong frō rockes and ſteepe places,Suetonius Trā
                     quil. in Nerone. to be caſt
to wilde beaſtes, and to be burnt: and made great fiers of theyr quicke
bodies, for the onely purpoſe to giue light by night, & for a very ſcorne
and mockynge ſtocke: and did compte them no better, then the vileſt
filthe, the ofſcouringes and laughinge games of the whole worlde.
Thus (as ye ſee) haue the Authours and profeſſours of the truthe euer
bene entreated.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Who would not thinke, theſe defenders were true men, that in the beginninge of their Apologie
ſpeake ſo muche of the truthe? Yet who knoweth not, that oftentimes euil meaninge is hidde
vnder good woordes? Who hath not hearde, that filthy queanes in time and place vſe the honeſt talke
of chaſte matrones? The theefe commendeth iuſte dealinges, and many times ſhewithe a ſtomake againſt
falſe harlottes,1. Corinth. 11. noman more. Amonge al none pretende truthe in wordes ſo muche as Heretiques.
I feare me, ſaithe S. Paule, leſt, as the Serpente beguiled Eue by his ſutteltie, ſo your wittes be corrupted,
and fallen away from that plainenes. Whiche is in Chriſte. The Apoſtle feared becauſe of
the craftie Iewes: who the rather to deceiue, mingled scriptures with their owne traditions, and
truthe with falſ head. So bringeth the Heretique his hearer to errour in faithe by coloure and pretence
of truthe.
                  They are muche like to the Manicheis,De Vtilita. Credendi ad Honoratū. Lib. 1. Ca. 1. Cōfeſſ. li. 5. ca. 6. Matth. 7. who promiſed their hearers to diſcuſſe, and ſet forthe
the truthe moſte euidently vnto them, and to deliuer them from all maner of errours. By whiche faire
promiſes S. Auguſtine was allured to be a diligent ſcholar of theirs for the ſpace of nine yeres.
                  Chriſte gaue vs a leſſon howe to diſcerne them. By their fruites ye ſhall knowe them, ſaithe he.
And nowe to you Sirs. Euen in the beginninge, and as I may ſaie, in the foreheade of your Apologie,
whiles I examine it diligently, I finde two foule faultes: the one in your Rhetorike, the other
in your Logike. By whiche two faultes bothe the vnſ kil of your secretarie, and the weakenes of
your mater maie be eſpied, as the Aſſe, I ſpake of right nowe, was by his two eares ſtaringe out vnder
the Lions ſkinne. Your diuinitie is nothinge els in groſſe, but a lumpe of lies, errours and Hereſies.
                  Firſt touching your Rhetorike, emongſt many faultie proemes, one of the woorſt is that, which
is ſuche, as the aduerſary may vſe: whiche by them is called Exordium commune, that is to wite,
ſuche a beginninge, as will ſerue the defendant, no leſſe then the Plaintife, or contrariwiſe. Of
that ſorte is the beginninge of your Apologie. For declaringe at large, that truthe hath euer beene
perſecuted, what ſaithe it therein (the faultes amended) that we may not ſaie the ſame? That shipmaiſter
is accoumpted very bad, who at the ſettinge out of the hauen driueth the Ship on the rockes.
                  Alleaginge Tertullian to healpe your cauſe, ye iniurie the Doctor by alteringe his wordes. Ye
were not wiſe, by falſifiyng the firſt ſentence, ſo muche to impaire your credite. Tertullian ſaith not,
that truthe readily findeth enimies and ſclaunderers amongſt thoſe, that knowe her not: but that truthe
ſone findeth enimies inter extraneos, amongſt aliantes and ſtrangers. Now the Chriſtian Catholikes,
whom ye call Papiſtes, be not in reſpecte of the truthe aliantes, and ſtrangers. For your ſelues in ſundry

places of your Booke reproue them for reſiſtinge the truthe whiche they knowe.
                  You haue geuen Tertullian a newe liuerie with your owne badge, and haue made exchaunge
of Extraneos with Ignotos. Tertullian meante by aliantes no other then Infidels, and Paynimes:
emonge whom Chriſten people then liued, and were daily perſecuted. But after the Goſpel had benne
ſounded abrode by the Apoſtles, and their ſucceſſours through al the earth, after that the Emperours
them ſelues, and all the people euery where had receiued the faithe, then was the truthe no more a
wanderer, ſtrangers or Pilgrime in the earthe.
               
               
                  The Biſhop of Sarisburie.
                  Touchinge this compariſon of whoores, and Théeues, and other like M. Hardinges
vngentle ſpéeches, as I haue before proteſted, I wil ſaye nothinge. He is
very doumbe, and can ſpeake but litle, that cannot ſpeake it.
                  It is true, M. Hardinge, that you ſaie: Moſt Lyers oftentimes pretende moſt
Truthe: as, if there were none other example, maye ſoone appeare by the whole tenour
and ſubſtance of your Bookes. The Diuel him ſelfe, the better to founde his
Lyes, beareth him ſelfe oftentimes as the Angel of Truthe.
                  But the example,2. Corinth. 11 that ye bringe of the Iewes, who, as you ſaie, the rather
to deceiue, mingled Scripture with their owne Traditions, and Truthe with
Falſehed, maketh moſte plainely againſt your ſelfe. For you knowe, that this
is the general compiainte of al the Godly this daye throughout the whole Churche
of God,Matth. 15. Hierem. 2. that you haue mingled your Leade with the Lordes Goulde, and haue filled
the Lordes Harueſt ful of your Darnel: that you haue broken Goddes manifeſt
cōmaundementes, to vpholde, & mainteine your owne Traditions: That you haue
damned vp the Springes of the Water of Life,Hierem. 23. & haue broken vp puddles of your
owne,2. Corinth. 11. ſuche as be hable to holde no water: That for your dreames ſake you haue
cauſed the people to forgeat the name of God, & haue ledde them from that ſimplicitie,
that is in Chriſt Ieſu. This is the mingling of Traditions with the Scriptures
of God. I marueile, ye coulde ſo fréely vtter ſo muche, and ſo directly againſt
your ſelfe.
                  As for the example of the Manicheis, it was vtterly impertinent, and from
the purpoſe. Yet (Good Reader) that thou maiſte vnderſtande, what manner of
Heretiques theiſe Manicheis were, and what errours they defended, firſt thy forebade
lawful mariage, and allowed fornication, as M. HardingesSee what is anſweared in the fourth pare herof, Ca. 1. Di. 1. Catholiques doo
nowe. So ſaith S. Auguſtine of them,In quaeſt. in Nouum Teſtam. Quae. 72. 
                     Nuptiarum aditus intercludunt: & promiſcu
                           •
                        
conuenire hortantur.
                     Leo Serm. 4. de Quadrageſima. Secondly they receiued, & miniſtred the Holy Myſteries vnder
one kinde, contrary to the general order of the Catholique Churche. And ſo
doeth M. Harding now.Aug. Epiſt. 19. Thirdly they yelded more credite to their owne diuiſes,
then to Goddes Holy woorde.Auguſt. con. Fauſtum. Lib. 32. Cap. 19. And where as the Scriptures were plaine againſt
them, they ſaide, euen asM. Hardinge Fol. 220. b. M. Hardinge ſaithe, the Scriptures were falſified, and ful of
errours.
                     Augu. de Morib. Mantchae. Lib. 2. Cap. 15. Peregrinas & exquiſitas f
                           •
                        uges multis ferculis variatas. Fourthly they abſtained from fleaſhe: and yet in their faſte, they had & vſed
al manner delicate and ſtrange fruites, with ſundrie ſortes of Spices in greate
abundance:Aug. De Morib. Manichae. Lib. 2. Cap. 13. They abſteined from Wine, & yet vſed other liquours more deintie,
and pretious, then any Wine, and thereof dranke while their bellies would holde.
S. Auguſtines woordes thereof be theſe, Diſtenti, et crepantes, I leaue ye reſt. Nowe
iudge thou, gentle Reader, whether partie ſéemeth beſt to reſemble the Manichets.
                  But whereas he thus vpbraideth vs, By their fruites ye ſhal knowe them. Verily
whiles the Biſhop of Rome euen in the Cittie of Rome mainteineth his houſes of
Ribaudrie and open Stewes, and M. Hardinge is ready, & hable by his eloquence
and Diuinitie to defende the ſame, they haue no iuſte cauſe, greatly to boaſte them
ſelues of their fruites. Howe be it, it maye be thought, Chriſt gaue vs this leſſon,
not thereby to trie the true Doctrine from the falſe, but a true profeſſour from an

Hypocrite. Otherwiſe our liues muſte be tried by the Goſpel, not the Goſpel by
our liues.
                  Nowe let vs examine that Horrible Hereſie, that M. Hardinge hathe eſpied in
the Rules of Rhetorique, by whiche, ſaithe he, the Secretaries vnſkil is betraied,
euen in the foreheade of our Booke. This entrie, ſaithe M. Hardinge, touchinge
the complainte of Truthe, is ſo indifferent and common to bothe the parties, that
either maie vſe it, as wel as other. Whiche kinde of beginninge, ſaithe he, is called
Exordium commune, and by the learned in Rhetorique is miſliked as faultie. Firſt
of al, M. Hardinge, this ſéemeth to me a ſtrange kinde of beginninge, in ſo déepe a
diſputation of Diuinitie, to make your firſt quarrel vnto Rhetorique. Bilike for
lacke of better Entrie, ye thought it good to ruſhe in as you might. In déede either
of vs maie ſéeme to ſtande in defence of Truthe. I denie it not. For as we haue
the ſubſtance, and Truthe it ſelfe, ſo are you contente to claime the name. And
ſo far forthe Truthe is common to vs bothe.Origen. contra Celſum, Li. 3. & Lib. 4. So the wicked Heathens Celſus, &
Antiphon, notwithſtandinge they publiſhed their Bookes againſt the Truthe, yet
they entituled the ſame 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the Booke of Truthe. S. Hierome ſaithe,
Mendacium ſemper imitatur Veritatem. Falſhed euermore beareth a ſhewe of Truthe.
                      In
this ſorte Truthe is common to either partie.Origen in Matthae. Tract. 27. Origen ſaithe, Veritas Chriſtus: ſimulata
Veritas Antichriſtus. Chriſt is the Truth it ſelfe: Antichriſt is the Truth countrefeite.
                     
Al this notwithſtandinge, Chriſt refuſed not to vſe the ſame kinde of entrie, that
M. Hardinge ſo muche miſtiketh:Iohan. 8. Roman. 1. but ſaide vnto the Phariſeis, Ye ſeeke to minder
me, a man that haue tolde you the Truthe. And S. Paule to the Romaines ſaithe,
They haue turned the Truthe of God into falſhed. The like might I ſaie of Tertullian,
Cyprian, and other Fathers. Yet, I trowe, M. Hardinge wil not therfore reproue
either Chriſt, or Paule, or Tertullian, or Cyprian: nor ſaie, they vſed ſuche a Beginninge,
as their aduerſaries might haue vſed as wel as they, and had forgotten
their Rules of Rhetorique.
                  Lothe I am ſo longe to ſtande in ſo light a mater. But I marueile mutche,
that M. Harding being ſo great an Artificer in ſo ſmal caſes, had no better eie to
his owne Entrie. For if in writing the Defence of Truthe, it be a faulte in Rhetorique
to beginne with the il intreatinge, & cōplainte of Truthe, what then may we
thinke it to be in the Defence of manifeſt & knowen errour, to beginne, as M. Hardinge
dooth, with Whoores, with Théeues, with Apes, with Aſſes, with Children
of the Diuel, and with many other like vnſéemely ſcoffes, and ſcornes? What Rhetorique,
what Eloquence, what Arte, what Skil is this? What Oratour euer vſed
it? what Rhetorician, what Sophiſte, Gréeke, or Latine euer taught it? Verily
this was ſometime accoūpted an old rule in Rhetorique, which it ſéemeth M. Hardinge
had quite forgotten:Cic. De Orator. Lib. 2. 
                     Scurrilis Oratori dicacitas magnoperé fugienda eſt. This
Secretaries Beginninge, by M. Hardinges owne confeſſion is ſutche, as either
partie indifferently might wel haue vſed. But M. Hardinges Beginninge is
ſutche, as neither partie with any modeſtie might haue vſed.
                  M. Hardinge alſo might haue remembred, that the ſkilful in Rhetorique, as
they miſlike Exordium Commune,
                     Cicer. Lib. 1. De Inuentione: Argumentum Cō
                        mune vitioſum eſt. ſo they alſo miſlike Commune Argumentum, that
is, a Reaſon or Proufe ſo Common, that it may indifferently ſerue bothe parties.
Whiche kinde of proufes if M. Hardinge woulde haue wéeded out of his Bookes,
he ſhould haue lefte very litle to trouble the Printer.
                  Where he ſaithe in groſſe, that our Apologie is nothing els, but a lumpe of
Lyes: the Truthe therof, I truſt, ſhal appeare by this Treatie. In the meane ſeaſon,
good Chriſtian Reader, it may pleaſe thée to conſider, that M. Hardinges mouth
is no iuſte meaſure in this behalfe. For ſome men thinke, it wil oftentimes vtter
vntruthe without meaſure. But he ſaithe, we haue falſified Tertullians meaninge,
placinge this woorde Ignotos, in ſtéede of Extraneos, and ſo at our pleaſure

makinge exchange of woordes, and geuinge the olde Father a newe Liuerie, and
thereby empairinge our whole credite. A greate outcrie in ſo ſmal a matter.
This greate exchange of woordes is nothinge ſo haynous as it is pretended. For
bothe Ignotus is Extraneus, and Extraneus alſo in Tertullians meaninge is Ignotus.
And M. Hardinge wel knoweth, that Tertullian ſpeaketh namely, and onely of
ſuche Aliens and Strangers, as knewe not the Truthe of God. Whether of theſe
two woordes it ſhal like him to leaue vs, the ſenſe is al one: it forceth nothing. If
he wil néedes refuſe this woorde, Ignotus, ſo yt he receiue the other woorde, Extraneus,
and graunte, that he and his felowes be Strangers to Goddes Truthe, it ſhalbe
ſufficiente.
                  Howe be it he addeth farther, that they of his ſide are nowe no Strangers,
but knowe God, as his deare frendes, and kinſfolke. Euen ſo ſaide the Phariſeis
of them ſelues,Iohan. 9. 
                     Nunquid & nos Coeci ſumus? What be we blinde too?
                      But Chriſte
anſweared them, Yf ye were blinde, then had ye no ſinne. Now ye ſay, that ye ſee: Therefor
your ſinne remaineth ſtil.
                     Iohan. 9. Matthae. 8. And againe, I am come to Iudgemente into the worlde, that
they that ſee, maie be made blinde. And againe, The Children of the kingdome ſhalbe throwen
foorthe into vtter darkneſſe.
                  
                  Yet further M. Hardinge ſaithe, After that the Goſpel had benne ſounded abroade by
the Apoſtles, and theire Succeſſours, then was the Truthe nomore a Stranger, or a Pilgrime in Earth.
Whereby he woulde cloſely conclude, that his Churche of Rome can neuer erre.
But this is too vaine a Paradiſe.Daniel. 8. Chryſoſt. in opere Imperfecto, Homi. 49. Auguſt. De C
                           •
                        
                        uita. Dei, Li. 18. Cap. 51. De Ciuit. Li. 19. Cap. 27. For Daniel ſpeakinge of the later daies ſaithe,
Veritus proſternetur in 
                           •
                        erra, The Truthe ſhal be ouerthrowen in the Earthe.
                      Chryſoſtome
ſaithe, Abornihatio Deſolationis ſtabit in Sanctis Locis Eccleſiae, The Abomination of deſolation
ſhal ſtande in the Holy places of the Churche. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Vſque ad huius
ſ
                           •
                        eculi finem, inter perſecutiones mundi, & conſolationes Dei peregtinando procurrit
Eccleſia: Vntil the worldes ende, the Churche goeth foreward, as it were in a Pilgrimage, bytweene
the perſecutions of the worlde, and the comfortes of God.
                      And againe, Tota Ciuitas
Dei peregrinatur in terris: The whole Cittie of God
                      (which is the Churche) is a Stranger,
and a Pilgrime in the Earthe. Verily as longe as Satan the Prince of darkeneſſe is
Prince of this world, ſo longe the Truthe of God paſſeth in this world as a Stranger:
and beinge emonge Strangers, as Tertullian ſaithe, eaſily findeth enimies,
& is it intreated.Tertullian in Apologetico. He ſaithe further, Caeterum vnum hoc geſtit, ne ignorata damnetur:
This onely thinge Truthe deſireth, that noman condemne her, before he knowe her.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wherfore we ought to beare it the more quietly, whiche haue taken
vpon vs to profeſſe the Goſpel of Chriſte, if we for the ſame cauſe
be handled after the ſame ſorte: and if we, as our Forefathers were
longe agoe, be likewiſe at this daye tormented and baited with raylinges,
with ſpiteful dealinges, and with lies: and that for no deſert
of our owne, but onely bicauſe we teache & acknowledge the Truthe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  O bleſſed folowers of the Patriarkes, Prophetes, Apoſtles, Martires, and Chriſte him ſelfe, that
ſuffer ſo much perſecution in your innocencie; hauinge deſerued nothinge at all, and onely bicauſe ye
acknowledge, and teache the Truthe. But Sirs, by your leaue, how foloweth this (VVherfore) of your
former common place ſo largely treated? This is your fowle faulte, whiche you make in your Logike.
Howe proue ye this argument: The Truthe is perſecuted, and the profeſſours of the Truthe
haue euer bene euill treated: wherefore wee ought to beare it quietly beinge likewiſe handled for
the ſame cauſe &c. If you make this argument, whiche ye ſeeme priuely to make, leauinge out the

                     Minor, The profeſſours of the Truthe be perſecuted for the Truthes ſake: wee be profeſſours of
the Truthe: Therefore we ſuffer perſecution for the Truthes ſake: Yf ye ſaye thus, we embarre you
from your Concluſion by deniynge your Minor, whiche ye can neuer proue.
                  And if ye reaſon thus, whiche waye alſo ye ſeeme to vſe: The profeſſours of the Truthe ſuffer perſecution:
VVee ſuffer perſecution: Ergo, wee are profeſſours of the Truthe: VVe graunt your Minor
is true: but your argument is naught. So might all Heretikes ſaye, and by that argument proue
them ſelues right beleuers. VVherefore vntil ye proue, that ye ſuccede the Patriarkes, Prophetes,
Apoſtles, Martyrs, and Chriſte himſelfe in profeſsinge the Truthe, boaſt not, as ye doo, of your Forefathers.
For not they whome ye name in your Proeme, but Hus, VVikleſe, Peter Bruſe, Berengarius,
VValdenſes, Albingenſes, Donatiſtes, Aë
                           •
                        ians, Manichees, and ſuche the like Heretikes,
iuſtly condemned of the Churche, were your Forefathers.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  M. Hardinge pretendeth Logique, and endeth in Sophiſtrie. The argument,
wée make, wherewith he playeth ſo pleaſantly, is founded vpon theſe woordes of
Chriſte:Matth. 10. Iohan. 15. 
                     The Scholare is not aboue his Maiſter, nor the Seruant aboue his Lorde: If they
haue perſecuted me, they wil perſecute you. Al theſe thinges ſhal they doo vnto you for my
names ſake, bicauſe they knowe neither my Father, nor me. The Minor is this, wée ſuccede
the Apoſtles, and Martyrs, and are the profeſſours of the Truthe. Whiche
Minor, by M. Hardinges iudgement, we can neuer proue. But Goddes holy name
be bleſſed for euer: The greateſt parte, of Chriſtendome this daye ſeeth, this Minor
is true, and that bothe we are the profeſſours of Goddes knowen Truthe, and you
the profeſſours of manifeſt ſalſehed. Touchinge the Donatiſtes, and Manichees,
and al other like condemned Heretiques, and Hereſies, we vtterly abhorre them,
euen as the gates of Hel. As for Iohn Wickleſe, Iohn Huſſe, Valdo, and the
reſte, for ought wée knowe, &, I beleue, ſettinge malice aſide, for ought you know,
they were godly menne.Alphonſus De Haereſibus. Theire greateſt Hereſie was this, that they complained
of the diſſolute, and vitious liues of the Cleregie, of woorſhippinge of Images, offeined
Miracles, of the tyrānical pride of the Pope, of Monkes, Freeres, Partans,
Pilgrimages,Bartholomae. Abramus in Concil. Ferrarien. and Purgatorie, and other like deceiuinge, and mockinge of the people,
and that they wiſſhed a reformation of the Churche. Wée ſuccede not them,
nor beare theire names. Wée ſuccede him, whoſe woorde wée profeſſe: whoſe woorde,
M. Hardinge, they of your ſide haue ſo often condemned, and vnder a colour of falſe
Tranſlation haue burnte for Hereſie.
                  Hereof we fourme our argument in this ſorte: Chriſte the Sonne of God was
perſecuted, & carried as a Lauuye vnto the Slauterhouſe for ſpeakyng the Truthe:
Therefore it behooueth vs for the ſame cauſe ſufferinge the like, to take it with patieuce.
So ſaithe S. Peter,1. Peter. 2. 
                     Chriſte died for vs, leauing vs an example, that we ſhould
folowe his ſteppes. If wee ſuffer patiently for dooinge wel, this thinge is thankes
woorthy before God. So the holy Father and Martyr Ignatius comforted him ſelfe,
when he was in the middes of his tormentes:Euſeb. Lib. 3. Cap. 36. Tertull. De Fuga in perſecutione. Matth. 5. 
                     lā incipio eſſe Diſcipulus Chriſti Now
beginne I to be Chriſtes. Diſciple.
                      So Tertullian, Quid debeo, niſi ſanguinem, quem
pro me fudit Filius Dei? What thinge owe I els, but the Bloude, whiche the Sonne of God
hath ſhedde for me?
                      The like comforte in like caſes Chriſte geueth to his Diſciples,
Reioice ye, (ſaithe he) and he gladde, for your rewarde is greate in Heauen. For thus haue
they perſecuted the Prophetes, that were before you.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 2.
               They crie out vpon vs at this preſent euerie where, that we are al
Heretiques, and haue forſaken the Faith, & haue with newe perſuaſions,
& wicked learninge vtterly diſſolued the concorde of the Church.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Yf ye haue forſaken the Faithe,Faithe in Britaine. ye were Baptized in, if ye be gonne from the faithe, whiche S. Eleutherius
Pope and Martyr the firſt Apoſtle of Britayne preached in this lande,Vntruthe. by Damianus and Fugatius
within little more then one hundred yeres after Chriſtes death,Damianus and Fugatius firſt Apoſtles of the Britons. Auguſtinus and Melitus of the Engliſhe. if ye refuſe the Faithe which
Gregorie the Greate that holy Pope, cauſed to be Preached to our Aunceſtours the Engliſhe nation by
Auguſtinus, Melitus, and other holy Prieſtes, and haue thereby diſſolued the vnitie of the Catholike
Churche, and leaue not to maineteine the doctrine, whereby the ſame vnitie is diſſolued: all this preſuppoſed.
Wee ſee not but that this crie made vpon you is true: For then are ye Heretikes in deede.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  As wel this reporte of Eleutherius, as alſo the other noted in the margin of
Auguſtine, that the one was the firſt Apoſtle of the Britannes, the other of the Engliſhe,
are both vntrue. For it is certaine, that the Churche of Britannie, nowe
called England, receiued not firſt the faithe from Rome. Lucius the Kinge of this
Countrie had receiued the Goſpel of Chriſt, and was Baptized welneare one hundred
and fiftie yeres before the Emperoure Conſtantine: and the ſame Conſtantine
the firſt Chriſtened Emperoure was borne in this Ilande, And notwithſtanding
Eleutherius the Biſhop of Rome, at the Kinges ſpecial requeſt, ſent hither Fugatius,
and Damianus, to enforme the Biſhopes and Cleregie, and to bringe thinges
to better order,Gildas. Polydor
                           ••
                        . Theodoret. De Curandis Graecorū affectibus. Niceph. li. 2. c. 4. Galfrid. Lib. 8. Cap. 4. yet vndoubtedly the Churche & Faithe of Chriſt had benne planted
here a longe while before they came, eyther by Ioſephe of Arimathaea: either (as
Theodoretus writeth) by S. Paule the Apoſtle paſſinge this waye into Spaine: or
(as Nicephorus ſaithe) by Simon Zel
                           •
                        tes: or by the Gréekes: or by ſome others.
                  As for our Auguſtine of Englande, for it was not S. Auguſtine the learned
Doctour, neither was he ſo godly a man, as M. Hardinge maketh him: for as Galfridus
writeth of him, he was cruel, diſoaineful, prowde, and arrogant, and no
way méete to be called an Apoſtle. Neither was he the firſt planter of the Faithe
in Englande. For the Faithe was planted here many hundred yeres before his
comminge.An. Do. 210. Tertullian ſaithe of his time,Tertull. contra Iudaeos. 
                     Britannorum inacceſſa Romanis loca ſubduntur
Chriſto: The countries of Britannie, whiche the Romaines coulde neuer atteine
vnto,
                     
                     Anno. 212. 
                     are now ſubiecte to Chriſte. Origen ſaithe of his time,Origen. in Ezechiel. Homi. 4. Athanaſ. Apologia Secunda. 
                     Terra Britanniae conſenſit
in Religionem Chriſti: The Lande of Britannie hath agreed to Chriſtes Religion.
                     
Athanaſius of his time ſaithe,Anno. 334. 
                     Epiſcopi Aphricae vniuerſae, Siciliae, Sardiniae, Hiſpaniarum,
Galliarum, Britanniarum ſeſe ad Concilium contulerunt: The Biſhoppes of al
Aphrica, Sicilia, Sardinia, Spaine, Fraunce, and Britannie came thither to the Councel, (holden
at Sardica.
                     )Anno 330. Conſtantinus the Emperour in his time maketh mention of the
Chriſtian Churches in Britannie.Theodoret. Hiſt. Eccl. Li. 1. Ca. 10. Hilarius De Synodis. Chryſoſt. in Homilia, Quòd Chriſtus ſit Deus Theodoret. Hiſt. Eccl. Li. 4. Ca. 3. S. Hilarie in his time intituled his letter in
this wiſe:Anno 360. 
                     Clericis Tololanis, & Prouinciarum Britannicarum Epiſcopis: To the Cleregie
of Tolouſe,
                     
                     Anno 400. 
                     and to the Biſhoppes of Britannie. Chryſoſtome of his time ſaithe,
Et Iuſulae Britannicae extra hoc mare ſitae, & in ipſo Oceano poſitae ſenſerūt virtutem Verbi
Dei: The Ilandes of Britannie beinge in the very Ocean, far out of this our Sea, haue felt
the power of Goddes Woorde.
                     
                     Anno 367. Theodoretus of the time of the Emperour Iouinian
ſaithe thus, Huic Fidei conſenſerunt omnes Eccleſiae, quae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in Hiſpania ſunt, quae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in
Britannia: To this Faith haue agreed al the Churches, bothe of Spaine, and of Britannie.
                     
Theſe recordes may ſéeme ſufficient, if it pleaſe M. Hardinge to receiue them. And
al, and euery of theſe liued ſundrie hundred yéeres before the arriual of Melitus, and
Auguſtine.
                  Yf any man ſhal happen to replie, The Faithe was then vtterly rooted out by the inuaſion
of the Engliſhe men beinge Heathens,
                     Art. 3. Diuiſ. 24. Beda, li. 1. ca. 26. that mater is already anſweared in my Former
Replie to M. Hardinge. Certainely Beda ſaithe, The Quéene of Englande was

then Chriſtened,Beda. li. 2. Cap. 2. and that there were then in this Realme ſeuen Biſhoppes, and
one Archebiſhop, with other moe greate learned Chriſtian menne.
                  As touchinge this Auguſtine, wée are not bounde to al his dooinges. Although
M. Hardinge allowe him Apoſtolike authoritie, yet al his heaſtes were not Goſpel.
The Churche in his time was growen to muche corruption, as it may many waies
appeare by ſundrie places of S. Gregorie.Beda. li. 2. Ca. 26. Verily Beda ſaithe, The Biſhoppes,
and learned Chriſtians of this Countrie vtterly refuſed to receiue this newe Apoſtle
with his Religion. And yet were they right Catholique, and godly menne.
And Galfridus ſaithe,Galfridus. lib. 8. Cap. 4. 
                     Erant ſeptem Epiſcopatus, & Archiepiſcopatus Religioſiſcionis
Praeſulibus muniti, & Abbatiae complures, in quib. grex Domini rectum ordinem tenebat:
There were then in Englande ſeuen Biſhoprikes, and one Archebiſhoprike poſſeſſed with very
godly Prelates, and many Abbies, in whiche the Lordes flocke helde the right Religion.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 3.
               That wee renewe, and, as it were, fetche againe from Hel the
olde and many a daie condemned Hereſies: that wee ſowe abroade
newe ſectes, and ſuche broyles as neuer earſt were hearde of: alſo that
we are already diuided into contrarie partes and opinions, and could
yet by no meanes agree wel amonge out ſelues.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Sith that ye raiſe vp againe the hereſie of Aerius in deniynge praier for the dead, who was
for the ſame accōpted an Heretike aboue a leuen hundred yeres paſt: ſith that ye raiſe vp the Hereſie of
Manichaeus that liued before him,That theſe Defenders be renevvers of olde Hereſies in taking awaire free will
                        •
                      ſith that ye raiſe vp the Hereſie of
Vigilantius, in refuſinge to praie to Sainctes, and to honour their holy Reliques, and to keepe
lightes in Churches to the honour of God, and many other Hereſies beſide of olde time condenmed: ſith
that ye raiſe vp the Hereſie of Berengarius in deniyng the preſence of Chriſtes very Body in the bleſſed
Sacrament of the Aultar: and ſith that ye adde to thoſe mo Hereſies of your owne, as the appointing
of the ſupreme Paſtorſhip or regiment of the Churche in all thinges and cauſes ſpiritual to
a laye Magiſtrate, the deniynge of the external Sacrifice of the Churche, whiche wee cal the Maſſe,
the maintenance of the breache of Vowes of Pouertie, Chaſtitie, and Obedience: Againe ſithe that
your Diuiſion into ſundrie ſectes can neither be diſſembled nor defended, whereof we ſhal ſpeake
hereafter more largely: al theſe thinges beſide ſundrie other of like enormitic beinge true, as they be
moſt true, this other crie made vpon you is true.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  This heape is greate in ſhewe, and light in ſubſtance. Touching Berengarius,
gentle Reader,Arti. 5. Diuiſ. 6. for ſhortneſſe ſake I muſt referre thée to my Former Replie
to M. Hardinge. Aerius the Arian Heretique, the Breache of Vowes, the Diſſenſion
of Iudgementes in Religion, ſhalbe anſweared (God willinge) hereafter,
eche mater ſeuerally in his place.
                  Wee flatter not our Prince with any newe imagined extraordinarie power,
but onely geue him that Prerogatiue & Chieftie, that euermore hath benne dewe
vnto him by the ordinance,Eſai. 49. and Woorde of God: that is to ſay, to be the Nurce of
Goddes Religion: to make Lawes for the Churche: to heare and take vp caſes,
and queſtions of the Faithe, if he be hable: or otherwiſe to commit them ouer by
his authoritie vnto the learned: to commaunde the Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes to
doo their dewties, and to puniſhe ſutche as be offenders.Auguſt. contra Creſc. li. 3. ca. 71. Thus the godly Emperoure
Conſtantinus ſate in Iudgement in a cauſe Eccleſiaſtical, bitwéene Caecilianus,
and Donatus à Caſis Nigris, and in the ende him ſelfe pronounced ſentence.
Greater authoritie then Conſtantinus the Emperoure had, and vſed, our Princes

require none. This, I truſte, hitherto is no greate Hereſie.
                  S. Hierome reproued Vigilantius, for that he founde faulte with the Vigils
or night wakes, that then were vſed, with Praieing to Sainctes, with Woorſhippinge
of Reliques, with Lightes, and other ſuche like weighty maters. Touchinge
which whole controuerſie,Eraſm. in praefatio. in Epiſtolam Hieronymi contra Vigilan. Eraſmus geueth this iudgement: in hunc ita conuitijs
debacchatur Hieronymus, vt pluſculum in co modeſtiae cogar deſiderare. Vtinam
argumentis tantùm egiſſet, et à conuitijs temperaſſet: Againſt this Vigilantius S. Hierome
ſo raileth, that I wante in him ſome peece of ſobrietie. I woulde rather, he had dealte with
argumentes, and had ſpared his railinge.
                     
                  
                  Of praier to Sainctes, & Lightes, we ſhal ſpeake hereafter. Night wakes afterward
were condemned, as I remembre, in ye Councel of Carthage, & ſo Sentence geuen
by the Churche with this greate Heretique Vigilantius againſt S. Hierome.
Verily ye Fathers in a former Councel holden at Eliberis in Spaine decréed thus:Concil. Eliberi. Cap. 35.
                     Placuit prohiberi ne foeminae in coemiterio peruigilent: quia ſaepé ſub obtentu orationis
ſcelera latenter committunt. It liketh vs that women be forbidden to watche at the places of
burial: For often vnder pretenſe of prayer, priuily they commit wickedneſſe.
                      To be ſhorte,
if Vigilantius were an Heretique for reprouinge of Night Watches, why hath
the Churche of Rome ſo longe ſithence condemned & aboliſhed the ſame watches,
agreeably to Vigilantius, and contrarie to the Iudgement of S Hierome?
                  Reliques were ſubiecte to muche villanie, and are welneare worne out of
them ſelfe.
                  The Manicheis emonge other their fantaſtical errours were wonte to ſay,
ye the body of Man was made,Auguſt De continent. Ca. 9. Auguſt. contra duas Epiſt. pelagian Li. 2. ca. 2. Auguſt ad Quod vult deū. not by God, but by the Angels of the Diuel, whiche
they called Gentem tenebratum: and that in Man there be two ſoules of contrarie
natures: the one of the ſubſtance of God: the other of the ſubſtance of the Diuel: and
that either ſoule contineweth ſtil as it is, and cannot alter: That is to ſay, that the
good ſoule can neuer be il: and that the il ſoule can neuer be good. And in this ſenſe
they ſaide, that Man hath no Frée wil.
                  Al theſe, and other like errours wée abhorre and Deteſt, as frantique furies.
Wée ſaie, that the Soule of Man is not the ſubſtance, but the Creature of God: an
that it maie be changed from good to il: from il to good: that Dauid maie fal: that
Paule maie riſe: that God geueth vs a newe hart, and a newe Spirite within our
breaſtes.
                  
                     But as touchinge the fréedome of wil, and power of our ſelues, we ſaie with
S. Auguſtine,
                     Auguſt Deverb. Apoſtoli, Sermo 11. O malum Liberum Arbitrium ſine Deo: O euil is Free Wil without God.
Againe,
                      Libero Arbitrio malè vtens homo. & ſe perdidit, & Arbitrium: Man miſuſinge
his Free Wil, ſpilte both him ſelfe, and his wil. Againe,
                      Quid tantùm de Naturae poſtibilitate
praeſumitur?Auguſti. in Enchiridio, ca. 30. Auguſti. De Natura & Gratia Cap 53. Vulnerata, ſaucia, vexata, perdita eſt. Vera confeſſione, non falſa defenſione
opus habet: What doo men ſo mutche preſume of the poſſibilitie of Nature? It is
woounded, it is mangled, it is troubled, it is loſte. It behoueth vs rather truely to confeſſe
it, then folſly to defende it. Againe,
                      Liberum Arbitrium captiuatum, non niſi ad peccatum
valet. Free wil once made thralle, auaileth now nothinge but to ſinne. Agayne,
                     
Quòd bené viuimus,Auguſti ad Boni faci. Li. 3. ca. 8. Auguſti. De verbis Apoſto. Sermo. 10. quòd rectè intelligimus, Deo debemus. Noſtrum nihil eſt, niſi peccatum,
quod habemus: That wee liue wel, that wee vnderſtande aright, wee haue it of
God. Of our ſelues wee haue nothinge, but onely ſinne, that is within vs.
                  
                  The better to cleare this whole caſe, I thought it good to vſe the moe woordes.
Thus may wée learne to knowe our ſelues, and humbly to confeſſe our imperfection,
and to geue the whole glorie vnto God.
                  
                     Therefore to conclude,
                     Auguſti. De Bono perſeueran. Cap. 13. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Nos volumus: Sed Deus in nobis
operatur velle. Nos operamur: Sed Deus in nobis operatur & operari pro bona ſua volūtate.
Hoc nobis expedit & credere, & dicere. Hoc eſt pium: hoc eſt verum: vt ſit humilis, &

ſubmiſſa Confeſsio,
                     
                     Cap. 6. 
                     & detur totum Deo. Tutiores viuimus, ſi totum Deo damus: non
autem nos illi ex parte, & nobis ex parte committimus. Wee wil: but it is God, that
woorketh in vs to wil. VVee woorke: but it is God that woorketh in vs to woorke, accordinge
to his good pleaſure. This is behooueful for vs bothe to beleeue, and to Speake: This is
a Godly, this is a True Doctrine, that our Confeſsion maye be humble, and lowly, and that
God maye haue the whole. VVee liue in more ſafetie, if wee geue al vnto God, rather then
if wee commit our ſelues partely to our ſelues, and partely to him.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 4.
               That wee be accurſed Creatures, & like the Gyauntes doo warre
againſt God him ſelfe, and liue cleane without any regarde or Woorſhippinge
of God.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat ye bee, God knoweth, and your owne Conſcience ſhoulde knowe. Our Lorde amende bothe
you and vs. But to ſaye ſome what to that your giltie minde imagineth the VVorlde to reporte of you,
if they which take away and abhorre the external Sacrifice, wherein Chriſte accordinge to his owne
inſtitution,Lucae. 2
                           •
                        . 1. Cor. 11. is offered to his Father, make no warre againſt God: if they whiche make Chriſte a Miniſter
of Shadowes, Signes, Tokens, and Figures: they, whiche feare not to breake their ſolemne Vowes
made to God, and defende the ſame as wel done: they, whiche aſſure them ſelues of their Saluation,
and therefore liue diſſolutely without due care and feare of God: If (I ſaye) they be not curſed Creatures,
and like Gyantes that warre againſt God, then are ye cleare of this charge.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  To anſweare Ifs with Ifs, and Woordes with Woordes, it were greate folie.
Therefore leauinge the anſweare of Vowes, & aſſurance of Saluation to theire ſeueral
places, firſt wee denie not ye Sacrifice of Chriſte. Chriſte onely vpon his Croſſe
is our whole and onely Sacrifice for ſinne, & biſide him wée haue none other. How
be it,In the. 17. Arti. I haue ſpoken hereof more at large in my Former Replie to M. Hardinge.
                  Neither make wée Chriſte, as it liketh M. Hardinge to ſaye, a Miniſter of Signes
& Figures.Iohan. 1. Wée knowe, that Chriſte is the Fulfillinge & Perfection of the Lawe,
and that Grace, and Truthe are wrought by him. Yet neuertheleſſe wée ſaye, that
the Sacramentes of the Newe Teſtamente are Signes, and Figures. The olde
Father Tertullian expoundeth Chriſtes Woordes in this ſorte, Hoc eſt Corpus
meum,
                     Tertull. contra Mar
                           •
                        ion Lib 4. Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 3. Auguſtin. contra A
                           ••
                        mantum, Cap. 12. 
                     Hoc eſt, Figura Corporis mei: This is my Body, that is to ſaye, This is a Figure
of my Body.
                      S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Chriſtus adhibuit Iudam ad conuiuium, in
quo Corporis & Sanguinis ſui Figuram Diſcipulis ſuis commendauit, & tradidit: Chriſte
receiue Iudas vnto his Banket, whereat he deliuered to his Diſciples the Figure of his Body,
and Bloude.
                      And againe, Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, Hoc eſt Corpus meum, cùm
daret Signum Corporis ſui: Chriſte doubted not to ſaye, This is my Body, whereas he gaue
a Token of his Body.
                     
                  
                  I leaue other Holy Fathers of like Woordes and ſenſe welneare innumerable.
Yet were they neither Giantes, nor Rebelles againſt God, nor accurſed Creatures.
If they had neuer vſed theſe Woordes, nor called the Sacramente the Figure, or
Token of Chriſtes Body, then might M. Hardinge haue 
                        •
                     enne bolde to ſaye ſomewhat,
and to leade awate his Reader with a Tragical exclamation of Signes, and
Figures. How be it, he him ſelfe, as I haue ſhewed in my Former Anſweare, in
the expoſition of theſe woordes of Chriſte,Arti
                           •
                        ul. 12. Diuiſion. 16. 
                     This is my Body, and other like Phraſes
incident vnto the ſame, to auoide one vſual and common Figure, is forc
                        •
                     d to ſhifte
him ſelfe into thirtie other vnneceſſarie & childiſhe Figures: as knowinge that not
ſo mutche as his open Untruthes can wel ſtande without Figures.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 6.
               That wee deſpiſe al good deedes: that wee vſe no diſcipline of Vertue,Faſtinge vvith Fleaſhe.
no Lawes, no Cuſtomes: that wee eſteeme neither righte, nor order,
nor equitie, nor Iuſtice: that wee geue the brydel to al naughtineſſe,
and prouoke the people to al licentiouſneſſe and 
                     •
                  uſt.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye teache men to Faſte for policie,Faſte for Policie. Fol. 2. Pa. 2. not for Religion. And by your Statute of Wedneſdaies faſte,
who ſo euer ſhal write or ſaye that forebearinge of Fleaſ he is a Seruice of God, otherwiſe then as
other polytike lawes are, they ſhal be puniſhed as ſpreaders of falſe Newes are and ought to be. VVhen
ye Preache onely Faithe not to remoue the merite of woorkes before Baptiſme,Epiſt. ad Roma. Bridle geuen to levvdnes by this nevve Goſpell. as S. Paule meante it,
but alſo after Baptiſme: VVhen ye take awaye the Sacrament of confeſsion and Abſolution, geue ye
not the brydel to al naughtineſſe? Do not ſome of your Goſpelling maides of London refuſe to ſerue, except
they maye haue libertie to heare a Sermon before noone, and a playe at after noone?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  I thought, M. Hardinge had knowen a difference bitwéene Faſtinge, and Abſtinence,
or choiſe of meates. True Faſtinge is a Religiouſe woorke, ordeined to teſtifie
our humilitie, & to make the Fleaſhe the more obedient vnto the Sprite, that
wée maye be the quicker to Praier, & to al good Woorkes. But Abſtinence from this
or that meate with opinion of Holineſſe, Superſtitious it maye eaſily make a man,
but Holy it can not.1. Corinth. 14. Hebrae. 13. S. Paule ſaithe, Cibus nos non commendat Deo: it is not meate
that maketh vs acceptable vnto God.
                      Againe, It is good to confirme the harte with Grace,
and not with meates: Wherein they that haue walked, haue founde no profite. The meate
ſerueth for the Belly,
                     1. Corinth. 6. Roman. 14. Matth. 15. 
                     and the Belly for the meate: The Lorde wil deſtroye them bothe.
And againe, The Kingedome of God is not Meate, and Drinke. Likewiſe Chriſte
ſaithe, The thinge that entreth into the mouthe, defileth not the man.
                  
                  Hereby it is eaſie to ſee, that Faſtinge is one thinge, & Abſtinence from Fleaſhe
is an other. The Nazareis in the old Teſtamente abſteined not from Fleaſhe, &
yet they Faſted.3. Regum. 17. Matthae. 3. Socrae. li. 5. ca. 22. Caſsidor. Lib. 9. Cap. 38. Elias was ſedde with Fleaſhe, Iohn the Baptiſte eate the Fleaſh
of Locuſtes: & yet they both Faſted. Socrates ſaithe, That many Chriſtians in the
Lente ſeaſon did eate Fiſhe & Byrdes: many abſteined vntil thrée of the clocke in
the after noone, & then receiued al kindes of meate, either Fiſhe, or Fleaſhe, without
difference. Likewiſe Epiphanius ſaithe, Some eate al kindes of Birdes, or Fowle,
abſteininge onely frō the Fleaſhe of fower footed beaſtes,
                     Epipha. De Haereſ. Lib. 3. In Oratione de Fide Catholica: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . And yet they kepte their Lente
truely, & faſted as wel as any others. Wherfore Abſtinence from any one certaine
kinde of meate is not of it ſelf a woorke of Religion to pleaſe God, but onely a mere
poſitiue PolicieAuguſtin. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Non quaeto quo Veſcaris, ſed quo Delecteris: I
demounde not, what thou Eateſt, but wherein thou haſte Pleaſure
                     
                     Hieronym. in Ioelem. Cap. 1. And S. Hierome ſaithe
of the Manicheis, Ieiunant illi quidem: Sed illorum leiunium eſt ſaturitate deterius.
They Foſte in deede: but theire Faſtinge is woorſe, then if they filled theire Bellies.
                     
                  
                  Of onely Faithe, and Confeſſion, wée ſhal ſpeake hereafter.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 7.
               That wee labour and ſeeke to ouerthrowe the ſtate of Monarchies
and Kingdomes, and to bringe al thinges vnder the rule of the raſhe
inconſtante People, and vnlearned multitude.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Can Monarkes and Princes ſeeme to be mainteined by your ſectes. who teache the people to rebel
for pretenſed Religion? Allow ye the Monarchie of the Romaine Empire, Who ſo muche complaine in
your Apologie, that the Pope made Charlemaigne Emperour of the VVeſte? Hathe the Queene of Scotland

cauſe to praiſe the procedinges of your Goſpel, through occaſion whereof ſhe ruleth not her subiectes,
but is rather ruled of her subiectes?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here is an other greate Vntruthe emonge the reſte. For M. Hardinge right
wel knoweth, that wée neuer armed the people, nor taught them to rebel for Religion
againſt the Prince. If any thinge haue at any time happened otherwiſe, it
was either ſome wilful rage, or ſome fatal furie: It was not our Counſel: it was
not our Doctrine. Wée teache the people, as S. Paule doothe, to be ſubiecte to the
higher powers,Roman. 13. Matth. 26. not onely for feare, but alſo for conſcience. Wée teache them, that
who ſo ſtriketh with the Swerde by Priuate authoritie, ſhal periſh with ye Swerd.
Yf the Prince happen to be wicked, or cruel, or burthenous, wée teache them to
ſaye, with S. Ambroſe, Arma noſtra ſunt Preces, & Lachrymae: Teares, and Praiers
be our Weapons.
                     
                     Ambroſius. Notwithſtandinge, what Rebellion hathe benne moued in Englande
by ſome of your ſide, in the late Raignes of Kinge Henrie the eight, & Kinge
Edward the ſixte in defence of your Religion, ye maie wel remember.
                  The diſplacinge of the Emperour of Conſtantinople, and the placinge of
Charlemaigne the Frenche Kinge, ſerueth M. Hardinge to ſmal purpoſe: onleſſe
it be to diſcloſe the Popes conſpiracie againſt the Emperour. Certainely, as
any man maye ſenſibly ſee, it was the aduauncinge of the Pope, the ſtrengtheninge
of the Saracenes, and after of the Turkes, and the Diuiſion, and diſſolution
of the ſtate of Chriſtendome.Platina in Adriano. 2. Platyna ſaithe, Ab hoc tempore perijt & poteſtas Imperatorum,
& virtus Pontificum: After this time the power of the Emperours, and the
Holineſſe of the Popes were bothe loſte.
                  
                  Touchinge the Quéene of Scotland, I wil ſaye nothinge: The Kingedomes,
and ſtates of the Worlde haue ſundrie agreementes, and compoſitions. The Nobles,
and Commons there neither drewe the Swerde, nor attempted force againſt
the Prince. They ſought onely the continuance of Goddes vndoubted Truthe, and
the Defence of theire owne liues againſt your Barbarous & cruel inuaſions. They
remembred,At Vaſſei, Anno. 1562. biſides al other warninges, your late dealinge at Vaſſei, where as
great numbers of theire Brethren were ſuddainely murthered, beinge togeather at
theire Praiers in the Churche, & holdinge vp theire Innocente handes to Heauen, &
callinge vpon the name of God. Achab ſaide ſometime to the Prophete Elia, Thou
arte he,
                     3. Regum. 17. 
                     that troubleſt the whole Countrie of Iſrael. But Elias made him anſweare,
It is not I, that trouble the Countrie: It is thou, and thy Fathers houſe, whiche houe foreſaken
the commeundementes of the Lorde, and houe folowed after Baalim.
                  
                  The Subiecte is bounde to obey his Prince: how be it not in al thinges without
exception: but ſo far as Goddes glorie is not touched. Theſe Nobles had learned
of S. Peter,Actor 5. Pſal. 118. Pſalm. 146. 
                     It is better to obey God, then man: And of the Prophete Dauid, Better
it is to truſte to God, then to truſte in Princes. For they are mortal, and ſhal die: theire
Sprite ſhalbe taken from them, & then ſhal they returne into the Earthe. Neither
maye a godly Prince take it as any diſhonour to his eſtate, to ſée God obeied before
him.Leo. De Paſsione Domi. Serm. 10. For he is not God, but the Miniſter of God. Leo ſaithe, Chriſtus quae Dei
ſunt, Deo, quae Caeſaris ſunt, Caeſari reddenda conſtituit, &c. Hoc eſt verè nō impugnare
Caeſarem, ſed iuuare: Chriſte commaunded, that is dewe vnto God, to b
                              ••
                           euen to God: that is
dewe vnto Caeſor, to be geuen to Caeſar. Verily this is not to rebel againſt, but to helpe Caeſar.
                     
Likewiſe S. Ambroſe, beinge him ſelfe in manner a Capitaine vnto the people in
Goddes quarrel againſt Valentinian the Emperour:Ambroſ. Lib. 5. Epiſt 33. 
                     Quid praeſentius dici potuit à
Chriſtianis viris, quàm id, quod hodie in nobis Spiritus Sanctus Ioquutus eſt? Rogamus,
Auguſte, non pugnamus: Non timemus, ſed Rogamus: What could be more boldly ſpokē
of Chriſtian menne, then that the holy Ghoſte ſpake in you this daye? (Thus ye ſaide) Wee beſeeche
thee, Noble Emperour, wee fight not. Wèe feare thee not, but wee beſeeche thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     
To conclude, the Quéene of Scotlande is ſtil in quiet poſſeſſion of her eſtate: &
is obeied of her Subiectes, ſo far as is conuenient for godly people to obeye their
Prince.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 7.
               That wee haue ſeditiouſly fallen from the Catholique Churche,
and by a wicked ſchiſme and diuiſion haue ſhaken the whole worlde,
and troubled the common peace and vniuerſal quiet of the Churche: &
that, as Dathan and Abiron conſpired in times paſt againſt Moyſes
and Aaron, euen ſo wee at this daye haue renounced the Biſhop of
Rome, without any cauſe reaſonable.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Before Luthers time al Chriſten people came togeather peaceably into one Churche, vnder one Heade,
as Shepe into one folde vnder one Shepeherd, and ſo liued Vnanimes in domo, in one accorde. But after
that Sathā,Diuiſion and Schiſmefolovved vpon Luthers Preachinge. 1. Iohan. 2. who at the beginninge begyled Eue, had perſuaded ſome to taſte of the poiſoned apple of
Luthers Newe Doctrine: they went out frō vs, who were not of vs (for if they had ben of vs, they had
remained with vs) forſooke the Catholike Churche of Chriſt, ſorted them ſelues into Synagoges of Antichriſte,
withdrewe them ſelues from obedience to warde theire Paſtor and Iudge, and ſundred them
ſelues into diuerſe Sectes. This ſchiſme, diuiſion, and conſpiracie againſt the Head Shepherd, is noleſſe
wicked,Numer. 6. then that of Dathan and Abiron againſt Moyſes and Aaron was. For as God commaunded
Moyſes and Aaron to be obeyed of the children of Iſrael,Greate Vntruthes. ſo Chriſte cōmaunded al his Shepe to obeye and
heare the voice of him,Iohan. 21. whom in Peter, and ſuccedinge Peter, he made Shepeherd ouer his whole ſtocke.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Before the time that Goddes Holy wil was, that Doctour Luther ſhould begin
to publiſhe the Goſpel of Chriſte, there was a general quietneſſe: I graunte: ſutche
as is in the night ſeaſon, when folke be aſleape. Yet, I thinke, to continewe ſutche
quietneſſe, no wiſe man wil wiſh to ſleepe ſtil.
                  Ye ſaye, They haue forſaken the Catholique Churche: They went from vs. who were not of vs.
Nay rather, M. Hardinge, wée are returned to ye Catholique Churche of Chriſte, &
haue forſaken you, bicauſe you haue manifeſtly foreſaken the wayes of God. But
what if a man would alitle put you frendely in remēbrance? Sir, it is not ſo longe
ſithence your ſelfe were out of your owne Catholique Churche: and ſo were gonne
out from your ſelfe: bicauſe your ſelfe were not of your ſelfe. For if your ſelfe had
bene of your ſelfe, you would haue remained better with your ſelfe. It is no wiſedome,
in carpinge others, to offer occaſion againſt your ſelfe. I beſeche God to geue
you grace, that you maye Redire ad cor, and returne againe to your ſelfe. But
here you bringe in a great many Vntruthes in a thronge togeather. You ſaye, that
as God commaunded the people of Iſrael to obey Aaron, ſo Chriſte commaunded al
his Shéepe to obey the Pope ſuccedinge Peter: You ſaye, Chriſte made the Pope
Shepheard ouer his whole flocke: You cal him Our Paſtour, and our Iudge: you
cal him the head Shepheard: & for proufe hereof, for ſome countenance of Truthe,
ye allege the one and twentith Chapter of S. Iohn, in whiche whole Chapter notwithſtandinge, ye are not able to finde, neither any ſuche commaundement of
Chriſte: nor any mention of Peters Succeſſour: nor Al his Shéepe: nor Shepheard
ouer his whole Flocke: nor Our Paſtour: nor Our Iudge: nor Our Head-ſhepheard.
It is mutche to reporte Vntruthe of a man. But to reporte Vntruthe
of Chriſte, and of his Holy Woorde, and that willingly, and witingly, and without
feare, ſome menne thinke it to be the Sinne againſt the Holy Ghoſte.
                  As for theſe woordes, Feede my Sheepe, Feede my Lammes, they perteine as wel

to other the Apoſtles,Matthae. 28. 1▪ Cor. 15. as to Peter. Chriſte ſaide generally to al his Diſciples, Goe
ye into al the worlde, and preache the Goſpel. And Paule ſaithe of him ſelfe, Ego
plus omnibus laboraui: I haue taken more paines
                      (and more fedde the flock) then al the reſt.
Surely me thinketh it is a weake kinde of reaſoninge, to ſaie thus, Chriſte bade
Peter féede his ſhéepe, Ergo, he made him headſhepheard ouer al the worlde.
                  But if this whole Prerogatiue hange of Féedinge the Flocke, what then if
the Pope Féede not? What if he neuer minde to Féede, as thinkinge it no parte
of his office? To conclude, what if he be vtterly ignorant, as many haue benne,
and cannot Féede? Yet muſt he needes be the headſhepheard ouer the whole flocke?
and muſt al the ſhéepe obey him, and heare his voyce, that cannot ſpeake? Verily
S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Qui hoc animo paſcunt oues Chriſti, vt ſuas velint eſſe, non Chriſti,
ſe conuincuntur amare,
                     Auguſtin in Iohan. Tracta. 123. 
                     non Chriſtum, vel gloriandi, vel dominandi, vel acquirendi
cupiditate: Who ſo euer they be, that Feede the ſheepe to the ende to make them theirs, and
not Chriſtes, they ſoue them ſelues, and not Chriſte, for deſire either of glorie, or of rule, or of gaine.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 8.
               That we ſet naught by the authoritie of the Auncient Fathers
and Councels of olde time: that we haue raſhly and preſumptuouſly
diſanulled the olde Ceremonies, whiche haue benne wel allowed by
our fathers and forefathers many hundred yeeres paſt, both by good
cuſtomes, and alſo in ages of more puritie: and that we haue by our
owne priuate head without the authoritie of any Sacred & General
Councel brought Newe Traditions into the Churche: & haue donne
al theſe thinges not for Religions ſake, but onely vpon a deſire of contention
and ſtrife. But that they for their parte haue chaunged no
manner of thinge, but haue helde & kepte ſtil ſutche a number of yeres
to this very day al thinges, as they were deliuered from the Apoſtles,
and wel approued by the moſt Auncient Fathers.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The auncient fathers are but men, if they pleaſe you not. But if ye finde anie colour of aduantage
but in the newe Schoolemen, ye make mutche of it. So that your owne opinion is the rule to
eſteeme them or deſpiſe them.Councels. Councles ye admitte as your phanſie and pleaſure leadeth, ſometimes
three, ſometimes foure, ſometimes fiue or ſixe. But al ye would neuer admitte: and yet ſo many, as
are general and haue bene confirmed by the See Apoſtolike,Ceremonies of the Churche Aboliſhed by the Goſpellers. they are al of like authoritie. Concerninge
Ceremonies, if ye ſhewe vs not the vſe of Chriſme in your Churches, if the ſigne of the Croſſe be not
borne before you in Proceſsions, and other wheres vſed, if Holy VVater be aboliſhed, if lightes at the
Goſpel and communion be not had, if peculiar Veſtimentes for Deacons, Prieſtes, Byſhoppes be taken
awaie, and many ſuche other the like: iudge ye, whether ye haue duely kepte the old Ceremonies of
the Churche.
                  As for your newe Traditions, P
                        •
                     ites and Ceremonies, I can not tel, what to make of them, nor
whether I maye ſo terme them.
                  No manner of thinge haue we changed that is of neceſsitie either to be beleued, or to be obſerued.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Wée allowe the Auncient Fathers the ſame credite, that they them ſelues haue
euer deſired. S. Auguſtine hereof writeth thus: Neque quorumuis Diſputationes,
quantumuis Catholicorum,Auguſt. and Fortunatianum, 
                           •
                        piſt. III. & laudatorum hominum, velut Scripturas Canonicas habere
debemus, vt nobis non liceat, ſalua reuerentia, quae illis debetur, aliquid in illorum Scriptis
improbare, aut reſpuere, ſi fortè inuenerimus, quòd aliter ſenſerint, quàm Veritas habet.
Talis ſum ego in ſcriptis aliorum: tales volo eſſe intellectores meorum: We receiue

not the Diſputations or VVritinges of any menne, be they neuer, ſo Catholique, or praiſewoorthy,
as wee receiue the Canonical Scriptures: but that, ſauinge the reuerence dewe vnto
them, wee may wel reproue or refuſe ſome thinges in theire writinges, if it happen wee finde,
they haue otherwiſe thought, then the Truthe may beare them. 
                           •
                        utche am I in the writinges
of others: and ſutche would I wiſhe others to be in mine. Likewiſe he writeth to S. Hierome,
                     
Non puto,Auguſt. ad Hieronym. Epiſt. 19. Frater, te velle Libros tuos legi, tanquam Apoſtolorum, aut Prophetarum:
I recken not, my Brother, that ye would haue vs ſo to reade your Bookes, as if they
were written by the Apoſtles, or Prophetes. It is certaine, Tertullian, EEyprian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Papias, Irenaeus, Victorinus, Lactautius, Hilarius, & other
Ancient Fathers were oftentimes mutch deceiued, S. Hierome ſ
                              ••
                           ffeth at S. Ambroſes
Commentaries vpon Luke, and calleth them,
                      Nugas, trifles, and nicknameth
S. Ambroſe,
                     Picus Mirandula in Apologia. Auguſt. contra Croſ. onium, li. 2. cap. 21. 
                     ſometime callinge him Coruus, ſometime Cornicula Likewiſe
S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Eccleſiaſtici Iudices, vt homines, plaerunque falluntur: The
Iudges, or Doctours of the Churche, as beinge men, are often deceiued. And Thomas of
Aquine ſaithe,
                      Non tenemur de neceſſitate Salutis, credere nō ſolùm Doctoribus Eccleſiae,
vt Hieronymo, aut Auguſtino, ſed ne ipſi quidem Eccleſiae, niſi in his quae pertinent
ad ſubſtantiam Fidei:Picus Mirandula in Apologia Thomas in 
                     Wee are not bounde vpon the neceſſitie of Saluation to beleue not onely
the Doctours of the Churche, as Hierome, or Auguſtine, but alſo neither the Churche it ſelfe,
ſauinge onely in maters concerninge the ſubſtane of Faithe.
                  
                  
                     Touchinge the authoritie of Councels,
                     Quod
                           •
                        ibet. 9. Arti. Vltimo. Auguſt contra Donat iſt. lib. 2. Cap. 3. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Ipſa plenaria
Concilia ſaepè priora à poſterioribus emendantur, cùm aliquo experimento aperitur, quod
clauſum e
                              •
                           at:
                      The very General Councels are often corrected, the former by the later, as often
as by trial and experience the thing is opened, that before was ſhut. Likewiſe Panormitane
ſaithe, Plus credendum eſt vni priuato fideli, quàm toti Concilio, & Papae, ſi meliorem
habeat authoritatem, vel rationem:
                      Wee ought to geue more credite to one priuate

                        •
                     aye man,Abb. Panormit. De Electio, & Electi Poteſt. Cap. Significaſii. Eſai. 8. then to the whoſe Councel, and to the Pope, if he bringe better authoritie, and
more reaſon. If the Counſel be wicked, and carried with malice, as many haue
benne, ſpecially within theſe fewe late hundred yeres, We ſaie, as the Prophete
Eſai ſaithe, Inite Conſilium, & diſſipabitur: Loquimini verbum, & non ſtabit: quia nobiſcum
eſt Dominus:
                      Take Counſel togeather, and it ſhalbe broken: Speake the woorde, and
it ſhal not holde: For the Lorde is with vs.
                  As for the late Schole Doctours, your ſelues weigh them as litle, as noman
leſſe. You ſay in youre common talkes, Bernardus nō vidit omnia: You haue controlled
your Doctour of al Doctours. Peter Lombard, with this common Caueat in the
Margine, Hic Magiſter non tenetur: Here our Doctour is no Doctour.
                      You your ſelfe
M. Hardinge,
                        M. Hardinge, Fol. 92. b. M Hardinge, Fol. 232. b. M. Hardinge. Fol. 258. in this youre very Booke againſt our Apologie ſate. that your Doctor
Gratian was deceiued, and in ſtéede of Anacletus alleged Calixtus. You youre ſelfe
againe ſaie, If in a ſecrete pointe of learninge S. Auguſtine, or S. Cyprian teache ſingularely, Wee
folowe them not: mutche leſſe do wee binde our ſelues to beeue, what ſoeuer 
                           •
                        lbertus Pigghius hath
written. And againe, VVee binde our ſelues neither to the woordes of Sylueſter, nor of Pighius.
And againe. wee take not vpon vs to defende al that the Canoniſtes, or Scholemen ſaie, or write. And
an other of your companie ſaieth, that your Doctour Gratian hath publiſhed great
vntruthes,Copus Dialogo 1. Pag. 33. & wilfully falſified the General Councel. Nomen Vniuer ſalis, ſaithe he,
aſſutum eſt à Gratiano. Thus, M. Hardinge, ye vſe your Doctours, euen as the
Marchante vſeth his Counters: ſometime to ſtande for an hundred pounde, ſometime
for a pennie.
                  But nowe let vs a litle examine the particulars of your bil. Ye come in
with Proceſſions, with Lightes, with Torches, with Tapers, with Chriſme, with
Oile, with Tunicles, and Chiſibles, with Holy Water, and holy Breade, and I
knowe not, what els: as if al theſe thinges had deſcended directly from the Apoſtles,
and without the ſame the Churche of God were no Churche.
                  
                     
Verily,Oile. M. Hardinge, wée hate not any of al theſe thinges. For wée know,
they are the Creatures of God. But you haue ſo miſuſed them, or rather ſe deſtled,
and beraied them with your ſuperſtitions, and ſo haue with the ſame mocked, &
deceiued Goddes people, that wée can no longer continue them without great conſcience.
I wil paſſe ouer the reſt, and ſpeake onely of your Oile, whereof you
ſéeme to make moſte accoumpte.De Conſec. Olei. In your Pontifical thus are ye taught to bleſſe
your Oile: Fiat Domine hoc Oleum te benedicente, vnctio Spiritualis ad purificationem
Mentis, & Corporis: O Lorde, ſet this Oile by thy bleſſinge be made a Spiritual ointement
to purifie both Soule and Body.
                      And againe, Emitte quaeſumus, Sancte Pater, Spiritum
Sanctum Paracletum tuum de Coelis in hanc pinguedinem Oliuae, ad refectionem
Corporum, & Sanationem animarum: O holy Father, wee beſeche thee, ſende downe thy
holy Sprite the Comforter from He
                              •
                           uen into this fatneſſe of the oliue, to the refreſſhinge of
Body and Soule.
                      In like ſorte ye are taught to prate ouer the ſicke: Per hanc Sanctam
vnctionem, & ſuam priſſimam miſericordiam ignoſcat tibi Deus, vt per hanc vnctionem
habeas Rem
                           •
                        ſſionem omnium peccatorum: By this holy enointinge, and by his greate Mercie
God pardone thee, that by this enointing thou maiſte haue Remiſſion of al thy finnes.
                      Theſe
thinges cannot be denied: they are written in al your Panuals, vſed and practiſed
in al your Churches. Ye cal it Holy Oile, & Oile of Saluation: Ye beare the people
in hande, that thereby they ſhal haue healthe of Body & Soule: And yet in deede ye
haue no Chriſme at al. For Pope Innocentius ſaithe, Chriſma conficitur ex Oleo,
& Balſamo:
                     Extra. De Sacra vnctions. 
                     The Chriſme is made of Oile and Balſame. And to the makinge thereof
the Balſame is as neceſſarie, as the Oile. But theſe many hundred yeres ye haue
had no Balſame, nor hath there benne any to be had: Therefore ye haue had no
Chriſme this longe while, but haue deceiued the people with quid pro quo, geuinge
them one thinge for an other.
                  
                     Nowe that your Oile came not from the Apoſtles, your owne Doctour Panormitane
is witneſſe.
                     Panormitan. De Conſuetud. ca. 5. 
                     For thus he writeth, Apoſtoli olim conferebant Spiritum
Sanctum ſola manus impoſitione. Et quia hodié Praelati non ſunt ita beati, fuit inſtitutum,
vt illi conferrent hoc Sacramentum cum Chriſmate: The Apoſtles in olde time gaue the Holy
Ghoſte onely by ſ
                           •
                        ieinge on of handes. But nowe a daies bicauſe Biſhoppes be not ſo Holy,
order hathe benne taken, that they ſhoulde geue this Sacramente with Chriſme.
                  
                  Neither is this mater ſo thorowly approued by al Antiquitie, as M. Harding
imagineth. For Pope Innocentius is witneſſe, that in olde times there were
ſome,Extra. De Sacra vnction. Vngitur. that founde faulte with theſe dooinges. Theſe be his woordes: Non ludaizat
Eccleſia, cùm vnctionis celebrat Sacramentum, ſicut Antiqui mentiuntur: The Churche
is not Jewiſhe in ſolemnizinge the Sacramente of Vnction, as the Elders haue miſreported.
                     
                  
                  Touching your Lightes,In Annotationi. in. 5. librum contra Marcionem. and Tapers, Beatus Rhenanus a man of greate
learninge, and iudgemente, doubteth not, but ye borowed the vſe thereof from
the Heathens. I graunte, the Chriſtians in olde time had Lightes in theire
Churches, when they mette togeather at their common Praiers. But it appeareth
by the Ancient Fathers, that the ſame Lightes ſerued to ſolace them againſt
the darke,Augu. De tempo. in Natali Do. Sermo. 3. and not for any vſe of Religion. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Vouent alius Oleum,
alius Ceram ad luminaria noctis: They promiſe
                      (to the Churche) one Oile, an other
waxe,
                     Euſebius devita Conſtan. Orat. 3. Hieron aduer. Vigilantium. M. Hardinge, Fol. 7. b. 
                           〈…〉
                         6. ca. 2. 
                     for the night Lightes. Likewiſe ſaithe Euſebius, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
Ignis Purus, quantum ſatis eſſet and praebendum lumen
precantibus. A cleare Light, ſo mutche as might ſuffice the people at theire Praiers.
                      So
likewiſe ſaithe S. Hierome, Cereos non clara luce accendimus, ſed vt noctis tenebras
hoc ſolatio temperemus: VVee ſight not cut Tapers at midde daie, but onely by this comfort
to eaſ the darkeneſſe of the night.
                      Therefore, M. Hardinge, vnto you, that ſet vp
Lightes in your Churches, as your ſelfe ſaie, to the Honour of God, the Aunciente
Father Lactantius ſaithe thus, Num mentis ſuae compos putandus eſt, qui Authori,

& Datori Luminis Candelarum,Lightes. VVater. & Cerarum lumen offert pro munere? What, maie wee
thinke, he is wel in his wittes, that vnto God the Maker and Geuer of Light wil offer vp
Candels, and Tapers for a preſent?
                      Verily Tertullian ſaithe, Accendant quotidiè lucernas,
quibus lux nulla eſt,
                     Tertul. De Idololatria. 
                     &c. Illis competunt & Teſtimonia tenebrarum, & auſpicia poenarum:
Let them that haue no ſight
                      (of God) ſet vp their Tapers euery daye, &c. To them
belongeth bothe the Teſtimonie of darkneſſe, and the beginninge of Paine.
                  
                  But what ſhal I ſaye of your Holy Water? No doubte it muſt néedes ſerue,
as your Oile doothe, to the ſaluation of body, and ſoule. Auguſtinus Steuchus, a
principal Doctour of your ſyde ſaithe,Augu. Steucha
                           •
                         in librum numer. Cap. 19. 
                     Non inane inſtitutum eſt, quòd Aquas ſale &
Orationibus ſanctificamus, vt ad eorum aſperſum delicta noſtra deleantur. It is no vaine
inuention, that wee hallowe VVater with Salte and Prayers, that by the ſprinkeſinge thereof
our ſinnes maye be forgeuen.
                      Thus profanely, and Heathenlike he writethe, as if
the Bloude of Chriſte were quite dried vp.
                  Beſide al this, one of your Doctours of Louaine tellethe vs in good ſadneſſe, by
reporte of one of the Ieſuites,Copus Dialo. 
                           •
                        . Pa. 18. b 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        : vlato in Timaeo: & Theodoret. De corrigēdis Graecorum affectibus, Lib. 1. that in India Holy Water is very wholeſome to
driue awaye Miſe, and to make barren Women to conceiue. I faine not this mater:
The place maye be ſéene. O M. Hardinge, I muſt néedes ſaye of your companie,
that one ſaide ſometime of the Grecians, Theiſe that cal themſelues Catholiques,
are euer Children.
                  
                  Ye ſaye, ye haue chaunged nothinge, that is of neceſſitie either to be beléeued,
or to be obſerued. What neceſſitie ye meane, I can not wel contecture. For
when you liſte, your Holy Water, and Holy Breade muſt néedes be of neceſſitie.
But in déede of the ancient Godly orders of the Churche ye haue in a manner
leafte nothinge, onleſſe it be ſuche as ye might beſt haue ſpared: and the ſame ye
haue ſo defaced withe ſuperſtition, that it hathe nowe quite loſte his former vſe,
and is not the ſame it was before. Certainely if you had changed nothinge, then
ſhould you haue nowe no Priuate Maſſe.
                  
                     Therfore wee maye iuſtly ſaye to you, as Tertullian ſaide in like caſe vnto the
Romaine Heathens:
                     Tertull. in Apologetico. Vbi Religio? vbi veneratio Maioribus debita? Habitu, victu, inſtructu,
ſenſu, ipſo denique ſermone Proauis renūtiaſtis. Laudatis ſemper Antiquitatem:
nouè de die viuitis. Per quod oſtenditur, dum à bonis Maiorum inſtitutis deceditis, ea vos
retinere & cuſtodire, quae non debuiſtis: cùm quae debuiſtis, non cuſtoditis. Where is your
Religion? where is the reuerence dewe to your forefathers? You haue forſaken them in your
apparel, in your diet, in your order, in your meaning, and in your ſpeeche. Ye change your life
daily: yet ye praiſe Antiquitie. Whereby it appeareth, while ye ſeaue the good orders of your
Elders, that yee keepe the thinges, yee ſhould not keepe: ſeeinge ye keepe not the thinges, ye
ſhould keepe.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 10.
               And that this mater ſhould not ſeeme to be donne but vpon priuie
ſclaunder, and to be toſſed to and fro in a corner onely to ſpite vs,
there haue benne beſides wilily procured by the Biſhop of Rome
certaine perſons of eloquence yenough, and not vnlearned neither:
whiche ſhould put theire healpe to this cauſe nowe almoſt deſpaired
of, and ſhoulde poliſhe and ſet foorthe the ſame, bothe in bookes and
withe longe tales, to the ende, that, when the mater was trimly and
eloquently handled, ignorant and vnſkilful perſons might ſuſpecte
there was ſomme greate thinge in it. In deede they perceiued, that
theire owne cauſe did euery where goe to wracke, that their ſteightes
were now eſpied and leſſe eſteemed, and that theire healpes did dayly

faile them, and that theire mater ſtoode altogeather in greate neede
of a cunninge ſpokeſman.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVee cannot deſpaire of this cauſe,Confidence of the Catholikes touchinge their cauſe. Lueae 21. Matthae, 28. Johan. 14. The Catholike Church aſſuredly defended. Epheſ. 4. onleſſe wee would forſake our Faithe, as ye haue. For beleuinge
Chriſte. whiche our faithe leadeth vs vnto, wee cannot miſtruſte the continuance of this cauſe.
Heauen and Earthe ſhal paſſe, but my woordes ſhal not paſſe, ſaithe Truthe it ſelfe. And his woordes
tel vs, that he wil be with his Churche al daies to the worlds ende: And that he hath beſought his
Father to geue to it the Sprite of Truthe to remaine with it for euer. Then be wee moſte aſſured of
this cauſe. VVee tel you therefore, it ſtandeth, and ſhal ſtande by Chriſtes preſence, and by the Holy
Ghoſtes aſſiſtance, to the ende. Your cauſe yet ſtandeth not, but wauereth and tottereth, as that
whiche S. Paule termeth a puffe of doctrine, and doubtleſſe ſhortely fall it ſhall, as all Hereſies
haue fallen.
                  The authours and profeſſours of them be dead and rotten, in Helfire with weepinge and
grintinge of teeth. The like iudgement lookeye and your folowers to haue, if ye repent not, and
reuoke your Hereſies by time.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Wee cannot deſpaire. ſaithe M. Hardinge, of the continuance of our cauſe. For Heauen
and Earthe ſhal paſſe: but Chriſtes VVoorde ſhal not paſſe. He wil be with vs al daies to the
worlds ende, &c. Theſe Woordes, M. Hardinge, be true and certaine: and therefore
our hope is the firmer. Chriſte hath promiſed that the Sprite of Truthe ſhal
remaine for euer, but not in the Pope, and his Cardinalles. For thereof he made
no promiſe. Nay rather the Prophete Eſai ſaithe, The Sprite of God ſhal reſt
vpon the poore,Eſaie. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . and méeke harted, that trembleth at the Woorde of the Lorde.
                  The Churche of God ſhal ſtande ſtil, yea though Rome were poſſeſſed with
Antichriſte.Matthae. 15. It is true that Chriſte ſaithe, Euery plante, whiche my Heauenly Father
hath not planted, ſhal be rooted vp: Vpon whiche woordes S. Hilarie ſaithe, Significat,
Traditionem hominum cruendam eſſe,
                     Hilar in Ca. 15. Matthaei. 
                     cuius fauore tranſgreſsi ſunt Praecepta Legis: He
meaneth, that the Tradition of man, for whiche Traditions ſake they haue broken the Lawe
of God, ſhal be taken vp by the rootes.
                      Heauen and Earthe ſhal paſſe: and your fantaſtes,
and diuiſes, M. Hardinge, ſhal paſſe: the Lorde hath ſpoken it: But the
Woorde of God, and his Churche ſhal endure for euer.
                  
                     But M. Hardinges Almanake ſaithe, Our Doctrine ſhal fal, and that very
ſhortly. Herein I profeſſe, I haue no ſkil. Goddes wil be donne. It is his cauſe:
what ſo euer ſhal happen, his name be bleſſed for euer. In like ſorte the Heathens
in olde times, as S. Auguſtine ſaithe, vaunted them ſelues againſt the Faithe
of Chriſte.
                     Auguſt. In Pſal. 70. 
                     Ad certum tempus ſunt Chriſtiani: poſtea peribunt, & redibunt Idola: redibit
quod erat anteà. Verùm tu, cùm expectas, miſer Infidelis, vt tranſtant Chriſtiani,
tranſis ipſe ſine Chriſtianis: Theſe Chriſtians are but for a while: 
                        •
                     al they ſhal, and that
ſhortly. Then ſhal our Idols come againe, and it ſhalbe as it was before. But, O thou miſerable
Infidel, while thou lookeſt that the Chriſtians ſhould paſſe, thou poſſeſt awaie thee ſelfe
without the Chriſtians. Againe be ſaithe, Ecce veniet tempus vt finiantur, & non ſint
Chriſtiani.
                     
                     Auguſti. in eundem Pſal
                           ••
                        m. 
                     Sicut coeperunt ad aliquo tempore, ita vſque ad certum tempus erunt. Sed
cùm iſta dicunt, ſine fine moriuntur: & permanet Eccleſia praedicans brachium Domini
omni generationi venturae: They ſaie, behold, the daie wil come, when al theſe Chriſtians
ſhal haue an ende. As they had a time to beginne, ſo ſhal they haue a time to continewe.
But while they make theſe crakes, they them ſelues die without ende. But the Churche
contineweth ſtil praiſinge the almighty arme of God to euery generation that is to come.
                  
                     But ye ſaie, The Authours and Profeſſours of our Doctrine be damned in Hel fiere, and crie,
Peccaui. This is a very terrible kinde of talke. But it is a raſhe parte for you,

M. Harding, ſo ſuddainely to ſkip into Goddes Chaire, and there to pronounce your
Sentence Definitiue like a Iudge.
                     
                     Auguſt. in Pſal. 36. par. 3. 
                     But God wil iudge of your iudgemente. S. Auguſtine
ſaithe, Alia eſt sella terrena, aliud Tribunal. Coelorum: Ab inferiori Sententia
accipitur. à ſuperiori Corona:
                      The earthly Chaier is one thinge: the Iudgemente ſeate in
Heauen is an other. From the one wee receiue Sentence, from the other we receiue a Crowne.
O M. Hardinge, God graunte you maie once crie, Peccaui: leſt the time come
that ye ſhal crie out, as it is written in the Booke of Wiſedome:
                     Sapien. 5. Theſe are they
whom wee ſometime had in deriſion, and in a parable of reproche. VVee fooles thoughte
theire life madneſſe, and theire ende without honoure. But nowe are they coumpted emonge
the Children of God, and theire portion is emonge the Sainctes.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 2.
               Nowe as for thoſe thinges whiche by them haue benne laide
againſte vs, in parte they be manifeſtly falſe & condemned ſo by theire
owne iudgementes, which ſpake them: partly againe, though they
be as falſe too in deede, yet beare they a certaine ſhewe and coolour
of truthe, ſo as the Reader (if he take not good heede) maie eaſily
be tripped and brought into errour by them, ſpecially when theire
fine and cunninge tale is added thereunto: And parte of them be of
ſutche ſorte, as we ought not to ſhunne them as crimes or faultes,
but to acknowledge and confeſſe them as thinges wel done, & vpon
very good reaſon. For ſhortely to ſaie the truthe, theſe folke falſely accuſe
and ſclaunder al our dooinges, yea the ſame thinges, which they
them ſelues cannot denie but to be rightly and orderly donne: and for
malice doo ſo miſconſtrue and depraue al our ſaienges and dooings,
as though it were impoſſible, that any thinge could be rightly ſpoken
or donne by vs. They ſhould more plainely & ſincerely haue gonne
to woorke, if they would haue dealte truely: But nowe they neither
truely nor ſincerely, nor yet Chriſtianly, but darkely and craftily
charge and batter vs with lies, and doe abuſe the blindeneſſe and
fondeneſſe of the people, togeather with the ignorance of Princes, to
cauſe vs to be hated, and the Truthe to be ſuppreſſed.
               This, lo ye, is the power of darkeneſſe, and of men, whiche leane
more to the amaſed wonderinge of the rude multitude, and to darkeneſſe,
then they doo to Truthe & Light: and,Hierony aduerſus Rufinum. as S. Hierome ſaithe,
doo openly gainſaie the Truthe, cloſinge, vp theire eies, and wil
not ſee for the nonce. But we geue thankes to the moſt good and
mighty God, that ſutche is our cauſe, where againſt (when they
would faineſt) they were hable to vtter no deſpite, but the ſame,
whiche might as wel be wreaſted againſt the Holy Fathers, againſt
the Prophetes, againſt the Apoſtles, againſt Peter, againſt Paule,
and againſt Chriſte him ſelfe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Catholikes doo not burden you with ought, wherein by their owne iudgementes they condemne
themſelues, as ye ſclaunder them not onely here, but oftentimes in your Booke. For if they iudged otherwiſe.
they would not wittingly do againſt their iudgemente. That is the ſpecial propertie of an Heretike,
whom S. Paule hiddeth al men to a voide, knowinge that he that is ſuche, is peruerted,Tim. 5. and
ſeemeth euen condemned by his owne iudgement.
                  
                     
They ſhewe bothe your blaſphemous Hereſies, and your wicked actes. Luther, ye knowe. powred
out his Hereſies and villanies. &c. Your robbinge of Churches, perſecutinge of men for ſtandinge
ſ
                        •
                     edfaſtly in the faithe of the Holy forefathers, your inceſtuous mariages of Monkes, Friers, and
Nonnes, your breache of ſolemne vowes for fleaſhly pleaſure, your prophaninge and abandoninge of
Holy Sacramentes, your contempt of auncient and godly ordinaunces and diſcipline of the Churche, and
ſuche other thinges of like eſtimation.
                  For in deede the catholikes doo perſecute you, (if ſuche deſerued entreatinge of euill perſons
maye be called perſecution) and al good folk beſides, wee gr
                        ••
                     te, and ſhal ſo doe, ſo longe as they
love the Truthe, and keepe them in the vnitie of the Churche. Yet with no other minde doo they
perſecu
                        •
                     e you,Geneſ. 16. Iohan. 2. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . then Sara did Agar: then Chriſt the Iewes, whom he whipt out of the Temple: then

                        •
                     eter did S
                        •
                     nom Magus.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Yewis, M. Hardinge, it might pleaſe you to remember, that Bartholomaeus
Latomus a Doctour of your ſide confeſſeth in writinge to al the worlde,
                        
                           •
                        ar. Latonus aduerſus Bucerū
                      y• our
requeſt touchinge the Holy Miniſtration vnder Bothe Kindes, accordinge to
Chriſtes firſt Inſtitution, is iuſte and reaſonable:
                  That Gerardus Lorichius an other of your owne ſide ſaithe, Sunt Pſe
                           •
                        docatholici,
qui Reformationem Eccleſiae quoquo modo remorari non verentur: They be falſe
Catholiques
                      (and this,
                        
                           •
                        erar. Lorichius De Miſſa prorogand
                           •
                        . In 7. par. Canonis. M. Hardinge, he ſpeaketh of you, beinge one of your owne)
they be Falſe Catholiques, that hinder the Reformation of the Churche by al meanes they be
hable. He ſaithe, you be falſe Catholiques, far contrary to the common opinion: and
concludeth in the ende, that the wilful mainteinance and ſequel of your Doctrine in
this pointe, is, as he calleth it, Haereſis, & Blaſphemia peſtilens, & execrabilis: An
Hereſie, and a Blayhemie againſt God, Peſtilent and Curſed;
                     
                  
                  That others of your 
                        •
                     de confeſſe, that this your vſe of Miniſtration vnder one
kinde,Steuin Gard. in the Diuels Sophiſt
                           •
                        ie. whiche nowe ye cal Catholique, began firſt, not of Chriſte, or his Apoſtles,
or any Ancient Learned Father: but onely of the errour, or, as he better termeth
it, of the ſimple Deuotion of the People:
                  That Albertus Pighius, the ſtouteſt gallante of al your Campe, graunteth
there haue benne,Albertus 
                           •
                        ighius De Miſſa P
                           ••
                        uata. Platina in Vio 2. 10. Shidanus Li. 4. and be many Abuſes in your Paſſe, notwithſtandinge ye haue
tolde vs far otherwiſe:
                  That Pope Pius oftentimes graunted, and vſed commonly to ſaie, He ſawe
great cauſes, why Prieſtes ſhoulde be reſtoared to the libertie of Mariage: That
Pope Adrian by his Legate Cheregatus confeſſed openly at Norenherg in the General
Diet of al the Princes of Germanie, that al the il of the Churche came firſte
à culmine Pontificio, From the toppe Caſtle of the Pope:
                     
                  
                  And to be ſhort, M. Hardinge, it might haue pleaſed you to remember, that
your ſelfe in your firſt Booke,
                        M. Harding fo. 22 b. in the Defence of your Priuate Paſſe, haue written
thus: Mary, I denie not, but that it were more commendable, and more Godly on the Churches
Parte, if many well diſpoſed, and examined woulde be partakers of the bleſſed Sacramente with
the Prieſte.
                  
                  Al theſe thinges, M. Hardinge, be they 
                        •
                     ſes, or Abuſes: Reaſonable, or Vnreaſonable:
Right, or Wronge: Better or woorſe: Be they neuer ſo wicked, neuer
ſo Blaſphemous, neuer ſo curſed, yet be they ſtoutly defended ſtil, and no hope
offered of amendement: With what Conſcience of your parte, he onely ſ
                        •
                     eth,
that ſ
                        •
                     eth the Conſcience. You graunte, ye perſecute your brethren, where
ye haue the Swerd, and maye perſecute: but as Sara did Agar:Gene. 16 Iohn 2. Chryſoſt. in Mat. thae. Homi. 19. as Chriſte did the
Iewes: and not otherwiſe. Verily, M. Hardinge, that Chriſte, or Sara were
perſecutours. I haue not greatly heard. But I remember Chryſoſtome ſaithe thus:
Nunquid Ouis Lupum perſequitur aliquando? Non, ſed Lupus ouem. Sic enim Caim

perſecutus eſt Abel:
                     Perſequution for Loue. 
                     non Abel Caim. Sic Iſmael perſecutus eſt Iſaac, non Iſaac Iſmael:
Sic Iudaei Chriſtum, non Chriſtus Iudaeos: Haeretici Chriſtianos, non Chriſtiani Haeresicos.
Ergo ex fructibus corum cognoſcetis eos: What, doothe the Sheepe perſcute the
Woulfe at any time? No, but the Woulfe doothe perſecute the Sheepe. For ſo Caim perſecuted
Abel, not Abel Caim: So Iſmael perſecuted Iſaac, not Iſaac Iſmael: So the Iewes
perſecuted Chriſte, not Chriſte the Iewes: So the Heretiques perſequute the Chriſtians, not the
Chriſtiaus the Heretiques. 
                              〈◊〉
                            ye ſhal knowe them by their fruites.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt contra Lite, Pe
                           •
                        ili a. Lib. 2. Cap 19. Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 19. Non eo modo perſecutionem paſsi ſunt Pſeudoprophetae ab
Elia, quomodo ipſe Elias à Rege nequiſsimo: Neither were the Palſe Prophetes ſo perſecuted
by Elias, as Elias was perſecuted by the wicked Kinge. Surely Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     
Quem videris in ſanguine perſequutionis gaudentem, Lupus eſt: Whome ſo euer ye ſee

                           •
                        eioicinge in the Bloudde of perſequution, he is the VVoulfe.
                  
                  But yée pretende greate good wil, and ſaye, Ye perſecute and murder your Brethren
for Loue,In veſpit. as Chriſte perſequuted the Iewes. So I trowe, Ariſtophancs
ſaithe, Philippides tooke a cudgel, and beatte his Father, and al for loue. How be it.
M. Hardinge, neither are you armed, as Chriſte was armed: nor was Chriſte armed,
as you are armed. I muſt ſaye to you, as S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto the Heretiques
the Donatiſtes:Auguſt. contra Liter. Per
                           •
                        lta
                           ••
                         Lib. 2. Cap. 87. 
                     Hanc formam ne ab ipſis quidem Iudaeis perſecutoribus accepiſtis.
Illi enim perſequuti ſunt Carnem ambulantis in terra: Vos Euangelium ſedentis
in Coelo: Ye learned not this fourme of perſequution, no not of the Iewes. For they perſequuted
the Fleaſhe of Chriſte walkinge in the Earthe: You perſequute the Goſpel of Chriſte
ſittinge in Heauen.
                     
                     Holcore in. 1. Sē
                        ten. Quaeſt 3. Arti. 8. Dubi 2. Orig. in Geneſ. Homi. 7. Gene. 21. Calat. 4. Robert Holcote emonge other his doubtes moueth this queſtion
An Amor ſit odium: VVhether Loue be hatred; or no.
                      Yf he were nowe aliue, & ſawe
your dealinge, and the kindneſſe of your Loue, I beleue, he woulde put the mater
out of queſtion, & ſaye, vndoubtedly your Loue is hatred, it is no Loue. So Moſes
ſaithe, Iſmael plaied or ſported with Iſaac. But S Paule ſaithe, The ſame plaieinge
and ſportinge was perſecution. For thus he writeth: He, that was after the Fleaſhe,
perſequuted him, was after the Sprite.
                  
                  
                     I doubte not, but you thinke, of your parte it is wel donne. For ſo Chriſte ſaithe,
VVho ſo euer ſhal Murder you,Iohan. 16. ſhal thinke be offereth a Sacrifice vnto God. And your
ſelues haue ſette to this note in greate Letters in the Margine of your Decrees:
Iudaei mortaliter peccaſſent,
                     Diſt. 13. Item: In Margine. 
                     ſi Chriſtū nō Crucifixiſſent: The Iewes had Sinned deadly, if
they had not hinged Chriſte vpon the Croſſe. Benedictus Deus, qui non dedit nos in captionem
Dentibus eorum: Bleſſed be God, that hath not geuen vs to be a Praie vnto their Teeth.
                  To al the reſte it is ſufficient for M. Hardinge to ſaye, They be Blasphemous Hereſies:
wicked Actes: Lutheres Hereſies, and villanies: Robbinge of Churches: Breaches of Vowes:
Pleaſ
                           •
                        ely pleaſures: Abandoninge of the Holy Sacramentes: Malices, Sclaunders, and Lies. And
biſides theſe thinges, in effecte he anſweareth nothinge. Nowe to anſweare nothinge
with ſome thinge, it were woorthe nothinge.
               
               
                  The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 5.
                  Nowe therefore, if it be leeful for theſe folkes to be eloquent and
finetongued in ſpeakinge euil, ſurely it becommeth not vs in our
cauſe, beinge ſo very good, to be doumbe in anſwearinge truely. For,
menne to bee careleſſe, what is ſpoken by them and theite owne mater,
be it neuer do falſely and ſclaunderouſely ſpoken, (eſpecialy
when it is ſutche, that the Maieſtie of God, and the cauſe of Religion
maye thereby be dammaged) is the parte doubtleſſe of diſſolute
and retcheleſſe perſons, and of them, whiche wickedly winke at the
iniuries donne vnto the Name of God. For although other wronges,
ye oftentimes greate, maye be borne and diſſembled of a milde and

Chriſtian man: yet he that goeth ſmoothely awaye and diſſembleth
the mater when he is noted of Hereſie, Ruffinus was woont to denie,
that man to be a Chriſtian. Wee therefore wil doo the ſame
thinge, whiche al Lawes, whiche natures owne voice doothe commaunde
to be donne, and whiche Chriſte him ſelfe did in like caſe
when he was checked and reuiled: to the in
                        •••
                     t wee maye put of from
vs theſe mennes ſclaunderous accuſations, and maye defende ſoberly
and truely our owne cauſe and innocencie.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Yee haue not proued, the Truthe to be of your ſide, nor euer ſhal be able to proue, mainteininge
the Doctrine of the Lutheras, Zwinglians, and Caluiniſtes, as ye doo. Nowe al dependeth of
that pointe. And bicauſe yee haue not the Truthe, what ſo euer ye ſaye, it is ſoone confuted: and
what ſo euer ye bringe, it is to no purpoſe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  This is the very iſſue of the caſe: Whether the Doctrine that wée profeſſe,
be the Truethe, or no. Whiche thinge through Goddes Grace, by this our conference,
in parte maye appare. I beſeeche God the Authour of al Truthe, and the
Father of Light, ſo to open our hartes, that the thinge that is the Truthe in déede,
maye appeare to vs to be the Truthe.
               
               
                  The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 2.
                  For Chriſte verily, when the Phariſeis charged him with Sorcery,
as one that had ſome familiare Sprites, and wrought many
thinges by theire helpe: I, ſaide he, haue not the Diuel, but doo glorifie
my Father: but it is you, that haue diſhonoured me, and put me to
rebuke and ſhame. And S. Paule, when Feſtus the Lieutenaunt
ſcorned him, as a mad man: I (ſaide he) moſte deer Feſtus, am not
mad, as thou thinkeſt, but I ſpeake ye Woordes of Truth & ſobreneſſe.
And the ancient Chriſtians, when they were ſclaundered to the people
for mankillers, for Adulterers, for committers of inceſt, for diſturbers
of the common Weales, and did perceiue, that by ſutche ſclaunderous
accuſations the Religion whiche they profeſſed, mighte be
brought in queſtion, namely if they ſhould ſeeme to holde their peace,
& in manner confeſſe the faulte: leſt this might hinder the free courſe
of the Goſpel, they made Orations, they put vp Supplications, and
made meanes to Emperours, and Princes, that they mighte defende
them ſelues and theire Felowes in open Audience.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  When ye prooue, that ye haue the Truthe, then maye ye be admitted, in your Defence to alleage
the example of Chriſte, of S. Paule, and of the firſte Chriſtians. But nowe wee tel you, beinge as
you are, theſe examples ſerue you to no purpoſe. And for ought ye haue ſaide 
                        •
                     itherto, the Anabaptiſtes,
Libertines, Zwenkfeldians, Neſtorians, Eunomians, Arians, and al other peſtiferous Heretikes
might ſaye the ſame aſwel as ye. Chriſte was charged of the Iewes with vſinge the power
of impure Sprites,Luke. 11. Act. 26. Tertul. in Apolog. blasphemouſly: Paule was ſcorned of Feſtus, as a mad man, without cauſe: the Ancient
Chriſtians were accuſed by the Infidels of hainous crimes, falſely. But ye are accuſed of Hereſies
and ſundrie Impieties, by Godly, VViſe, and Faithful men, vpon Zeale, by good aduiſe, and truely.
And as for thoſe Auncient Chriſtians, when they made Apologies or Orations in the Defence of the

Chriſten Faithe,The Apologies of the olde Fathers vvere lavvfully publiſhed. Eccleſ. Hiſt. Lib 4. Cap. 26. they did it ſo as became Chriſten men, plainely and openly. Either they offered them
to the Emperours with thei owne handes, or put to their names, and ſignified to whome they gaue
the ſame. As S. Hilary deliuered a Booke in Defence of the Catholique Faithe againſt the Arians to
Conſtantius. Melito and Apollinaris wrote their Apologies to the Emperours. S. Iuſtine the Philoſopher
and Martyr gaue his firſte Apologie for the Chriſtians to the Senate of the Romaines, the ſeconde
to Autonius Pius Emperour:Eccleſ. Hiſt. Lib. 5. Cap. 21. Tertullian to the Romaines. S. Apollonius the Romaine Senatour and
Martyr did Reade his Booke openly in the Senate houſe, whiche he had made in Defence of the Chriſtian
Faithe.The Apologie of the Churche of England for foorthe ſuſpitiouſly, and vvithout due order. But yee doo your thinges, that ought to be done openly, in Hucker Mucker. Ye ſet foorth
your Apologie in the name of the Churche of Englande, before any meane parte of the Churche were
priuie to it, and ſo as though either ye were aſhamed of it, or afraide to abide by it. The inſcription
of it is directed neither to Pope nor Emperour, nor to any Prince, nor to the Churche, nor to the
general Councel then beinge when ye wrote it, as it was moſte conuenient: There is no mans name ſet
to it:Vntruthe. It is Printed without Priuilege of the Prince, contrary to Lawe in that behalfe made: allowed
neither by Parlament, nor by Proclamation, nor agreed vpon by the Cleregie in Publike and lawful
Synode. This packinge becommeth you: it becommeth not the vpright Profeſſours of the Truthe
Wherefore your vnlawful Booke,The Apologie 
                           •
                         famous Libel. as it is, ſo it maye be called an Inuectiue, or rather a Famous Libel,
and ſclaunderous VVrite, as that whiche ſeemeth to haue benne made in a corner, and caſt abroade
in the ſtreetes, the Authours whereof the Ciuil Lawe puniſ heth ſharpely.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Howe far foorth theſe examples maye ſerue vs, wée remit the iudgement thereof
to the diſcrete Chriſtian Reader. It is not yenough thus to crie out, Impieties,
and Hereſies. M. Hardinges bare Woorde in this behalfe is not ſufficient to warrant
an euidence. Certainely emonge other greate comfortes, that wee haue in
Goddes mercies, this is one, and not the leaſte, that touchinge the Innocencie, and
right of out cauſe, wée maye ſaye to you, as Chriſte ſaide to the Phariſeis, Wee
haue not the Diuel,
                     Iohan. 2. Act. 26. 
                     but wee glorifie our Father: Or, as S. Paule ſaide vnto Feſtus,
Wee are not madde (M. Hardinge) as ye reporte of vs: but wee viter vnto you the
Woordes of Truthe and sobrietie.
                  
                  But this is a piteous faulte: The names of al the Biſhoppes, Deanes, Acchedeacons,
Perſonnes, Vicares, and Curates of England are not ſette to our Apologie.
It is directed neither to the Emperour, nor to the Pope, nor to the Councel.
Neither is it Printed with Priuilege of the Prince. This laſte clauſe is a manifeſt
Vntruthe, and maye eaſily be reproued by the Printer. Hereof ye conclude,
It is a ſclaunderous Libel, and was written vnder a Hedge, and, as you ſaye, in
Hucker Mucker.
                  Firſte, were it graunted, that al, ye ſaye of Hilarie, Melito, Iuſtinus, Tertullian,
and Apollonius were true: Yet muſte it néedes folowe, that al Bookes,
that are not Subſcribed with the Authours names, were written in a corner?
Firſte to beginne with the Scriptures, tel vs, M. Hardinge, who wrote the
Bookes of Geneſis, of Exodus, of Leuiticus, of Numeri, of Deuteronomiū, of Io
                        •
                     ue,
of the Iudges, of the Kinges, of ye Chronicles, of Iob, &c. Who inrote theſe Bookes?
I ſaye: Who authorized them? Who Subſcribed his name? Who ſet to his S
                        •
                     ale?
The Booke of Wiſedome by ſome is Fathered vpon Philo, by ſome vpō Salomon.
The Epiſtle vnto ye Hebrewes, ſome ſaye, was written by S. Paule: Some, by Clemens:
Some, by Barnabas: Some, by ſome other: & ſo are wee vncertaine of ye Authours
name. S. Marke, S. Luke, S. Iohn, neuer once named them ſelues in their
Goſpels. The Apoſtles Crede, the Canons of the Apoſtles, by what names are
they Subſcribed? Howe are they authorized? To what Pope, to what Emperour
were they offered? To leaue others the Auncient Doctours of the Churche, whiche,
as you knowe, are often miſnamed, Ambroſe for Auguſtine, Gréeke for Latine,

                     Newe for Olde: your Doctour of Doctours, the faireſt flower, and croppe of your
garlande Gratianus, is ſo wel knowen by his name, that wiſe menne can not wel
tel,
                     Eraſm. In Praeſae. in tertiam Seriem quaerti Tom. Hieronymi. 
                     What name to geue him. Eraſmus ſaithe of him thus, Quiſquis fuit, ſiue Gratianus,
ſiue Craſsianus:
                      What ſo euer name wee may geue him: be it Gratianus, or Craſsianus.
And againe he ſaithe, Eruditi negant, illam Gratiani, neſcio cuius, congeriem
vlla vnquam Publica Eccleſiae authoritate fuiſſe comprobatam:
                      The learned ſaye, that
Gratians Collection, or heape of maters, was neuer allowed by any Publique Authoritie of the
Churche.Eraſm. In Praefatione in. 4. Tom. Hieronymi. 
                     And againe, Non conſtat vllis argumentis, quis fuerit Gratianus, quo tempore
opus ſuum exhibuerit, cuius Pontificis, cuius Concilij fuerit Authoritate comprobatum:
                     
It cannot appeare by any tokens of recorde, neither what this Gratian was: nor at
what time he offered vp his Booke: nor what Councel, nor what Pope allowed it.
                  Who ſubſcribed the late Councel of Colaine? Who ſubſcribed the Booke not
longe ſithence ſette abroade vnder the name of the Churche of Colaine, and named
Antididagma? To be ſhorte, who ſubſcribed your owne late Booke intituled the
Apologie of Priuate Maſſe? Where were they written? Where were they Subſcribed?
By what authoritie, and vnder what names were they allowed? I wil ſaye
nothinge of your late Famouſe Volume bearinge the name of Marcus Antonius
Conſtantius. This Booke, as you ſee, hathe three greate names: Notwithſtandinge
the Authour him ſelfe had but twoo: and yet not one of al theſe three. What,
M. Hardinge, would you make your Brethren beleue, that al theſe be but ſclaunderous
Writes, diuiſed onely in Hucker Mucker, and vnder a Hedge?
                  The Decree,Actor. 13 the Apoſtles made in the fiftenthe Chapter of the Actes, it appeareth
not, it was ſo curiouſly ſubſcribed with al theire names. The Proteſtation
of the Bohemiens in the Councel of Baſile, the Confeſſion of the Churches of Geneua
& Heluetia, for ought that I knowe, haue no ſutche Publique Subſcriptions.
Neither is it neceſſarie, nor commonly vſed, to ioyne Priuate mennes names to
Publique maters: neither in ſo mightie & ample a Realme, vpon al incident occaſions
is it ſo eaſy to be donne. Briefely our Apologie is cōfirmed by as many names,
as the highe Courte of Parlamente of England is confirmed.
                  Neither was the ſame conceiued in ſo darke a corner, as M. Hardinge imagineth.
For it was afterwarde imprinted in Latine at Pariſe: and hathe henne
fithence Tranſlated into the Frenche, the Italian, the Duche, and the Spaniſhe
tongues: and hathe benne ſente, and borne abroade into France, Flaunders,
Germanie, Spaine, Poole, Hungarie, Denmarke, Sueucland, Scotland,
Italie, Naples, and Rome it ſelfe to the iudgemente and trial of the whole Churche
of God. Yea it was Readde, and ſharply conſidered in your late Couente at Trident,
& greate threates made there, that it ſhould be anſweared: and the mater by
twoo Notable learned Biſhoppes taken in hande, the one a Spaniarde, the other
an Italian: Which twoo notwithſtandinge, theſe fiue whole yéeres haue yet donne
nothinge, nor, I belèeue, intende any thinge to doo. In deede certaine of
your Brethren haue benne often gnawinge at it: but ſutche as care nothinge, nor
is cared, what they write.
                  But if names be ſo neceſſarie, wee haue the names of the whole Cleregie of
Englande, to confirme the Faithe of our Doctrine, and your name, M. Hardinge,
as you can wel remember, emongſt the reſte: onleſſe, as ye haue already denied
your Faithe, ſo ye wil nowe alſo denie your name.
                  To conclude, it is greatter modeſtie to publiſhe our owne Booke, without
Name, then, as you doo, to publiſhe other mennes Bookes in your owne Names.
For in deede, M. Hardinge, the Bookes ye lende ſo thicke ouer, are not yours. Ye
are but Tranſlatours: ye are no Authours. Yf euery birde ſhoulde fetche againe
his owne Feathers, alas your poore Chickens woulde die for colde.
                  
                     
But you ſaye, Wee offered not our Booke to the Pope. No, neither ought wée
ſo to doo. He is not our Biſhop: He is not our Iudge. Wee maye ſaye vnto him, as
the Emperour Conſtantius ſaide ſometime to Pope Liberius,Theodoret. in Hiſt. Eccleſiaſt. 
                     Quoia es tu pa
                           •
                        s Orbis
terrarum? VVhat greate portion art thou of the whole Worlde?
                      As for your Councel
of Tridente, God wote, it was a ſéely Couente, for ought that maye appeare by
theire Concluſions.
                  Wée offered the Defenſe, and profeſſion of our Doctrine vnto the whole Churche
of God: & ſo vnto the Pope, & the Councel too, if they be any parte, or member of the
Churche: & by Goddes mercie, ſhal euer be hable in al places bothe with our handes,
and with our Bodies to yelde an accoumpte of the hope wee haue in Ieſus Chriſte.
Whereas it liked you to terme our Apologie a Sclaunderous Libel, I doubt not,
but who ſo euer ſhal iudifferently conſider your Booke, ſhal thinke M. Hardinges
tonge wanteth no ſclaunder.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 3.
               But wee truely, ſeeinge that ſo many thouſandes of our brethren in
theſe laſt twentie yeeres haue borne witneſſe vnto the Truthe, in the
middes of moſt paineful tormentes, that coulde be diuiſed: and when
Princes deſirous to reſtraine the Goſpel, ſought many waies, but preuailed
nothinge, & that nowe almoſt the whole worlde dothe beginne
to open theire eies to beholde the lighte: wee take it, that our cauſe
hathe alreadie benne ſufficiently declared and defended, and thinke
it not needeful to make many woordes, ſeinge the very mater ſaithe
yenoughe for it ſelfe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The reaſons and examples ye bringe for it, conclude nothinge. Bicauſe lackinge Truthe. ye builde
vpon a falſe grounde, what ſo euer ye ſet vp, eftſones it falleth, beinge ſtated by no iuſte proufe. Here
ye goe foorthe, and faine woulde ye proppe vp that matter: but your reaſons be as weake as before.
There haue not ſo many thouſandes of your Brethren benne burnte for Hereſie in theſe laſte twentie
yeeres, as yee pretende. But when ye come to boaſtinge, then haue ye a greate grace in vſinge the
Figure Hyperbole: Then Scores be Hundreds: Hundreds be Thouſands: Thouſands be Millions.
                  But what was Michael Seruetus the Arian,Seruetus burnt for Hereſie at Ge
                           •
                        eua. who was burnte at Geneua by procurement of Caluine,
a Brother of yours? Dauid George that tooke vpon him to be Chriſte, who was taken vp after
he was buried and burnte at Baſile,Dauid George. Ioan of Kent. was he your Brother? To come neare home, Ioan of Kent that fil
                        •
                     h,
who tooke foorthe a leſſon further then you taught her (I trowe) or yet Preache, was ſhe a Siſter of
yours? So many Adamites, ſo many Zwenck feldians, ſo many hundreds of Anabaptiſtes and Libertines,
as haue within your twentie yeeres benne ridde out of their liues by fiere, ſwoorde, and water
in ſundry partes of Chriſtendome, were they al of your bleſſed Brotherhed?
                  And this is the chiefe argument yee make in al that Huge Dungehil of your ſtinkinge Martyrt,Actes and Monumentes.
whiche yee haue intituled Actes and Monumentes. But we tel you, It is not deathe that iuſtifieth
the cauſe of dyinge: But it is the cauſe of dyinge that iuſtifieth the Death.
                  Princes (ye ſaye) were deſirous to reſtraine your Goſpel, and though they went about it by many
waies, yet preuailed they nothinge. Therefore your Doctrine muſt needes be the true Goſpel. As good
an Argumente as this is,A vveake argumēt of Truthe. may Theeues make in their Defence. For Princes be deſirous to keepe their
Dominions from Robbinge, and haue euer deuiſed ſtraight Lawes and puniſhmentes for reſtrainte of
Theeues: yet be Theeues euery where, and thefte is dayly committed.
                  And whereas your Goſpel is a groſſe Goſpel,This Carnal Goſpel ſoone taketh place amonge carnal hearers. a Carnal Goſpel, a Belly Goſpel: wonder it is not, if
thoſe people be not wholy withdrawen from aſſentinge to the ſame, who be not of the fineſt wittes.
and be muche geuen to the Seruice of the Belly, and of the thinges beneath the Belly. Yet where the

Princes haue vſed moſt diligence,Hereſies reſtrained by due puniſhement. and beſt meanes to ſtoppe the courſe of your Hereſies, there the people
remaine moſt Catholike: As euery man may iudge by vewe of Italy, Spaine, Baſe Almaine, and
Fraunce, before that weightie Sceptre by Gods ſecrete prouidence for puniſhement of ſinne, was committed
to feeble handes, that for tender age were not able to beare it.
                  Your other argument,The argument of the defenders ſeruinge vvel for Antichriſt. whereby ye would perſuade your Gospel to be the trueth, is, that nowe (as
ye crake) almoſt the whole world doth beginne to open their eies to behold the light. This argument
ſeruethe maruelous wel for Antichriſt. And truely, if he be not already come, ye may very wel ſeme
to be his foreronners. Nay Sirs, if it be true that ye ſaye, that almoſt the whole world loketh that
waye, knowinge that in the latter dayes and towarde the ende of the world iniquitie ſhal abounde,
and the Charitie of the more parte ſhal wexe colde:Matth. 24. VVee maye rather make a contrarie argument,
and iudge your Goſpel to be erroneous and falſe, becauſe the multitude is ſo ready to receiue it.The argument of multitude returned vpon the defenders to a contrary concluſion. Againe
Chriſte hathe not loued his Churche ſo little, as that the world ſhould nowe beginne to open their eies
to behold the light. For the ſame preſuppoſeth a former general darkenes. It ſtandeth not with
Chriſtes promiſes made to the Churche, touchinge his being with the Churche al daies to the worldes
ende, and the Holy Ghoſtes remaininge with it the Sprite of Truthe for euer, that he ſhould ſuffer his
Churche,Matth. 28. Iohan. 14. to continewe in darkenes and lacke of Truthe, theſe thouſand yeres paſt, and now at the latter
daies to reuele the Truthe of his Goſpel by Apoſtates, Vowebreakers, Churcherobbers, and ſutche
other moſt vnlike to the Apoſtles.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  What ſo euer wée ſaye, here appeareth ſmal weight in M. Hardinges ſaieinges.
Wée make no boaſte of the numbers, and multitudes of our Martyrs. And yet, as
S. Paule ſaithe, if wée ſhould needes boaſte, wée would chiefly boaſte of ſutche our
infirmities.2. Cor. 1
                           •
                        . But wée reioiſe with them, and geue God thankes in theire behalfe,
for that it hath pleaſed him, to prepare theire hartes vnto temptation, to trie and
purifie them as Gold in Fornace, and to kéepe them faitheful vnto the ende.
                  As for Dauid George, and Seruete the Arian, and ſutche other the like, they
werè yours, M. Hardinge, they were not of vs: You brought them vp, the one
in Spaine, the other in Flaunders. Wée detected theire Hereſies, and not you:
Wée arreigned them: Wée condemned them: Wée putte them to the Exequution
of the Lawes. It ſéemethe very mutche to calle them our Brothers, becauſe wée
burnte them. It is knowen to Children, it is not the deathe, but the cauſe of the
deathe that maketh a Martyr.Auguſt in Pſal. 34. Par. 2. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Tres erant in Cruce: Vnus Saluator:
Alter Saluandus: Tertius Damnandus. Omnium par Poena, ſed diſpar cauſa:
There were three hanginge on the Croſſe: The firſt was the Saueour: The ſeconde to be Saued:
The third to be Damned. The Paine of al three was one, but the cauſe was diuerſe.
                     
                  
                  Your Anabaptiſtes, and Zuenkfeldians, wée knowe not. They finde
Harbour emongſte you in Auſtria, Sleſia, Morauia, and in ſutche other Countries,
and Citties, where the Goſpel of Chriſte is ſuppreſſed: but they haue no Acquaintance
withe vs, neither in Englande, nor in Germanie, nor in France, nor
in Scotlande, nor in Denmarke, nor in Sueden, nor in any place els, where the
Goſpel of Chriſte is clearely preached. But it hathe benne your greate Policie
theiſe many late yeres, when ye murdered the Sainctes of God, firſte to roote out
theire Tongues, for feare of ſpeakinge: and then afterward to telle the people,
they were Anabaptiſtes, or Arians, or what ye lifted. Withe ſutche policie Nero
ſometime that Bloudy Tiranne burnte the Chriſtians in heapes togeather,Suetonius Tranquillus in Nerone. and
made open Proclamations, that they were Traitours, and Rebelles, and had 
                        •
                     ired
the Cittie of Rome.
                  It pleaſeth you for lacke of other Euaſion, to cal the Storie of Martyrs a Dungbi
                        •
                     
of Lies. But theiſe Lies ſhal remaine in Recorde for euer, to teſtifie and to
condemne your Bloudy dooinges. Ye haue impriſoned your Brethren, ye haue

ſtripte them naked, ye haue ſcourged them with Roddes, ye haue burnte theire
handes and armes withe flaminge Torches, ye haue famiſhed them, ye haue
drowned them, ye haue burnte them: ye haue ſommoned them beinge deade, to
appeare before you out of theire graues, ye haue ripte vp theire buried Carkeſſes,
ye haue burnte them, ye haue throwen them out into the Dunghil: ye tooke a poore
Babe falling from his Mothers Wombe, and in moſt cruel, and Barbarous manner
threw him into the fiere.
                  Al theiſe thinges, M. Hardinge, are true: they are no Lies: The eyes, and
conſciences of many thouſandes can witneſſe your dooinges. The Bloud of innocent
Abel criethe to God from the earthe: and vndoubtedly, he wil require it at
your handes.Chryſoſt in Matth. 1 Iomi. 19. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, as it is alleged before, Quem videris in Sanguine
perſecutionis gaudentem, is Lupus eſt: Who ſo euer hathe pleaſure in the Bloude of
perſecution, the ſame is a Wolfe.
                      Ye ſlewe your Brethren ſo cruelly, not for Murder,
or Robberie, or any other gréeuous crime, they had committed, but onely for that
they truſted in the Liuinge God. Howe be it, wée maye ſaye withe the Old Father
Tertullian,Tertull. ad Scapulam. 
                     Crudelitas veſtra noſtra gloria eſt: Your crueltie is our glorie.
                     
                  
                  Whereas wée auouche the Power and Authoritie of Goddes Holy Woorde, for
that the more it is trodden downe, the more it growethe, and for that the Kinges,
and Princes of this world with al theire puiſſance, and policie were neuer hable
to roote it out, youre anſweare is, that this reaſon may ſerue théeues as wel as vs.
To diſſemble youre odious compariſons, howe lightly ſo euer it ſhal pleaſe you to
weigh this reaſon, yet youre Forefathers the Phariſeis in olde time ſéemed to
make ſome accoumpte of it.Iohan. 12. For thus they murmured, and miſliked emong them
ſelues: Videtis, nos nihil proficere. Ecce Mundus totus poſt eum abijt. Ye ſee, wee can
doo no good. Loe the whole world
                      (for al that wée can dòo) is gone after him. Tertullian
likewiſe ſaithe, Exquiſitior quae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         crudelitas veſtra illecebra magis eſt Sectae. Plures
efficimur,
                     Tertull. in Apologetico. 
                     quoties metimur a vobis. Semen eſt Sanguis Chriſtianorum: The greatteſt
crueltie, that ye can diuiſe, is an entiſement to our Secte. Howe many of vs ſo euer ye murder,
when ye come to the viewe, ye finde vs moe and moe. The ſeede of this encreaſe is
Chriſtian Bloud.
                     
                     Auguſt. de Ciui. lib. 22. cap. 6. So S. Auguſtine, Ligabantur, includebantur, caedebantur, torquebantur,
vrebantur: & multiplicabantur: They were fettred, they were impriſoned, they
were beaten, they were rackte, they were burnte: and yet they multiplied.
                      S. Cyprian
ſaithe,Cyprian. lib. 1. Epiſt. 3. Gregorius Nazianzen. in reditium ſuum ex agro. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Euſeb. li. 4. ca. 8. 
                     Sacerdos Dei Euangelium tenens, & Chriſti praecepta cuſtodiens, occidi poteſt,
vinci non poteſt: The Prieſt of God holdinge the Teſtamente in his hande, killed he maye be,
but ouercome he can not be.
                      So likewiſe Nazianzene, Morte viuit: vulnere naſcitur:
depaſtum augetur: By deathe it liuethe: by woundinge it ſpringethe: by diminiſhinge it encreaſethe.
                     
                  
                  Thus theiſe Holy Fathers, when they ſawe, the Goſpel of Chriſte increaſed
and grewe by perſecution, contrary to al iudgement of reaſon, and worldly policie,
they were enforced, contrary to M. Hardinges iudgemente, therein to acknowledge
the mighty power, and hande of God, and an vndoubted Teſtimonie of the
Truthe. Iuſtinus a Godly Learned Father, and Martyr ſaithe thus of him ſelfe,
Cùm auditem Chriſtianos publicè traduci, & exagicati ab omnibus, viderē autem eos ad
mortem, & ad omnia, quae ad terrorem excogitari poſſent, eſſe intrepidos, cogitabam, nullo
modo poſſe fieri, vt illi in aliquo ſcelere viuerent: VVhen I
                      (béeinge an Heathen,
and one of Platoes Scholars) heard that the Chriſtians were accuſed, and reuiſed of al
menne, and yet ſawe them to goe to theire deathe, and to al manner terrible, and cruel tormentes,
quietly, and without feare, I thought with mee ſelfe, it was non poſsible, that ſutche
menne ſhould liue in any wickednes.
                     Sozomen. lib 1. cap. 1. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      The like writethe Sozomenus of the Chriſtians
in the Primitiue Churche: Nec adulatione victi, nec minis perterriti, magnum omnibus
argumentum dabant, ſeſe de maximis praemiis in certamen deſcendere: The Chriſtians

neither relentinge by faire meanes,
                     
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     nor ſhrinkinge for threates, made it wel appeare to
euery man, that it was for ſome greate rewarde, they ſuffred ſutche trouble.
                  
                  Theiſe learned Fathers therefore ſawe, that M. Hardinge could not ſée, the
encreaſinge of the Goſpel throughe deathe, and perſecution, maugre the might of
worldly Princes,Pſal. 2. is an euident token of the Truthe. The Prophete Dauid ſaithe,
The Princes came, and conſulted togeather againſte God, and againſte his Chriſte. But he that
dwelle the in heauen,
                     Prou
                           •
                        r. 22. 
                     wil laughe them to ſcorne. There is no wiſedome, there is no policie,
there is no counſel againſt the Lorde.
                  Further, you ſaye, Our Goſpel is groſſe, and the people dulle, and ſenſual, and geuen to
theire belly, and beaſtly pleaſure, and therefore the apter, and readier to receiue the ſame. O M.
Hardinge, what a deſperate cauſe is this, that cannot ſtande without ſutche manifeſte
blaſphemie of the Goſpel of Chriſte, and diſpiteful reproche of Goddes people?
Certainely S.Rom. 2. Pſalm. 2. Paule ſaithe, The Goſpel is the power of God vnto Saluation:
And the Prophete Dauid ſaithe, The people is Chriſtes enheritance. What hathe the
people ſo mutche offended you, that you ſhould either in this place ſo ſcornefully,
and ſo reprochefully reporte of them, or in your former Booke ſo diſdeingfully cal
them Swiene,M. Hardinge, Fol. 155. b. and Dogges? Yet is it not ſo longe ſithence your ſelfe were an
earneſt profeſſour of the ſame Goſpel, were it neuer ſo groſſe. Where was then
your fineneſſe, and ſharpneſſe of witte? Where was your belly? Where was the
reſte? You ſhould not ſo ſoone haue forgotten your owne ſelfe.
                  Surely M. Hardinge, neither wil the ſenſual man drowned in filthy, and
beaſtly pleaſures take vp his Croſſe, and folowe Chriſte, and yelde his necke to
your ſwearde, or his body to your fie
                        •
                     e: neither is it a groſſe, or ſenſual Goſpel, that
wil leade him to the ſame.
                  You ſaye, it ſtandethe not withe Goddes promiſſe, to forſake his Churche a
thouſande yeeres. It is mutche for you, M. Hardinge, openly to breake Goddes
commaundementes, to defile his Holy Sanctuarie, to turne light into darkeneſſe,
and darkeneſſe into light: and yet neuertheleſſe to binde him to his promiſſe. Al
menne be liers,Pſal. 50. 2. Tim. 
                           •
                        . but God onely is true, and preuailethe, when he is iudged. God
knoweth his owne. Chriſte wil be euermore with his Churche, yea although the
whole Churche of Rome conſpire againſt him.
                  But why doo you ſo mutche abate your rekeninge? Why make you not vp your
ful accoumpte of fiftéene hundred thréeſcoare and ſixe yéeres, as ye were woonte to
doo? Ye haue here liberally, and of your ſelfe quite ſtriken of fiue hundred thréeſcoare
and ſixe yeeres, that is to ſaye, the whole time, wherein the Apoſtles of
Chriſte, and Holy Martyrs, and other Learned Fathers, and Doctours liued: in
whiche whole time it appeareth by your owne ſecrete Confeſſion, the Churche of
God might wel ſtande bothe without youre Priuate Maſſe (for then was there
none) and alſo without many other your like fantaſies. Neither ought you, M.
Hardinge, ſo déepely to be greeued, and to calle vs Apoſtates, and Heretiques, for
that wee haue reformed either our Churches to the Paterne of that Churche, or
our ſelues to the example of thoſe Fathers. Verily in the iudgement of the godly,
fiue hundred of thoſe firſte yeeres are more woorthe, then the whole thouſande
yeeres that folowed afterward.
                  
                     Therefore I wil aunſweare you with the woordes of S.
                     Hieron ad Pammachium & Oceanum. 
                     Hierome: Quiſquis
es aſſertor 
                              •
                           ouorum Dogmatum, quaeſo te, vt parcas Romanis 
                              •
                           uribus: parcas Fidei,
quae Apoſtolico ore laudatur. Cur poſt quadringentos annos docere nos niteris, quod anteà
neſciuimus? Cur profers in medium, quod Petrus, & Paulus edere noluerunt? Vſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           
ad hunc diem ſine iſta Doctrina Mundus Chriſtianus fuit.
                      Thou, that art a Mainteiner
of newe Doctine, what ſo euer thou be, I praie thee ſpare the Romaine eares: ſpare the Faithe,
that is commended by the Apoſtles mouthe. Why goeſt thou aboute nowe after foure hundred

yeeres to teach vs that Faithe, which before wee neuer knewe? Why bringeſt thou vs foorthe
that thinge, that Peter, and Paule neuer vttered? Euermore vntil this daye the Chriſtian
world hathe benne without this Doctrine.
               
               
                  The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 7.
                  For yf the Popes woulde, or els if they could weigh with theire
owne ſelues the whole mater, and alſo the beginninges and procedinges
of our Religion, howe in a manner al theire trauaile hathe
come to nought, no body driuinge it forewarde, and without any
worldly healpe: and howe on the other ſide, our cauſe, againſte the
wil of Emperours from the beginninge, againſte the willes of ſo many
Kinges, in ſpite of the Popes, and almoſte maugre the head of al
menne, hathe taken encreaſe, and by little and little ſpredde ouer into
al Countreis, and is come at length euen into Kinges Courtes and
Palaces: Theiſe ſame thinges me thinke the might be tokens greate
yenough to them, that God him ſelfe doth ſtrongly fight in our quarrel,
and dothe from Heauen laughe at theire enterpriſes: and that
the force of the Truethe is ſutche, as neither Mans Power, nor yet
Helle gates are able to roote it out.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  It is wel, that ye vſe the terme of the beginninge and procedinges of your Religion. For in
deede of late yeres it beganne, not at Ieruſalem, but at Wittenberg. Neither was it firſt deliuered
vnto you by an Apoſtle, but by an Apoſtata. Stil it procedeth, and the farther of from the end. And wel
may ye name it your Procedinges, for there is no ſtaie in it. VVhat likethe to day, miſlike the tomorowe.
The ſeely begiled ſoules that folowe it, be as S. Paule ſaithe, ouer learninge, and neuer reachinge to the
knowledge of the Truthe.
                        
                           •
                        . Tim. 
                           •
                        .
                  
                  Did not your Religion beginne firſte of Co
                        •
                     etiſe,Vntruthe. and grew it not afterward of rancour and
malice,The firſt beginninge of this nevve Goſpel, and the occaſion that firſt moued Luther to Hereſie. whiche Martin Luther conceiued againſt the Dominican Friers in Saxonie, becauſe Albert the
Archebiſhop of Mentz and Electour of the Empire, had admitted them to be Preachers of the Pardon of
a Croiſade againſt the Turkes, cōtrary to an Ancient cuſtome, whereby the Auguſtine Friers, of whom
Luther was one, had of longe time ben in poſſeſsion of that preſerment? Is it not wel knowen what
afſtirre Frier Luther made againſt Iohn Tetzet the Frier of S. Dominikes order, for that the ſaid Tetzet
was made chiefe preacher of a Pardon. wherein, was greate gaine, and thereby him ſelfe was
bereft of that ſweete Morſel, whiche in hope he had almoſt ſwallowed downe?
                  Where you ſaie, your Religion is ſpred abroade, and hath taken ſo mutche encreaſe againſt the
willes of Princes, and almoſt maugre the head of al men: that is as falſe, as your Religion is.
                  Did not the greate ſlaughter of your hundred thouſand Boures of Germanie ſignifie to the world,The diete of Smalcald.
your cauſe to haue had the helpe of man: VVhat maie weindge of the great League of Germaine Princes
made at the diere of Smalcald, for defence of your Lutheran Goſpel?
                  The troubles and tumultes of Fraunce raiſed by your Brethren the Huguenots,The Hugu
                           •
                        no
                           •
                         of Fraunce. and the lament able
outrages committed there for your Goſpels ſake, be they not a witnes of freſh memorie, that your
Religion is maintained, ſet forthe, and defended with power and helpe of men?
                  That it is nowe at length come euen into Kinges Courtes and Palaices,The comminge of Luthers Goſpel into Princes Courtes is a vveake argumēs for the Truthe. it mouethe wiſe men no
leſſe to ſuspect it, then to praiſe it.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Ye make your ſelfe game, M. Hardinge, for that the Preachinge of the Goſpel
iſſued firſt out of Wittenberg, and not from Rome: Notwithſtandinge Wittenberg
is a noble, and a famous Vniuerſitie, ſo generally frequented out of al

foreine Countreis, and ſo mutche commended for al kindes of tongues, and liberal
knowledge, as not many the like this day in Chriſtendome.
                  But be it, that Wittenberg were ſo ſimple a burrough, as M. Hardinge imagineth.
Yet were it not more ſimple then was the Towne of Nazareth: in whiche
poore Towne notwithſtandinge, firſte appeared the moſt glorious, and greatteſt
Light of the world. Chriſtian modeſtie would not diſdeigne the Truthe of God in
reſpecte of place. That rather becommethe the Proude lookes of the Scribes, and
Phariſeis. They deſpiſed Chriſte and his Diſciples, and called them Nazarenes,
in deſpite of his Countrie. And there hence, it is likely, firſt grewe that ſcorneful
queſtion vſed by Nathanael,Iohan. 1 
                     Nunquid ex Nazareth poteſt aliquid eſſe boni? Can any
good thinge come from Nazareth,
                      ſo poore a Towne? So Celſus the Heathen deſpiſed
the Religion of Chriſte, bicauſe it came (not from Rome, or Athens, but) from the
Barbarous Iewes.Origen. contra Celſum li. 1. For thus Origen reportethe of him: Dogma Chriſtianuns
affirmat à Barbaris cepiſſe ortum, hoc eſt, à Iudaeis. He ſaithe, the Doctorue of the Chriſtians
had his beginninge onely from a Barbarous Nation, that is to ſay, from the Iewes.
                     
                  
                  But this is the mighty hande and power of God.1 Cor. 1. He chuſethe the weake
thinges of the world, to confounde the ſtrong: and the fooliſhe thinges of the world,
to confounde the wiſe.1. Reg. 17. 2. Theſſ▪ 2 Matthae. 11. Pſal. 24. Galat. 3. He ouerthrowethe the greate Goliath with a ſeely ſlinge,
and blowethe downe Antichriſte in al his glorie with the breathe of his mouthe. I
thanke thee, O Father, ſaithe Chriſte: for that thou haſte hid theiſe thinges frō the
wiſe, and Politique: and haſte reueled the ſame vnto the ſimple. The Faithe of
Chriſte is not bounde to place. The whole Earthe is the Lordes, and al the fulneſſe
of the ſame. There is nowe no Diſtinction of Gréeke, and Barbar
                        •
                     us: Wée
are al one in Chriſte Ieſu.
                  Notwithſtanding, the Goſpel of Chriſte that wée profeſſe, neither had his
beginninge from that Learned Father Doctour Luther, nor came firſt from Wittenberg.
It is the ſame Goſpel,Mich. 4. wherof it is Written by the Prophete, The
Lawe ſhal come out of Sion, and the VVoorde of God out of Jeruſalem.
                  
                  Touchinge your longe tale of Doctour Luthers auarice, and ſale of Pardounes,
I minde not, nor néede not to anſweare you. It is a ſimple ſtale ſclaunder.
Yet it often ſeruethe your turne of courſe, when other thinges beginne to
faile. In déede Fréere Tecel the Pardoner made his proclamations vnto the people
openly in the Churches in this ſorte:Iohā. Sleidanus, lib. 13. Although a man had lyen with our Lady
the Mother of Chriſte, and had begotten her with Childe, yet were he hable by the
Popes power to Pardonne the faulte. Againſt this, and other like foule Blaſphemies
Doctour Luther firſte beganne ſo ſpeake. Nowe whether this occaſion were
ſufficient, or no, let M. Hardinge him ſelfe bée the Iudge.
                  Wée graunte, the Princes, and Eſtates of the world haue nowe laide theire
power to aſſiſte the Goſpel. Goddes Holy Name therefore be bleſſed. Howe be it
the Goſpel came not firſt from them. It ſprange vp, and grewe by them many
wheres againſt theire willes.
                  Neither is the Goſpel therefore the more to be ſuſpected, bicauſe it hathe
entred into Princes Courtes. Daniel was in Kinge Nabuchodonoſors Palaice,
and taught him to knowe the Liuinge God.Philip. 1. S: Paule reioiced, and tooke comforte
in his bandes, for that there were ſome euen in Neroes Courte, that began
to hearken to the Goſpel. And Euſebius ſaithe, Valeriani Aula erat iam Eccleſia Dei:
Valerian the Emperours Courte was now become the Churche of God.
                      Athanaſius ſaithe
vnto the Emperour Iouinian, Conueniens eſt Pio Principi, &c: The Studie and loue
of Godly thinges,
                     
                     Theod. li. 4. ca. 3. Cyrill. in Epiſt. ad Theodoſ. & Valentinian. 
                     is very meete for a Godly Prince. For ſo ſhal you ſurely haue your harte
euer more in the hande of God. Likewiſe ſaithe S. Cyril to the Emperours Theodoſius
and Valentinian: Ab ea, quae erga Deum eſt, pietate, Reipub. veſtrae ſtatus pendet.

                        The ſtate, and aſſurance of your Empiere hangethe of your Religion towardes God.
                     
                  
                  So likewiſe ſaithe Sozomenus of the Emperour Arcadius,Sozom. li. 9. ca. 3. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  Therefore it behouethe Princes to vnderſtande the caſes of Goddes Religion,
and to receiue Chriſte with his Goſpel into theire Courtes.Pſal. 2. Eſaie. 49. For God hathe
ordeined Kinges, as the Prophete Dauid ſaithe, to ſerue the Lorde: and, as Eſai
ſaithe, to be Nources vnto his Churche.
                  If there be occaſions of vanities or wickedneſſe in Princes Courſes, yet is
there no Courte therein comparable to the Courte of Rome. For there, S. Bernard
ſaithe, Mali proficiunt: boni deficiunt: The wicked waxe: the godly wane.
                     
                  
                  Ye ſtriue in vaine, M. Hardinge: This Counſel is not of Man: it is of God. Yf
Princes with theirs powers could not ſtaie it, mutche leſſe can you ſtaye it with
vntruthes and fables. The poore beguiled ſoules, of whom ye ſpeake, are neither ſo
ſéely,Act. 5. nor ſo ſimple, but they are able to eſpie your folies. The Truthe of God wil
ſtande: Vanitie will falle of it ſelfe. Remēber the Counſel of Gamaliel: Fight not
againſt the Sprite of God.
               
               
                  The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 3.
                  For they be not al madde at this daye, ſo many Free Citties, ſo
many Kinges, ſo many Princes, whiche haue fallen awaye from the
Seate of Rome, and haue rather ioined them ſelues to the Goſpel of
Chriſte.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  M. Hardinges anſweare hereto is longe: the effecte thereof in ſhort is this:
                  The Faithe of the Holy Romaine Churche, is the very Catholique Faith, which who ſo foreſake,
ſhalbe companions with Diuels in euerlaſtinge fiere.
                  And where ye ſaie, ſo many Free Citties, ſo many Kinges, I praie you, howe many free Citties
can you name, that haue receiued your Sacramentarie Religion? Nay the Free Citties of Germanie, as
many as haue foreſaken the Catholique Churche, doo they not perſecute you the Sacramentaries? But,
ſay ye, they be fallen from the Seate of Rome. So be the Greekes alſo in a pointe or twoo: yet condemne
they you for Heretiques.
                  Neither be al the Free Citties in al the Countrie of Germanie fallen from the See Apoſtolike. Of
fiue partes of that great Countrie, at leaſte twoo remaine Catholique.
                  Let vs ſee, how make ye vp the number of ſo many Kinges, ye ſpeake of? The Realmes of Englande,
and Scotlande, bicauſe by Goddes prouidence the Gouernement of them is deuolued to VVomen,
for as mutche as they be no Kinges, though they haue the ful right of Kinges, of them I ſpeake
not. Now onely twoo Chriſtened Kinges remaine, the Kinge of Denmarke, and the Kinge of sweden.
Geate you nowe vp into your Pulpites like bragginge cockes on the rowſt: Flappe your whinges,
and crow out aloude, so many free Citties, ſo many Kinges.
                  But what thinke you of al the world before this daye? VVere al Citties, al Prouinces, al Countries,
al Kinges, al Princes, &c. til Freer Luther came, and with his Nunne tolde vs a newe Doctrine,
and controlled al the old, were al theſe mad?
                  The Vertuous menne of the Societie of Ieſus, haue they not brought many Countries, many Kinges,
many Princes to the Faithe of Chriſte by preachinge the Doctrine of the Catholike Churche? VVee wil
not folowe your foliſhneſſe in boaſtinge, &c. The Faithe profeſſed in the holy Romayne Churche, is
now preached in Peru in the Kingdome of Ignamban, in the Kingdome of Monopotapa, in Cambaia,
in Giapan, in Cina, in Tartaio, in Baſnaga, in Taprobana, in Ormaz, in Ceilon, in Zimor, in Bacian, in
Macazar.
                  The Miracles wrought by theſe Holy Fathers whiche conuerted theſe Countries, I trowe, ye wil
not accoumpte to be madneſſe. Thus your vaine boaſt in wickedneſſe wrought by the power of Satan is
put to ſilence, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The Faithe of the Romaine Churche,Greekes. ſaithe M. Hardinge, is the very Catholique
Faithe of Chriſte: whiche who ſo foreſakethe, bée he Kinge or Emperour,
he ſhalbe Companion with Diuels in euerlaſting fire. Thus mutche, I trow,
M. Hardinge learned of the Countrefeite Decrée of Anacletus. For thus it pleaſeth
him to gloſe,Anaclet. Epiſt. 1. and interlace the woordes of Chriſte: Super hanc Petram, id eſt, Super
Eccleſiam Romanam, aedificabo Eccleſiam meam: Vpon this Rocke, that is to ſaye, Vpon
the Churche of Rome, I wil build my Churche.
                      And therfore Pope Bonifacius, for a ful
reſolution of the mater ſaithe thus:Extra. De Maior. &. Obedien, Vnam Sanctam. Gloſſa in eodem. Cap. 
                     Subeſſe Romano Pontifici, omni humanae creaturae
declaramus, dicimus, definimus, & pronuntiamus, omnino eſſe de neceſſitate ſalutis:
Wee declare, ſaye, determine, and pronounce, that it is of the neceſſitie of Saluation for euery
mortal creature, to be ſubiecte vnto the Biſhop of Rome.
                      And the Gloſe likewiſe vpon
the ſame, Quicquid ſaluatur, eſt ſub Summo Pontifice: What ſo euer creature is ſaued, is vnder
the Higheſt Biſhop.
                      Here is no mention neither of Chriſte, nor of his Goſpel. Saluation,
& Damnation hangeth onely of the B. of Rome. This thing once graunted,
the caſe is cleare: The Pope him ſelfe hathe reſolued the doubte. What ſhould wee
néede a better trial?Cornelius Epiſc. Bitont. in Conci. Tridentino. Notwithſtāding Cornelius the Biſhop of Bitonto in the late
Chapter at Tridente, of the Biſhop, and Holy Sée of Rome ſaithe thus, Vtinam à
Religione ad Superſtitionem, à Fide ad Infidelitatem, à Chriſto ad Antichriſtum, à Deo
ad Epicurum velut prorſus vnanimes non declinaſſent, dicentes in corde impio, & ore impudico,
Non eſt Deus: O would God
                      (the Pope and his Cardinales) had not fal 
                           •
                        en
with common conſente, and altogeather, from true Religion to Superſtition, from Faithe to
Infidelitie, from Chriſte to Antichriſte, from God to Epicure: ſaieinge with wicked harte, and
ſhameleſſe mouthe,
                     Pſal. 14. Bernard. in Cantic. Canticor. 
                     There is no God. In like ſenſe, of the ſame Biſhoppes, and See of
Rome S. Bernard ſaithe, Serui Chriſti ſeruiunt Antichriſto: The Seruauntes of Chriſte
ſerue Antichriſte.
                      Cornelius ſaithe, the Biſhoppes of Rome are fallen to Superſtition,
to Infidelitie, to Antichriſte, to Epicure: & are not aſhamed to ſaye, There is
no God. Yet, ſaithe M. Hardinge, the Faithe of Rome is the Catholique Faithe: &
who ſo departethe from the ſame, be he Kinge or Emperour, he ſhalbe companion
with the Diuel in Helle fire. And thus to ſaye, is no méere madneſſe.
                  That the Princes, and frée Citties of Germanie euer perſecuted vs, it is
vtterly vntrue, and like the reſte of your tales. They reioice in God in our behalfe:
and beinge there, they receiued vs vnder theire protection, and offered vs
ſutche fréedome, and courteſie, as they ſeldome offered the like to any Nation.
Certaine of them by your owne Confeſſion, haue already agréed to al the pointes
of our Doctrine. But none of them al, no not one would euer ſuffer the ſame Doctrine
of ours to be condemned.
                  What the Grecians this daye thinke of vs, I cannot telle. Notwithſtandinge
it appeareth by their letters written purpoſely to the Churches of Bohemia,
that they allowe wel of our Doctrine, and vtterly condemne yours. For
thus they writte vnto them:Epiſt. Eccleſiae Conſtantinopolitanae ad Eccleſiā Pragenſem. In Concil. Lateranen. Cap. 4. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : VVherefore, louing Brethren,
and Children, if it be ſo as wee heare, and hope, make haſte, that wee maie ioine togeather
in Vnitie. And againe, thus it is recorded in the late Councel of Laterane,
Graeci in tantum coeperunt abominari Latinos, vt ſi quando Sacerdotes Latini ſuper eorum
altaria celebraſſent, ipſi non vellent priùs in illis ſacrificare, quàm ea, tanquam per hoc inquinata
lauiſſent: The Greekes beganne ſo mutche to abhorre the Latines, that, if it had happened
the Latine Prieſtes had Miniſtred vpon theire aultars, they would not afterwarde make
oblation vpon the ſame, before they had waſſhed them: as thinkinge theire Aultars defiled by
the Latines handeling.
                      Wherefore, M. Hardinge, what ſo euer the Grecians thinke of
vs, it appeareth hereby, they vtterly refuſe your Communion, & condemne you for
Heretiques.
                  
                     
But who would haue thought, M. Hardinge had benne ſo ſkilful in proportions?
The whole countrie of Germanie, ſaithe he, beinge diuided in equal portions,
twoo of fiue remaine ſtil in y• obedience of the See of Rome. Wée geue God
thankes, it is, as it is. In déede certaine townes ſubiecte to the Biſhoppes, in
outwarde vſage of theire Churches, remaine ſtil, as they were before. Yet neuertheleſſe
where the Churches are Popiſhe, the people of al ſortes are Proteſtantes,
and loue the Truthe, and are mutche aſhamed of your folies. It was Goddes
ſecrete prouidence, that certaine of yours ſhould remaine emongſt vs a ſeaſon,
as the Cananites remained emongſt the people of Iſrael. Otherwiſe within
fewe yeres ye would denie, that euer your diſorders had benne ſo greate.
                  It is very harde, and in manner not poſſible, to conuert the whole people of ſo
greate a countrie al at once. The Heares of a mans Bearde, or Head neuer
waxe white al togeather.Luc. 13. Chriſte compareth the Kingdome of God vnto Leauen,
whiche the woman takethe, and laieth in a lumpe of dowgh. It worketh, and
laboureth by 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and litle,Euſebius. vntil it haue Leauened al the whole. In this ſorte
Euſebius ſéeme
                        ••
                      to compare the twoo partes of the Romaine Empire diſſentinge
in Iudgement of Religion: the Eaſt parte to the Night, and the Weaſte to the
Daye.Iohan. 12. 1. Corin. 15. But Chriſte wil drawe al vnto him ſelfe: and then ſhal God be al in al.
                  But here to matche our ſo many Kinges, and ſo many Princes, M. Hardinge
hath brought vs a manie of newes out of Ignamban, Monopotapa, Cambaia,
Giapan, Biſnaga, Ormoz, and other ſtrange, and far Countries. There, he
ſaithe, ſo many, and ſo many Kinges, and Princes are lately Conuerted, and
brought to the obedience of the See of Rome. I marueile, he ſaithe not, the Man
in the Moone was likewiſe newly Chriſtened, to make vp the Muſter.
                  Howe be it al theſe thinges muſte néedes be true. For Chriſtes owne Felowes,
or, as M. Hardinge vttereth it in better wiſe, the Holy Fathers of the Societie
of Ieſus, haue ſente home woorde as wel hereof, as alſo of ſundrie Miracles
wrought by the ſame Holy Fathers. Verily, ſo the name of Chriſte be publiſſhed,
whether it be by them, or by vs, by Light, or by Darkenes, Goddes Holy name
be bleſſed. But of many theire Miracles I haue no ſkil. For thus theſe Holy
Fathers write, as it is ſaide before, that with Holy Water they haue driuen Miſe
out of the countrie,Copus Dialo. c. Pa. 18. Alexander de Hales, par. 4. quaes. 53. mem. 4. Ar. 3. ſolut. 2. Nicola. Lyra in Daniel. Ca. 14. and made Barren Women to beare Children, and ſutche other
the like marueilous Miracles. Neither are wée bounde of neceſſitie to beleue
al ſutche Miracles what ſo euer, without exception. Alexander of Hales ſaith,
In Sacramēto apparet Caro, interdū humana procuratione, interdū operatione Diabolica:
In the Sacramente it ſelfe there appeareth Fleaſh, ſometime by the conuciance of men, ſometime
by the woorkinge of the Diuel.
                      Likewiſe ſaithe Nicolaus Lyra, Aliquando in
Eccleſia fit maxima deceptio Populi in Miraculis fictis à Sacerdotibus, vel eis adhaerentibus,
propter lucrum: Sometime euen in the Churche the People is ſhamefully deceiued with
fained Miracles wrought either by the Prieſtes, or els by theire companions, for lukers, ſake.
                     
Miracles be not euermore vndoubted proofes of True Doctrine.Auguſti contra Fauſt Li. 13. Therefore S. Auguſtine
ſaithe vnto Fauſtus the Manichee: Miracula non facitis: quae ſi faceretis, tamen
ipſa in vobis caueremus: Ye woorke no Miracles: and yet if ye wrought any, at your
handes wee would take heede of them.
                     
                     Hieremi. 23. The Prophete Hieremie ſaithe, Seduxerunt
Populum meum in mendacijs ſuis, & in Miraculis ſuis: They haue deceiued my People
by theire Lies, and by theire Miracles.
                     
                  
                  Touchinge the Conuerſion of the Eaſte India, Veſputius writeth, there
were many Godly Biſhoppes there,Veſputius. and ſundrie whole countries Conuerted, and
Chriſtened, longe before that either the Portugales, or the Ieſuites came thither:
and yet had neuer heard of the name of the Biſhop of Rome.
                  As for the reſt of the Weaſt Spaniſhe Indies, the People there liued not

onely without al manner knowledge of God, but alſo wilde, and naked, without
any Ciuile gouernmente.
                        
                           •
                        etr Martyr Mediolanen. offeringe vp mennes bodies in Sacrifice▪ drinkinge mens
bloud, and eatinge mennes fleaſh. Some of them woorſhipped the Sonne, and the
Moone: ſome, an ancient olde Trée: ſome, what ſo euer they ſawe firſt in the morninge,
they thought the ſame for that day to be theire God. Some woorſhipped
certaine familiar Diuels, and vnto them Sacrificed yonge boies, and girles.
                  Beinge in this miſerable ſtate, and naturally by the very ſenſe, and iudgement
of common reaſon abhorringe and lothinge theire owne blindneſſe, what
marueile is it, if they were eaſie to be leadde into any Religion, ſpecially carrieing
                        •
                     
ſutche a ſhewe of apparel, and Holy Ceremonies?
                  So the greate Kinge of Tartarie of late,Veſputius in Nouo Orbe, fo. 485. findinge him ſelfe and his people
without any manner Religion, was contented to borrowe ſome Religion of the
Tu
                        •
                     kes. For men would rather clothe them ſelues with leaues, and barkes,
then to goe quite naked: and rather eate Akecornes, then die for hunger.
                  And what if God would vſe this meane for the time, after warde the better
to leade the ſaide nations to the cleare Light of the Goſpel, as 
                        •
                     . Auguſtine ſaith,
the ſhoomaker vſeth his briſtle not to ſewe withal, but to drawe 
                        〈◊〉
                      his threede? No
doubte, M. Hardinge, if your Doctrine, and ours were laide togeather, the verie
Indians them ſelues, be they neuer ſo rude, woulde be able to ſée. a great difference.
                  But let the Biſhop of Rome winne abroade, and loſe at home. You remember
the olde Prouerbe. Dionyſius Corinthi. Dionyſius when he had loſt his Kingdome
at home at Syracuſae, he gotte him ſelfe to Corinthe, and there became a
Schoolemaiſter, and ſo ſéemed to continue a Kingedome ſtil.
                  Wée make no boaſte, M. Hardinge, nor g
                        •
                     ate vs to rowſte, as ye ſay, nor

                        •
                     lappe our winges in the behalfe of theiſe Princes, and Countries, ſo many, and
ſo many, as it pleaſeth you to ſporte, that haue ſubmitted them ſelues to the Goſpel
of Chriſt. Neither are the ſame, ſo many, and ſo many, ſo ſewe as you would
ſéeme to make them. The Kingedome of England, the Kingedome of Scotland,
the Kingedome of Denmarke, the Kingedome of Sweden: the Dukes of Saxonie,
the Duke of Brunſwike, the Palſgraue of Rhene, the Duke of Wirtenberg, the
Landtgraue of Heſſia, the Marques of Brandeburg, the Prince of Ruſſia, al other
the Earles, and noble men, and greate Citties throwgh the whole countrie of
Germanie, the mighty common weales of Heluetia, Rhetia, Vallis Tellina,
with ſo many hundred thouſandes biſides in Fraunce, Italie, Spaine, Hungarie,
and in the Kingedome of Poole: Certainely al theſe wel reckened cannot ſéeme ſo

                        •
                     ewe, as ye would haue it. Yewiſſe, M. Hardinge, it gréeueth you ful 
                        •
                     ore, they are
ſo many. Yf God of his mercy bleſſe thoſe thinges. that he hath mercifully begonne.
it wilbe high time for you ſhortly to ſéeke a newe refuge.
                  We boaſte not our ſelues of theſe thinges. There is no cauſe It is not the woorke
of man: it is the onely hand of God. Dauid ſaith, Let the Heauens reioice: let
the Earth be glad:Pſal. 19. The voice (of the Apoſtles) is ſounded abroade into al the
world:Luc. 2. The Angels of God ſange,Apocalyp. 19. Glorie be to God on high:Tertull. contra Iudeos. The Angel in the Apocalyps
crieth amaine, Cecidit, cecidit Babylon illa magna: Down, down is fallen that
greate Babylon:
                      Tertullian ſaithe, Parthi, Medi, Elamitae, &c. The P
                              •
                           rthians, the Medians,
the Elamites, the people of Meſopotamia, of Armenia, of Phrygia, of Cappadocia, of
Pontus, of Aſia, of Pamphilia, of Aegypte, of Aphrica, of Rome, of H
                              ••
                           ruſalem, of Getuſia,
of Mauritania, of Spaine, of Fraunce, of Britannie, of Sarmatia, of D
                              •
                           cia, of Germanie,
of Scythia and many other nations, and Prouinces, knowen▪ and vnknowen h
                              •
                           ue receiued the
Goſpel of Chriſte.
                      Thus ſaide they, the Angels, & Prophetes of God, & Holy Fathers,
and yet without boaſtinge, or fléeinge to rowſte, or clappinge of whinges. Geue
vs leaue therefore, M. Hardinge, in the like caſe to ſolace our ſelues with the conſition

of Goddes mighty, and merciful woorkes, and humbly to reioice at the triumphe
of the Croſſe of Chriſte.
                  
                     Arnobius ſaithe vnto the Heathens: Ne nobis de noſtra frequentia blandiamut.
Multi nobis uidemur: ſed Deo admodùm pauci ſumus. Nos gentes nationes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      diſtinguimus:
Deo vna Domus eſt mundus hic totus: Let vs not flatter our ſelues of our greate
multitudes.
                     Arnobius contra Gentes l
                           •
                        . 8. 
                     Vnto our ſelues wee ſeeme many: but vnto God wee are but fewe. VVee put
difference bitweene Nation, and Nation: But vnto God this whole worlde is but one houſe.
This counſel, M. Hardinge, is wholeſome for either parte to folowe, that who
ſo wil reioice, may reioice in the Lorde.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 4.
               And although the Popes had neuer hitherunto leaſure to conſider
diligently and earneſtly of theſe maters, or though ſome other
cares doo now let them, and diuers waies pulle them, or thoughe
they coumpt theſe to be but common and trieflinge ſtudies, and nothinge
to appertaine to the Popes worthineſſe, this maketh not
why our mater ought to ſeeme the woorſe. Or if they perchaunce
wil not ſee that, whiche they ſee in deede, but rather wil withſtande
the knowen Cruthe, ought wee therefore by and by to be coumpted
Heretiques, bicauſe wee obey not theire wil and pleaſure?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Sith Chriſte hath geuen to the Pope in Peter,Iohan. 22. whoſe laufull ſucceſſour hè is, commiſſion to feede
his Sheepe: Holeſome feedinge beinge thend of that commiſſion, it is not to be doubted, but he that
ordeined thend, hath alſo ordeined meanes belonginge to thend. Therefore it is not the dutie of a
good and humble ſheepe, to geue foorthe a malicious ſurmiſe, that the ſhepheard wil not ſee that he
ſeeth in deede, but rather wil withſtand the knowen Truthe. And what ſo euer ſheepe be diſobedient,
and refuſe to heare the voice of their ſheepeheard, whom Chriſte hath made ouer them, the ſame be
not of Chriſtes folde. And mainteininge contrary Doctrine to their ſhepeheardes true Doctrine.
iuſtly may they be accoumpted Heretikes.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  To be Peters lauful Succeſſour, it is not ſufficient to leape into Peters ſtalle.
Lauful Succeſſion ſtandeth not onely in poſſeſſion of place, but alſo, and mutche
rather in Doctrine and Diligence. Yet the Biſhoppes of Rome, as if there were
nothinge els required, euermore put vs in minde, and tel vs many gaye tales of
theire Succeſſion, Pope Symmachus ſaithe, In Papa ſi deſint bona acquiſita per
meritum,
                     Diſtin. 40. Non nos. 
                     ſùfficiunt quae à loci Praedeceſſore praeſtantur:
                     Gloſa ibid. in verb. Cùm Haereditatem. 
                     If the Pope wante vertūes,
                     Dis. 40. Non eſt facile. 
                     and
goodneſſe of his owne,
                     Alphonſus Contra. Hareſ. L. 
                     yet the vertues that are geuen him by (Peter) his predeceſſour,
                     1. cap. 9. 
                     are ſufficient.
And the Gloſe vpon the ſame: Petrus fecit Papam haeredem bonitatis ſuae: Peter
hath made the Pope Heire of his goodneſſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     But S. Hierome ſaithe farre otherwiſe: Non sanctorum filij ſunt, qui tenent loca
ſanctorum: They be not euermore Holy mennes Children, that ſitte in the roumes of Holy
menne. Likewiſe ſaithe
                      Alphonſus de Caſtro, a ſpecial aſſiſtante of that ſyde,
Quamuis teneamur
                        ••
                     x Fide credere, verum Petri Succeſſorem eſſe Supremum totius Eccleſiae
Paſtorem, tamen non tenemur eadem Fide credere, Leonem, aut Clementem eſſe
verum Petri Succeſſorem: Notwithſtanding we be bounde by Faithe to beleue, that the
true Succeſſour of Peter is ye higheſt Shepheard of the whole Churche: yet are we not bounde by
the ſame Faithe to beleue, that Leo, or Clement (being Eiſhoppes of Rome) are the true Succeſſours
of Peter.
                  
                  The woordes,Iohan. 20 that Chriſte ſpake vnto Peter, importe no Souerainetie, but

were common to al the reſt.Head Shepherd. S. Cyprian ſaithe, Hoc erant vti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         coeteri Apoſtoli, quod
fuit Petrus, pari coſortio praediti & Honoris, & Poteſtatis:
                     Cyprian. de ſimplicita. praelato. 
                     The reſt of the Apoſtles were
euen the ſame, that Peter was, a
                           •
                         endewed with like felowſhip both of Honour. and of Power.
What ſpecial priuilege then can the Pope claime by the Succeſſion of S. Peter?
Or what talketh he of féeding the whole flocke of Chriſte, yt neuer feedeth any parte
therof? wherin is ye Pope like S. Peter? or wherein euer was S. Peter like ye Pope?
                  Yet M. Hardinge doubteth not to geue his Definitiue Sentence, vvhat ſo euer
Sheepe is not obedient to the Headſhepheard, is not of the flocke of Chriſt. The Pope alſo him ſelfe
boldely warranteth the ſame. Thus he ſaithe of him ſelfe, Quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         praeceptis noſtris
non obedierit,
                     Diſt. 81. si qui ſunt: In gloſa. 
                     peccatum Idololatriae, & Paganitatis incurrit: Who ſo euer obeieth not
our commaundementes, falleth into the ſinne of Idolatrie, and Infidelite.
                      And therefore
Pope Steuin thus auanceth the authoritie of his owne See: Sacroſancta Domina
noſtra Romana Eccleſia:
                     Diſt. 79. Opor
                        
                           •
                        ebat. 
                     Our Holy Lady the Churche of Rome.
                     Iohan. 10.
                  
                  
                     But Chriſte ſpeaking of him ſelfe ſaithe,
                     Luc. 6. I am the True Sheepheard: And,
                     Galat. 2. Who
ſo heareth theſe woordes of myne. and doeth the ſame. I wil liken him to a wiſe man. S. Paule
beinge but one of the ſhéepe, ſaithe thus, I withſtoode Peter (as M. Hardinge ſaithe,
the Head ſhéepheard) euen vnto his face, for that he walked not vprightly to the Goſpel of
Chriſte. Yet was he a ſhéepe of the flocke of Chriſte. Hoſtienſis in this caſe ſeemeth
reaſonable:
                     De conceſſ. praebendae. Propoſuit. Hoſtien. De Reſcriptis. Si quando. ver. Sed nunquid. 
                     His woordes be theſe Omnes debent obedi
                              •
                           e Papae, quicquid praecipiat:
niſi ſequi poſſit peccatum:
                      Al men muſt obey the Pope, what ſo euer he commaunde: ſo there folowe
no ſinne of his commaundement. Likewiſe Feliuus a notable Canoniſte: Non obſtante
Plenitudine Poteſtatis, quae eſt in Papa, non eſt obediendum ei, peccato imminente:
                     
Notwithſtandinge the fulneſſe of power, that is in the Pope, when ſinne ſhal folowe his biddinge,
we may not obey him.
                  Yf the Pope wil claime the Headpaſt ourſhip ouer the whole flocke of Chriſte,
or rather if he wilbe taken for any Paſtour at al, let him then féede the Flocke: Let
him breake the breade of Life, without Leauen: Let him ſpeake the woorde of God
truely, without fables: and wée wil heare him. Otherwiſe S. Auguſtine hath warned
vs:Auguſti. in Iohan. tracta. 46. 
                     Sua ſi docere velint, 
                           •
                        olite audire, nolite facere. Certè enim tales ſua quaerunt:
non quae ſunt Ieſu Chriſti: If they wil teache you Doctrines of theire owne, ſee, ye heare
them not:
                      (and what ſo euer ſutche thing they commaunde you) ſee, ye doo it not. For
vndoubtedly ſutche men ſe
                           •
                        ke for their owne maters: and not the thinges that perteine to Jeſus
Chriſte.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 6.
               If ſo be that Pope Pius were the man (wee ſaie not, whiche he
would ſo gladly be called) but if he were in deede a man, that either
would accoumpt vs for his brethren, or at leaſt would take vs to be
men, he would firſt diligently haue examined our reaſons, and would
haue ſeene, what might be ſaide with vs, what againſt vs: & would
not in his Bul, whereby he lately pretended a Councel, ſo raſhly haue
condemned ſo great a part of the worlde, ſo many Learned & Godly
men, ſo many common wealthes, ſo many Kinges, & ſo many Princes,
onely vpon his owne blinde preiudices & foredeterminations, &
yt without hearing of them ſpeake, or without ſhewing cauſe why.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Speake of Pope Pius, what ye wil, and what ye can. Neither your praiſe can aduaunce his eſtimation,
nor your diſpraiſe abaſe it. His ſingular vertues be wel knowen. God is highly to be praiſed
for that he hath prouided for his flock ſo good a ſhepheard. As for you, as 
                        •
                     e taketh you to be men, ſo
not his brethren, bicauſe ye haue cut of your ſelues from the Catholike churche. Your reaſons haue ben

diligently and exactly examined already.A compariſon betvvene the Defenders and Balſaſar King of Babylon. No good vvrought by reaſoning vvith Heretikes. In reſpect of your reaſones Learning, and Holy Scriptures
whiche ye bring, ye are founde ſuche as Balſaſar Kinge of Babylon 
                        •
                     as ſignified by the hande, that
appeared writing before him in the wall.
                  What it is, Heretikes to be admitted to reaſoning, it is and hath ben euermore too wel knowen.
Be they neuer ſo throughly confuted, they yelde not. Ouercome they may be, reformed th
                        ••
                      wil not be.
Therein no good lightly is done.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Yf Pope Pius w
                        •
                     te ſo good 
                        〈◊〉
                     , who ſo, 
                        〈…〉
                      thy a Paſſout for the
Churche of God, why then did his Cat d
                        ••
                     lles of thee 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſo 
                        〈◊〉
                      by treaſon,
and conſpiracie to oppoſe him, 
                        〈…〉
                      you ſay▪ ſo good a man▪ 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      it were
not ſo,Oratio Pij Papae. why then did he himſelfe 
                        〈◊〉
                      thereof ſo vtterly in 
                        •
                     n Oration pronounced
openly in Rome in the Conſiſt
                        ••
                     te▪ Is it not lauful for ſo good a man to
liue in Rome? Is the ſame Proclamation nowe practiſed emong the Cardinalles
in Rome,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . that was ſometime vſed in the Councel houſe at Epheſus, Nemo noſtrum
frugi eſto. Let no good man be emongſte vs:
                     
                  
                  Ye ſafe. Pope Pius would not voucheſaue to cal vs his Brethren. No marueile,
ſéeing his owne dèere, and firſt begotten Children the Cardinales would no lenger
haue him to be theire Father.Mattha e. 28. It is ſufficient for vs,Iohan. 20. that Chriſte the Sonne of
God is contente to cal vs his Brethren.
                  Ye haue Excommunicate vs, as the Ph
                        •
                     riſeis did the Apoſtles, bicauſe wée
ſpeake vnto you in the name of Chriſte. But your owne Lawe ſaithe, Excommunica
                           •
                        us
non poieſt Excommunicate: He that is Excommunic
                              •
                           t him ſelfe, cannot geue Sentence
to Excommunicate others:
                     
                     11. Quae. 3. Cui eſt illata. And your owne Gelaſius ſaithe.Mala. 2. 
                     Neminem ligate debet
iniqua Sententia: A wicked Sentence
                      (of Excommunication) bindeth noman. But before
al others God him ſelfe ſaithe, Ego Benedicam Maledictionibus veſtris: I wil Bleſſe,
that you Curſe,
                      ſaithe the Lorde. You ſaie, you haue weighed our Reaſons, and
haue founde them too light. Now ſurely that is a good Light anſweare. Euen in
ſutche Light ſorte Iulianus the Apoſtata wrote ſometime vnto the Chriſtian Biſhoppes:Sozomen. li. 
                           •
                        . Cap. 18. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : I haue readde your reaſons: I know them wel yenough:
and therefore I haue condemned them. But the ſame Chriſtian Biſhoppes anſweared
him againe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . It may be, ye haue
readde our reaſons: but ye vnderſtoode them not. For if ye vnderſtoode them, ye would not condemne
them.
                     1. Corin. 2. As S. Paule alſo likewiſe ſaithe, Nam ſi cognouiſſent, nunquam Dominū
Gloriae crucifixiſſent: Yf they had knowen, they would neuer haue Crucified ye Lord of Glorie.
                     
                  
                  But vnto many of your ſide, M. Hardinge, I feare me wée may ouer truely ſay
as S. Hilarie ſaithe vnto the Arian Heretiques:Hilar. De Synodis aduerſus Arianos. 
                     Verè Deum neſciunt: at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vtinam
n
                           •
                        ſcirent: Cum procliuiori enim venia ignorarent: In deede they know not God: and would
God they kn
                              •
                           w him not: Then theire ignorance were the eaſier to be pardoned.
                     
                  
                  You ſaie, There is no Diſputation to be had with Heretiques. Yet your Fathers
in the Councel of Baſile,Concil Baſil. Concil. Trident. and your Frendes in the laſt Councel of Trident, I
wil not ſay, had Diſputations, but certainely yelded, and gaue place vnto the Bohemiens,
& vnto ſutche others, as you cal Heretiques. But ye haue reaſon: ye can
foreſée your beſt aduantage. It were the readieſt way to diſcloſe your ſhame You neuer
yet càme to Diſputation, but ſome of your companie ſhranke away from you,
As I before haue reported out of Tertullian:Tertull. in Apologetico. 
                     Veritas nihil veretur,
                     1. Regum. 5. 
                     niſi abſcondi:
Truthe feareth nothing, but leſt ſhee be hid.
                      If the God of Iſrael come into the Temple,
the Idole of Dagon muſt needes fal downe.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 1.
               But bicauſe he hath already ſo noted vs openly, leſt by holdinge
our peace we ſhould ſeeme to graunt a fault, and ſpecially bicauſe we

can by no meanes haue audience in the Publike aſſemblie of the General
Councel, wherin he would no creature ſhould haue power to
geue his voice, or to declare his opinion, excepte he were ſworne, and
ſtraightly bounde to mainteine his Authoritie: For we haue had
good experience hereof, in the laſt Conference at the Councel of Irident:
where the Embaſſadours & Diuines of the Princes of Germanie,
and of the free Cities, were quite ſhut out from theire companie.
Neither can we yet forgeate, how Iulius ye thirde, aboue tenne yeres
paſt, prouided warely by his write, that none of our fort ſhoul be ſuffered
to ſpeake in the Councel, excepte yt there were ſome man peraduenture,
yt would recante, & chaunge his opinion. For this cauſe chiefly
we thought it good, to yelde vp an accoumpte of our Faith in writtinge,
& truely and openly to make anſweare to thoſe thinges, wherewith
we haue ben openly charged: to the end the worlde maye ſee the
partes & fundations of that Doctrine, in the behalfe wherof ſo many
good men haue litle regarded theire owne liues. And that al men
may vnderſtand what manner of people they be, & what opinion they
haue of God & of Religion, whom the Biſhop of Rome, before they
were called to tel theire tale, hath condemned for Heretiques, without
any good conſideration, without any example, and vtterly without
Lawe or right: onely bicauſe he heard tel, that they did diſſente
from him and his in ſome pointe of Religion.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye alleage t'woo cauſes, The firſt is, leſt by holding your peace, ye ſhould ſeeme to graunte a fault.
The ſecond,Tvvo cauſes of making the Apologie. which ye make more ſpecialie becauſe by no meanes ye could haue audience in the late general
Councel. Your ſecond cauſe is falſe, as hereafter it ſhalbe ſhewed. Your firſt is naught, as that which
ſheweth youre pride, vaine glorie, and pertinacie. VVel. ye do but as Heretikes before you haue euer done.
It muſt not be looked for at your handes,I
                           •
                         Councels any man may ſhevve his opinion, but none maye geue a voice, or ſuffrage, and Sentence Definitiue, but onely Biſhoppes. that ye acknowlege any fault. For that were Humilitie, which
vertue al Heretikes be farre from &c. To geue a voice or ſuffrage, and vtter Sentence definitiue it perteineth
onely to Biſhops. Now ye be no Biſhops, but ſome of you mere laie men, and moſt of you Apoſtates.
                  VVhether the Ambaſſadours and Diuines of the Princes of Getmanie and of the free Citties there.
were at any time vpon any conſideration of their miſliked demeanour, or for any other iuſt cauſe reſtrained
from the companie of the Fathers in the late general Councel at Tren
                        •
                     : Againe whether Pope
Iulius the third prouided by any write that none of your ſort ſhould be ſuffred to ſpeake in the Councel,
the cauſe of recantation excepted: what ye ſay touching this mater, becauſe ye ſay it without proufe.
We haue found you in ſo many other pointes of greater importance ſo farre to ſteppe aſide from truth.
that for this we cannot beleue you. But that your ſelues by no meanes could haue audience in the Councel
at Trent, and that the Ambaſſadours and Diuines of the Princes and free Citties of Germanie
were from thence quite ſhutte out:Three ſafe Conduites graunted An accoumpt of faithe by the Defenders yelded vp in vvriting, vvithout due order in al reſpectes. how true that is. I reporte me to the three ſafe conductes. whiche
the three Popes, vnder whom that Councel was holden, graunted forth and confirmed in that behalfe.
VVherfore belie the councel nomore, complaining that ye coulde not there haue audience and be heard.
                  Ye yeld vp an accoumpt of your faithe in writing, ye ſay. But to whom doe ye yeld it vp? and by
whom is it yelded? from whom commeth ye ſame? Do ye acknowlege no lauful 
                        •
                     udge, no lauful conſiliorie
in the whole world? Committe ye your whole mater to the temeritie of the people? VVhy haue ye not
ſet your names to the Booke, that conteineth the profeſſion of your faithe, and of your whole conſcience.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge thought it anſweare ſufficient, to vpbraide vs with ſuſpicion
of Untruthe. How be it I haue no doubte, but both the Truthe, and the Untruthe
by the particulares wil ſoone appeare.
                  
                     
Firſt, that al Biſhoppes, hauing voice Definitiue, and intereſt in Councelles,
are ſolemnely ſworne in al theire Decrées, & Canons to vphold the Authoritie of ye
Pope, he thought it the wiſeſt way to diſſemble it. For it had ben great wante of
modeſtie, to denie it. The fourme of the othe recorded in the Popes owne Decretalles,Extra. De Iureiuran. Ego N.
is this; Ego N. &c. Papa
                           •
                        um Romanae Eccleſiae, & regulas Sanctorum Patrum
adiutor no ad defendendum, & retinendū, ſaluo ordine meo, contra omnes homines: IN.
ſweare, that I wilbe an helper, to defende, and mainteine the Papacie of the Churche of Rome,
and ye Rules of the Holy Fathers
                      (ye Popes) mine owne order ſauedſ, againſt ol men aliue. But
theſe Rules, & Priuileges of ye Holy Fathers the Popes are theſe:Extra. de Elect. & Electi poteſt. Singificaſti. That ye Pope is
aboue al General Coūcelles:Extra. de tranſta. Epiſcopi, Quanto: In gloſſ. That his bare wil muſt be holden as a lawe:Extra. de Conceſſ. Praben. Propoſuit. In gloſſ. That,
what ſo euer he doo, noman may ſay vnto him, why doo you thus:Pighius. Li. 6. Cap. 13. That his iudgement
is more certaine, then the iudgement of al the worlde:9. q. 3. Nemo. In gloſſa. That if the whole
world geue Sentence in any mater cōtrarie to ye Popes pleaſure, yet it ſéemeth, we
are bound to ſtand to the Iudgement of the Pope: &,M. Hardinge, Fol. 334. b. as M. Hardinge ſaithe, That
ye Pope, what ſo euer he ſaie, or doo, as beinge Pope, can neuer erre, Theſe, & other
the like be the Priuileges, that the Pope claimeth vnto him ſelfe. Al which the Biſhoppes
are bound by oths. & by theire allegeance to defend againſt al menne aliue.
                  Now, where you ſay, that Biſhoppes onely haue Sentence Definitiue in the
Councel, ye ſeeme willingly, & without cauſe to reporte Untruthe. For Pius Secundus
being him ſelfe a Pope, would haue tolde you the contrarie. Theſe be his
woordes:Aeneas Sylui. de geſtis Concil. Conſtātien. Li. 1. 
                     Apparet, alios, quam Epiſcopos, in Concilijs habuiſſe vocem decidentem: It is
plaine, that certaine others biſide Biſhoppes, had voice Definitiue in the Councelles.
                      Likewiſe
ſaithe Gerſon.Iohan. Gerſon, Quae veritates ſint Credendae. Corol. 4. 
                     Etiam ad Laicos hoc poteſt extendi: & plus aliquando, quàm ad multos
Clericorū: This
                      (Priuilege of geuing Sentēce in Councel) may be extended euen vnto y•
                        
                           •
                        aye ſort: yea and yt oftētimes better then vnto many Prieſtes. But here of herafter 
                           〈◊〉
                         at large.
                  
                  But whether we be Biſhoppes or no, M. Harding is no competent, nor indiſſerēt
Iudge. ForSalluſt. in bell
                           •
                         Catilin. who ſo wil Iudge vprightly, muſt be voide of anger, hatred loue,
enuie, & other like affections. Whiche Sentence being otherwiſe profane, is vſed &
halowed by ye Apoſtolique Legates in theCōcil. Iriden. ſub Paulo. 3. Councel of Trident: Surely the Godly
ſay, yt, as your Biſhoppes doo no part of Biſhoppes dewtie, & therefore in déede are
no Biſhoppes at al: ſo your late Couente at Trident, what ſo euer glorious name
it pleaſeth you to geue it, yet notwithſtanding, in déede, & verily was no Councel.
                  Whether Pope Iulius by his Bulie vtterly embarred the Diuines, & Embaſſadours
of ye Princes, and frée Citties of Germanie from al audience, & Diſputation
in the Councel, or no, I report me to Pope Iulius owne Bulle touching the ſame.
His woordes be theſe,Breue Iulij. 3. Citatur à Caluino. 
                     Eri
                           •
                         Conciliū, vt qui temerè loquuti ſunt, aut dicta recantat
                           ••
                        i veniant,
aut eorum maudita cauſa, in executionem iam ordinatarum. Conſtitutionū Haeretici
declarentur, & condemnenturi There ſhalbe a Councel, that they th
                              ••
                            haue ſpoken raſhly, either
may recante theire ſaieinges, or els without farther hearing, or reaſoning of the mater, they
may be denounced and condemned for Heretiques, according to the Conſtitutions already mode.
                     
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Iohn Sleidane,
                     Iohan Sleidan▪
                      
                     touchinge the Conference had ſome time at Auguſta:
                     Lib. 13.
                     In Colloquio frequenter ad initium actionis hoc dicebantinolle ſe vel tantillum de
Opinione, & Doctrina ſua decedere: ſed quicquid facerent, eo fieri, vt in ſententiam ſuàm
nos adducerent: In the Conference y• was had bitwene vs, and them, they told vs at the firſte.
that they would not yelde one whit, from theire Opinion, and Doctrine: But that, what ſo euer
they did, they did it onely to the intent, to bring vs to theire Judgement.
                  I could farther allege Matthias Flacius Illyricus, Iohannis Fabritius Montanus,
Petrus Paulus Vergerius the Biſhop of Iuſtinopolis, to like purpoſe. But
perhaps M. Hardinge would refuſe theire Authorities, & cal them partial. Yet in
a mater ſo euident, & ſo openly knowen, it had ben great folie for them to diſſemble.
Illyricus ſaithe,Illyri. in Recuſatione Con. Tritini. 
                     Noſtri audiri non potuerunt, quamuis id Ampliſsimi Caeſaris Legati
Orarent: Our Diuines, and Oratours coulde is no wiſe bee hearde, notwithſtandinge
the Emperours moſte woorthie Embaſſadours hadde deſired it.
                      Iohannes Fabritius

ſaithe,Councel of Tridēt. 
                     Fateor extenſionem fuctam eſſe ad alias nationes:
                     Iohan. Fabriti. 
                     Sed tamen additur, eam formam
non niſi ad illos pertine
                           •
                        e, qui reſipiſcere, & ad Eccleſiae gremium redire velint: I
graunt, the Saue conduite was extended to other Nations: But it is added withal, that the ſame
fourme, or libertie ſhould perteine to none others, but onely to them, that would repe
                              •
                           te, and
returne to the boſome of the Churche,
                      And againe he ſaith, Tantum aburant ab A
                           •
                        ce Diſputation̄,
vt ne ad veſtibulum quidem accedere potuerint: The Diuines of the Princes of
Germanie were kept ſo for of from the high Caſtel of Diſputation, that they could not be ſuffered
to approche to the entrie.
                     
                     Petr. Paulus Nergerius De
Concil Trident Petrus Paulus Uergerius ſaithe, that the Biſhop of Uegla
in Dalmatia was 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſhaken vp in the ſame 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and threatened with
Depriuation, and other extremities, onely for a litle in
                        •
                     ling of the Truthe.
                  Now d
                        •
                      it, what 
                        〈…〉
                      Authorities? Noman is herein ſo plaine and

                        〈…〉
                     ,M. Hard fo. 20. M. Hardinge him ſelfe.M. H. fo. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . b. This is his determinate anſweare,M. H. fo. 174. a. and
ful reſolution in the caſe:M. H. fo. 333. b. 
                     Your reaſon 
                           〈◊〉
                         no more to be hearde, onleſſe ye repente, and 
                           〈◊〉
                        
your er rours▪
                      Againe, Our doctrine hath ben approued too longeth be put a 
                           〈◊〉
                         in theſe daies.
Againe, 
                        
                           ••••
                        che wicked 
                           〈◊〉
                        , as ye haue made ie, it is lanful, to make, neither 
                           〈…〉
                         Councel, not
without Councel. Againe, vve tel you, that your change of religion, and 
                           〈…〉
                         Hereſies
ought not be haue benne 
                           〈◊〉
                        , nor without the Biſhop of 
                           〈◊〉
                         commanndemente, nor with his
commaundemente. Theſe be your woordes, M. Hardinge: This you ſay, you tel vs
plainely
                        •
                     and therefore, I trowe, we muſt beleue you. And ſo ye ſéeme to conclude
with the woordes written in the P
                        ••
                     yhete Hieremie:Hieremi. 44 
                     Non audiemus Verbum, quod
loquiſſus es nobis in nomine Domini sed faciendo faciemus omne verbū, quod egredietur
ex o
                           •
                        e noſt
                           ••
                        : VVe wil not beare the VVoorde, that thou haſt ſpoken to vs in the name of
the Lorde: But we wil doo euery Woord, that ſhal come from our owne mouthe.
                     
                  
                  
                     Was may therefore ſay of you,
                     Auguſtin. Epiſ
                           •
                        ola. 
                           •
                        52. 
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Auguſtine ſometimes ſaide of the Heretiques
the Donatiſtes: Cùm omnis 
                              〈◊〉
                            ſuſpenſa expectares, in tanta collectione quid

                              〈…〉
                            ageretu
                              •
                           : Quare hoc? nisi quia cauſam ſuam
malam ſciebant, & facillime ſe poſſe conuin
                              •
                           i, ſi ageretur, dubitare non poterant?
                      When
euery body was looking carefully, what ſhould be doone in ſo great Aſſemblie, they (The Donatiſtes
Heretiques) laboured what they could, that nothing vtterly ſhould be doone. And
why for They knew
                        •
                     theire cauſe was n
                        •
                     ught: and could not doubte, but that if any conference,
or Diſputation ſhould be had, they ſhould ſoone be reproued.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 2.
               And although S. Hierome would haue no body to be patient
when he is ſuſpected of Hereſie, yet we wil deale herein neither bitterly,
nor brablingly, nor yet be caried away with angre & heate: though
he ought to be reckened neither bitter, nor brabler y• ſpeaketh y• Truth.
We willingly leaue this kind of eloquence to our Aduerſaries, who,
what ſo euer they ſay againſt vs, be it neuer ſo ſhrewdly or deſpitefully
ſaid, yet thinke, it is ſaid modeſtly & comely yenough, & care nothing
whether it be true, or falſe. We neede none of theſe ſhiftes, which
do maintaine the Truthe. Further, if we do ſhewe it plainely y• Gods
Holy Goſpel, y• Auncient Biſhoppes, and the Primitiue Churche do
wake on our ſide, & that we haue not without iuſt cauſe left theſe men,
& rather haue returned to y• Apoſtles & olde Catholique Fathers: And
i
                     •
                   we ſhalbe founde to do the ſame, not colourably or craftily, but
in good Faith before GOD, Truely, Honeſtly, Cleerely, and Plainely:
and if they theim ſelues whiche flie our Doctrine, and would
bee called Catholiques, ſhal manifeſtly ſee, howe al theſe titles of
Antiquitie, whereof they boaſte ſo mutche, are quite ſhaken out of
their handes, and that there is more pith in this our cauſe, then they

thought for: we then hope and truſt that none of them wil be ſo negligent
& careleſſe of his owne Saluation, but he wil at length ſtudie &
bethinke him ſelfe, to whether parte he were beſt to ioine him. Vndoubtedly
excepte one wil altogeather harden his hart, and refuſe to
heare, he ſhal not repent him to geue good heede to this our Defence,
and to marke wel, what we ſaie, and how truely and iuſtly it agreeth
with Chriſtian Religion.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     I ſee wel, we muſt looke to your fingers. Ye ſpit foorth your gal, and cholar by and by at the
firſt. Through your whole Booke in woorde ye pretend Truthe, zeale, plainnes, and ſober dealing: But
in deede power out litle other then Lieing, Spite, Scoffes, and immoderate railing. The effecte of the
reſt in this: Ye haue ioined your ſelues to the Synagog of Antichriſte. Ye ſerue the ſtage, ye haue begonnt
to playe your Tragedie on falſely, ſhamefully, darkely, and guilefully: your bragges, and promiſes,
your crakes of Goddes Holy woorde, your errours, your Hereſies, your contagious poiſon, your ſclaunders,
your newe Cleregies Doctrine, &c.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The Saieing of S. Hierome is auouched by y• like Saiyng of Ruffinus an Auncient
writer. Thus he ſaithe. Vnam notam Haereſeos qui diſſimulat, non eſt Chriſtianus:
Who ſo diſſembleth, when he is called Heretique, is no Chriſtian man.
                      For the reſt blame
me not, good Chriſtian Reader, yf I vſe no moe woordes, then néede requireth. If
I thought it woorthy the while, I could anſweare al theſe thinges more at large. I
truſt, in our whole Apologie there appeareth no ſutche immoderate kinde of railing.
But if I ſhould folow M. Hardinges humoure, and write but the one halfe
of that he writeth, then perhappes I might woorthily be called a railer.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 2.
               For where they cal vs Heretiques, it is a crime ſo hainous, that
onleſſe it maie be ſeen, vnleſſe it may be felt, & in manner may be holden
with handes & fingers, it ought not lightly to be iudged or beleued,
when it is laied to the charge of any Chriſtian. For Hereſie is a
forſaking of Saluation, a renouncing of Gods Grace, a departing
from the Body and Sprite of Chriſte.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Definition ye ſeeme to make of Hereſie, is not ſufficient. For as ye define it, ſo euery deadly
ſinne is Hereſie.The Defenders Definition of Hereſie founde inſufficient. The true Definition of Hereſie. For euery deadly ſinne is a forſaking of Saluation, a renouncing of Gods Grace, a departing
from the Body and Sprite of Chriſte. Hereſie is a falſe Doctrine againſt the right beleefe, by
him that profeſſeth the Faithe ſtubbournly either auouched or called in doubte. In which Definition
this woorde, ſtubbournly, is added, bicauſe it is not errour onely in thoſe thinges that be of Faithe, but
ſtubbournes in errour, that maketh an Heretike, as S. Auguſtine teacheth. VVho (ſaithe he) in the Church
of Chriſte ſauer any thing that is vnholſome and crooked, if being ſharply admoniſhed to ſauer that is
hole and right, they reſiſt ſtubbournly, and wil not amend their venemous and deadly Doctrines, but
ſtande to defend them, the
                        •
                      be Heretikes. But now the lawe of vpright dealing ſpecially in Gods cauſe
ſo requiring,Lib. 18. de Ciui
                           •
                         Dei, cap. 51. ye muſt pardon vs. if, as among huſbandmen we cal a rake, a rake, a ſpade, a ſpade, a mattocke,
a mattocke: ſo among Diuines, we cal Hereſie, hereſie, and likewiſe, falſehed, lieing, ſclaundering,
crafte, hypocriſie, Apoſtaſie, malice. blaſphemie, euery ſuch crime, by his proper name without al gloſing.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Ye ſaie, This is not the right Definition of Hereſie. Verily, M. Hardinge, this
is but a ſimple quarrel. It was not my minde in this place to vtter any Definition

of Hereſie, either right, or wronge. You knowe right wel, that ſutche curioſitie
in this kinde of writinge is not néedeful. It is ſufficient, our woordes be true,
although they include no Definition.
                  For iuſt proufe of Hereſie three thinges neceſſarily are required. Firſt, that
it be an errour: Secondly, that it be an errour againſte the Truthe of Goddes
woorde: For otherwiſe euery errour maketh not an Hereſie. Thirdly, that it be
ſtoutly, and wilfully maineteined. Otherwiſe an errour in Goddes Truthe without
wilful mainteinance, is not an Hereſie. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Errare poſſum,
Haereticus eſſe non poſſum:
                     Auguſtinus. 
                     In an errour I may be: but an Heretique I cannot be.
                  
                  It was not ſo neceſſarie in this mater, ſo preciſely to ſéeke vp Definitions. I
thought it ſufficient, onely to declare the horrour of Hereſie. For as touchinge the
Definition, S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Quid ſit Haereſis, regulari quadam Definitione comprehendi,
ſicut ego exiſtimo, aut omnino non poteſt,
                     Auguſtin. ad Quoduultdeum 
                     aut difficillim
                           •
                         poteſt: To expreſſe by
orderly Definition, what thinge maketh an Heretique, as I iudge, it is either impoſſible, or very
harde.
                      Therefore you, M. Hardinge, and your felowes are the more blame woorthy,
for y• of euery your fantaſies ye haue made an Hereſie. Ludouicus Viues one of your
owne Schoole thus complaineth thereof:Ludouicus viues De Corrupt. Artib 
                     Haereſis nomen rebus leuiſſimis impingitur:
                     Dis. 22. Omnes.
                     Idem facerent Scotiſtae de Thomiſtis, niſi Scholarum conſuetudo aures emolliuiſſes: The
name of Hereſie is laide vpon euery light mater. So would the Scotiſtes handle the Thomiſtes:
ſauinge that the cuſtome of the Schooles hath brought theire eares in vre.
                      Thus Pope Nicolas
ſaithe, Qui Romanae Eccleſiae Priuilegium auferte conatur, hic procul dubio labi
                        
                           •
                        ur
in Haereſim: Who ſo euer goeth about to abrogate the priuilege of the Churche of Rome,
be no doubte is an Heretique.
                     
                  
                  That ye ſpeake of ſtubberneneſſe in defence of Hereſie, I praye God, M. Hardinge,
it doo not ouer neare touche your ſelfe. I praye God, you doo not wilfully
defende that thinge, wherein you knowe, and ſée manifeſt, and open errour. Verily
S. Hierome ſaithe:
                        
                           •
                        4. Quaeſt. 3. Haereſis eſt. 
                     Quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         aliter Scripturam intelligit, quàm ſenſus Spiritus Sancti
flagitat, quo ſcripta eſt, licet ab Eccleſia non receſſerit, tamen Haereticus appellari poteſt:
VVho ſo euer expoundeth the Scriptures otherwiſe, then the ſenſe of the Holy Ghoſte, by
whome they were written, dothe require, although he be not yet departed from the Churche,
yet maye he wel be called an Heretique.
                      Likewiſe the old Father Tertullian ſaithe:
Quicquid contra veritatem ſapit, Haereſis eſt, etiam vetus Conſuetudo: VVhat ſo euer
thinge 
                              ••
                           uoureth againſt the Truthe,
                     
                     Tertull. de virginib. velandis. Vdalri
                           •
                        us Auguſtanus Ipiſcopus ad Nicola. Papam. 
                     it is an Hereſie, be it neuer ſo mutche an old cuſtome.
                     Hilari. de Trinitate, Li. 6.
                  
                  Likewiſe your Tyrannical and filthy reſtraininge of Prieſtes lauful mariage,
Vdalricus the Biſhop of Auguſt a calleth Periculoſum Haereſis Decretum: A dangerous
Decree of Hereſie.
                     
                  
                  
                     Nowe touchinge ſimple errour, and wilful defence, S. Hilary ſaithe,
Illis in eo, quod neſciunt, poteſt adhuc in tuto eſſe ſalus, ſi credant: Tibi verò iam omnia
ad ſalutem clauſa ſunt, qui negas, quod iam ignorare no
                              •
                            potes:
                      They, for ſo mutche as
they knowe not the Truthe, maye haue theire ſaluation in ſafetie, if afterwarde they beleeue:
But al hope of health is ſhut from thee, for as mutche as thou denieſt that thinge, that thou
canſte not chuſe but knowe.
                  
                     To conclude, vnto you, M. Hardinge, who oftentimes of ſmal errours, oftentimes
of vndoubted, & knowen Truthes▪ without regard of Definition haue fanſied
great,
                     Alphonſus de Caſtro de H
                           •
                        re. Li. 1. Ca. 7. 
                     & horrible Hereſies, Alphonſus de Caſtro a Doctour of your owne ſaith thus:
Idcirco ſit, vt hi, qui tam leuiter de Haereſi pronunciant, non expendentes de qua re loquā
                     tur,
ſaepe ſua ipſorū ſagitta feriantur, incidant
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in eam foueam, quam alijs parabant. Nam
velle humanas Scripturas in Diuinarum ordinem connumerare, hoc veriùs ego dixerim
Haereſim: quod faciunt hi, qui humanis Scriptis diffentire impium autumant, perinde ac
Diuinis: There fore it happeneth, that they, that ſo raſhly pronounce, and cal euery thing Hereſie,
not conſidering wherof they ſpeake, be often ſtriken with their own dart, and fal into the ſame
pit, yt them ſelues haue digged for others. For this would I rather cal Hereſie, to accoumpt men
                           •
                        
                        
writinges emonges the Scriptures of God. So doo they, that thinke it a wicked mater to diſſent
from the writinges of man, noleſſe, then if it were the Judgement of God.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 3.
               But this was euer an olde and ſolemne propertie with them
& their forefathers: if any did complaine of their errours and faultes,
and deſired to haue true Religion reſtored, ſtreight waie to condemne
ſutche for Heretiques, as men new fangled, and factious. Chriſte
for no other cauſe was called a Samaritane, but onely for that he
was thought to haue fallen to a certaine new Religion, and to be the
authour of a new ſecte. And Paule the Apoſtle of Chriſte, was called
before the Iudges,Act. 24. to make anſweare to a mater of Hereſie: and therefore
he ſaide: Accordinge to this way, whiche they cal Hereſie, I doo
worſhip the God of my Fathers, beleeuinge althinges whiche be
written in the Lawe, and in the Prophetes.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Yf ye meane Hus, Hierome of Prague, Wickle
                        •
                     , Almaricke, Abailard, the Apoſtolikes, Peterbruſians,
Berengarians,The Defenders predeceſſours Waldenſes, Albingenſes, Imagebreakers, or ſuche like, which euer founde
faulte with the Churche in their time, and cried for a reſtoringe of Religion, as though it had ben
quite loſt, and would them ſelues haue the glory of it by bringing in their Hereſie in place of the
Catholique Doctrine, vnder the name of Goddes woorde, whiche hath alwaies ben the propertie of
al Heretikes: if, I ſay, ye meane theſe, or any of theſe: we alſo cal them Heretikes, and for ſuch wee
condemne them.
                  But Sirs ye forget your ſelues fouly.Contradiction founde in the defenders. How agreeth this with that ye ſaie hereafter oftentimes,
that the Light of the Truthe was quite put out, and that Luther and Zuinglius firſt brough the
Goſpel abroade into the worlde?
                  VVere it true that Chriſte was called a Samaritane for the cauſe ye aſſigne, thereof what conclude
ye? VVe ſee where about ye go. Ye woulde ſeeme to ioine with Chriſt, with Paule, and with
the firſt Chriſtians. But truely they refuſe your companie.
                  But we tel you,Samaritane. Chriſt was the true Samaritane in deede,Iohan. 8. that is to ſay, the Keeper, as he that
is Keeper of mankinde: and therefore he ſhunned not the name. Yet was he not a Samaritane as the
Iewes ment. Paule likewiſe, (who was not as ye ſay, to ſpeake properly, called before the Iudges to
make auſweare to a mater of Hereſie) being accuſed to Felix by Tertullus that he was of the ſecte or
Hereſie of the Nazarens (ſo were the Chriſtians firſt called) did not onely not denie,Act. 24. but openly confeſſed,
that according to that way or ſtate of life, which the Iewes called a ſecte or Hereſie, he worſhipped
God.Hereſie. For it is to be conſidered that in thoſe times the name of Hereſie was not ſo infamous, as
it may be iudged by the place of the Actes, cap. 5. onleſſe ſomewhat be added whereby it may be vnderſtanded
to be taken in rate of a vice, as, 1. Cor. 11. Galat. 5. So the woorde was then indifferent, and might
be taken in good part, or euil part. Tertullian vſeth it in good part, where ſpeaking of the Chriſtians,
he calleth them Sectam,
                     Apologeti. C
                           •
                        . 21. Secta. a Secte, into which Latine woord the Greeke woorde Hereſis is turned.
Now theſe examples of Chriſt, Paule, and the firſt Chriſtians, ſerue not your defence. Chriſt
was called of the Iewes a Samaritane vnwoorthely after the ſenſe of their thought: Ye are called Heretikes,
woorthely. Paule burdened with the name of Hereſie, for as muche as thereby was ſignified
the kinde of life of thoſe that beleeued in Chriſt, the woorde being indifferent, was honoured rather
then reutled. And Tertullian calleth the Chriſtian people a Secte (as he might) without blemiſhe or
note of any euil, Your caſe is not like: For ye are charged with Hereſie, as it is taken in the worſt part.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  O howe many waſte woordes hath M. Hardinge to ſpare? Here once againe
he comneth in with Hus, Hierome of Prage, Wicklefe, Almarik, Abailard, Apoſtolikes,

Peterbruſians, Berengarians, Waldenſes, Albingenſes, Imagebreakers,
to fraye his ſimple reader with a terrour of ſtrange names. Wée ſaie,
Luther and Zuinglius were the firſt Publiſhers of the Goſpel: and yet againe we
ſaie, the ſame Luther and Zuinglius were not the firſte: Wée haue forgotten our
ſelues fouly: Wée write contradiction againſt our ſelues: Wée would ſéeme to
toine with Chriſte and Paule: but truely they refuſe our companie: And ſo foorthe,
I knowe not what.
                  verily, M. Hardinge, wée neuer ſaied, Luther, and Zuinglius were the
firſte Publiſhers of the Goſpel. Yf wée ſhould ſo ſaie, wée ſhould reporte vntruthe,
as you doo often. Chriſte, and his Apoſtles were the firſte.
                  Theſe woorthy, and Learned Fathers, Luther, and Zuinglius, and other
like Godly and zelous men, were appointed of God, not to erecte a newe Churche,
but to reforme the olde, whereof you had made a Caue of Théeues: to kendle againe
the Light, that you had quenched: and to heare witneſſe to the Truthe of
GOD.
                  You ſaie, Chriſt, and Paule wil none of our companie: as if you were priuie
of theire counſel. But perhappes, M. Hardinge, this is Clauis errans, and therefore
can neither open,Hieronym. in. 16 Ca. Matthae. nor ſhutte: Or,Iohan. 14. as S.1. Pet. 2. Hierome ſaithe, Pars aliqua ſupercilij
Phariſaici, ſome parte of the high lookes of the Phariſeis.
                      Chriſte him ſelfe hath ſaide,
Who ſo loueth me, wil keepe my woorde: and my Father loueth him: And my Father, and
I wil come to him, and dwel with him. S. Peter ſaithe, Who ſo truſteth in him, ſhal not
be confounded.
                  
                  Of Abailard, and Almarik, and certaine other your ſtrange names, wée
haue no ſkil: They are none of ours. Of Iohn Hus, Hierome of Prage, and
Berengarius, and other like vertuous Learned men, wée haue no cauſe to be aſhamed.
Theire Doctrine ſtandeth ſtil, and encreaſeth daily: bicauſe it is of God.
But as for yours, bicauſe it is onely of your ſelues, therefore it falleth daily, and
is now forſaken the worlde through.
                  You ſaie, that the ſimple namè of Secte, or Hereſie, wherewith S. Paule
was charged, was not ſo infamous, or odious in thoſe daies: and that Tertullian
called the Religion of Chriſte a Secte, or Hereſie without any manner blemmiſhe
or note of euil. It was néedeleſſe for M. Harding, to auouche Vntruthe ſo
earneſtly without cauſe.
                  I graunte, the name of Hereſie, or Secte emonge the Philoſophers was not
infamous.Cicer. in Paradox. Cicero ſaithe, Cato in ea Haereſi eſt, quae nullum ſequitur florem Orationis.
But in caſe of Religion it was euermore emongſt al men taken in il parte, and
condemned, and coumpted odious. Touchinge S. Paule, in howe good parte the
Iewes called him Heretique,Actor. 24. it may eaſily appeare by theſe woordes of Tertullus
his accuſer: Inuenimus hunc virum peſtilentem, & mouentem ſeditionem omnibus Iudaeis
per vniuerſum orbem, ac Principem Sectae Nazaraeorum: We haue founde this man
to be a Peſtilent, and a wicked felowe, mouinge ſedition emonge the Jewes throughout the
whole worlde, and a Captaine of the Hereſie of the Nazareines.
                      In ſutche good parte
they ſaide vnto Chriſte:Iohan. 7. Arte thou greater then was our Father Abraham: Thou
arte a falſe Prophete,Iohan. 8. and deceiueſt the People: Thou arte a Samaritane, and haſt
the Diuel.
                  The like good parte Chriſt promiſed afore hande to his Diſciples:Iohan 16. They ſhal
caſte you out of theire Synagoges:Matth. 1
                           •
                        . Ye ſhalbe hated of al men for my names ſake.
In ſutche good parte and meaninge was S. Paule called an Heretique. And ſo,
M. Hardinge,Nicola Lyra in 24. Cap. Actor. biſides others, your owne Doctour Nicolaus Lyra would ſoone
haue tolde you.
                  But muche more I marueile, ye ſhould ſo vnaduiſedly ſaye, that Tertullian

called the Chriſtian people a Secte,Chriſtian Faithe called Hereſie. or Hereſie in good parte, and, as you ſaye,
without any blemiſhe, or note of euil. For the ſame. Tertullian in the ſame Apologie
ſaithe, the Heathens commonly called the Chriſtians, Inceſtos, Homicidas,
Infanticidas,
                     Tertull. in Apologetico. 
                     Sacrilegos, Peſsimos, Nocentiſsimos, Publicum odium, Hoſtes humani
generis, Omnium Scelerum reos: Deorum, Imporatorum, Legum, Morum, Naturae totius
inimicos: Aduouterours againſt kinde, Mankillers, killers of Children, Churcherobbers,
moſte wicked, moſte husteful, the publique hatred, the enemies of Mankinde, guiltie of al kinde
of wickedneſſe: Enimies againſt the Goddes, againſt the Emperours, againſt the Lawes, againſt
good order, againſt Nature it ſelfe.
                     
                     Tertull. in Apologetico. Where ſo euer they ſawe them, they made an
outcrie vpon them, Chriſtianos ad Leonem: Non licet eſſe Chriſtianos: Haue theſe
Chriſtians to the Lion: It is not lawful, theſe Chriſtians ſhoulde liue.
                      So S. Auguſtine
ſaithe,Auguſt. De Ciuitate, li. 2. ca. 3. Eujeb. li. 4. ca. 18. 
                     Factum eſt vulgi Prouerbium, Pluuia defecit cauſe Chriſtianorum: It is nowe
become a common Prouerbe emonge the people, our raine faileth vs, bicauſe of theſe Chriſtians.
                     
So Euſebius ſaithe, the Religion of Chriſte was called Impiorum Chriſtianorum
Haereſis: The Hereſie of the Godleſſe Chriſtians.
                      Theſe woordes, M. Hardinge, I
trowe, were neuer vttered without al manner blemiſhe, and note of euil. S. Hierome
ſaithe, Quod magis mirum ſit,
                     Hieronym. in Epiſt. ad Titum▪ Cap. 3. 
                     etiam illud de Actibus Apoſtolorum videtur eſſe
relegendum, Fidem noſtram in Chriſtum, & Eccleſiaſticā Diſciplinā iam tunc à peruerſis
hominibus Haereſim nuncupatam: And that wee maye the more marueile, wee maye once
againe reade this place of the Actes of the Apoſtles: where we finde, yt the Chriſtian Faithe,
and Eccleſiaſtical Diſcipline was euen then of wicked menne called on Hereſie.
                     
                  
                  Euen as rightly, M. Hardinge, and vpon as good groundes, you haue againe
this daye condemned the ſame Goſpel of Chriſte, and in ans good parte, & meaninge
haue called it Hereſie. But wée maye truely, and ſimply ſaye with S. Paule,Actor. 24. 
                     Accordinge
to this Secte, whiche you calle Hereſie, wee woorſhip the God of our Fathers,
whiche is the Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 1.
               But the more ſore, and outragious a crime Hereſie is, the more it
ought to be proued by plaine & ſtronge argumentes, eſpecially in this
time, when menne beginne to geue leſſe credite to theire woordes, &
to make more diligent ſearche of their Doctrine, then thei were wonte
to doo. For the people of God are otherwiſe inſtructed nowe, then they
were in times paſte, when al the Biſhoppes of Romes Saieinges
were allowed for Goſpel, and when al Religion did depende onely
vpon theire Authoritie. Nowe a dayes the Holy Scripture is abroade,
the writinges of the Apoſtles and Prophetes are in Printe:
whereby al Truthe and Catholique Doctrine maye be prooued, and
al Hereſie maye be diſproued and confuted.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhere ye require your Hereſie, for ſo muche as it is ſo hainous a crime,The Defenders Hereſies ſufficiently and fully confuted alreadie by ſundrie greate Clerkes. Lanfrancus. Guimundus. Petrus Cluoiacenſis. by plaine and ſtronge are
gumentes to be prooued: it is not vnfoowen how ſufficiently and ſubſtantially that is perfoormed already
by men of excellent learninge, as wel of this age, as of times paſte. VVas not Berengarius, the
firſt Author of your Sacramentarie Hereſie? by moſt plaine and ſtronge argumentes confuted of Lanfrancus
B. of Canturbury, and Guinundus B. of Auerſa? VVere not the Peterbruſians ſo, whoſe Hereſie
ye holde againſt the Bleſſed Sacrifice of the Maſſe, of the learned Abbot Petrus Cluniaccenſis? VVas
not VVicklef ſo of Thomas VValden, a learned man of Englande? hathe not Luther and Oeclampadius
benne ſo confuted in our time, of that Holy and learned Father Biſhop Fiſher?
                  But whatſhal I ſpeake of particular men,Tho. VValden. B. Fiſher. were they newer ſo excellent, by whome they haue
benne confuted, ſithe by Publike ſentence of the Churche they haue bene condemned, bothe in General

and Prouincial Councels?Scriptures and Doctours. Therefore we thinke it not noede no we againe to prooue your doctrine,
ſo ſufficiently condemnèd, to be Hereſie. That the people be no we otherwiſe inſtructed,
then they were in times paſte, we confeſſe. But whether better nowe, then in our Forefathers
dayes, they that can conſider the liues of them no we, and of them that were then, maye eaſily Indge.
                  The ſaieinges of the Biſhop of Rome were neuer allowed for the Goſpel. His priuate ſayinges
and common talke might be erroneous,In vvhatcaſe the Popes ſayinges are to be taken for Truthe. Luc
                           •
                        . 22. noteſſe then other mennes But what he ſaith by waie of iudgement
and ſentence definitiue in doubteful pointes touchinge Religion, ſuche ſaieinges of Peters ſucceſſour
(for whome Chriſte prayed, that his Faithe might not faile, and who was commaunded by
Chriſte to ſtrengthen his Brethren) we take for Truthe, and the ſame obediently receiue. So the Fathers
aſſembled in Councel at Chalcedon,Vntruthe. receiued and agreed to the ſayinge and writinge of Pope Leo,
noleſse then if Peter the Apoſtle and firſte Biſhop of Rome him ſelfe had ſpoken. The Popes auctoritie
we acknowledge Supreme aboue al other auctoritie in Earthe, touchinge the gouernement of the
Churche:Vntruthe: yet was it neuer ſaide, ne thought by the Catholiques, that al Religion depended onely
thereon, as your ſclaunderous reporte beareth menne in hande.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Lanfrancus, Euimondus, Abbas Cluniacenſis, Thomas Waldenſis, Iohn Fiſher,
and other your like Doctours, M. Hardinge, are ouer yonge, al within the
ſpace of this laſte fiue hundred yéeres, far vnlike S. Auguſtine, S. Hierome, S.
Ambroſe, S. Chryſoſtome, and others the Ancient Learned Fathers, & Doctours
of the Churche. Neither is there any ſufficient cauſe to the contrarie, but that Berengarius,
Iohn Wicklefe, Iohn Hus, Doctour Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius,
& others, either for Learninge, or for Truthe, or for Iudgement in the Scriptures,
or for Antiquitie maye wel & ſafely be compared with them. At the leaſt I
hope wée maye ſaie of them, as S. Auguſtine once ſaide of the Doctours, & Fathers
of his time:Auguſt. ad Fortunarian. Epiſ. 111. 
                     Neque quorumliber Diſputationes, quamuis Catholicorum, & laudatorum
hominum, velut Scripturas Canonicas habere debemus: vt nobis non liceat, ſalua honorificentia,
quae illis debetur, aliquid in eorum Scriptis improbare, aut reſpuere: ſi fortè
inuenerimus, quòd aliter ſelfſerint; quàm Veritas habet: Neither weigh wee the writinges
of al meane, be they neuer, ſo woorthy, and Catholique, as wee weighe the Canonical Scriptures:
but that, ſauinge the reuerence that is dewe vnto them, we maye wiſlike, and refuſe ſomewhat
in their writinges, if we happen to finde, that they haue thought otherwiſe, then the
Truthe maye beare.
                      Likewiſe the Councelles, ye meane, are very Newe, & therefore
beare the leſſe authoritie, for that they be ſo many waies contrary to the Olde.
Hereof hereafter more at large. Certainely, there is none of your errours ſo groſſe
and palpable, but by ſome of your late Councelles it hath benne confirmed. Therefore
wee maye iuſtly ſaie to you, as S. Auguſtine ſometime ſaide to Mariminus
the Arian Heretique,Auguſt. contrae Maximin. Li. 3. Cap. 14. 
                     Nec ego Nicenam Synodum tibi, nec tu mihi Ariminenſem debes,
tanquam praeiudicaturus, obijcere. Scripturarum Authoritatibus, res cum re, cauſa
cum cauſa, ratio cū ratione conceuer: Neither maye I ſaye to thee the Councel of Nice,
nor maiſte thou laye to mee the Councel of Ariminum, either of vs thinkinge thereby to finde
preuidice againſt the other. But let vs laye mater to mater, cauſe to cauſe, and reaſon to reaſon,
by the Authoritie of the Scriptures.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ye graunte, there is more lighte and knowledge nowe, then was before. The
greatter is either your faulte, or your folie, M. Hardinge, that in the broade daye, &
open Lighte ſo buſily ſet foorthe the woorkes of darkeneſſe. S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Pſalm. 9.
                     Hic eſt multò impudentior. Ex furibus enim leges eos grauiùs puniunt, qui interdiu
furantur: He is very ſhameleſſe, that woorketh deceite in the open Lighte. For of al
Theeues the Lawe moſte ſharpely puniſheth them, that robbe in the daye time. Therefore
S. Cyprian ſaithe vnto you: Ignoſci poruit ſimpliciter erranti. Poſt inſpirationem
verò & reuelationem factam,
                     
                     Cyprian. 
                     qui in eo, quod errauerat, perſeuerat prudens, & ſciens,
ſine venia ignorantiae peccat. Praeſumptione enim, atque obſtinatione ſuperatur:.
                     
He that is deceiued,Pope aboue Goddes VVoorde. and erieth of ſimplicitie, maye be pordoned. But after that the Truthe is
once reueled, who ſo continueth neuertheleſſe in his former errour witingly and willingly, ſinneth
without pardonne of ignorance, as beinge ouercome by preſumption, and wilfulneſſe.
                  You ſaie, not withſtandinge al this greate Light wée talke of, yet our liues are
nothinge comparable to the liues of them that haue benne before vs. This, M.
Hardinge, hathe euer benne an olde complainte in al ages, as maye appeare by S.
Cyprian,Cyprian. ad Demetrianum. Auguſt. De Ciuita. Dei. Eccleſiaſtes. 7. S. Auguſtine, and other Ancient Fathers: It was a common Prouerbe
in olde times, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Thinges a yéere paſte are euermore better, then
thinges preſente. For euery thinge to vs ſéemeth the greatter, as it ſéemeth neareſt
to touche our ſenſes. And bicauſe wée féele not our Fathers euilles, therefore
wée imagine, they had no euil at al. The wiſe man ſaithe, Ne dixeris, quae cauſa
eſt, quòd priora tempora meliora fuerint, quàm praeſentia. Stulta enim eſt huiuſmodi interrogatio:
Neuer demaunde wherefore the times paſte were better then the times preſente.
For in deede it is a fooliſhe queſtion.
                     
                  
                  But, M. Hardinge, wherefore doo you thus condemne our liues in reſpecte of our
Fathers? Certainely you muſt néedes confeſſe, there are fewer blaſphemies, fewer
Othes, fewer breaches of Matrimonie, fewer Stewes, fewer Concubines, fewer
Fraies, fewer Murthers emongſt vs this daie, then commonly were at any time emonge
our Fathers. How be it, to let our Fathers paſſe, if it ſhal pleaſe you to
laye our liues to your liues, although we acknowledge many our imperfections, yet
Goddes name be bleſſed, wee haue no cauſe to flee the compariſon.
                  The Popes woordes, you ſaie, were neuer taken for Goſpel: Yes, M. Hardinge,
and ſomewhat alſo aboue the Goſpel. For proufe whereof it maye pleaſe you to remember
the woordes of certaine your late Doctours. Sylueſter Prieriâs late Ma
                        •
                     
                     ſ
                        •
                     ter
of Pope Leoes Palaice,Sylueſter Prieriâs, Cōtra Lutherum. writeth thus: Indulgentiae authoritate Scripturae non innotuere
nobis: ſed authoritate Eccleſiae Romanae, Romanorum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Pontificum, quae maior
eſt: Pardonnes are not warrented vnto vs by the authoritie of Goddes Woorde: but by the
authoritie of the Romaine Churche, and of the Biſhoppes of Rome, whiche is more, then
Goddes VVoorde.
                      Yf this be not ſufficient, he addeth farther: A doctrina Romanae
Eccleſiae, & Romani Pontificis Sacra Scriptura robur, & authbritatem trahit: The Hoſy
Scripture taketh ſtrength, and authoritie of the Doctrine of the Biſhop and Churche of Rome.
                     
                  
                  Cardinal Cuſanus entituleth his Booke:Nicolaus Cuſanus. 
                     De authoritate Eccleſiae, & Councilij
ſupra, & contra Scripturam: Of the Authoritie of the Churche, and Councel aboue, and againſt
the Scripture.
                     
                  
                  
                     Your greateſt Doctour Albertus Pigghius ſaithe,
                     Albert. Pigghius, Hierarch. Lib 1. Cap. 2. 
                     Apoſtoli quaedam conſcripſerunt,
non vt ſcripta illa praeſſene Fidei & Religioni noſtrae, ſed potius vt ſubeſſent:
The Apoſtles wrote certaine thinges, not to the ende that ſutche willinges ſhoulde he ouer our
Faithe, and Religion: but rather, that they ſhoulde be vnder. Your Canoniſtes ſaie,
                     16. q. 1. Quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        : In Cloſſa. 
                     a Papa poteſt diſpenſare cōira ius Diuinum: The Pope maye diſpenſe againſt the Lawe of
God:15. q. 6. Authoritate. In Cloſſa. 
                     Papa poteſt diſpenſare contra Ius Naturae: The Pope maye diſpenſe againſt the Lawe
of Nature:Diſt 34. Lector, & Diſt 82 Preſbyter. 
                     Papa poteſt diſpenſare contra Apoſtolum: The Pope maye diſpenſe againſt
S. Pauſe the Apoſtle:Abbas Panot. Extra. De Diuorijs. Cap. fin. 
                     Papa poreſt diſpenſare contra Nouum Teſtamentum: The Pope
maye diſpenſe againſte the Newe Teſtamente:Summa Angel. in Dictione Papa. 
                     Papa poteſt diſpenſare de omnibus praeceptis
veteris, & Noui Teſtamenti: The Pope maye diſpenſe with al the Commaūdementes
bothe of the Olde, and alſo of the Newe Teſtamente. Hereof more hereafter, as farther
occaſion ſhalbe offered.
                  
                  Theſe be your owne Doctours woordes, M. Hardinge: they be truely reported:
they be no ſcalunders. And therefore Franciſcus Zarabelia a Cardinal of Rome
ſaithe thus:Franciſcus Zarabella, De Sectis. 115. 
                     Perſuaſerunt Pontificibus, quòd omnia poſſent, & ſic quòd facerent, quicquid
liberet, etiam illicita, & ſint pluſquam Deus: They haue made the Popes beleeue
that they might doo al thinges, what ſo euer they ſiſted, yea notwithſtandinge they were
thinges vnlawful? and thus haue they made them more then God.
                     
                  
                  
                     
You ſaye, The Pope in his common talke maye be deceiued, and erre, as other
menue maye: but in his Iudgemente Seate, and Sentence Definitiue of Religion
be cannot erre: as if ye would ſaye, The Pope hath one Sprite in the Conſiſtorie,
& an other at home: mutche like, as one ſaide ſometimes vnto Cicero in reproche
of his inconſtancie,Saluſt. in Cices ronem. Lucae, 22. 
                     Aliud ſtans, aliud ſedens de Republica loqueris: Touchinge the
Common Weaſe, ye haue one minde ſittinge, and an other ſtandinge.
                     
                  
                  But Chriſte ſaide vnto Peter, I haue praied for thee, that thy Faithe ſhould not faile:
Therefore, ſaye you, Wée receiue obediently, what ſo euer the Pope ſpeaketh in
place of Iudgemente. Hereby ye ſéeme to geue vs ſecretely to vnderſtande, that
Chriſtes Praiers were auailable for the Pope, to kéepe him from errour, not in the
Churche, or Pulpite, or Cloſet, or any other common, or Priuate place, but onely
in the Conſiſtorie, and Councel, in debatinge doubteful caſes of Religion.
                  But how holdeth this arguments? Chriſte praied for Peter, that his Faithe
ſhould not faile:Auguſtin. in Quaeſti. Noui Teſla. Quae. 75. Iohan. 17. 
                     Ergo, the Pope cannot erre. Verily S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Nunquid
pro Petro rogabat: pro Iohanne, & lacobo non rogabat? Vt de coeteris taceamus:
VVhat did Chriſte praie for Peter: and did be not praie for Iohn, and Iames? I wil not
ſpeake of the reſte.
                      Neither did Chriſte praie for Peter onely, or for the Apoſtles,
but, for al the Faithful, that euer ſhould be: as him ſelfe ſaithe, I praie not onely
for them, but alſo for al them, that through theire preachinge ſhal beleue in mée.
                  
                     How be it, what, ſaithe M. Hardinge, he ſo obediently receiueth the Popes Decrees?
Yewis, the Popes them ſelues wil not ſo receiue them. Platyna ſaithe,
Acta Priorum Pontificum ſequentes Pontifices aut infringunt,Platyna in Stephano, & in Romano. aut omninò tollunt.
Nihil enim aliud iſti Pontificuli cogitabant, quàm vt nomen, & dignitatem maiorum ſuorum
extinguerent: The nexte Pope either breaketh, or vtterly repeaſeth his Predeceſſours
Decrees. For theſe litle petie Popes had none other ſtudie to buſie them ſelues withal, but
onely to deface the name and dignitie of the former Popes.
                  
                  Where you ſaye, The whole Councel of Chalcedon ſo eſtéemed the voice of
Pope Leo, as if it had benne the voice of Peter him ſelfe, this, M. Hardinge, is a
manifeſt Vntruthe, as it ſhal ſoone appeare. I graunte, the name of Leo, for his
greate learninge, and granitie was mutche regarded. So. S. Ambroſe for the like
cauſe was called,Athanaſ. ad Heronem. Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 23. 
                     Orbis terrarum oculus, Sacerdotum Archiſacerdos, & Fundamentum
Fidei: The Eie of the worlde, the Head Prieſte of al Prieſtes, and the Fundation of
the Faithe.
                      So Paphnutius, beinge no Pope, was hearde againſt al the reſte of
the Councel of Nice: So S. Hierome beinge neither Pope, nor Biſhop, was receiued
againſt this whole Councel of Chalcedon.36 Quaeſt. 2. Quia legitima.
                  
                  Neither did the Councel folowe Leo alone, as the Vniuerſal Biſhop, and Head
of the Churche, but ioined him together with others, as eſtéeminge them of equal
Authoritie.Concil. Chalcedon. Actio. 2. For thus they made theire general ſhoote: Omnes ita credimus: Leo
Papa ita credit: Gyrillus ita credit: Leo, & Anatolius ita credunt: Thus wee al beleeue:
Thus Pope Leo beleueth: Cyrillus thus beſeueth: Leo, and Anatolius thus beleeue.
                     
                  
                  And with what credite can M. Hardinge ſaie, The whole Councel of Chalcedon
yelded vnto Pope Leo, as if it had benne vnto Peter him ſelfe? For it is certaine,
that the ſame whole Councel decreed againſt Leo: and likewiſe Leo againſt
the Councel. For the Councel decreed, contrary to the olde Canons, that the Biſhop
of Conſtantinople emonge the foure Patriarches ſhoulde be the ſeconde in dignitie,
and that the ſame Biſhop of Conſtantinople ſhould haue and enioie one authoritie,
and like Priuileges with the Biſhop of Rome. The woordes be theſe,
Acqua Sāctiſiſsmae Sedi Nouae Romae Priuilegia tribuerunt rationabile iudicantes,
                     Concil. Chalcedon. Actio. 16. Pa. 936. 
                     vrbem
eam ornatam iam Imperio, & Senaru, aequis Senioris Regiae Romae Priuilegijs frui, & in
Eccleſiaſticis, ſicut illa habet, Maieſtatem habere negotijs: The Fathers gane equal Priuileges
vnto the Holy See of Newe Rome
                      (whiche was Conſtantinople) thinkinge it to
be reaſonable, that the ſame Cittie of Conſtantinople, beinge now furniſhed with Empire, and

Councel,
                     Churche depēdeth of the Pope. 
                     ſhould enioie equal Priuileges with the Princely Cittie of the olde Rome, and in al
Eccleſiaſtical affaires ſhoulde beare the ſame Maieſtie, that Rome beareth. This thinge
Pope Leo mutche miſliked, and founde greate faulte with the Councel, and would
in no wiſe conſente vnto it. Thus he writeth,Leo Epiſt. 59. 
                     Quae per occaſionem Synodi malè
ſunt attentata reprehenderam: I reproued thoſe thinges that were euil attempted by the
Councel of Chaſcedon:
                     
                     Leo Epiſt. 53. And againe, Nullum vnquàm potuerunt noſtrum obtinere conſenſum:
They were neuer hable to geate our conſente.
                     
                  
                  
                     And when theſe maters were paſte by the conſente of al the Biſhoppes, Lucentius
Pope Leoes Legate came whininge in, and beſought the Councel, that the
whole mater might be repealed. The woordes written in the Councel be theſe:
Lucentius dixit:
                     
                     Concil. Chalcet don. Actio. 16. 
                     Sedes Apoſtolica, quae nobis praecepit, praeſentibus humiliati non debet.
Et ideò quaecun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in praeiudicium Canonum, heſterna die geſta ſunt, nob 
                           •
                         abſentibus,
ſublimitatem veſtram petimus, vt circunduci iubeatis. Viri Illuſtriſsimi ludices dixerunt,
Quod interloquuri ſumus, tòta Synodus approbauit: Lucentius the Popes Legate
ſaide,
                      The Apoſtolique See of Rome, whoſe commiſsion wee haue, maye not by any
theſe dooinges be defaced. Therefore wee beſeche your honours, that what ſo euer was concluded
here yeſterday in our abſence, in preiudice of the Canons, ye wil commaunde the ſame
to be blotted out. The Honorable Iudges made him aunſweare: That we haue talkte of,
the ſame the whole Councel hath allowed.
                  Thus many waies, M. Hardinge, the Vntruthe of your tale plainely appeareth.
For the Councel of Chalcedon eſtéemed not the voice of Leo, as if it had
benne the voice of Peter, as you ſaye: but rather contrariewiſe made lighte of it,
and weighed it none otherwiſe, then they ſame cauſe.
                  
                     Therefore Liberatus ſaithe thus touchinge the ſame:
                     Liberatus, ca. 13. 
                     Cùm Anatolius, conſentiente
Concilio Primatum obtinuiſſet, Legati verò Romani Epiſcopi contradicerent, à
ludicibus, & Epiſcopis omnibus illa contradictio ſuſcepta non eſt. Et licet Sedes Apoſtolica
nune vſque contradicat, tamen, quod à Synodo firmatum eſt, Imperatorio Patrocinio
permanet: When Anatolius (the Biſhop of Conſtantinople) by conſente of the
Councel had obteined the Primacie, notwithſtandinge, the Biſhop of Roomes Legates ſtoode
againſt it, yet theire gaineſaieinge coulde not be receiued, neither of the Iudges, nor of the Biſhoppes.
And al be it the Apoſtolique See of Rome withſtande it ſtil, yet the Decree of the
Councel by the Emperours warrante continueth in force.
                  But you neuer taught vs, ye ſaye, y• the whole ſtate of the Churche dependeth
of the Pope. It is not your Doctrine: you neuer ſpake it. And therefore wée are
railers, and ſclaunderers, that ſo reporte you. If it be ſo in deede, M. Hardinge, as
you ſaye, wherefore then ſuffer you Cardinal Cuſanus to write thus, Veritas adhaeret
Cathedrae.
                     Nicolaus Cuſasnus De author. Eccl. & Concil. Supra & cōtra Scripturam. 
                     Quare mēbra Cathedrae vnita, & Pontifici coniuncta efficiunt Eccleſiā:
The Truthe cleaueth faſte to the
                      (Popes) Chaire. Therefore the members vnited to the
Chaire, and ioined to the Pope, make the Churche. Wherefore ſuffer you Iohannes de
Pariſijs, one of your Catholique Doctours, to write thus: Fiet vnum Ouile, & vnus
Paſtor. Quod quidem de Chriſto intelligi non poteſt: Sed de aliquo alio Miniſtro, qui
praeſit loco cius:
                     Iohan. De Pariſijs De poteſtate Regia, & Papali, Cap. 3. 
                     There ſhalbe one Plocke, and one ſhepheard. Whiche thinge cannot be taken
of Chriſte. We muſt needes vnderſtande it of ſome other Miniſter, that ruleth in his ſteede.
                  
                  Wherefore ſuffer you Noſius your Grande Captaine to write thus: Vnum toti
praecſſe Eccleſiae Vſque adeò eſt neceſſarium, vt abſque hoc Eccleſia vna eſſe non poſsit:
It is ſo neceſſarie a thinge,
                     
                     Hoſius In Cōfeſſione Petricoui, Cap. 27. 
                     that one onely man oueruſe y• whole Churche, yt without the ſame
the Churche cannot be one. Wherefore ſuffer you your Canoniſtes to ſaie, Conſtat Eccleſiam
ideo eſſe vnam, quia in Vniuerſali Eccleſia vnū eſt Caput Supremū, Scilicet Papa:
It is plaine, that therefore the Churche is one, bicauſe that in the whole Vniuerſal Churche
there is one Supreme Head,
                     
                     Clemen. Lib. 5. Ad noſtrum: In Gloſſae. 
                     that is the Pope. To be ſhorte, why doo you your ſelfe, M.
Hardinge, allege S. Hieromes woordes directly, as ye woulde haue vs beleue, to
this purpoſe?M. Hard fo 80. b Hierony. contra Luciferianos. 
                     Eccleſiae ſalus à Summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet: Which woordes
into Engliſhe ye haue turned thus: The ſafetie of the Churche hangeth of the VVoorſhip

of the Highe Prieſte. He meaneth the Pope Peters Succeſſour. In whiche laſte clauſe, ye
miſconſtrue, and racke S. Hieromes woordes far contrary to his meaninge. For
S. Hierome meante not bereby the Biſhop of Rome, but euery ſeueral Biſhop
within his owne Charge: euery whiche Biſhop he calleth the Higheſt Prieſte, as
in my Former Replie it is declared more at large.Art
                           •
                        . 4. Diul. 15.
                  
                  If theſe thinges be true, why are they nowe deuied? If they be falſe, why are
they not condemned? I truſte, it maye appeare by theſe fewe, that wée reporte the
Truthe truely, and are no ſclaunderers.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 2.
               Sithence then they bringe foorthe none of theſe for them ſelues,
and cal vs neuertheleſſe Heretiques, whiche haue neither fallen from
Chriſte, nor from the Apoſtles, nor yet from the Prophetes, this is an
iniurious and a very ſpiteful dealinge.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Nay Sirs, ye ſhal not ſo carie awaye the concluſion with a lie. But contrarywiſe, ſithens wee
bringe foorthe many Scriptures for the Truthe, whiche ye impugne, as your ſelues ſhal ſee, when we
come to confute your doctrine, whiche here foloweth: and ſithens not withſtandinge that ye wil not
yeelde to the Scriptures, but peruert the True meaninge of them with Gloſes and interpretations of
your owne Heades,Vntruthe. frame newe opinions contrary to that ye haue receaued, and that the Churche
hathe euer taught: the Catholikes wilful cal you Heretikes, and the Churche wil condemne you for
Heretikes, and ſo accompt you, vntil ye recant, and repent.
                  But ye haue not fallen from Chriſte,That the Defenders be fallen from Chriſte. ye ſaye, nor from the Apoſtles, nor yet from the Prophetes. As
though they that departe from the Romaine Churche, whiche is the Catholike Churche, which diuerſe
times in the Apologie ye confeſſe, fell not from Chriſte, and conſequently from the Apoſtles, and Prophetes.Math. 28. Luke. 10.
Saithe not Chriſte in the Goſpel: He that heareth not the Churche, let him bee to thee as an
Heathen, and a Publicane? Saieth he not alſo, He that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth mee?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Whether parte rightly and reuerently vſeth the Scriptures of God, and whether
peruerteth them by ſhiftes, and Gloſes, I truſte, it ſhal in parte appeare by
this conference. In déede, M. Hardinge, it is no great maiſterie, by your interpretations,
and handelinges to haue ſtoare yenough and plenette of Scriptures. For
this is one ſpecial grounde of your Diuinitie,Extra. De tranſlatione Epiſcopi, Quāto, in Gloſſa. 
                     Papa poteſt ex nihilo facere aliquid:
& Sententiam, quae nulla eſt, facere aliquam: The Pope is hable of nothinge to make ſome
thinge: and of no Sentence to make ſome Sentence.
                      By your Doctrine it is lawful, and
good Logique, to reaſon thus:Diſt. 21. Inferior Sedes. Eſai. 10. 
                     An gloriabitur ſerra aduerſus eum, qui trahit illam
                           •
                        
                        Shal the ſawe boaſte againſt him, that draweth it?
                     
                     Matthae. 10. Concil. Roman. ſub Sylueſtro. 1. 
                     Non eſt Seruus ſupra Dominum: There
is no Seruant aboue his Lorde: Ergo, Noman maye dare to Iudge the Pope. Or
thus,Ad Titum. 1. Diſt. 82. Propoſuiſti. 
                     Omnia munda mundis: Coinquinatis autem, & infidelibus mihil eſt mundum:
Al thinges are cleane to the cleane: but vnto the filthy, and Infidelles nothinge is cleane:
Ergo, It is not lawful for Prieſtes to marry.
                  Or, as you, M. Hardinge, ſometimes haue delited to reaſon:Matthae. 7. M. Hardinge in his former Booke, Fol. 155. b. 
                     Nolite dare Sanctum
Canibus: Geeue not Holy thinges to Dogges, Ergo,
                      It is not laweful for the
Chriſtian vulgare People to Reade the Scriptures.
                  Thus maye you eaſily be wel ſtoared, and ful freight of Scriptures yenough,
and, asHieronym. ad Pammachium: Exēpla captiua ſeruiunt ad Victoriam. S. Hierome ſaithe, maye carrie them captiue to ſerue your turne. But S.
Hierome coulde alſo haue tolde you,Hierony. in 1. Cap. Ad Galat. 
                     Non in verbis Scripturarum eſt Euāgelium,
                     Cyprian ad Notianum. to. 2. 
                     ſed
in ſenſu: The Goſpel ſtandeth not in the bare woordes of the Scriptures, but in the meaninge.
                     
Therefore wée maye ſaye vnto you, as S. Cyprian once ſaide to the Nouatian

Heretiques: Audite, Nouatiani, apud quos Scripturae Coeleſtes leguntur potiùs, quàm
intelliguntur: Hearken hereto, ye Nouatian Heretiques, emongſt whome the Heauenly Scriptures
are readde rather, then wel perceiued.
                     
                  
                  You ſaye, the Churche of Rome by our owne Confeſſion is the Catholique
Churche: whiche Churche, for as mutche as wée haue forſaken, wée haue forſalten
Chriſte, and his Apoſtles.Matth. 18. Lucae. 10. For ſaithe not Chriſte in the Goſpel, ſaye you, He
that heareth not the Churche, let him be vnto thee as an Heathen, and a Publicane? And,
He that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſethe mee?
                  
                  Wée graunte, M. Hardinge, the name of the Churche of Rome is Catholique:
but the Errours and abuſes thereof are not Catholique. Neither is it the Churche,
that wée finde faulte withal: but the greate corruptions, and foule deformities, that
you haue brought into the Churche.
                  Howe be it your policie herein is apparent. Your Reader, be he neuer ſo ſimple,
maye ſoone ſée your whole drifte. Ye magnifie the Churche with al manner
titles of Authoritie, not for any ſpecial regarde, ye beare the Churche in déede,
but onely to ſettle your ſelues in an infinite Tyrannie, and to make vs beleue,
that you onely are the Churche, & to geue credite to al your fantaſies: yea although
ye be the defacers, & enimies of the Churche. Verily the bare name of the Churche
is not ſufficient. S. Paule ſaithe, that Antichriſte the Man of ſinne,2. Theſſ. 
                           •
                        . ſhal ſitte in
the Temple of God: whereby no doubte he meante the Churche.
                  But, M. Hardinge, Heare you the voice of God: leaue your Fables: ſpeake
Goddes Holy Woord, and ſpeake it truely: be ye faitheful Miniſters of the Truthe.
Then who ſo euer ſhalbe founde to deſpiſe your Doctrine, be he kinge, or Emperour,
wée will not doubte to calle him an Heathen, and Publicane. But if he be an
Heathen, that wil not beare your Churche, what is he then that wil not heare
Chriſte?Aeneas Sylui. in Geſtis Concil. Conſiant. 
                     Aeneas Syluius, beinge afterwarde Pope him ſelfe, ſaithe thus:
Si Romanus Pontifex non audiet Eccleſiam, Chriſtum quoque non audiet, & tanquam
Ethnicus, & Publicanus haberi debet: If the Biſhop of Rome wil not heare the Churche, he
wil not heare Chriſte: and therefore muſte be taken as an Heathen,
                     
                     Paral. Vrſperg. Pag. 411. 
                     and Publicane. S. Auguſtine
ſaith, Oues meae vocem meam audiūt, & ſequuntur me. Auferātur chartae Humanae:
ſonent voces Diuinae: My Sheepe heare my voice,
                     
                     Aug. De Ouibus Cap. 14. 
                     and folowe me. Awaie with Mannes
VVrittinges: Let the Voice of God ſounde vnto vs.
                  
                  Surely Doctour Luther him ſelfe, againſte whom M. Hardinge ſo vehemently,
and ſo often inflamethe his choler, in humble and reuerent manner writethe thus:
Nos colimus Romanam Ecclefiam in omnibus.
                     Paral. Viſperg. Pag. 472. 
                     Tantùm illis reſiſtimus, qui pro Eccleſia
obtrudunt Babyloniam: VVee honour the Churche of Rome in al thinges. Onely wee
withſtand them, that in ſteede of the Churche, haue thruſte in the Cōſuſion of Babylon.
                      In like
ſenſe S. Cyprian. ſaithe, Non eſt pax, ſed bellum: nec Eccleſiae iungitur,
                     Cyprian Sermone 5. De Lapſis. 
                     qui ab Euangelio
ſeparatur: It is not peace: It is VVarre. Neither is he ioined to the Churche, that is dinided
from the Goſpel.
                      Nowe, howe carefully the Churche of Rome is leadde by the
Goſpel of Chriſte,Nicola. Cuſanus, De Authoritate Eccle. contra. & ſupra Scripturā. Aug contra Literas Petilianl Lib. 2. Cap. 85. wee maie eaſily learne by Nicolaus Cuſanus a Cardinal of the
ſame Churche of Rome. Thus he ſaithe: Sequuntur Scripturae Eccleſiam: & non è
conuerſo: The Scriptures of God folowe the Churche: but contrary wiſe the Churche folowethe
not the Scriptures.
                      To conclude, wée maye ſaye vnto you, as S. Auguſtine
ſaide ſometime to Pētilian the Donatian Heretique: Vtrùm nos Schiſmatici ſimus,
an vos, nec ego, nec tu, ſed Chriſtus interrogetur, vt iudicet Eccleſiam ſuam:
Whether of vs be Sch
                              •
                           matiques, wee, or you, aſke you not me: I wil not aſke you: Let Chriſte
be aſked: that he maie ſhewe vs his owne Churche.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 1.
               With this ſwerde did Chriſte put of the Diuel, when he was
tempted of him: with theſe weapons ought al preſumption, whiche

doothe auaunce it ſelfe againſte God,
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 3. to be ouerthrowen and conquered.
For al Scripture, ſaithe S. Paule, that commethe by the Inſpiration
of God, is profitable to teache, to confute, to inſtructe, and
to reproue, that the man of God may be perfite, and throughly framed
to euery good woorke. Thus did the Holy Fathers alwaie fight
againſte the Heretiques, with none other force, then with the Holy
Scriptures.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  That the Holy Fathers did euer more fight againſt the Heretiques with nowe other force, then
with the Holy Scriptures, that weè denie.
                  For What did the Fathers in the firſt general Councel holden at Nice? did they fight againſt
Arius and the mainteiners of his Hereſie with no other force, then with the Scriptures? When thoſe
Heretikes refuſed the woorde Homouſion, whereby is ſignified the sonne of God to be of one and the
ſame ſubſtance with God the Father, for that it was not to be found in the Scriptures, beſides whiche
they ſtiffely denied, as ye doo, that any thinge ought to be receiued: did not the Caetholike Biſhoppes of
thother ſide flie to the Ancient Fathers? did thei not appeale to the iudgementes of thoſe Fathers, which
had geuen ſentence of the mater then beinge in controuerſie, before that Arius and thoſe that helde
of his ſide were borne?
                  In the ſeconde Councel aſſembled at Conſtantinople,Hiſtor. Tripart. lib. 5, cap. 10. were not the Heretikes of ſundry ſectes
by a wittie and a godly policie contriued betwene Nectarius the Biſhop and Theodoſius the Emperour,
through the ſuggeſtion of the greate Clerke Stſinnius, driuen to receiue the Doctours, who liued
before theire Hereſies were heard of, as witneſſes of true Chriſtian Doctrine woorthy of credite?
                  Macedonius in that Councel was condemned,Macedonius. who therefore denied the Holy Ghoſt to be God.
bicauſe the Scriptures geue not vnto him that name. But the Biſhops there aſſembled, as Photius that
learned Biſhop writeth, declared out of the teaching of the Fathers, and Diuines before theire time, that
the Holy Ghoſt is to be adored, worſhipped, and glorified, as beinge of one nature and ſubſtance togeather
with the Father, and the Sonne.
                  In the thirde Councel kept at Epheſus,Neſtorius euer called for Scripture, as the Heretikes at this daie doo, vvhat ſo euer ſecte they bee of. Epiſt. 1. Tom. 4 Deipara not found in Scripture, yet receiued and kept. the Heretike Neſtorius boaſted, at ye doo, of the Scriptures,
ſayinge, they were of his ſide, and would neither ſpeake, nor heare ought but Scriptures, Scriptures.
And alleaginge a place or twoo out of the Goſpel, where Marie is called the Mother of Ieſus,
ſtoutely, finde me in all Scripture, (quoth he) wher Marie is called the Mother of God. Hereto what ſaid
that holy and learned Biſhop Cyrillus, chiefe in that Councel? Hanc nobis fidem diuini tradidere
Diſcipuli: & licet nullam fecerint dictionis huius mentionem, ita tamen ſentire à ſanctis
Patribus edocti ſumus. This Fatthe (ſaith he) the Diſciples of God haue by tradition lefte vnto vs.
And although they haue made no expreſſe mention of this woorde (Deipara) yet ſo to thinke we haue
benne taught of the Holy Fathers.
                  When they reaſoned about rules touchinge faithe to be made, (ſaithe Vincentius Lirinenſis
writinge of that Councel) to al the Biſhoppes there aſſembled to the number almoſt of two hundred,
this ſeemed moſt Catholike, moſt faitheful, and beſte to be done, that the ſentences of the Holy Fathers
ſhould be brought foorthe amonge them: to thend that by theire conſente and Decrce the Religion of
the Olde Doctrine ſhould be confirmed, and the blasphemie of the Prophane nouel
                        •
                     ie condemned.
Behold Sirs what weapons the Fathers haue vſed againſt Hereſies, beſides the Holy Scriptures.
                  In the fourthe Councel, whiche was celebrated at Chalcedon, the Heretike Eutyches, as ye and al
Heretikes haue done, c
                        •
                     aked mutche of the Scriptures, and required his matter to be diſcuſſed by Scriptures.
Tel me (quoth he mockingly to euery one that reaſoned with him) in what Scripture lie the twoo
natures?Eutyches claimed his opiniō to be tried by the Scriptures.
                  
                  But let vs heare what the Learned Biſhoppes of that Councel ſaide thereto. VVee finde in the
firſt action of the Councel, that they cried out aloude, Ea quae ſunt Patrum teneantur: The thinges
that the Fathers haue taught,The teachinge of the Fathers to be kept: Actio. 5. let them be kept. Againe when they come to the definitiue ſentence, they
ſaie: Sequentes igitur Sanctos Patres, &c. Folo winge the Holy Fathers, wee doo al with one

accorde teache men to confeſſe one and him ſelfe the Sonne our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, perſite him ſelfe in
Godhead, and perfite himſelfe in Manhood. And for Auctoritie of the Fathers in high pointes of
Faith a Biſhop in that reuerēd aſſemblie named Eudoocius pronounced a notable ſentence, ſayeing thus:
Euery one that conſentethe not to the expoſition of the Holy Fathers,A notable ſayinge of a Learned Father, for thexpoſition of the Fathers. doothe alienate him ſelfe from al
Priſtely Communion, and from the preſence of Chriſte. Thus wee haue alleaged the foure firſt general
Councels, whiche S. Gregorie honourethe as the foure Goſpels.
                  But the thinge beinge ſo euident as it is, and ſo welkuorwen euen to your ſelues, if ye be learned,
the Auctorit it of theſe chief Councels maie ſuffice.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here M. Hardinge, ye haue taken in hande a néedeleſſe labour. For you
knowe right wel, wee deſpiſe not the Authoritie of the Holy Fathers: but rather
in this ſelfe ſame place haue alleged togeather S. Auguſtine, S. Hierome, and S.
Ambroſe, thrée of the moſte Auncient and approued Fathers: and throughout the
whole diſcourſe of this Apologie, in the Defence of the Catholique Truthe of our
Religion, nexte vnto Goddes Holy Woorde, haue vſed no prouſe, or Authoritie ſo
mutche, as the expoſitions, and iudgementes of the Holy Fathers. Wée deſpiſe
them not therefore, but rather geue God thankes in theire behalfe, for that it hathe
pleaſed him to prouide ſo woorthy inſtrumentes for his Churche: and therefore wée
iuſtly reproue you, for that ſo vnaduiſedly, and without cauſe, ye haue forſaken the
ſteppes of ſo Holy Fathers.
                  Theſe foure General Councelles, wherein you dwel ſo longe, as they make
nothinge againſt vs, ſo in ſundrie pointes they fight expreſſely againſt you.
                  Firſte, they were ſummoned by the Emperours, Conſtantinus, Theodoſius
1. Theodoſius. 2. and Martianus: and not by any right, or authoritie of the Pope: as
hereafter it ſhalbe ſhewed in place conuenient more at large.Sozo. li. 1. ca. 17 Iulius the Biſhop of
Rome was ſummoned by the Emperours write to appeare at the Councel of Nice,
as wel as others:Concil. Chalcedon. Actio. 1. Fol. 748. And Pope Leo afterwarde was charged by like Authoritie to
appeare at the Councel of Chalcedon.Eodem tenore Leo vocauys eſt.
                  
                  
                     Euſeb. De Vita Conſtan. Orat. 3. In the Councel of Nice the Biſhop of Rome was not Preſident, but Euſtathius
the Biſhop of Antioche. In the ſameTheodoretus, Lib. 1. cap. 7. Con. Nicen. Can. 6. Councel of Nice, the Biſhop of Rome hathe
his Authoritie and Iuriſdiction made equal, and leuel with the other thrée Patriarkes:
Concil. Chal. cedon. Actio. 16. Pag. 936. And in the Councel of Chalcedon the Biſhop of Conſtantinople is made
equal in Authoritie with the Biſhop of Roome. To be ſhorte,Liberat. ca. 13. the ſaide Councel
of Chalcedon, for this laſte, and ſome other like cauſes, Leo the Biſhop of Rome
would not allowe. Which thinge notwithſtandinge, the Councel ſtandethe ſtil in
force, whether the Pope wil, or no.
                  Theſe be the foure fiſte General Councelles, whiche M. Hardinge comparethe
in Authoritie with the foure Euangeliſtes.
                  
                     But theſe Heretiques. Arius, Neſtorius, Macedonius, and Euiyches in theſe foure General Councelles,
vtterly deſpiſed al the Auncient Fathers, and boaſted them ſelues (ſaithe M. Hardinge) of
the Scriptures, and euermore cried out Scriptures, Scriptures. Touchinge the Arians, that
they alleged certaine doubteful, and darke places of the Scriptures, to ſerue theire
purpoſe, it is certaine, and manifeſte. But that either they deſpiſed, or that the Catholiques
againſt them auouched the Eropſition and authoritie of any Father, M.
Hardinges onely woorde muſte be our Warrante. For neither allegethe he any one
Author for prouſe hereof, nor yet namethe any of al theſe Fathers.
                  Notwithſtandinge, let vs graunt, theſe Heretiques cried out, as M. Hardinge
ſaithe, Scriptures, Scriptures. Euen ſo did the ſame Heretiques likewiſe
crie out, euen as nowe M. Hardinge doothe,Socr. li. 4. ca. 26. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      Fathers, Fathers. Socrates ſaithe,
Et Ariani Originis libros citabant in Teſtimonium, vt illi quidem iudicabant, ſui Dogmatis.

And the Arian Heretikes alleged the Learned Father Origens Bookes,Doctours alleged by Heretiques. as they thought,
for proufe, and witneſſe of theire Doctrine.
                  
                  
                     The Heretique Eutyches ſaide, Ego legi ſcripta Beati Cypriani, & Sanctorum
Patrum,Concil Chalced Actio 1. Pag. 792 Concil. Chalced Actio. 4. Pa. 877 & Sancti Athanaſii: I haue readde the writinges of S. Cyprian, and of other Holy Fathers,
and of S. Athanafius.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe the Eutychian Heretique Caroſus ſaide, Ego ſecundum expoſitionem
trecētorum octodecim Patrum ſic credo, fic Baptixatus ſum. Aliud quid mihi dicas, neſcio:
This is my Faithe, accordinge to the expoſition of the three hundred and eighteene. Fathers (in
the Councel of Nice). In this Faithe was I Baptized. What ye ſhould ſaye more to me, I
cannot telle.
                  
                  
                     Euen ſo ſaide Eutyches him ſelfe:
                     Concil. Chalced. Actio. 1. Pag. 751 
                     Sic à Progenitoribus meis accepi, & credidi.
In hac Fide Baptizatus ſum, & ſignatus: & vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         and hunc diem in ea vixi, & in ea opto moti.
Thus haue I receiued of my Forefathers, and thus haue I beleeued. In this Faithe was I Baptized,
and ſigned: and in the ſame haue I liued vntil this daye: and in the ſame I wiſh to die.
                  Thus,Auguſtia. contra Creſco. li. 4. ca. 17 Conc. to. 1 pa. 568 S. Auguſtine ſaithe, the Donatian Heretique Creſconlus alleged the
authoritie of S. Cyprian: Thus the Neſtorian Heretiques alleged the authoritie
of the Councel of Nice.
                  
                     To be ſhorte, thus the Heretique Dioſcorus cried out in the open Councel of
Chalcedon:
                     Concil. Chalced. Act. 1. Pag. 767. 
                     Ego habeo Teſtimonia Sanctorum Patrum, Athanaſij, Gregorij, Cyrilli.
Non tranſgredior in aliquo. Ego cum Patribus cijcior: Ego defendo Patrum Dogmata:
Ego horum habeo teſtimonia, non ſimpliciter, aut tranſitorie, ſed in ipſorum libris:
I haue the Teſtimonies of the Holy Fathers, Athanaſius, Gregorius, Cyrillus: I alter not from
them in any pointe: I am throwen foorthe, and banniſhed with the Fathers: I defende the Fathers
Doctrine: I haue theire iudgementes vttered, not by chaunce, or vnaduiſedly, but remaininge
expreſſed in theire Bookes.
                  I doubte not, M. Hardinge, but you maye hereby eaſily ſée, that the Heretiques
ye ſpeake of, cried not onely, Scriptures, Scriptures, as ye ſaye: but had leaſure
alſo ſometimes to crie, as you doo, Fathers, Fathers: & that as wel to purpoſe,
and as rightly, as you of longe time haue vſed to crie, hauinge in déede in the caſes
wée ſpeake of, neither Scriptures, nor Fathers.
                  To come neare the mater, wée ſaie not, that al caſes of doubt are by manifeſte,
and open woordes plainely expreſſed in the Scriptures. For ſo there ſhould neede
no expoſition. But wée ſaye, There is no caſe in Religion ſo darke, and doubteful,
but it maie neceſſarily be either proued, or reproued by collection, and conference
of the Scriptures.
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hieron. in Eſai. Cap. 19. Moris eſt Scripturarum obſcuris manifeſta ſubnectere: It is y• order
of the Scriptures▪
                     
                     Augu. in lib. 83. Quaeſt. q. 69. 
                     after harde thinges, to ioine other thinges that bee plaine. S. Auguſtine like
wiſe ſaithe,
                      Solet circunſtantia Scripturarum illuminare ſententiam: The Circunſtance of
the Scripture is woonte to geue light, and to open the meaninge. The like rule Tertullian
alſo geuethe:
                     
                     Tertull. Aduerſus Tra
                           •
                        eam. I piphani lib. 3. De Semiariani
                           •
                        . 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      Oportet ſecundum plu
                        •
                     a intelligi pauclora: The fewer places muſte be expounded
by the moe. Therefore touchinge this woorde,
                      Homouſios, whiche M. Hardinge
here moueth, and the whole contention of the Arians, Epiphanius writethe
thus: Nomen Subſtantiae ſimpliciter, & nudè in veteri, & Noua Scriptura non proponitur:
Sententia autem eius nominis vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      oc
                        •
                     urrié: This woorde, Subſtance, plainely, and
nakedly is not founde, neither in the Olde, not in the Newe Teſtamente. But the ſenſe, and
meaninge of that woorde is founde euerywhere.
                  
                  In this conference, and Iudgemente of the Holy Scriptures wée néede oftentimes
the diſcretion, and wiſedome of Learned Fathers. Yet notwithſtandinge
maye wée not géeue them herein greater credi
                        •
                     e, then is conuenient, or then they
them ſelues, if it were offered, would receiue. Wée maye reuerently ſaye of them,
as Seneca in the like caſe ſommetime ſaide,
                        
                           •
                        eneca. 
                     Non ſunt Domini, ſed Duces noſtri:

                        They are our Leaders, but not our Lordes.
                     
                     Scriptures and Doctours. They are not the Truthe of God it ſelfe,
but onely witneſſes vnto the Truthe.
                  
                     Therfore S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 19. ad Hieronym. Alios Scriptores ita lego, vt quan
                        •
                     alibet Sanctitate,
Doctrina
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      praepolleant, non ideò verum putem, quòd ipſi ita ſenſerint, ſed quòd id
mihi vel per alios Authores Canonicos, vel probabili ratione perſuadere potuerint:
Other writers, or Fathers (biſides the Holy Scriptures) I reade in this ſorte, that be theire
Learninge, or Holineſſe neuer ſo greate, I wil not thinke it true, bicauſe they haue thought ſo,
but bicauſe they are hable to perſuade me ſo, either by other Canonical writers, or els by ſome
likely reaſon.
                     Auguſti. contra Fauſt. lib. 11. ca. 5. 
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe, Hoc genus literatum, nō cum credendi neceſſitate,
ſed cum iudicandi libertate legendum eſt: This kinde of writinges (of the Holy Doctours,
and Fathers) muſt be readde, not with neceſſitie to beleeue eche thinge, but with libertie
to iudge of eche thinge.
                     Aug. De Vnita. Eccle. ca. 10. 
                     And to that ende he ſaithe, Ne Catholicis quidem Epiſcopis
conſentiendum eſt, ſicubi fortè falluntur, vt contra Canonicas Dei Scripturas ſentiant:
Wee maie not conſente vnto the Biſhoppes, notwithſtandinge they be Catholique, if
they iudge contrarie to the Holy Canonical Scriptures. In this authoritie and credite wée
haue, and ought to haue the Holy Fathers.
                     
                  
                  Nowe let vs ſée, whethér the Biſhoppes, and others in theſe Councelles, confuted
theſe Heretiques, as wée ſaye, by the Scriptures: or els, as M. Hardinge
ſéemethe to ſaye, for wante or weakeneſſe of the Scriptures, vſed therein the Authoritie
of the Fathers.Thedor. li. 1. ca. 7 Trip. hi. li. 2. ca. 5 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Firſte the Emperour Conſtantinus in the Councel of
Nice, inſtructinge the Biſhoppes there, howe they might beſte debate theire quarrelles,
and ende al ſtriues, ſaithe thus vnto them: Euangelicae & Apoſtolicae Literae,
& Veterum Prophetarum Oracula perſpicuè nos inſtituunt, quid oporteat ſapere de voluntare,
& ſenſu Dei. Ponentes ergo contentionem, ex diuinitùs inſpiraris oraculis quaeramus
ſolutionem eorum, quae proponuntur: The Euangeliſtes and Apoſtles Writinges, and the
ſaieinges of the Olde Prophetes doo clearely inſtructe vs, what iudgemente wee ought to haue
of the meaninge, and wil of God. Therefore ſaieinge a fide al contention, out of thoſe Heauenly
Oracles let vs ſeeke for the aſſoilinge of our queſtions.
                     
                  
                  Socrates alſo touchinge the ſame Councel of Nice, ſaithe thus of the Arian
Heretiques:Socrat. li. 1. ca. 6. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Explicantes Sacroſanctas Scripturas ſaepe illos euertimus: By openinge, and
expoundinge the Holy Scriptures, oftentimes wee ouerthrewe them.
                     
                  
                  Likewiſe S. Auguſtine diſputinge againſte the ſame Arians refuſethe, as I
haue ſaide before, bothe Councelles, and Fathers, and appealethe onely to the
Scriptures: Nec ego Nicenam Synodum tibi, nec tu mihi Ariminenſem debes obijcere:
Scripturarum Authoritatibus, res cum re, cauſa cum cauſa, ratio cum ratione concertet:
Neither wil I allege the Councel of Nice againſt you:
                     
                     Auguſti. contra Maxi. li. 3. ca. 14 
                     nor ſhal you allege the Councel of Ariminum
againſte me. By the Authoritie of the Scriptures let vs weigh mater with mater: cauſe
with cauſe: reaſon with reaſon.
                  
                  
                     Touchinge the Councel holden at Conſtantinople againſt Macedonius, and the
Diuinitie of the Holy Ghoſte, Athanaſius ſaithe,
                     Athanaſ. ad Serapion. Spirit. Sanct. non eſſe Creaturam. 
                           •
                        uagrius. Ne interroges, ſed ſolùm ex Sacris
literis condiſcas. Sufficiunt enim documenta, quae in illis reperias: Neuer mooue queſtion
hereof, but onely learne of the Holy Scriptures. For the onely proufes, that ye ſhal there
finde, are ſufficient (to warrant the Godhed of the Holy Ghoſte). So likewiſe ſaithe
Euagrius of the other twoo Councelles, of Epheſus, and Chalcedon:
                      Ex Euangelicis,
& Apoſtolicis de Domino vocibus ſcimus Viros illos Diuinos conſtituiſſe:
Wee knowe that theſe Godly Fathers concluded this mater by ſuche woordes, as the Euangeliſtes,
and Apoſtles haue vttered of our Lorde.
                  
                  
                     Therefore the Auncient Father Origen ſaithe, Vide quàm propè periculis
illi ſint,Orig. in ca. 16. ad Rom. lib. 10. qui negligūt exerceri in Diuinis Literis: ex quibus Solis examinationis huiuſmodi
agnoſcenda diſcretio eſt: Conſider, in what daunger they be, that haue no care to reade the
Holy Scriptures.
                     Chryſoſt. in Opere imperfec
                        
                           •
                        o, Homi 49. 
                     For by the ſame Scriptures Onely the iudgement of this trial muſt be allowed.
                  
                  
                     Euen ſo ſaithe Chryſoſtome, Etiamſi in ipſis Veris Eccleſijs, quae Dei ſunt, dixerint,

Chriſtum apparuiſſe, nolite eis credere dicentibus iſta de me. Non enim digna eſt
Diuinitatis meae haec notitia: Oſtēdens per haec, quòd ab ipſis ſaepè Veris Eccleſijs excunt
ſeductores. Proptereà ne ipſis quidem credendum eſt, niſi ea vel dicant, vel faciant, quae
conuenientia ſint Scripturis: Yea if they ſaie, that Chriſte hathe appeared in the very true
Churches of God, yet beleeue them not. For this is no woorthy or ſufficient knoweledge of
my Godhed. By this he ſheweth, that out of the very true Churches oftentimes come foor the
deceiuers. Therefore wee maie not beleeue, no not them (that ſpeake vnto vs in the name
of the Churche) onleſſe they ſpeake, and doo ſuche thinges, as are agreeable to the Scriptures.
In like manner againe ſaithe Origen,
                     
                     Orig. in Hiere. Hom. 1. Neceſſe nobis eſt in reſtimonium vocare Sancras
Scripturas. Senſus quippe noſtri, & enarrationes ſine ijs reſtibus non habent fidem:
Wee muſte needes calle to witneſſe the Holy Scriptures: For our iudgementes and expoſitions
without thoſe witneſſes carrie no credit.
                  
                  And, to leaue al other like authorities, that might he alleged, for ſhorte concluſion,Aug. De Naturae & Cratia, ca. 61
S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Solis Canonicis Scripturis ſine vlla recuſatione cōſenſum
debeo: I owe my conſente without gaine ſaieinge
                      (not vnto the Doctours, or Fathers,
but) Onely vnto the Canonical Scriptures.
                     
                  
                  But the Biſhoppes in thoſe Councelles, ſaithe M. Hardinge, brought foorthe,
and folowed the expoſitions of the Auncient Learned Fathers. And wherefore
might they not? What man euer taught, or ſaide the contrarie? Yet notwithſtandinge
they alleged them, not as the fundations, or groundes, but onely as approued,
                        
                           •
                        uagrius libr. 3. Cap. 18 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
and faitheful witneſſes of the Truthe. Whiche thinge if M. Hardinge
happily wil denie, maie eaſily appeare, by the woordes of Cyrillus, pronounced
and publiſhed openly in the Councel of Chalcedon: Gratulamur nobis mutuò, quòd
& noſtrae, & veſtrae Eccleſiae Fidem habent conſentientem, & diuinitùs adſpiratis Scripturis,
& Traditionibus Sanctorum Patrum: Wee reioice togeather eche of vs in others behalfe,
for that the Faithe bothe of our Churches, and alſo of yours, is agreable bothe vnto the
Heauenly inſpired Scriptures, and alſo to the Tradition, and expoſition of our Fathers.
                     
Whiche woordes of Cyrillus beinge hearde, and the conſente of the Fathers being
knowen, the whole Councel for ioye made a ſhoote togeather, Omnes ita credimus,
Papa Leo ita credit, &c. Thus wee al beleeue: Pope Leo thus beleeuethe: Thus beleeuethe
Leo, and Anatolius: Thus Cyrillus beleeuethe: This is the Faithe of our Fathers: This is
the Faithe of the Apoſtles: Thus haue the Apoſtles taught.
                     
                  
                  Thus maye you ſée, M. Hardinge, (wée ſaye not to you, as you doo to vs, If
you be Learned, for thereof we haue no doubte: God graunte, ye maie directe your
Learninge to his glorie) but thus maye you ſee, to what ende the Biſhoppes in the
Councelles, ye ſpeake of, alleged the expoſitions of the Ancient Fathers, and howe
farre they weighed them vnder the Authoritie of the Scriptures. In like ſorte doo
wée alſo this day allege againſt you the manifeſte, and vndoubted, & agreeable iudgementes
of the moſte Aunciente Learned Holy Fathers: and thereby, as by apapproued,
and faitheful witneſſes, wée diſcloſe the infinite folies, and errours of
your Doctrine. And ſéeinge you haue forſaken the felowſhip of the ſaide Holy Fathers,
as hereafter ſhal more 
                        •
                     ully appeare, wée ſaye, vnto you, as Endoxius ſaide
vnto the Heretique Abbate Eutyches in the Councel of Chalcedon: Ye haue remoued
your ſelues, bothe from al Prieſtly Communion, and alſo from the preſence of Chriſte.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 2.
               S.De Vnitate Eccle. ca. 3. Et contra Maximinum Arianorū 
                     
                        •
                     piſ. Li. 3. Cap 14. Auguſtine, when he diſputed againſte Petilian the Donatian
Heretique: Let not theſe woordes, quod he, be hearde betweene
vs: I ſaye, or, you ſaye: Let vs rather ſpeake in this wiſe: Thus
ſaithe the Lorde. There let vs ſeeke the Churche: there let vs boulte
out the cauſe.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Concerninge this place of S. Auguſtine, it ought not to be ſtretched to al maters in general, that
be in queſtion,Manifeſte Vntruthe. as though wee might not vſe the Teſtimonies and Authorities of the Fathers againſte
Heretikes: but it perteinethe onely to the quaeſtion in that booke, De vnitate Eccleſiae, treated of,
whiche is, where the Churche is. Petiliā the Donatiſt, and the Mainteiners of that Hereſie cōtended the
Churche to be onely in Aphrike, or at the furtheſt in Parte Donati, amonge thē onely that helde with
Donatus. The ſame hereſie went they about to proue by Scriptures. But when S. Auguſtine ſawe howe
weake theire proufes were, whiche they brought out of the Scriptures, he prouoked them, the better to
ouerthrow them, to come to the trial of the Scriptures. And in deede where the Scriptures be manifeſte
for proufe of any matter, what nede is there of Doctours? But where the ſenſe of the Scriptures is obſcure,
and may be wreſted by euil wittes to the maintenaūce of an Hereſie, there the expoſitions of the
Fathers by al Olde VVriters haue ben taken of neceſsitie, to ſupplie the Scriptures obſcuritie, and to
declare the ſenſe of the Churche, whiche the Holy Ghoſt hathe prōpted. And in ſutche caſes S. Auguſtine
himſelfe vſethe the Teſtimonies of the Fathers not ſeldome, namely againſt Iulian the Pelagian: VVhere
beſide Scripture, touchinge Original ſinne, he allegethe againſt the Pelagians a great number of Fathers:
and at length in one place ſpeakinge of the Authoritie, reuerence, and credite he had them in,
he ſaithe thus:Contra Iulian
                           •
                         Pelagian. Lib. 1. 
                     Quod credunt, credo, &c: VVhat they beleue, I beleue: what they holde, I holde:
what they teache, I teache: what they preache, I preache. From the ſpecial to the general negatiuely,
the argumente holdethe not, ye knowe, if ye haue not forgotten your Logike.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  M. Hardinge, as wel here, as els where, thinkethe it an eaſy mater, with a
bolde Aſſeueration to ſmoothe his vnlearned ſimple Reader, ſpecially ſutche a one,
as hathe no eies to looke after him. Theſe woordes of S, Auguſtine, ſaithe he, perteine
onely vnto the mater he had then in hande, and therefore maye not be forced
to any other. And here he remembrethe vs of a profounde pointe in Logique, that
a Negatiue Cōcluſion from the Special to the General cannot holde. Here it were
a mater woorthy the hearinge: firſte, howe M. Hardinge coulde enter ſo déepely, to
knowe ſo mutche of S. Auguſtines meaninge: next, for as mutche as in reſpecte of
him ſelfe, he euermore fanſiethe vs to be vnlearned, howe he were hable to teache
vs to knowe the ſame. He aſſuerethe vs vpon his woorde, that theſe woordes of S.
Auguſtine muſte néedes be pounded, and reſtreined to that one onely mater, & maie
not in any wiſe be ſtretched farther: & this, he imagineth, was S. Auguſtines meaninge.
Thus, good Reader, by M. Hardinges handlinge, thou haſte here a meaninge
of S. Auguſtines, that S. Auguſtine himſelfe neuer meante. For S. Auguſtine
in the ſame mater, and againſt the ſame Heretique Petilian, although not
in the ſame Booke, writethe thus:Auguſti. contra Liter. Petilian. Lib. 3. Cap. 6. 
                     Siue de Chriſto, ſiue de eius Eccleſia, ſiue de quacun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
re alia, quae pertinet ad Fidem, vitam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         noſtrā, nō dicam, Si Nos, Sed, ſi Angelus de
Coelo nobis annuntiauerit, praeterquàm quod in Scripturis Legalibus, & Euāgelicis accepiſtis,
Anathema ſit: VVhether it bee of Chriſte, or of his Churche, or of any thinge els what
ſo euer, perteininge either to our life, or to our Faithe, I wil not ſaie, If I mee ſelfe, but if an
Angel from Heauen ſhal teache vs otherwiſe,
                     
                     Gala. 1. 
                     then wee haue receiued in the Bookes of the Lawe,
and in the Goſpelles, holde him accurſed.
                  
                  M. Hardinge ſaithe, S. Auguſtine meante onely of one mater: S. Auguſtine
him ſelfe ſaithe, he meante of al manner maters, touchinge either Faithe, or Life.
                  M. Hardinge ſaithe, S. Auguſtine meante this onely of him ſelfe: S. Auguſtine
him ſelfe ſaithe,De quacunqúe re. Si Angelus de Coelo. be meante it of any other, yea euē of the Angels of God. And
ſhal wee thinke, M. Hardinge knoweth S. Auguſtines meaninge, and S. Auguſtine
him ſelfe knewe it not?
                  Verily S. Auguſtine in an other caſe concerninge the Arians, as I haue touched

twiſe before, likewiſe refuſeth the Determinations of al Councelles, and Fathers,
and ſtandeth onely to the Scriptures:Auguſti. contra Maxi. Li. 3. ca. 14 Neither wil I, ſaithe he▪ allege againſte thee,
the Councel of Nice: nor ſhalt thou allege againſte mée the Councel of Ariminum,
&c.
                  
                     Neither dothe S. Auguſtine onely ſaye thus, but alſo yeeldeth a reaſon, why he
ſaithe it. Theſe be his woordes: Auferantur de medio, quae aduerſus nos inuicem,
non ex Diuinis Canonicis Libris,
                     
                     Augu. Devnita. Iccle. contra Petilian. Cap. 3. 
                     ſed aliundé recitamus. Quaerer fortaſſe aliquis,
Cur vis iſta auferri de medio? Quia nolo humanis Documentis, ſed Diuinis Oraculis Eccleſiam
Sanctam demōſtrari: Haue away al thoſe Authorities, that either of vs allegeth againſt
the other, ſauinge ſutche onely, as be taken out of the Heauenly Canonical Scriptures. But
perhaps, ſomme man wil aſke me. Wherefore would ye haue al ſutche other Authorities put
away? I anſweare, Bicauſe I would haue the Holy Churche to he proued, not by the Doctrines
of menne, but by the VVoorde of God.
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Auguſtine vnto other the Donatiſtes:
                     Augu. in Pſal. 57 
                     Auferantur de medio Chartae
noſtrae: procedat in medium Codex Dei. Audi Chriſtum dicentem: audi Veritatem loquentem:
Take a waie from emongſt vs any our own Bookes: Let the Booke of God comme
emongſte vs. Heare, what Chriſte ſaithe: Herken, what the Truthe ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe, Audi, dicit Dominus: Non, dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius,
                     
                     Augu. in Epiſt. 48
                     aut Hilarius, aut Ambroſius, aut Auguſtinus: ſed, dicit Dominus:
Heare this: The Lorde ſaithe. Heare not this, Donatus ſaithe, Rogatus ſaithe, Vincenius
ſaithe, Hilarius ſaithe, Ambroſe ſaithe, Auguſtine ſaithe: But herken to this, The Lorde ſaithe.
                  
                     In like fourme of woordes ſaithe S. Ambroſe: Nolo nobis credatur: Scriptura
recitetur.Ambroſ. De Incarnat. Domin. Sacramen. ca. 3. Chryſoſt. in 2. ad Corinth. Homi. 3 Non ego dico à me, In principio erat Verbum, ſed audio. Non ego effingo: ſed
lego: I would not, ye ſhould beleeue vs: But reade the Scriptures: I ſaye not of mee ſelfe, In
the beginninge was the Woorde: But I heare it. I make it not: but I reade it.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Chryſoſtome, Oro vos omnes, vt relinquatis, quid huic, aut illi videatur:
& de his à Scripturis haec omnia inquirite:
                      I beſeeche you al, weigh not, what this
man, or that man thinketh: but touching al theſe thinges ſearche the Scriptures.
                  Nowe, where as it pleaſeth M. Hardinge, to telle vs of an Argumente Negatiue
from Special to General, and ſo to cal vs to the remembrance of our Logique:
pleaſeth it him alſo to remēber. that the Argument, that wee grounde of S. Auguſtines
woordes, holdeth not, as it is here imagined, frō Special to General: but frō
the imperfection, and weakeneſſe of the wiſedome of man, to the ſtabilitie, and certainetie
of Goddes Holy Woorde. And therefore the Olde Learned Father Origen
ſaithe,Origen. in Hieremi. Homi. 1. Micro. in Pſal. 86 as it is alleged before, Senſus noſtri, & Enarrationes fine his teſtibus non habent
fidem: Our iudgementes, and Expoſitions without theſe witneſſes
                      (of the Scriptures) haue
no credite. In like ſorte S. Hierome, Quamuis Sāctus ſic aliquis poſt Apoſtolos, quamuis
diſertus ſit, non habet Authoritatem: After the Apoſtles of Chriſte, notwithſtandinge
ſomme man be Holy, notwithſtandinge he be eloquente, yet he wanteth Authoritie.
                      Therefore
S. Auguſtine ſaithe,Auguſt De Peccator. Merit. & R
                           •
                        miſ. li. 1. ca. 22. 
                     Cedamus, & conſenuamus Scripturae Sacrae, quae nec falli poteſt,
nec fallere: Let vs yeeld, and conſente to the Holy Scripture, whiche can neither deceiue, nor
be deceiued.
                      For this cauſe, M. Hardinge, S. Auguſtine not onely in the mater that
laye bitweene him and Pettlianus, but alſo in al other maters what ſoeuer, ſo often
appealed from al Fathers, and Councelles vnto the Scriptures.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 3.
               Likewiſe S. Hierome: Al thoſe thinges (ſaithe he) whiche
without the Teſtimonie of the Scriptures, are holden, as deliuered
from the Apoſtles, be throughly ſmitten downe by the Swerde of
Goddes Woorde.
            
            
               
               M. Hardinge.
               Ye would falne remoue vs from a good hold, I ſee wel, whiche is the Authoritie of the Holy Fa
                     •
                  thers,
of Ancient Traditions, and of the Vniuerſal Churche. Al theſe would ye to be of no force againſt
Heretiques. For ye knowe the Fathers and the Churche to be againſte you, and that ſo longe as they are
beleued, your Doctrine ſhal not be receiued, as alwaies founde to be newe, and of priuate deu
                     •
                  ſe. If we
were driuen from theſe, ye doubt not but to matche vs wel yenough in the Scriptures. And as ye would
handle the mater, I thinke ſo my ſelfe verely. For when al Authoritie and iudgemente of the Fathers
and of the Churche is ſhakē quite of in any cōtrouerſie, by whome ſhal we be tried? By the Scriptures,
ye ſaie. But when bothe ye and we alleage Scriptures to a contrary purpoſe, and when we vary about
the ſenſe of the Scriptures, by whom then ſhal we be iudged? Perhaps ye wil referre the iudgement
of doubtful maters, to the Holy Ghoſte. VVe refuſe not tharbitrement and Vmpierſhip of the
Holy Ghoſte. For the ſame hath ben promiſed by Chriſte to the Churche, to remaine with the Churche
for euer, to teache what thinges ſo euer he ſaide, to lead men into al Truthe.
               And thus for iudgemente and trial of Truthe, we ſhalbe retourned to the Churche and to the Fathers,
by whom the Holy Ghoſte ſpeaketh vnto vs, whoſe Authoritie and due eſtimation ye go aboute to
remooue from vs.
               But let vs ſee, what force ye bringe to driue vs from this holde. Makinge your batterie againſt
it, what ſhoote ye of but VVinde and Paper? Your Artillerie makethe a no
                     •
                   es, but it geueth no blowe.
As in the laſte allegation ye falſified the ſenſe of S. Auguſtine, ſo in this ye falſifie bothe the ſenſe and
woordes of S. Hierome. The woordes, as ye allege them, ſeeme to be ſpoken againſt what ſo euer Tradition,
of the Apoſtles. VVhiche woordes, or any the like to ſutche purpoſe, were neuer vtered by any
Catholike Doctour of the Churche, mutche leſſe by S. Hierome. Looke ye againe and vewe better the
place, ye ſhal ſaye your ſelues, that I finde the faulte of falſefyeinge in you not without cauſe.
               S.Agg
                        •
                     i. cap. 1. Hierome in his Commentaries vpon thoſe woordes of the Prophete Aggaeus, Et vocaui ſiccicitatem
ſuper t
                        ••
                     ram, & ſuper Montes: I haue called the drought to come vpon the Earthe, and
vpon the Hilles, &c. Firſt ſhe winge the literal ſenſe accordingly as the Hebrew woorde there by him
noted, ſignifieth Siccitatem, drought, thē treatinge Myſtically, as the ſeuenty Interpreters haue turned
that woorde into Romphaeam,Gladius. that is a ſwerde, and vnderſtandinge by the ſwerde, the VVoorde of God:
thereof takethe occaſion briefly to ſaie, what this ſwerde doothe, how it deſtroieth the negligent soule,
whiche is expounded to be drie earthe, and howe it plaguethe Montaines that lifte vp them ſelues againſt
the knowledge of God, whereby he meanethe Heretikes. Of whom he tellethe, howe they flatter
the deceiued peoples with theire Breade, Wine, and Oile, (by whiche he meaneth theire Hereſies) as it
were with meates, and drinkes, and refection.
               There Breade (ſaithe he) any man maie very aptly cal it, the Bread of VVaylinge, and theyr VVine,
the madneſſe of Dragons, and the madneſſe of Serpentes incurable: And theire Oile the promiſinge
of Heauenly thinges, wherewith they doo as it were anointe theire Diſciples, and promiſe them rewardes
of theire labours: which the Prophete deteſteth ſayeinge, the Oile of the ſinner ſhal not anoint
my head. After this folowe the woordes of S. Hierome whiche ye haue falſified to the intent they
might ſeeme to ſerue your falſe meaninge. Sed & alia quae abſque Authoritate & Teſtimonijs
Scripturarum, quaſi Traditione Apoſtolica reperiunt at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cōfingunt, percutit gladius Dei.
But the Swerde of God ſtrikethe alſo other thinges, whiche the Heretiques (for of the
                     •
                   he ſpeaketh)
deuiſe and faine of theire owne heades without the Authoritie and witneſſes of the Scriptures, as
though they came by Tradition from the Apoſtles. He that compareth this place with your flſified
allegation, maie ſone eſpie greate oddes betwene them. For ye make S. Hierome to ſaie, that al thoſe
thinges, whiche without the Teſtimonies of Scriptures are holde (ſo your allowed interpreter tourneth,
Aſſeruntur,) as deliuered from the Apoſtles, be throughly ſmitten downe by the Swerde of Goddes
VVoorde. By this Swerde of your Goddes Woorde ye woulde quite ſmite downe al Apoſtolike Traditions
at a blowe. But thanked be God, that your Swerde is a forged Swerde, a paper Swerde, a Swerde
that neither with Edge cutteth, nor with weight beareth downe. S. Hierome putteth not al thinges,
whiche we haue by Tradition from the Apoſtles without the expreſſe Scriptures, to the Swerde of

Goddes Woorde.Scriptures and Doctours. He ſpeaketh not Generally. His woorde is, Alia, other thinges: and ye make it,
Omnia, al thinges. Againe he ſpeaketh of ſutche thinges as be deuiſed and fained by Heretikes,
of theire owne braine, without Authoritie and Teſtimonies of the Scriptures: vnto whiche they geue
Eſtimation, as though they came by Tradition from the Apoſtles. Theſe circumſtances and exaggerations
doo ye omitte, and ſaye, that S. Hierome putteth al Apoſtolike Traditions to that dreadful Swerde
of Goddes VVorde. Nowe what S. Hierome ſaithe, wee holde with it, and allowe it wel. But
your ſaienge we refuſe, as falſely fathered vpon S. Hierome. VVhat he condemneth, we condemne.
Neither can that place be iuſtly alleaged againſte vs: For we inuente not, no fame not any thinges
of our own accorde, or of our owne heades, as though they were deliuered by the Apoſtles beſides the
Scriptures: that is the parte of Heretikes, ſpecially of the Tatians, as in that place S. Hierome
ſaithe. VVe finde, deuiſe, and faine nothinge in the Catholike Religion. We doo but kepe and mainteine
thinges Deuiſed by the Holy Ghoſte, and leafte to the Churche by the Apoſtles, or by Apoſtolike
men, or by the Generall Councelles, whoſe Authoritie is in the Churche moſt healthful, ſaithe S. Auſtine.
But concerninge the force whiche the conſent of the Fathers had in the iudgement of S. Hierome,
it appeareth in his Epiſtle to Euagrius: where, by the Authoritie of the Auncient Doctours before
his time, he proueth againſt an Heretike, that Melchiſedech was a man of the Lande of Chanaan,
and not the Holy Ghoſt.
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie
                  Faine would M. Hardinge haue his Reader beleeue, that wée vtterly deſpiſe al
Holy Fathers. But wée deſpiſe them not, M. Hardinge, as maye partely appeare,
by that wee haue already ſaide. Wée reade theire woorkes: wée reuerence them:
wée geue God thankes for them: wée calle them the Pillers, the Lightes, the Fathers
of Goddes Churche: wée deſpiſe them not. This thinge onely wée ſaye: Were
theire Learninge, and Holineſſe neuer ſo greate, yet be they not equal in credite
with the Scriptures of God.
                  
                     Thus alſo ſaithe S. Auguſtine,
                     Auguſti. contra Creſconi. Gram. Lib. 2. Cap. 29. Auguſt. Ad Hieron. Epiſt. 19. Nos nullam Cypriano facimus iniuriam, cùm eius
qua
                        ••
                     ibet literas, à Canonica Diuinarum Scripturarum Authoritate diſtinguimus:
Wee offer no wronge to S. Cyprian, when wee ſeuer any his Letters, or Writinges, from the
Canonical Authoritie of the Holy Scriptures. And againe, ioininge al the Doctours,
and 
                              •
                           athers togeather, he ſaithe thus:
                      Ipſe mihi pro his omnibus, imò ſupra hos omnes
Apoſtolus Paulus occurrit. Ad ipſum confugio: ad ipſum ab omnibus, qui aliter ſentìunt,
literarum tractatoribus prouoco: In ſteede of al theſe Learned Fathers, or iather aboue
them al, Paule the Apoſtle commeth to my minde. To him I renne: To him I appeale from
al manner Writers (Doctours, and Fathers) that thinke otherwiſe.
                  
                  So likewiſe S. Hierome,Hiero. Ad Tranquillinum, To. 2. 
                     Ego Originem propter cruditionem ſic interdum legendum
arbitror, quomodo Tertullianum, Nouatum, Arnobium, Apollinarium, & nonnullos
Eccleſiaſticos Scriptores Graecos pariter, & Latinos: vt bona eorum eligamus, vitemúſque
contraria: I thinke, that the Auncient Father Origen, in reſpecte of his Learninge, maye be
readde ſometimes, as Tertullian, Nouatus, Arnobius, Appollinarius, and ſundrie other Eccleſiaſtical
VVriters, as wel Greekes, as Latines: that in them wee maye take the good, and flee the
contrarie.
                      Of this iudgemente were S. Auguſtine, S. Hierome, and ſundrie others:
whoſe woordes for ſhortneſſe I paſſe ouer: yet were they not therefore condemned
as deſpiſers of the Holy Learned Fathers. Wée remoue you not, as you ſaye,
from your holde, M. Hardinge. This is nothinge els, but a courrage of your countenaunce.
The Fathers, ye ſpeake of, are againſt you. I truſt, it appeareth already
by your former writinges, that in the Special caſes, that lie bitwéene vs, ye
haue but fewe Fathers to holde by.
                  Ye ſaye, Wée euermore calle you to the Scriptures. This faulte, I hope, is
not ſo hainous. Chriſte hathe commaunded vs ſo to doo: Searche ye, ſaithe Chriſte,
the Scriptures.
                     Iohan. 5. And S. Hilarie ſaithe vnto the Emperoure Conſtantius,

                     Fidem,
                     Interpretation of the Scriptures. 
                     Imperator, quaeris? Audi eam, non denouis chartulis, ſed de Dei Libris:
Doothe youR Maieſtie ſeeke the Faithe? Heare it then, not out of any newe ſcrolles, but out
of the Bookes of God.
                      He is rather to be ſuſpected, that fléeth the light, and wil not
be iudged by the Scriptures.
                  When the Scriptures be darke,Hilarius ad Imper. Conſtantium and doubteful, & are alleged of bothe partes,
then ye ſaie, ye refuſe not the Vmpéereſhip, and iudgemente of the Holy Ghoſte.
But ye adde farther, The Holy Ghoſt is promiſed onely to the Churche. Nowe by
your opinion there is no Churche,Petrus De Palude, De poteſtate Papae, Arti. 4. Heruaeus de poteſt. Papae, ca. 23. but the Churche of Roome. And the Churche of
Roome is no Churche without the Pope: For one of your greate Doctours ſaithe,
Poteſtas Papae ſolius excedit poteſtatem totius reſiduae Eccleſiae: The Popes onely power
paſſethe al the power of the whole Churche biſides:
                      And an other like Doctour ſaithe,
Papa virtualiter eſt tota Eccleſia: The Pope by power, and vertue is the whole Churche:
                     
And thus your reaſon goethe round aboute, à Primo ad vltimum: Ergo, There is neither
Holy Ghoſte, nor Interpretation, or ſenſe of the Scriptures, but onely in the
Pope. This is, Summa Summarum: whiche thinge being graunted, what ſhould
a man ſéeke any farther? The whole mater is at an ende.
                  It is true, As the Scriptures were written by the Sprite of God, ſo muſt they
be expounded by the ſame.2. Petri. 1. Matth. 11. Apoc. 3. Actor. 16. Iohan. 6. For without that Sprite, wée haue neither eares to
heare, nor eies to ſée. It is that Sprite, that openethe, and noman ſhuttethe: the
ſame ſhuttethe, and noman openethe: The ſame Sprite prepared and opened the
Silk womans harte, that ſhée ſhoulde geue eare to, and conſider the thinges, that
were ſpoken by S. Paule. And in reſpecte of this ſprite the Prophete Eſai ſaithe,
Erunt omnes docti à Deo: They ſhalbe al taught of God.
                     
                  
                  
                     But God hathe not bounde him ſelfe, that this Sprite ſhould euermore dwel in
Rome:
                     Eſai. 66. Chryſoſtom. De Sancto & Adorando Spiritu. 
                     but vpon the lowly, and humble harted, that tremblethe at the Woorde of
God. Chryſoſtome ſaithe: Qui propria loquuntur▪ falſò praetendunt Spiritum Sanctū:
                     
They that ſpeake of them ſelues, falſely pretende the Holy Ghoſte. And againe, Si quid
praeter Euangelium ſub titulo Spiritus obtrudatur, ne credamus. Quia ſicut Chriſtus Legis,
& Prophetarum impletio. eſt, ita eſt Spiritus Euangelij:
                      If any thinge be brought vnto
vs vnder the Name of the Holy Ghoſte, biſides the Goſpel, let vs not beleue it. For as Chriſte
is the fulfillinge of the Lawe and the Prophetes: ſo is the Holy Ghoste the fulfillinge of the
Goſpel.
                  Nowe, with what Sprite the Biſhoppes of Rome haue expounded vnto vs the
Holy Scriptures of God, wée ſhal ſhewe it hereafter, as fitter occaſion ſhal require.
                  Here, you ſaye, wée haue corrupted bothe the woordes, and the ſenſe of S. Hierome:
That we haue taken, Omnia, in ſtéede of, Alia: And that you haue diuiſed,
and made nothinge of your ſelues: that S. Hierome meante not heereby the Traditions
of the Apoſtles, but onely the fonde fantaſtes, and dreames of the Heretiques
called Tatians.
                  Of al theſe thinges, wée muſt néedes confeſſe, one thinge is true. In déede wée
tooke, Omnia, in ſtéede of, Alia: and ſo by ouerſight gaue ſome occaſion vnto the
quareler. Howe be it I doubt not, but the indifferente gentle Reader wil ſoone pardonne
that faulte. It procéeded onely of negligence, & not of malice. Notwithſtandinge
this wante maie eaſily be ſupplied by a ſufficient Commentarie.
                        Matt. 15. Omnis. For Chriſte
ſaith, Omnis, plantatio, quam non plantauerit Pater meus Coeleſtis, eradicabitur. Euery
plante, that my heauenly Father hathe not planted, ſhalbe rooted out.
                      Here, M. Hardinge,
ye may borrowe, Omnia, to healpe S. Hierome.
                  
                     Or,
                     Cyprian Lib. 1. Epiſt. 8. Quodcun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           .
                      
                     if this like you not, S. Cyprian maye telle you, Adulterum eſt, Impium
eſt, Sacrilegum eſt, quodcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      humano furore inſtituitur, vt Diſpoſitio Diuina violetur:
It is aduoùterous, it is wicked, it is abominable, what ſo euer is ordered by the raſheneſſe of man,
that Goddes order ſhoulde be broken.
                  
                  
                     
It is true, S. Hierome ſpeakethe not theſe woordes of the Traditions of the
Apoſtles: It is true. Yet, M. Hardinge, he ſpeakethe theſe woordes of ſutche fantaſies,
as were brought into the Churche of God, and magnified vnder the name
and colour of the Traditions of the Apoſtles.Euſeb. li. 3. ca. 28. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Anno. 1548. Illyricus de Sect. Pag. 109. In Confe. Petricouien. De Ceremoniis, Pag. 289. Copus Angl. Dial. 2. Pag. 194. Copus Angl. Dial. 2. Pag. 284. Iohan 16. 2 Cor. 1
                           •
                        
                      So Euſebius ſaithe, The Heretique
Cherinthus brought vs in his owne Monſtrous Diuiſes, vnder the pretenſe of Reuelations,
as written by ſome greate Apoſtle.
                  Sutche, M. Hardinge, be your Inuentions, wherewith ye haue of longe
time deceiued the worlde. One of your companions the Suffragane of Sidon, at
the late diete at Auguſta, in the preſence of the whole Empiere, doubted not to ſaie,
that your whole Canon woorde by worde, euen as it is nowe vſed in your Maſſes,
came directly from the Apoſtles. Your Hoſius of Polonia ſaithe, that the Apoſtles
appointed your orders of Monkes. An other of your ſide ſaithe, Chriſtus Dux, &
Signifer Vitae Monaſticae: Chriſte was the Captaine, and standerd bearer of Monkes life:
                     
Imagininge, I trowe, that Chriſte was an Abbate. And yet afterwarde the ſame
Doctour, either by ſome obliuion, or els vpon ſomme better remembrance, ſaithe
thus: Elias, & Elizaeus D
                           •
                        ces Inſtituti Benedictini: Elias, and Elizaeus were the
firſte Captaines of S. Benettes Order.
                      And you, M. Hardinge, haue tolde vs often, that
ye haue your Priuate Maſſe, your Halfe Communion, and I knowe not what els,
al from the Apoſtles. And al this ye prooue. God wote, by ful ſimple coniectures, bicauſe
Chriſte ſaithe to his Apoſtles, I haue many thinges to ſaye vnto you: but ye are not
hable to beare them yet: And bicauſe S. Paule ſaithe to the Corinthians, I wil order
the reſte, when I comme. Hereby ye beare vs in hande, that al your moſte triflinge
Vanities were brought vnto you by S. Paule euen from the thirde Heauens.
                  And although it were true, that ye ſaie, ye haue not diuiſed theſe thinges of
of your ſelues, but haue receiued them al from the Apoſtles, and Holy Fathers,
whiche thinge your conſcience knowethe to be moſte vntrue, yet notwithſtanding
the ſame thinges ſo receiued ye haue ſithence fouly defaced with ſundry your ſuperſtitions.
Ye haue made them neceſſarie to Saluation: ye haue bounde the people to
them no leſſe then to the Lawe of God: & ſo haue ye made them ſnares of Chriſtian
conſciences. Although the thing it ſelfe came from the Fathers, yet the abuſe therof
came from your ſelues: and for the ſame ye haue taught the people to breake
Goddes expreſſe commaundement.Eſai. 1. Matt. 23. Matt. 16. Thus haue you blended Goddes heauenly wine
with your puddle water: Thus haue ye ſtrained gnattes, and ſwalowed camelles.
This is the very Leauen of the Scribes, & Phariſeis, whiche Chriſte calleth Hypocriſie.
Therfore al be it the thinge it ſelfe, ye haue thus receiued, in reſpecte of
ſubſtance be al one: yet now, beinge thus abuſed, in reſpecte of your Superſtitions,
and deformities, it is not one.
                  The Apoſtles, and Holy Fathers, vſed Oile: yet they vſed it not, as ye
doo, for the Saluation of Body and Soule.
                  Moſes erected vp the Braſen Serpente in the wilderneſſe:Num. 21. Iohan. 3. Ioel. cap. 1. Yet not to be
adoured with Godly honoure, as it folowed afterwarde.
                  God commaunded the people to faſte: yet not with Hypocriſie, as the wicked
faſted. And therefore God ſaithe vnto them, Non eſt hoc leiunium, quod ego elegi:
This is not the faſtinge,
                     
                     Eſai. 1 & 58. 
                     that I haue choſen.
                  
                  God commaunded the people to kepe the Calendes, and Newe Moones: Yet not
with ſutche Superſtition, and Abuſes, as the people kepte them. And therfore God
ſaide vnto them,Eſai. 1. Matth. 23. 
                     Who required theſe thinges at your handes?
                  
                  God commaunded ſundrie Bathinges, and Waſſhinges: yet vnto them, that
moſte preciſely vſed the ſame, Chriſte ſaide: VVoe be vnto you ye Scribes, and Phariſeis:
in vaine they woorſhip mee, teachinge the Commaundementes and Doctrines of
menne.
                  
                  
                     
Yet you, M. Hardinge, haue infeaffed the Apoſtles of Chriſte, not onely with
the Subſtance of the thinges, whiche, ye ſaye, ye haue receiued by Tradition, but
alſo with al your Abuſes, Superſtitions, Corruptions, and Idolatries: whiche ye
haue diuiſed of your ſelues. And therein ye wel reſemble the Tatian Heretiques,
of whome onely, ye ſaye, S. Hierome ſpeaketh. But whether S. Hierome meante
onely, I knowe not what fantaſtical dreames of the Tatians, (as you imagine
onely of your ſelfe, without proufe, in particulare naminge nothinge) or els alſo al
ſutche Superſtitious Vanities, as wee haue often, and iuſtly reprooued in you, it
maye ſoone appeare by theſe woordes immediately folowinge: Omnem laborem
manuum,
                     Hieronym. in Aggae. Cap. 1. 
                     & Ieiunia corum, & obſeruationes varias, & 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , id eſt, humi dormitiones:
Al theire hande Labour, and theire Faſtinges, and their Obſeruations, and Vſages,
and harde Sleepinge on the grounde.
                      Theſe and ſutche other like be the thinges,
whiche, menne imagine, came from the Apoſtles, and are ſtriken & conſumed with
the Swerde of Goddes Woorde.
                  Thus, M. Hardinge, notwithſtandinge your longe Gloſe biſide the Texte, ſéemeth
to be the very meaninge of S. Hierome.
                  Yf ye wil yet force the contrarie, and turne al from your ſelues to the Tatians,
as you doo, the very two lines nexte folowinge muſte néedes make you bluſhe at
your owne errour. The woordes are theſe, Haec autem vniuerſa, quae dixi, poſſunt
de Eccleſiae Rectoribus intelligi: Al theſe thinges, that I haue ſpoken, maye be vnderſtanded
of the Rulers of the Churche.
                      Tel vs nomore therefore, M. Hardinge, of your
Tatians. For S. Hierome him ſelfe telleth you, he meante not onely them, but
alſo the Biſhoppes, and Rulers of the Churche. And a little before he ſaithe,
Inferrur gladius ſuper Montes eleuantes ſe aduerſus ſcientiam Dei: The Swerde of
Goddes Woorde is laide vpon the Mountaines, that lifte them ſelues vp againſte the knowledge
of God.
                     
                  
                  
                     In this ſenſe writeth S.
                     Cyprian. Ad Pompeium. 
                     Cyprian: Si ad Diuinae Traditionis Caput, & Originem
reuertamur, ceſſat omnis error humanus:
                      Yf wee returne to the Head, and beginninge
of our Lordes Tradition, al errour of Man muſte needes geue place.
                  
                     In like ſenſe alſo writeth Tertullian:
                     Tertull. De Praeſcrip. Haere. 
                     Ipſa Doctrina Haereticorum cum Apoſtolica
comparata, ex diuerſitate, & contrarietate ſua pronuntiabit, neque Apoſtoli alicuius
Authoris eſſe, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Apoſtolici: The verie Doctrine of Heretiques compared with the
Apoſtles Doctrine, by the diuerſitie and contrarietie, that is bitweene that, and the other, wil
ſoone pronounce ſentence of it ſelfe, yt neither Apoſtle, nor Apoſtolique man was authour of it.
                  Euen thus it fareth, M. Hardinge, with a greate heape of your Doctrine. Ye
ſaie, ye haue it by Tradition from the Apoſtles. Yet is it vtterly voide of al authoritie,
or teſtimonie of the Scriptures. And therefore, as S. Hierome ſaithe, it
is conſumed & ſtriken downe in the Conſcience of the Godly, by the onely Swerde
of Goddes Holy Woorde, as our eies ſée this daye: and beinge compared with the
Apoſtles Doctrine, (the difference, & contrarietie is ſo greate) it eaſily bewraieth
it ſelfe, as Tertullian ſaithe, that it neuer came from any Apoſtle, nor from any
other Apoſtolique Doctour of the Churche.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 4.
               S. Ambroſe alſo to Gratian the Emperour: Let the Scripture
(ſaithe he) be aſked the queſtion, lette the Prophetes be aſked,
and let Chriſte be aſked. For at that time made the Catholique
Fathers and Biſhoppes no doubte, but that our Religion mighte
be prooued out of the Holy Scriptures. Neither were they euer ſo
hardy to take any for an Heretique, whoſe errour they coulde not euidently
and apparantly reprooue by the ſelfe ſame Scriptures.

And wee verily doo make anſweare on this wiſe, as S. Paule did:
Accordinge to this waye whiche they calle Hereſie, wee doo woorſhippe
God, and the Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte: and doo
allowe al thinges whiche haue benne written either in the Lawe, or
in the Prophetes, or in the Apoſtles Woorkes.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Gratian the Emperour bucklinge him ſelfe as it were to encounter with the Heretike, at the
firſte he geueth meaninge to al to be ware of him, for that he endeuoureth to prooue his falſe Doctrine,
(namely for the firſt pointe, that the Sonne is vnlike the Father) Verſutis diſputationibus,
                     Cap. 2.
VVith ſuttel and craftie reaſoninges. He alleageth to that purpoſe, S. Paule to the Coloſsians, Cauere
ue quis vos depraedetur pes Philoſophiam: Beware that no man ſpoile you through Philoſophie,
and vaine deceit, &c. For (ſaithe be) theſe Heretikes put al the force of theire poiſons in
Logike, or Dialectical diſputation, whiche by the opinion of Philoſophers is deſined, not to haue
power to prooue, but an earneſt deſire to deſtroie and diſproue. Hauinge geuen this holeſome warninge,
leſt him ſelfe might ſeeme to vſe that, whiche he counſelleth others to beware of: to withde
awe the Emperour and al other from the guileful Logike of Arius,Ambreſ. De Fide Lib. 1. Cap. 4. at his firſte entrie he ſaithe: I
wil not that thou geue credite, Holy Emperour, to argument, and to our Diſputation, (then folowe
the woordes. Whereof the Defenders take holde,) Scripturas interrogemus, &c. Let vs aſke
the Scriptures, let vs aſke the Apoſtles, let vs aſke the Prophetes, let vs aſke Chriſte: VVhat neede
many woordes? let vs aſke the Father, &c.
                  And to this pointe of our beleefe, whiche is very highe and ſecrete, is that ſayinge of S. Ambroſe
to be reſtrained. But that for confirmation of the Truthe in pointes whiche be nearer to common
ſenſe, and for confutation of thoſe Hereſies whiche be of leſſe ſubteltie, of whiche ſorte theſe Goſpellers
groſſe errours be, to this ende that wee ought not to vſe the Teſtimonies of the Holy Fathers
againſt Heretikes,Vntruthe. (for whiche purpoſe they alleage this place:) S. Ambroſe neither in al that Booke,
neither in al his woorkes ſpeaketh ſo muche as one woorde.
                  But contrarie wiſe in ſundry places of that woorke be alleageth the auctoritie of the Nicene
Councel, as a Teſtimonie of good force againſt the Arians, and declareth a diuine Myſterie to haue
benne ſignified by ſuche ſpecial number of the Fathers there aſſembled: Sayinge, Sic nempe noſtri
ſecundum Scripturas dixerunt Patres: Euen thus, accordinge to the Scriptures, haue the
Fathers ſaide. Seruemus Praecepta maiorum, &c. Let vs keepe the Preceptes of our Forefathers,
neither with Temeritie of rude boldnes let vs breake the Hereditarie Seales, (he meaneth the Doctrine
ſealed by the Fathers, and left to the poſteritie as it were by Heritage). VVhiche of vs wil
be ſo hardy, as to vnſeale the Prieſtly Booke, ſealed by the Confeſſours, and nowe conſecrated with
the Martyrdome of many a one? Lo heare ye not SirsNothing. howe muche S. Ambroſe is againſt you?
                  And though he ſaye, touchinge this Myſteries Let vs aſke the Scriptures, Apoſtles, Prophetes, and
Chriſte: yet thereby dothe he not quite exclude the Fathers. He ſaithe not, let vs reiect the Fathers.
The Scriptures and the Fathers be not contrary: and therefore thallowinge of them, is not the diſalowinge
of theſe. VVho ſo euer maketh this argument,Vntruth. whiche in your VVoorde is implied, The
Scriptures are to be aſked, Ergo, the Holy Fathers are not to be aſked, maketh a fooliſhe argument.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The greatteſt forte hereof is anſweared already. S. Ambroſe, ye ſaye, by this
appeale to the Scriptures, excludeth not the iudgement of the Learned Fathers,
but onely the cau
                        ••
                     lations, and ſubtileties of Philoſophers and Sophiſters. For
S. Ambroſe him ſelfe is the ſame treatie often allegeth the Authoritie of the Fathers.
Al this, M. Hardinge, is true in deede▪ Notwithſtandinge there is a
certaine ſecrete Vntruthe lapped in it. For S. Ambroſe allegeth the Fathers,
not as Groundes, or Principles, or Fundations of the Faithe: but onely as Interpreters,
or Witneſſes, or Conſenters vnto the Faithe: Whiche thinge of our

parte was neuer denied. Nowe, whether S. Ambroſe meante thus,Scriptures and Doctours. or no, let S.
Ambroſe him ſelfe he the Iudge.Ambr. Ad Cratia. De Fide, li. 1. His woordes be theſe, Sic nempe noſtri ſecundum
Scripturas dixerunt Patres: Thus haue our Fathers ſaide (not of them ſelues, but) accordinge
to the Scriptures. He allegeth the Fathers, not as hauinge ſufficient credite
and ſubſtance in them ſelues, but onely as Expounders, and Interpreters of the
Scriptures.
                  
                     So ſaithe the godly Father Athanaſius:
                     Athanaſ. De Humanitate Verbi. 
                     Nos iſta Hauſimus à Magiſtris diuinitùs
afflatis, qui Sacros Libros euoluerunt: Theſe thinges haue we learned of our Maiſters
(or Fathers) inſpired from Heauen, whiche haue Readde and peruſed the Holy Scriptures.
For S. Auguſtine very wel ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. Contra Creſconi. Gramma. Li. 2 Ca. 29. Hierony. in Epiſto. ad Epheſ. Lib. 3. Cap. 5. 
                     Secundum hos Libros de coeteris Literis, vel Fidelium,
vel Infidelium liberè iudicamus: Accordinge to thoſe Bookes of the Scriptures
wee iudge frankely of al other writinges, whether they be of the Faitheful, or of the Vnfaitheful.
Therefore S. Hierome ſaithe, Omni ſtudio legendae nobis ſunt Scripturae,
& in Lege Domini meditandum die ac nocte: vt probati trapezitae ſciamus, quis numus
probus ſit, quis adulterinus:
                      Wee muſte Reade the Scriptures with al diligence, and muſte
bee occupied in the Lawe of our Lorde bothe daie and nighte: that wee maye become perfite
exchangers, and be hable rightly to diſcerne, what Monie is lawful, and what is Counterfaite.
S. Hilarie ſaithe, Hoc proprium eſt Apoſtolicae. Doctrinae, Deum ex Lege, ac Prophetis
in Euangelijs praedicare:
                     
                     Hilari. in Pſal. 65. This is the very order of the Apoſtles Doctrine, in the Goſpel
to Preache God out of the Lawe and the Prophetes.
                  
                     Otherwiſe, touchinge the diſcourſe of natural reaſon, S. Ambroſe ſaithe, No
Creature either in Earthe, or in Heauen is hable to reache the deapthe of theſe
thinges. Thus he ſaithe: Mens deficit: Vox ſilet, non mea tantùm, ſed Angelorum.
Supra poteſtates,
                     
                     Ambro. ad Gratianum de Fide, Lib. 1. Cap. 5. 
                     ſupra Angelos, ſupra Cherubim, ſupra Seraphim, ſupra omnem ſenſum
eſt: The minde is aſtonned: the voice faileth, not onely mine, but alſo of the Angelles.
It is aboue the powers, aboue the Angelles, aboue the Cherubius, aboue the Seraphins, and aboue
al manner vnderſtandinge. And therefore he ſaithe, as it is alleaged once before,
Nolo nobis credatur: Scriptura recitetur:
                     
                     Ambroſ. De Incarnationis Dominicae Sacracramen. Ca. 3. 
                     Non ego dico à me, In principio erat
Verbum, Sed audio: I woulde not, ye ſhoulde beleeue mee: Lette the Scriptures be
readde: I ſaye not of mee ſelfe, In the beginninge vvas the VVoorde:
but I heare it ſpoken. And againe he ſaithe in the ſame Booke vnto the Emperour
Gratian:
                     Ambroſ. ad Gratian. Imperator. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. 
                     Faceſſat noſtra Sententia: Paulum interrogemus: Let our Iudgemente ſtande
aparte: and let vs aſke S. Paule the queſtion.
                  
                     But M. Hardinge ſaithe, VVhoſo euer maketh this argumente, whiche in your VVoorde
is implied, The Scriptures are to be aſked: Ergo, the Holy Fathers are not to be aſked, maketh a
fooliſhe argumente.
                  It ſeemeth no greate pointe of Wiſedome, M. Hardinge, to vpbraide others
with folie without cauſe: God encreaſe bothe you and vs in al wiſedome, and vnderſtandinge
in Chriſte Ieſu. How be it, our Argumente, howe ſo euer it hathe
pleaſed you to faſhon, and to handle it, as we meante it, and made it, had no ſutche
Folie. Wherefore, what ſo euer Folie is nowe come to it, it is your owne: it is
not ours. For wée denie not the Learned Fathers expoſitions, and iudgementes
in doubteful caſes of the Scriptures. Wée reade them our ſelues: Wée folowe
them: Wée embrace them: and, as I ſaide before, wée moſte humbly thanke God
for them. But thus wée ſaie, The ſame Fathers opinions, and iudgementes, for
as mutche as they are ſometimes diſagréeable one from an other, and ſometimes
implie contrarieties, and contradictions, therefore alone, and of them ſelues, without
farther authoritie, and guidinge of Goddes Woorde, are not alwaies ſufficient
Warrantes to charge our Faithe. And thus the Learned Catholique Fathers
themſelues haue euermore taught vs to eſteeme, and to weighe the Fathers.
                  
                     The Ancient Father Origen ſaithe thus, as it is reported before; Ex Solis

Scripturis examinationis noſtrae diſcretio petenda eſt: The diſcuſsinge of our Iudgemente,
muſte be taken Onely of the Scriptures. And againe,
                      Senſus noſtri, & enarrationes
ſine Scripturis teſtibus non habent fidem:Origen. in Epiſt. ad Roma. Lib. 10. Cap. 16. Ex Solis. Origen. in Hieremt. Homi. 1. Auguſt. De Natura & Gratia, Ca 61. 
                     Our Iudgementes, and Expoſitions without
witneſſe of the Scriptures haue no credite. Likewiſe S. Auguſtine,
                      Ego Solis Canonicis
Scripturis debeo ſine vlla recuſatione conſenſum: My conſent without exception
I owe (not vnto any Father, were he neuer ſo wel learned, but
                     ) Onely to the Holy
Canonical Scriptures. His reaſon is this:
                      Nam cùm Dominus 
                        •
                     acuerit, quis noſtrum
dicat, Illa, vel illa ſunt? Aut ſi dicere audet, vnde probat? For where as the Lorde him
ſelfe hath not ſpoken, who of vs can ſaie, It is this, or that? Or if he dare ſaie ſo, howe can
he prooue it?
                  
                  
                     And therefore he concludeth directly and in like woordes with S. Ambroſe:
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 96. Auguſt. De Paſtorib. Ca. 14.
                     Ego vocem Paſtoris inquiro. Lege hoc mihi de Propheta: Lege de Pſalmo: Recita de
Lege: Recita de Euangelio: Recita de Apoſtolo: I require the voice of the Shephearde:
Reade me this mater out of the Prophete: Reade it mee out of the Pſalmes: Reade it
out of the Lawe: Reade it out of the Goſpel: Reade it out of the Apoſtles.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 10. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wherefore if wee he Heretiques, and they (as they woulde faine
be called) be Catholiques, why doo they not, as they ſee the Fathers,
whiche were Catholique men, haue alwaies donne? Why doo they
not conuince and maiſter vs by the Diuine Scriptures? Why doo
they not calle vs againe to be tried by them? Why doo they not
laye before vs, howe wee haue gonne awaye from Chriſte, from the
Prophetes, from the Apoſtles, and from the Holy Fathers?
               Why ſticke they to doo it? Why are they afraide of it? It is Goddes
cauſe: Why are they doubteful to commit it to the trial of Goddes
Woorde? Yf wee be Heretiques whiche referre al our controuerſies
vnto the Holy Scriptures, & reporte vs to the ſelfe ſame Woordes,
whiche wee knowe were ſealed by God him ſelfe, and in compariſon
of them, ſette litle by al other thinges, what ſo euer maye be diuiſed
by menne, how ſhal wee ſaye to theſe folke, I praye you: what manner
of men be they, and howe is it meete to calle them, whiche feare
the iudgement of the Holy Scriptures, that is to ſaie, the Iudgement
of God him ſelfe, and doo preferre before them theire owne
dreames, and ful colde inuentions: and to maintaine theire owne
Traditions, haue defaced and corrupted nowe theſe many hundred
yeeres the ordinances of Chriſte, and of the Apoſtles?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVe doo ſo. For they condemned thoſe that went againſt the Tradition of the Fathers, and ſo
doo wee.Iohan. 14. The Scriptures conſiſte not in inke and paper, but in the ſenſe. VVhiche ſenſe the Holy
Ghoſte by Chriſtes promiſe hath taught the Churche.
                  Epiphanius refutinge the Heretikes whiche named them ſelues Apoſtolikes,Haereei. 61. Scripture neſdeth Speculatiō. Traditiō neceſſa
                           •
                        ie, bicauſe Scripture hathe not al thinges. Recognition. Lib. 10. ſaithe, that the Scriptures
haue neede of Speculation that is to witte, to be wel ſtudied and conſidered) to the ende the
force and power of euery argument maye be knowen. It behoueth vs alſo (ſaithe he) to vſe the Tradition:
For wee can not haue al thinges of the Holy Scripture. Thus Epiphanius. By Tradition
without doubte he meaneth the ſenſe and vnderſtandinge receiued of the Fathers. For that is the Keie
of the VVoorde of God, as S. Peter taught, by report of S. Clement. This ſenſe and vnderſtandinge
of the Lawe had the Miniſters of the Lawe, to whome the Traditions of Moſes and of the Elders
came as it were by handes. Nowe wee require you to admitte this Tradition, that is to ſaye, the

Catholike ſenſe and vnderſtandinge of the Scriptures, whiche hathe benne deliuered vnto vs by the
Holy Fathers of al Ages, and of al Countries, where the Faithe hath benne receiued. And then we
wil calle you againe to be tried by the Scriptures.
                  This haue the Catholikes layde before you oftentimes, and this doo we ſhewe you in this Confutation.L
                           •
                        c. 10.
He that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth mee, ſaithe Chriſte of his Churche. Ye deſpiſe the Catholike
Churche, and therefore ye deſpiſe Chriſte.
                  What neede ſo many queſtions Sirs? Your hote Rhetorike ſheweth more courage in woorde,
then Victorie in deede. Ye calle vs foorthe to the Scriptures,Great bragges made by the Defenders, of thaſſurance of the Scriptures. as it were to the fielde. Ye ſtrike
vs downe with woordes, before ye come to encounter. To ſhewe your brauerie in the mo
                        •
                     ſtre, ye
referre your controuerſies vnto the Holy Scriptures, ye reporte you vnto the woordes ſealed by God
himſelfe: but we the Catholikes, as ye pretende, ſticke at it: we be afraide of it, we doubte of th
                        •
                     
mater, we feare the Iudgement of Holy Scriptures, we preferre our owne dreames and colde inuentions.
VVel, nowe that ye haue tolde your luſty tale, heare our ſober anſweare. Often
                        •
                      times the
true Scriptures are ſtretched foorthe to ſerue euil and falſe purpoſes. The Iewes went about by the
Scriptures to prooue, that Chriſte was not ſo muche as a I
                        •
                     ophete.Iohan. 7. For they ſaide,Vntruth: For the vvoordes are othervviſe. Searche the Scriptures,
and ſee, that a Prophete riſeth not out of Galiley. By the Scriptures they would needes ſhewe
him woorthy to die.Iohan. 19. We haue a Lawe, quod they, and by our Lawe he ought to die, becauſe he
hath made him ſelfe the Sonne of God The Diuel by alleaginge Scripture, would haue deceiued our
Sauiour him ſelfe, and ſaide vnto him: Scriptum eſt,
                     Matth. 4. De Fide. li. 2. c. 
                           •
                         Marke. 10. It is written. The Arians were ful of the
Scriptures, and by the ſame, as S. Ambroſe writeth, went about to prooue, that Chriſte the author
of al goodneſſe was not good. It is written, quoth they, Nemo bonus niſi vnus Deus, None is
good, but onely God. Likewiſe the Macedonians, the Neſtorians, the Eutychians.
                  Now in this caſe, your ſelues dooinge the like, what may wee doo better, then honour the Scriptures,
and ſeeke for their right Senſe and Vnderſtandinge? Scriptum eſt, It is Scripture (ſaith S.
Ambroſe to the allegation of the Arians) I acknowlege, but the letter hath not the errour: woulde
God the Arians interpretation had not. Apices ſine crimine ſunt, ſenſus in crimine. The letters
be without crime: the ſenſe is in crime.Hilari. De Trinita. Li. 
                           •
                        . From the vnderſtanding commeth Hereſie, not from the Scripture:
the ſenſe, not the woorde, becommeth to be a crime, ſaith S. Hilary, Sithens then al ſtandeth in
the ſenſe, let vs agree firſt vpon the ſenſe and interpretation of the Scriptures: and then if we be not
as ready as ye, come foorth when ye liſte, vpbraide vs hardely, and ſay luſtely, as here ye doo, why
ſticke they to doo it? why are they afraide of it?
                  As for the true ſenſe and interpretation of the Scriptures, where ſhal wee finde it, but, as before
wee ſaide,Matthae 7. Iohan. 4. Eſai. 59. in the Catholike Churche? The Churche hauinge Chriſte remaininge with it al daies
to the ende of the worlde, hauinge by promiſe of Chriſte the Sprite of truethe, remaininge in it for
euer, hauing by Goddes owne ancient promiſe bothe the woordes, whiche the Father hath put in the
mouthe of Chriſte, and the Sprite whiche he putte in him, whereby it may vnderſtand the meaninge of
Goddes woordes: wee maie not now ſeeke for the true ſenſe, vnderſtanding, and interpretation of
the Scriptures any where, but in the Churche. Your owne Doctour Iohn Caluine him ſelfe▪
                     In Epiſt. ad H
                           •
                        
                        braeos. whom ye
folowe and eſteeme ſo mutche, admoniſheth very wel, and ſaithe, it is ſpecially to be noted, that out of
the Churche there is no light of the ſounde vnderſtandinge of the Scriptures. This ground beinge
laide, on whiche eche parte muſt ſtande and be tried in, crowe no more againſte vs, boaſt your ſelues no
more:Vntruthe. VVe feare not the iudgement of the Holy Scriptures. Nay it is your ſelues, that feare this iudgment.
For your owne conſcience telleth you that on this ground ye are the weaker ſide. Yf ye ſtande
with vs on this grounde, ye ſhal neuer be able to defende your Maiſter Iohn Caluines doctrine touchinge
Baptiſme,Vntruthe. For he debaſeth not the Sacrament of Baptiſme whiche h
                        •••
                     aketh to be of ſo litle force, againſt the manifeſt Scripture: Let euery
one of you (ſaithe S. Peter) be Baptized in the name of Ieſus Chriſte, to Remiſsion of Sinnes.
Keepinge this groundeVntruth. ye ſhal be borne from your Doctrine touchinge Abſolution, denyinge the
Prieſte to haue power to abſolue penitentes by his Prieſtly Auctoritie, but by Preachinge the Goſpel
to them, contrarie to the plaine Scripture: VVhoſe Sinnes ye 
                        •
                     orgeue, they are forgeuen to
them: VVhoſe ye retaine, they are reteined. Yf ye refuſe not this grounde, ye ſhal be forced to reſtore
the Sacrament of extreme Vnction▪ and the vſe of Holy Oyle againe, whiche ye haue abandoned.
                  
                     
For what haue ye to ſaye againſt the Scripture,Iacob. 5. It any ſicke amonge you? Let him cauſe the Prieſtes
of the Churche to come in to him, anointinge him with Oile, in the name of our Lorde? Ab
                        •
                     dinge in
this grounde, ye ſhal be driuen to forſake your Zwinglian doctrine, whiche putteth Signes and Figures
I onely in the Sacrament of the Aultar, for the True and Real Body of Chriſte there 2 preſente.Three and dente Vntruthes.
contrarie to the 3 cleare Scripture, This is my Bodie. Beinge on this grounde, ye ſhal ſoone geue
ouer the maintenance of the Doctrine of your ſpecial Faithe, and of your Iuſtification by Faithe
onely,Iacob. 2. as beinge contrary to the plaine Scripture, Man is iuſtified by woorkes, and not by Faithe onely.
To conclude (for, to ſhewe in howe many pointes ye maye be confuted by euident Scriptures, it
were in maner infinite) if ye wil admitte this for a good grounde, as ye midſte needes admitte: then
ſhal ye not mainteine the Preſumptuous Doctrine of your certaintie of Grace and Saluation, contrary
to that S. Paule counſelleth,Philip. 2. VVith feare and tremblinge woorke your Saluation.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Whereas wée make reaſonable requeſt
                        •
                     , that God maye be vmpéere in his
owne cauſe, and that al our controuerſies maye be iudged, and tried by the Holy
Scriptures, M. Hardinge thereto anſweareth thus: The Scripture ſtandeth not
in the Wordes, but in the Senſe: and the ſame Senſe is continued by Tradition
in the Churche. Otherwiſe, he ſaithe, the Iewes, the Arians, the Neſtorians,
the Eutychians, and al other Heretiques were alwaies hable to claime by the
Scriptures. To conclude, he maketh vp a greate emptie heape, of the force of Baptiſme,
of Holy Oile, of Extreme Unction, of Abſolution of Signes, of Figures, of
Onely Faithe, and, as it liketh him to calle it, of the Preſumptuous Doctrine of
the Certainetie of Saluation: in euery of whiche thinges, he ſaithe, the Scriptures
are cleare of his ſide, and directly againſt vs.
                  To anſwears al theſe pointes in particulare, it would require an other Booke.
But briefely to touche ſo mutche onely, as ſhalbe néedeful, Firſt, that the Subſtance
of the Scriptures ſtandeth in the right Senſe, and Meaninge, and not onely
in the naked, and bare woordes, it is true, and generally graunted without exception,
and needeth no farther proufe.Hiero
                           •
                        y. contra Luciferian. Hilari. De Triuitate, Li. 4. S. Hierome ſaithe, Non in Legendo, ſed
in Intelligendo Scripturae conſiſtunt: The Scriptures ſtande, not in the Readinge, but in
the Vnderſtandinge.
                      And S. Hilarie, Non Diuinorum dictorum, ſed intelligentiae
noſtrae à nobis ratio praeſtanda eſt: Wee muſte yeelde an accoumpte, not of Goddes Diuine
Woordes, but of our owne Expoſitions.
                     
                  
                  But if that onely be the right Meaninge, and Senſe of the Scriptures, that
within theſe fewe late hundred yéeres is cropen into the Churche of Rome: and if
it be al Goſpel, what ſo euer it bée, that arriueth from thence: and if they be al Heretiques,
and Schiſmatiques, and Deſpiſers of Chriſte, and of the Apoſtles, and of
the Uniuerſal Churche, that make ſtaie at it, or cānot receiue it, then is the whole
mater already concluded: wée ſhal néede no more adoo.
                  Ye ſaie, The Iewes, the Arians, the Neſtorians, and other Heretiques alleged
the Scriptures. Yea verily, M. Hardinge, and that euen with like Faithe, and in
like Senſe, and to like purpoſe, as you allege them nowe: as hereafter, I truſte, it
ſhal appeare. By the waye, for example hereof, in this very place, where you allege
the woordes of the Phariſe is auouchinge the Scriptures,Iohan. 7. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Chryſoſtom. Auguſtinus. it maye pleaſe you to remember,
that either witingly, or of ſome errour, and ouerſight, ye haue manifeſtly
corrupted the Scriptures. For, whereas you haue tranſlated the place thus,
Searche the Scriptures: the Phariſeis ſaide nothinge els, but Scrurare, & Vide,
Searche, and see:
                      and ſpake not one woorde of the Scriptures. And although the
mater importe not mutche, yet to charge you with your owne rule, whiche muſte
needes be good againſt your ſelfe, any ſmal faulte in Goddes Woorde muſt be counted
greate. In deede S. Chryſoſtome, and S. Auguſtine ſéeme to ſupplie this

woorde, Scriptures, although it were not in the Texte.
                  
                     Touchinge the mater it ſelfe,
                     Oile. Figure. Signe. 
                     Nicolas Lyra ſaithe,
                     Nicol. Lyra in 7. Cap. Iohan. Hoe Verbum eorum ſimpliciter
falſum eſt. Quia, ſi intelligatur de Prohetis generaliter, aliqui fuerunt nati de
Galilaea: videlicet, Elizaeus, Tobias, & Debora Prophetiſſa, & fortè plures alij;
This woorde of the Phariſeis is plainely falſe. For if it be taken generally of al Prophetes,
then were there certaine of them borne in Galilei, namely Elizaeus, Tobias, Debora, and perchance
others moe. In ſutche ſorte, M. Hardinge, euen with like Faithe and credite,
you alſo haue vſed, to allege the Scriptures.
                     
                  
                  But whereto driue you al this longe tale? Wil you in the ende conclude thus:
The Iewes, and Heretiques alleged the Scriptures: Ergo, Faitheful Chriſtians
maye not allege them? Or thus, Théeues haue ſometimes armed them ſelues:
Ergo, True menne maye not be armed? Nay, wée maye rather ſaye thus vnto
you: The Iewes, and Heretiques alleged the Scriptures: What accoumpte then
maye wée make of you, that flée, and condemne, and burne the Scriptures?
                  Certainely notwithſtandinge the Phariſeis,Iohan. 5. and Heretiques wickedly miſalleged
the Scriptures, as ye ſometimes doo to ſcrue your purpoſe, yet for al that,
Chriſte ſaide vnto them, Scrutamini Scripturas: Searche the Scriptures:
                      And,Cap. 9. Diuiſi. 
                           •
                        
                      as it is
ſaide before, the Catholique learned Fathers in al theire caſes, and controuerſies
appealed euermore to the Scriptures.
                  Where you ſaye, The Scriptures are ſo cleare of your ſide▪ and make ſo directly
againſte vs: would God ye woulde in deede, and vnfainedly ſtande to that trial.
Your fanſies, and folies woulde ſoone come to grounde.
                  Touchinge your greate heape of examples, of the Sacramente of Baptiſme
defaced, as you ſaye, by M. Caluine: of Abſolution, of Extreme Unction, of Holy
Oile, of Signes, of Figures, of Onely Faithe, & of the certainetie of Saluation,
whiche you calle Preſumptuous: Firſte of the Sacramente of Baptiſme, M. Caluine
euery where writeth with al manner reuerence, callinge it a Diuine, and an
Heauenly Myſterie, and the Sacramente of our Redemption: Wherein alſo ſometimes
he iuſtly reprooueth you, for that ye haue ſo many waies, ſo profanely, and
ſo vnreuerently abuſed the ſame. Of Abſolution wée ſhal haue occaſion to ſaye
more hereafter.
                  Touchinge your Oile, in déede in ſhewe of woordes, S. Iames ſéemeth to make
ſomewhat for you. Notwithſtandinge neither doothe he calle it Holy Oile, as ye
doo: neither doothe he calle it a Sacramente of the Churche: nor doothe he ſaye, as
ye ſaie, it ſhould ſerue for the Saluation of Body, and Soule: nor doothe he teache
you to ſalute it, and to ſpeake vnto it, as to a liuely, and reaſonable Creature, Aue
Sanctum Oleum, Alhaile Holy Oile:
                      nor with theſe woordes to miniſter it vnto the
ſicke: Per hanc Sanctam Vnctionem, & ſuam pijſsimā Miſericordiam, ignoſcat tibi Deus:
By this Holy enointinge, and his deere mercie, God Pardonne thee.
                      To be ſhorte, it was a
miraculous gifte of Healinge, laſtinge onely, as other like Miracles did, for the
time: not a neceſſary Sacramente of the Churche to continewe for euer.
                  As for the Obiection of Signes, and Figures, for ſhortneſſe of time,The. 12. Article. I muſte referre
thée, gentle Reader, vnto my Former Replie to M. Harding. The woordes of
Chriſte, whiche are thought to be ſo plaine, the Anciente Learned Father Tertullian
expoundeth thus:Tertullian. contra Marcion. Lib. 4. Figure. Signe. 
                     Hoc eſt Corpus meum: Hoc eſt, Figura Corporis mei: This is
my Body: that is to ſaye, This is a Figure of my Body.
                      Likewiſe S. Auguſtine, Non
dubitauit Dominus dicere, Hoc eſt Corpus meum, cùm daret Signum Corporis ſui:
Our Lorde doubted not to ſaye, This is my Body, when he gaue a Signe of his Body.
                     
                  
                  To rehearſe al other like Ancient Authorities, it were too longe. O what triumphes
would M. Hardinge make, if none of al the Olde Learned Fathers coulde
be founde, that euer had called the Sacrament, the Signe, and Figure of Chriſtes
Body? But, as before he alleged an imagined Senſe of the Scriptures without

woordes,Onely Faithe. ſo nowe he allegeth the woordes alone without ſenſe. He ſhoulde haue
remembred better, that S. Hierome ſaithe, Ne putemus,
                     Hierony in 
                           •
                        
                        piſt. ad Gala. Cap. 
                           •
                        . 
                     in Verbis Scripturarum eſſe
Euangelium, ſed in Senſu: Let vs not thinke, the Goſpel ſtandeth in the VVoordes of
the Scriptures, but in the Meaninge.
                     
                  
                  Twoo other greate quarelles M. Hardinge moueth: the one of Onely Faithe:
the other, as he calleth it, of the Preſumptuous Certainetie of Saluation.
Wherein iudge thou vprightly, good Chriſtian Reader, how iuſte cauſe he hath to
reprooue our Doctrine.
                  As for the firſte hereof,Roma. 
                           •
                        . S. Paule ſaithe, Iuſtificamur Gratis ex Gratia ipſius:
Wee be Iuſtified Freely of his Grace: wee Iudge that a man is Iuſtified by Faithe, without
the VVorkes of the Lawe: Wee knowe, that a man is not Iuſtified by the VVoorkes of the
Lawe, but by the Faithe of Chriſte.
                      M. Hardinge wil ſaie, Yet hitherto of, Sola
Fides, that is, of Onely Faithe, wée heare nothinge. Notwithſtandinge, when
S. Paule excludeth al manner Woorkes biſides Onely Faithe, what els then leaueth
he, but Faithe alone?
                  How be it, if it be ſo horrible an Hereſie, to ſaye, Wée be Iuſtified before God
by Onely Faithe, that is to ſaie, Onely by the Merites & Croſſe of Chriſte, let vs
ſée, what the Holy Learned Fathers of the Churche ſo many hundred yéeres agoe,
haue taught vs thereof.
                  
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſ. in 
                           •
                        
                        piſt ad Roman. Cap 4. 
                     Iuſtificati ſunt Gratis, quia nihil Operantes, neque vicem reddentes,
Sola Fide Iuſtificati ſunt dono Dei: They are Iuſtified Freely: Bicauſe woorkinge
nothinge and requitinge nothinge,Ambroſ. Eodē loco they are Iuſtified by Onely Faithe through the gifte of
God. Againe, Sic decretum eſt à Deo, vt, ceſſante Lege, Solam Fidem Gratia Dei poſceret
ad Salutem:
                      This was Goddes determination, that, the Lawe ſurceaſinge, the Grace
of God ſhoulde require Onely Faithe vnto Saluation.Ambroſ. in Epiſt. ad Roma. Ca. 9. Baſil. De Humintlitate: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Theodorer. De Curandis Graecorum affectibus. Lib. 7. Nazia
                           •
                        . 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Origen. in Epiſt. ad Roma. C
                           •
                        . 3. Li. 3. Heſychi. in Leuiti. Li. 4. Chryſoſt. in Epiſt ad Galat. Cap. 3. 
                     And againe, Sola Fides poſita eſt ad
Salutem:
                      Onely Faithe is ſaide, or appointed vnto Saluation. S. Baſtle ſaithe, Nouis
ſe eſſe inopem Verae Iuſtitiae: Sola autem Fide in Chriſtum eſſe Iuſtificatum:
                      He knoweth
him ſelfe to be voide of True Righteouſneſſe: and to be Iuſtified by Onely Faithe in Chriſte.
                  
                     Theodoretus ſaithe, Non vllis Operibus noſtris, ſed per Solam Fidem Myſtica bona
conſequuti ſumus:
                      Not by any VVoorkes of ours, but by Onely Faithe we haue gotten
the Myſtical good thinges.
                  
                     Nazianzenus ſaithe, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Credere ſolum eſt Iuſtitia:
Onely Beleeuinge is Righteouſneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Origen ſaithe, Vbi eſt gloriario tua? Excluſa eſt. Dicit ſufficere Solius Fidei Iuſtificationem:
ita vt credens quis Tantūmodo Iuſtificetur, etiāſi Nihil boni Operis fecerit:
                     
VVhere nowe is thy boaſtinge (of thy good Woorkes)? It is ſhutte out. Paule ſaithe,
that the Iuſtification of Onely Faithe is Sufficiente: So that a man Onely Beleeuinge maye
be Iuſtified, although he haue donne no good woorke at al.
                  
                     Heſychius ſaithe, Gratia ex Miſericordia, atque Compaſsione praebetur, & Fide
comprehenditur Sola:
                      The Grace of God is geuen onely of Mercie, and Pauoure: and is
embraced, and receiued by Onely Faithe.
                  I leaue a greate number of others, that haue written the like, as wel Gréekes,
as Latines. In ſteede of them al, S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe thus: Illi dicebant, Qui
Sola Fide nititur, Execrabilis eſt: Hic contrà demonſtrat, eum, qui Sola Fide nititur, Benedictum
eſſe: They ſaide, who ſo ſtaieth him ſelfe by onely Faithe, is accurſed: Contrar
                              •
                           ewiſe
S. Paule prooueth, that who ſo ſtayeth him ſelfe by Onely Faithe, he is Bleſſed.
                     
                  
                  Touchinge the woordes of S. Iames, yf M. Hardinge wel conſidered the Equiuocation,
or double vnderſtanding of this woorde, Iuſtification, he might ſoone,
and eaſily haue eſpied his owne errour.Roma. 4. For when S. Paule ſaithe, Abraham was
Iuſtified by Faithe without VVoorkes of the Lawe, he teacheth vs, how Abraham was
receiued into fauour, and Iuſtified before God: Of the other ſide, S. Iames, when

he ſaithe,Certainetie of Faithe. 
                     Abraham was Iuſtified by VVoorkes, and not by Faithe Onely, he ſpeaketh of
the woorkes that folowe Iuſtification, & of the Fruites of Faithe: Without whiche
Fruites Abrahams Faithe had benne no Faithe.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Non ſunt contrariae duorum Apoſtolorum Sententiae,Auguſt. in. Li 83. quae. Quae. 76. Iacob. 5. Pauli,
& Iacobi: Cùm dicit Paulus, Iuſtificari hominem ſine Operibus: & Iacobus dicit, inanem
eſſe Fidem ſine Operibus. Quia Paulus loquitur de Operibus, quae Fidem praecedunt:
Iacobus de ijs, quae Fidem ſequntur: The ſaieinges of the twoo Apoſtles, Paule, and Iames
are not contrarie, where as Paule ſaithe, A man is Iuſtified without Woorkes: and Iames
ſaithe, Faithe without Woorkes is in vaine. For Paule ſpeaketh of the VVorkes that goe
before Faithe: James ſpeaketh of the VVorkes, that folowe after Faithe.
                  
                  
                     Yf M. Hardinge ſhal thinke, S. Auguſtines authoritie herein is not ſufficient,
Thomas of Aquine wil auouche ye ſame. His woordes be theſe:
                     Thomas Aquin. in Epiſt. Iacobi. Cap. 5. Iacobus hic loquitur
de Operibus ſequentibus Fidem: quae dicuntur Iuſtificare, non ſecundum quod Iuſtificare
dicitur Iuſtitiae infuſio: ſed ſecundum quod dicitur Iuſtitiae Exercitatio, vel Oſtenſio,
vel Conſummatio. Res enim dicitur fieri, quando perficitur, vel innoteſcit: Iames in this
place ſpeaketh of ſutche woorkes, as folowe Faithe: whiche woorkes are ſaide to Iuſtifie, not
as Iuſtification is the procuring of Righteouſneſſe: but in that it is an Exerciſe, or a shewinge,
or a Perfitinge of Righteouſneſſe. For wee ſaye, A thinge is donne, when it is perfited,
or knowen to be donne.
                  
                  
                     Nowe concerninge the aſſurance, or Certainetie of Saluation, the Scriptures
are fulle. S. Paule ſaithe, There is no damnation to them that be in Chriſte Ieſu:Roma. 8. The
Sprite of God beareth witneſſe to our Sprite, that wee are the Children of God: I knowe, that
neither Deathe, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Powers, nor Principalities, nor thinges preſente,
nor thinges to come, nor Highth, nor Deapthe, nor duy Creature els ſhalbe hable to remooue
me from that Loue, that God beareth to wardes mee in Chriſte Ieſu our Lorde.
                  But for as mutche as theſe woordes perhaps haue not the Senſe of the Churche
of Roome, without whiche, in M. Hardinges iudgemente, the Scripture of God is
no Scripture, let vs ſée the Senſe, and Expoſition of the Holy Fathers.
                  
                     Tertullian ſaithe, Vt certum eſſet, nos eſſe Filios Dei, miſit Spiritum ſuum in corda
no
                              •
                           tra clamantem,
                     
                     Tertull. Contra Marcion. Lib. 5. 
                     Abba, Pater. That wee might be certified, that we bee the Children
of God, he hath ſente the Holy Ghoſte into our hartes, crieinge, Abba, Father.
                  
                     Clemens Alexandrinus ſaithe,
                     Clemens in Paedagogo. li. 1. c. 6. 
                     Re vera Sanguis Fidei eſt Spes, in qua continetur,
vt Fides in anima. Cùm autem Spés expirauerit, perinde acſi ſanguis effluxerit, vltalis
Fidei facultas diſſoluitur: In deede Hope is; as it were, the Bloudde of Faithe: in
whiche Faithe Hope is conteined, euen as Faithe is conteined in the Soule. And when
Hope is gonne, then is al the Liuely power of Faithe diſſolued, as if the Bloudde were
ſheadde out of the Body.
                  
                     S Cyprian ſaithe, Et tu dubitas, & fluctuas? Hoc eſt Deum omnin
                              •
                            non noſſe:
                        Cyprian. De Mortalita. Sermon. 4.
                        Hoc eſt Chriſtum Credentium Magiſtrum peccato incredulitatis offendere: Hoc eſt,
in Eccleſia conſtitutum, Fidem in Domo Fidei non habere:
                      And dooſte thou ſtagger,
and ſtande in doubte (of thy Saluation)? That were as mutche as not to knowe God: that
were as mutche as with the sinne of vnbeliefe, to offende Chriſte the Maiſter of Beleeuers:
That were as mutche as beinge in the Churche, in the Houſe of Faithe, to haue no Faithe.
                  
                     Proſper ſaithe,
                     Proſper, De promiſs & Praedictionib. Dei. Par. 1. Ca. 16. 
                     Securi diem Iudicij expectant, quibus in Cruce Domini gloriantibus
mundus Crucifixus eſt, & ipſi Mundo: They, vnto whome the worlde is Crucified,
and are Crucified vnto the worlde, waite for the daye of Iudgemente without
feare.
                  
                     But to leaue the Ancient Fathers of olde time, and to put the mater quite
out of doubte, One Antonius Marinarius in the late Councel of Tridente in
open audience ſaide thus: Si Coelum ruat, ſi Terra euaneſcat, ſi Orbis illabatur praeceps,
                     
                     Concil. Tridentin. Act. 1. Anno. 1546.
                     ego in eum erectus ero. Si Angelus de Coelo aliud mihi perſuadere contendat,

dicam illi Anathema.
                     Certainetie of Faithe. 
                     O Foelicem Chriſtiani pectoris fiduciam: Yf the Heauen ſhoulde
fal, yf the Earthe ſhoulde vaniſhe, yf the whole worlde ſhoulde come downe headlonge,
yet woulde I ſtande preſte, and bolde before God. Yf an Angel from Heauen woulde tel
mee otherwiſe, I would accurſe him. O the Bleſſed truſte (and certainetie) of a Chriſtian
Harte.
                  Certainely, M. Hardinge, it were a very Preſumptuous parte, to ſaye, that
theſe Fathers, Greekes, Latines, Newe, Olde, your owne, and ours, were al
Preſumptuous. Yf it be ſo Preſumptuous a mater to put affiance in the Merites
of Chriſte, what is it then, to put affiance in our owne Merites? S. Paule hath
taught vs to ſaye,Galat. 6. Baſil in Pſal 32. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     God forebidde that I ſhoulde glorie, but onely in the Croſſe of Chriſte.
S. Baſile ſaithe, Qui non fidit ſuis Meritis, nec expectat ex Operibus Iuſtificati, Vnā,
& Solam ſpem habet ſalutis ſuae, Miſericordias Domini: Who ſo truſteth not in his owne
Merites, nor looketh to be Iuſtified by his owne Woorkes, hath his onely hope of Saluation in
the Mercies of our Lorde.
                     
                  
                  So ſaithe Iob in al his miſeries, Etiamfi me occiderit, ſperabo in eum. Veruntamen
vias meas in conſpectu eius arguam:
                     Iob. 13. Pſalm. 70. 
                     Although he kiſſe mee, yet wil I put my truſt in
him: Notwithſtandinge I wil reprooue my waies before his ſighte. So y• Prophete Dauid,
In thee O Lorde haue I truſted: I wil neuer be confoūded. This is no Preſumption, but a
patiente, and an humble waitinge for the Redemption of the Children of God. It
is moſte true,Philip. 2. that S. Paule ſaithe, Wee muſt woorke our owne Saluation with feare,
and tremblinge. But this feare riſeth in conſideration of our owne weakeneſſe, and
vnwoorthineſſe: not of any diſtruſte, or doubte in Goddes mercie. But rather the
leſſe cauſe wée finde to truſte in our ſelues, the more cauſe wée haue to truſte in
God.Auguſt. De verbis Domi. Sermo. 28. Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Praeſume, non de Operatione tua, ſed de
Chriſti Gratia. Gratia enim ſaluati eſtis, inquit Apoſtolus. Non ergo hic Arrogantia
eſt, ſed Fides. Praedicare quod acceperis, non eſt Superbia, ſed Deuotio: Preſume
thou, not of thine owne woorkinge, but of the Grace of Chriſte: For the Apoſtle ſaithe,
Ye are ſaued by Grace. Heere therefore is not Preſumption, but Faithe. To proclaime that
thou haſte receiued, it is no Pride, it is Deuotion.
                     
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. in Iohan. Tracta. 22. Baſil. De humilitate: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Non mea Praeſumptione, ſed ipſius Promiſsione in iudicium non
venio: It is not of my Preſumption, but of his Promiſſe, that I ſhal not comme into Iudgemente.
S. Baſile ſaithe,
                      Paulus Gloriatur de contemptione Iuſtitiae ſuae: Paule (preſumeth,
and) boaſteth of the contempte of his owne Righteouſneſſe. So ſaithe S. Ambroſe:
                     
Non gloriabor, quia iuſtus ſum: ſed quia redemptus ſum, gloriabor: Non quia
vacuus ſum à peccatis, ſed quia mihi remiſſa ſunt peccara. Non gloriabor, quia profui,
neque quia profuit mihi quiſquam: ſed quia pro me Aduocatus apud Patrem Chriſtus
eſt: ſed quia pro me Chriſti Sanguis effuſus eſt: I wil not glorie, for that I am a iuſte
man: But for that I am redeemed, th
                           •
                        refore wil I glorie: Not for that I am voide of
ſinne:
                     Ambroſ. de Iacabo, & vita Beata. 
                     but for that my Sinnes be forgeeuen mee. I wil not glorie, for that I haue donne good
to any man, nor for that any man hath donne good to wee: but for that Chriſte is my Aduocate
with the Father, and for that Chriſtes Bloudde was ſhead for mee.
                  
                  
                     Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. Confeſſ. Lib. 11. Cap. 7. 
                     Quid retribuam Domino, quo'd recolit haec memoria
mea, & anima mea non meruit inde? VVhat ſhal I re
                        •
                     der vnto our Lorde, for
that I calle to remembrance al theſe my sinnes, and yet my Soule thereof is not afraide?
                  
                     To be ſhorte, thus ſaithe S. Bernarde:
                     Bernard. in Cā
                        ti. Cantico. Sermo. 61. Vbi tura firma
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      infirmis ſecuritas, & requies,
niſi in vulneribus Saluatoris? Tant
                        •
                      illic ſecurior hab
                        •
                     to, quant
                        •
                      ille potentior
eſt ad ſaluandum, &c. Peccaui peccatum grande: turbatur conſcientia, ſed non perturbabitur:
quoniam vulnerum Domini recordabor. Nempe vulneratus eſt propter iniquitates
noſtras: What ſafe teaſte or ſur
                           •
                        tie can the weake Scule finde, but in the
w
                           •••
                        des of our Saueour? As he is mightier to ſaue, ſo dwel I there with more ſafetie &c.
I haue committed a greate Since: My conſcience is troubled: Yet ſhal it not bee ſhaken downe:

bicauſe I wil remember my Lordes woundes.
                     Eſai. 53. 
                     For he was wounded for our Sinnes.
                  
                  Thus, M. Hardinge, to be aſſured of our Saluation, S. Auguſtine ſaithe, it
is no arrogante ſtouteneſſe: It is our Faithe. It is no Pride: It is Deuotion. It is
no Preſumption: It is Goddes Promiſſe.
                  
                     But your whole Doctine of the truſte in Mennes Merites leadeth directly to
Deſperation. And therefore S. Cyprian ſaithe wel of you:
                     Cyprian. De Simpli. Praela. Aſſerunt Noctem pro
Die: Interitum, pro Salute: Deſperationem; ſub obtent Spei. Perfidiani, ſub praetex
                        •
                     u Fidel:
Antichriſtum, ſub vocabulo Chriſti: They teach
                           •
                         vs Nighte in ſteede of Daie: Dei
ſtruction in tleede of Healthe: Deſperation vnder the coloure: of Hope: Infidelitie vnder the
pretenſe of Faithe: Antichriſte vnder the name of Chriſte.
                  
                  Nowe a litle to viewe the groundes of M. Hardinges longe diſcourſe: whereas
he ſo often and ſo earneſtly telleth vs of the Senſe of the Scriptures, as if wee had
Scriptures without Senſe, his meaninge thereby is onely to leade vs awaye to
the Senſe of the Churche of Rome:Alberius Piggh. Hierar. li. 1. ca. 4. Ecki
                           •
                        s De Eccleſia. Whiche Senſe, Albertus Pigghius ſaithe, Is
the Infallible, and Inflexible Rule of Truthe. Echius ſaithe, Scriptura, niſi Eccleſiae
Authoritate, non eſt Authentica: The Scriptures of God are not Authentical, or of credite,
but onely by the warrante and Authoritie of y• Churche.
                      And Hoſius in like manner,
Apoſtoli,
                     Hoſius in Confeſsione vetricouien. Ca. 80. 
                     cùm Symbolum traderem, nunquam dixerunt, Credo Sancta Biblia, aut
Sanctum Euangelium: ſed dixerunt, Credo Sanctam Eccleſiam: The Apoſtles, when
they deliuered the Crede, they neuer ſaide, I beleeue the Holy Bible, or the Holy Goſpel:
but they ſaide, I beleeue the Holy Churche.
                      Thus nowe the mater is ſure yenough
for euer. Wee haue neither Scriptures, nor Senſe of Scriptures, but onely
from Rome.
                  I wil not here reporte the vnſauerie Senſes, that they haue imagined of the
Scriptures. One example, or twoo for a taſte maye be ſufficient. Pope Boniface
ſaithe thus,De Maior. & Obedien. Vnam Sanctam. Pſalm. 8. Antonen. in Summa, Par. 3. Titu. 22. Ca. 5. Hebraeo. 2. 
                     Ecce duo Gladij h
                           •
                        c: Beholde here are twoo Swerdes: That is to ſaye, The
Pope hath the power bothe of the Spiritual Swerde, and of the Temporal.
                     
                  
                  An other ſaithe: Omnia ſubieciſti ſub pedibus eius, id eſt, Papae: Pecora campi, id
eſt, homines viuentes in terra: Piſces maris, id eſt, animas in Purgatorio: Volueres Coeli,
id eſt, animas Beatorum: Theſe woordes S. Paule applieth onely vnto Chriſte,
meaninge thereby, that God hath auanced him aboue al Powers, & Dominions,
and that al thinges are ſubiecte vnto him. But the Romaine Senſe is far otherwiſe:
Thou haſte made al thinges ſubiecte vnto him, that is to ſaye, to the Pope: The Cattaile
of the Fielde, that is to ſaye, Menne liuinge in the Earthe: The Fiſhes of the Sea,
that is to ſaye, the Soules in Purgatories The Birdes of the Heauens, that is to ſaye, the Soules
of the Bleſſed in Heauen. I leaue M. Hardinges owne peculiar Expoſitions,M. Hard. in his Former Anſweare. Artic. 2 M. Hardinge 
                           •
                         Articulo. 2. & 10. Drinke
ye al of this, that is to ſaye, as he geathereth in Concluſion, Drinke ye not al of
this: It is the Subſtance, that is to ſaye, It is the Accidens.
                  
                     By ſutche prety Senſes, I wil not ſaie, as S. Hierome ſaithe, De Euangelio
Chriſti facitis hominis Euangelium, aut, quod peius eſt, Diaboli:
                      Of the Goſpel of
Chriſte, ye make the Goſpel of a Man: or, that is woorſe, the Goſpel of the Diuel: I
wil not ſo ſaye:
                     Hieronym. in Epiſ. ad Gala. Cap. 1 
                     But thus maye I ſaye with the Prophete Eſal, Ye make Lighte
Darkeneſſe: and Darkeneſſe Lighte.
                  
                     Yet muſte wée néedes beléeue, vpon M. Hardinges Woorde, that the Scripture
without the Senſe of the Churche of Rome is no Scripture.
                     Eſai. 5. Hoſius de expreſſo Verbo Dei. 
                     And therefore Haſius
ſaithe, Si quis ha
                        •
                     eat interpretationem Eccleſiae Romanae de loco aliquo Scripturae,
etiamſi nec ſciat, nec intelligat, an, & quomodo' cùm Scripturae verbis conueniat, tamen
habet ipſiſsimum Verbum Dei: If a man haue the expoſition of the Churche of
Rome, touchinge any place of the Scriptures, although he neither knowe, nor vnderſtande,
whether, and howe it agreeth with the woordes of the Scripture, yet he hath the verie
Woorde of God. So ſaithe
                      Rabbi Abraham Hiſpanus,Rabbi Abrahā. 
                     ſpeakinge of the expoſitions
of the Rabbines, Licet videantur nobis verba noſtra eſſe vera, & recta, nobis tamen

                     Veritas abijcienda eſt in terram: quia Veritas cum illis eſt: Not withſtanding
                        •
                      our
Expoſitions ſeeme to vs neuer ſo True, and righte,Scripture, Traditiō. yet muſte wee throwe our. Truthe to the
grounde: For the Truthe in deede is with them. Lyra likewiſe reporteth the common
opinion the Iewes had of their Rabines:
                     Lyra. in Deuteron. Cap. 17. 
                     Recipiendu
                           •
                        r eſt, quicquid hoc modo
proponatur, etiamſi dicant Dextrant eſſe Siniſtram: Wee muſte needes receiue, what ſo
euer they laye vnto vs, yea although they tel vs, The Righte hande is the Lefte.
                  
                     Nowe, gentle Reader, that thou maiſte the better ſee the conſtancie, and certainetie
of theſe Senſes, and Expoſitions, whereunto M. Hardinge laboureth ſo
earneſtly to haue thee bounde, it maye pleaſe thee to conſider theſe woordes of Nicolaus
Cuſanus ſometime Cardinal in the Churche of Rome:
                     Nicolaus Cuſanus De Author. Eccle. & Cōcil. Supra, & Con. Scripturam. 
                     Non eſt mirum, ſi
Praxis Eccleſiae vno tempore interpre
                           •
                        atur Scripturam vno modo: & alio tempore, alio
modo. Nam lntellectus currit cum Praxi. Intellectus enim, qui cum Praxi concurrit,
eſt Spiritus Viuificans. Sequuntur ergo Scripturae Eccleſiam, & non è conuerſo:
It is no marueile, though the Practiſe of the Churche expounde the Scriptures at one time one
waye, and at an other time an other waie. For the vnderſtandinge, or Senſe of the Scriptures
renneth with the practiſe: and that ſenſe ſo agreeinge with the practiſe is the quickeninge
Sprite. And therefore the Scriptures folowe the Churche: but contrariewiſe the Churche foloweth
not the Scriptures. For ſutche kindes of Expoſitions of the Scriptures, S.
Hilarie ſaide ſometime vnto the Arians, Fides ergo temporum magis eſt, quàm Euangeliorum:
                     
The Faithe therefore foloweth the time, and not the Goſpel.
                  
                     This is the Senſe of the Churche of Rome, whereby onely M. Hardinge willeth
vs to meaſure, and to weighe the Woorde of God. But the Ancient Father
Origen ſaithe,
                     Origen. in Matthae. Homil. 25. Sicut omne Aurum, quodcunque fuerit extra Templum, non eſt Sanctificatum:
ſic omnis Senſus, qui fuerit extra Diuinam Scripturam, quamuis admirabilis
videatur quibuſdam, non eſt Sanctus: quia non continetur à Senſu Scripturae: As what
ſo euer Golde is without the Temple, is not Sanctified: ſo what ſo euer Senſe is without the
Holy Scripture, although vnto ſome it ſeeme wounderful, yet is it not Holy, bicauſe it is not
conteined in the Senſe of the Scripture.
                  
                  
                     To conclude, where as M. Hardinge ſaithe, wee cannot vnderſtande the Scriptures
without Tradition, the ancient Father Irenaeus ſaithe, This is one
ſpecial marke, whereby wee maye knowe an Heretique: Theſe be his woordes:
Haeretici cùm arguuntur ex Scripturis,
                     
                     Ire
                           •
                        a. Li. 3. ca. 2. 
                     in accuſationem Scripturarum conuertuntur, quaſi
non rectè habeant, nec ſint ex authoritate, & quòd variè fint dictae, & quòd ex his non
poſsit inueniri Veritas ab illis, qui Traditionem neſciunt: Heretiques, when they be reprooued
by the Scriptures, they falle to the accuſinge of the Scriptures, as though either they
were not wel and perfite, or wanted authoritie, or were doubtefully vttered: or that they
that knowe not the Tradition, were neuer hable by the Scriptures to finde out the Truthe.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 10. Diuiſion. 2.
               Menne ſaie, that Sophocles the Tragical Poete, when in his old
daies he was by his owne Sonnes accuſed before the Iudges, for a
dotinge and ſottiſhe man, as one that fondely waſted his owne Subſtance,
and ſeemed to neede a gouernour, to ſee vnto him: to the intent
he might cleere him ſelf of the faulte, he came into the place of Iudgemente,
and when he had rehearſed before them his Tragedie called
Oedipus Colonaeus, whiche he had written at the very time of his
accuſation, marueilous exactely & cunningly, did aſke the Iudges
in his owne behalfe, whether they thought any ſottiſhe or dotinge
man coulde doo the like peece of Woorke. In like manner, bicauſe
theſe menne take vs to be madde, and appeache vs for Heretiques,
as menne whiche haue nothinge to doo, neither with Chriſte, nor

with the Churche of God, wee haue iudged it ſhould be to good purpoſe,
and not vnprofitable, if wee doo openly and frankely ſet foorthe
our Faithe wherein wee ſtande, and ſhewe al that confidence whiche
wee haue in Chriſte Ieſu: to the intent al menne maye ſee, what is our
iudgement of euery parte of Chriſtian Religion: & maye reſolue with
them ſelues, whether the Faithe whiche they ſhal ſee confirmed by
the Woordes of Chriſte, by the Writinges of the Apoſtles, by the Teſtimonies
of the Catholique Fathers, and by the Examples of many
ages, be but a certaine rage of Furious and madde menne, and a conſpiracie
of Heretiques. This therefore is our beliefe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The compariſon whiche ye make betweene your ſelues and Sophocles, gladly we admitte. Yet we
acknowledge, that as in many respectes ye are like, ſo in ſome vnlike. Sophocles was a Poet, that is to
ſaie, a fainer, and deuiſer of thinges, that be not true, but fabulous: Ye alſo are fainers, and deuiſers
of nouelties, and folowers of Newe deuiſes, that be falſe. Sophocles was a Tragicall Poet: ye are Tragical
Diuines. A Tragedie ſetteth foorthe thouerthrowes of Kingdomes, Murder of Noble Perſonages,
and other greate troubles, and endethe in woful lamentations. Your Goſpel inuadeth Chriſtes Heauenly
Kingdome the Churche, it murdereth ſoules bought with a moſte deere price, it cauſethe a helliſhe garbotle
in mennes conſciences, in the ende it bringethe to euerlaſtinge weepinge and gnaſſhinge of
teethe. VVe take you not to be madde. VVould God ye were not woorſe then madde. VVere ye
madde, ye ſhould be tied vp. Els were ye ſuffered to goo abroad, for feare folke would flie from you. And
then ſhould ye doo little hurte. Nowe whiles ye offer venemous kiſſes with ſugered lippes, whiles ye
couer woluiſhe crueltie vnder Lambes Skinnes, whiles ye hurte vnder pretēce of benefite, wounde vnder
colour of a medicine, begyle vnſtable Soules with reſemblance of Truth: neither ſtinte ye to woorke
miſchiefe, nor others can beware of you.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  O M. Hardinge, Sophocles him ſelfe, if he were aliue, were not hable with al
his eloquence to expreſſe the Tragical dealinges of your Companie. Your whole
life,Marti. Ruceru
                           •
                        . Paul. Phagius. and Religion is nothinge els, but a Tragedie. You haue ripte vp the graues,
and digged out the deade, and practiſed your crueltie vpon the poore innocente
cackeſſes.
                  Your Pope Stephanus tooke vp Formoſus his predeceſſours Body, chopte of
his forefingers,Platina in Stephano. 6. Sabellicus, Ennea. 9. Lib. 2. Sabellicus, Enneade 9. Lib. 9. Beno Cardinalis cut of his heade, and threwe out the naked carkeſſe into Tiber.
                  Your Pope Iohn the twelfth cut of one of his Cardinales right hand, and an
others noſe.
                  Your Pope Vrbanus the ſixth thruſt fiue of his Cardinales aliue into ſackes,
and threwe them into the ſea.
                  Your Pope Hildebrande poiſoned ſixe other Popes his predeceſſours, to make
him ſelfe roome to the Holy Seate. They are ſo ſkilful there, in theſe feates, that
noman can telle, neither what to flie, nor what to take: nor whom to doubte, nor
whom to truſte. They haue conueighed theire poiſon, I wil not ſaie into theire
meates, or drinkes, for that is ouer groſſe, & Common, but euen into theire Maſſe
Bookes, into the Sacramente, into the Chalice. Camotenſis one of theire owne
ſide ſaithe wel of them:Heb 9. Agrippa. De Vaeni. Scientiaru
                           •
                        
                      
                     Sine Sanguinis effuſione nō ingrediuntur in Sancta Sanctorum:
VVithout ſheaddinge of Bloude they enter not into that Holy place, the Holy of Holies.
                     
                  
                  Howe be it, what ſpende I theſe woordes? It is not poſſible to ſaye al, that maie
be ſaid. They haue inflamed Warres: they haue raiſed the Subiectes againſt theire
Princes: They haue armed the Sonne againſt the Father: They haue ouerthrowen
Ci
                        •
                     ties, and Countries: They haue depoſed Kinges: They haue ſette theire
feete on Emperours neckes.
                  
                     
Theſe maters,Madde. M. Hardinge, be Tragical in déede. And herein ſtandeth thē
whole practiſe, and Policie of your Churche of Rome.
                  Where you thinke your ſelfe a ſober man, in that you can ſo eaſily calle vs
madde, and woorſe then madde, you maye remember, that this kinde of eloquence
emōgſt you is Anciente, and Catholique, and maie wel ſtande with your Religion.
For ſo the Falſe Prophete Semeias ſaide,Hierem. 29. 4. Regum. 19. that Hieremte the Prophete of God
raued, and was ſtarke madde. So the wicked ſaide vnto Iehu, of Elizeus the Prophete,
What hath this madde Bedlem Body to doo with thee? Euen ſo they ſayde
of Chriſte,Marci. 3. Augu. in Pſal. 6. That he was madde, and ſpake in furie, be knewe not what. S. Auguſtine
ſaithe of S. Paule: Incidit in iſtorum ſacrilegam dicacitatē: & ab eis, qui ſanari
nolunt, vocatur inſanus: S. Paule is fallen into theire curſed raiſinge: and of them, that
wil neuer be made ſober, is called a madde man.
                      So ſaithe the Auncient Father Origen,
of Celſus the wicked Heathen:Origen. contra Celſum. Lib. 4. 
                     Videamus igitur nos, qui iuxta hunc inſanimus: Let vs
therefore confider hereof, that in this mannes iudgemente are ſtarke madde.
                     
                  
                  But, M. Hardinge, wherein are wee ſo madde? or what tokens of madneſſe
haue wee ſhewed? Can noman either ſpeake the Truthe, or diſcloſe your errours,
without madneſſe? But, I trowe, it is euen as S. Hierome ſaide ſometime:
Delirabat,
                     Hiero. Ad Pammachi. contra errores Iohan. Hieroſolymit. Leo in Epiphan. Sermo. 5. Augu. in Pſal. 33. 
                     ſcilicet, qui in ruo Regno contra tuam ſententiam loquebatur: He raued, and
was madde, no doubte, that within thy Dominion ſpake any thinge againſt thy minde.
                      So
ſaithe Leo, Inſarris Magiſtris Veritas ſcandalum eſt, & Coecis Doctoribus fit caligo,
quod lumen eſt: Vnto Frantique Maiſters the Truthe is a ſclaunder: and vnto Blinde Doctours
the light is becomme Darkeneſſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Auguſtine of kinge Dauid: Inſanire videbatur: Sed Regi Achis inſanire
videbatur, id eſt, ſtultis, & ignorantibus:
                      Dauid ſeemed madde: But vnto Kinge
Achis be ſeemed madde, that is to ſaye, vnto fooles, and idiotes.
                  As for our parte,Actor. 26. wée remember, what anſweare S. Paule made vnto Feſtus
in the like caſe: O good Festus, I am not madde: but I vtter vnto thee, the woordes of
Truthe,
                     Hiero. in Epitaphio Paulae. 
                     and Sobrietie. Therefore we may comforte our ſelues, as the Vertuous Gentlewoman
Paula did, when ſhe was likewiſe ſuppoſed to be madde: Nos ſtulti propter
Chriſtum: Sed ſtultum Dei ſapientius eſt hominibus: wee are iudged fooles (and madde
folkes) for Chriſtes ſake: But the fooliſheneſſe of God is wiſer their menne.
                     
                  
                  
                     But,
                     Cyprian. ad Cornelium. 
                     M. Hardinge, S. Cyprian wil telle you thus: Haec eſt, Frater, Vera dementia,
non cogitare, nec ſcire, quòd mendacia non diu fallant: noctem tam diu eſſe, quàm diu
illuce ſcat dies:
                      O my Brother, this is madneſſe in deede, not to thinke, or knowe, that (your)
Lies cannot longe deceiue vs: and that it is Night no longer, but vntil the Daye ſpringe. This
in deede is very madneſſe. And therefore Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Qui in manifeſtam foueam
cadit, non negligens dicitur, ſed inſanus:
                      Who ſo falleth into a pitte, that liethe wide open,
is not ſaide to bee negligente, but ſtarke madde.
               
            
            The ende of the firſte parte.
         
         
            
            The Seconde parte.
            
               The Apologie, the firſt Chapter,
Diuiſion. 1.
               
                  WEe beleeue,span
                        •
                     
                   that there is one certaine Nature and Diuine
Power, whiche wee calle God: and that the ſame
is diuided into Three equal Perſons, into the Father,
into the Sonne, and into the Holy Ghoſte: and
that they al be of one power, of one Maieſtie, of one
Eternitie, of one Godhed, and of one Subſtance. And
although theſe Three Perſons be ſo diuided, that neither the Father
is the Sonne, nor the Sonne is the Holy Ghoſt, or the Father: yet neuertheleſſe
wee beleeue, that there is but one very God: And that the
ſmne one God hathe created Heauen, and Earthe, and al thinges conteined
vnder Heauen.
               Wee beleeue, that Ieſus Chriſte the onely Sonne of the Eternal
Father (as longe before it was determined, before al beginninges)
when the fulneſſe of time was cōme, did take of that Bleſſed, & Pure
Virgine, bothe fleaſhe, and al the Nature of Man, that he might declare
to the worlde the ſecrete and hid Wil of his Father: whiche wil
had benne laide vp from before al Ages, and Generations: And that
he might ful finiſhe in his Humaine Body the Myſterie of our Redemption:
and might faſten our ſinnes to the Croſſe, & alſo that Hādwritinge,
whiche was made againſte vs.
               Wee beleeue, that for our ſakes he died, and was buried, deſcended
into Hel, the thirde daie by the Power of his Godhed returned to life
and roſe againe: and that the fourtethe daie after his Reſurrection,
whiles his Diſciples behelde and looked vppon him, he Aſcended into
Heauen,Augu. Tract. 5
                        •
                     . in Iohan. to fulfil al thinges, and did place in Maieſtie, and Glorie the
ſelfe ſame Body, wherewith he was borne, wherin he liued on Earth,
wherein he was ieſted at, wherein he had ſuffered moſt paineful tormentes,
and cruel kinde of deathe, wherein he roſe againe, and wherein
he aſcended to the Right Hande of the Father, aboue al Rule, aboue
al Power, al Force, al Dominion, and aboue euery name, that is named,
not onely in this worlde,Actor. 3. but alſo in the worlde to comme: And
that there he nowe ſittethe, and ſhal ſitte, til al thinges be ful perfitted.
And althoughe the Maieſtie, and Godhed of Chriſte be euerywhere
abundantly diſperſed,In Epiſt. ad Darsdanum. yet wee beleeue, that his Body, as S.
Auguſtine ſaith, muſt needes be ſtil in one place: & that Chriſte hathe
geuen Maieſtie vnto his Body, but yet hathe not taken awaye from
it the Nature of a Body:Cō
                     
                        •
                     ra 
                        •
                     utychen. Lib. 1. and that we muſt not ſo affirme Chriſte to
be God, that wee denie him to be Man: and, as the Martyr Vigilius
ſaithe, that Chriſte hathe leafte vs as touchinge his Humaine Nature,
but hath not leafte vs as touchinge his Diuine Nature:Tulgent. ad Thraſ
                        •
                     mūdum. And y•
the ſame Chriſte, thoughe he be Abſent from vs concerning his Manhed,

yet is euer Preſent with vs concerninge his Godhed.
               From that place alſo wee beleeue that Chriſte ſhal come againe to
execute that General Iudgement, as wel of them whom he ſhal then
finde aliue in the Body, as of them that ſhal be already dead.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  In our Fathers dayes before any change in Religion was thought vpon, Chriſten people lyued togeather
in perfite vnitie.Neither is any man now aſhamed of the Apoſtles Creede. If accoumpt of belife had ben demaunded, none was aſhamed of the
common Apoſtles Crede. Euery one conſtantly confeſſed, I beleue in God the Father Almighty Maker of
Heauen and Earthe, and in Ieſus Chriſte, and ſo foorthe. But ſithens Luther brought aVntruthe It vvas the Olde. Newe Goſpel
into the worlde, wee haue ſene greate diuerſitie amōge men, not onely of Ceremonies, and Adminiſtration
of the Sacramentes, but alſo of theManifeſte Vntruthe: For vvee keepe al one Creede. Publike Confeſſion of the Faithe. For as ſundrie Rulers, Countries,
and common Weales receiued that newe Doctrine: ſo theire Preachers and Miniſters haue ſette
foorthe ſundrie Credes, and Confeſſions of theire Faithe.
                  S. Hilarie in his time complaininge there of,S Hilaries complaint of many Faithes. One God, one Faithe. Nowe a dayes there be (ſaithe he) ſo many Faithes, as
there be willes: ſo many Doctrines, as there be maners: ſo many cauſes of blaſpemies ſpringe vp, as there
be vices: whiles Faithes either are ſo written as wee liſt, or ſo vnderſtanded as we liſt. And where as
there is but one God, one Lorde, one Baptiſme, and accordinge thereto one Faithe, wee ſteppe aſide from
that whiche is the onely Faithe: and whiles mo faithes be made, they beginne to come to that point,
that there be no Faithe at al.
                  But the maner of the vtterance of your Faithe is ſtrange to Chriſten eares,The maner of the vtterance of the defenders Faithe ſtrange to Chriſtē eares. who haue ben accuſtomed
to heare, Credo in Deum, Credo in Ieſum Chriſtum, Credo in Spiritum Sanctum: I beleue
in God, I beleue in Ieſus Chriſte, I beleue in the Holy Ghoſte. That other forme of woordes, whiche
you vſe, ſoundeth not ſo Chriſtianlike. I beleue there is a God, I beleue that Ieſus Chriſte is the Sonne of
the Father, I b
                        •
                     liue that the Holy Ghoſte is God. Although this forme of woordes do expreſſe a right
Faithe, yet beinge ſutche as maye be vttered by Deuils, and hatheVntruthe. For the Heretiques ſaide, I beleue in God, as vvel as did the Catholiques. alwaies ben vttered by Heretikes
theire Miniſters: the Auncient and Holy Fathers haue liked better the Olde forme and maner, after
whiche euery Chriſten man ſaithe, I beleue in God, I beleue in Ieſus Chriſte, I beleue in the Holy Ghoſte.
For this importeth a ſignification of Faithe with hope and charitie: that other of Faithe onely, whiche
the Deuils haue and tremble,Iacob. 
                           •
                        . as S. Iames ſaithe: wherein as in many other thinges theſe Defenders reſemble
them. S. Auguſtine in ſundrie places putting a differēce betwen theſe two formes of wordes, vpōs
Iohn alleaging S. Paules wordes, To one that beleueth in him who iuſtifieth the wicked, his Faithe
is imputed to rightuouſneſſe, demaōdeth, what is it to beleue in him? It is by his anſweare, Credendo
amare, credendo diligere, credendo in eum ire, & eius membris incorporari: With beleuinge
to loue him, with beleuinge to goe into him, and to be incorporate in his members, that is, to be
made a member of his Body.
                  As this Defender procedeth in declaringe the belefe of his Newe Engliſhe Churche, he grateth
mutche vppon the Article of Chriſtes Aſcenſion,The Article of Chriſtes aſcenſiō mutche grated vpon 
                           •
                        y the defenders to euil purpoſe. In Iohan. Tract. 30. Oportet for Poteſt. as the maner is of al Zwinglians to do. For theire
minde geueth them, thereby they ſhal be able to bringe at leſte many of the ſimpler ſorte to their Sacramentarie
Hereſie, and to thinke, that the Body of Chriſte, wherein he aſcended into Heauen, and
ſuteth at the right hande of the Father, is ſo abſent frō Earthe, as it may not be beleued to be here preſent
in the Sacrament of the Aulter. Thereto he alleagethe S. Auguſtine, makinge him to ſaye, that
Chriſtes Body wherein he roſe againe, muſt nedes be ſtil in one place. In which treatiſe that Holy Father
hathe not the worde,Vntruthe. For S. Auguſtines vvoorde is, Oportet. S. Auguſtine knevve no ſutche Body in the Sacramente. 
                     Oportet, that is, muſt nedes, as this Defender alleageth, but this worde,
Poteſt, that is, maye, as the bookes haue that be not corrupted by the mainteiners of that Hereſie.
And where as he ſaithe, Ad Dardanum, alleaged by this defender, though Chriſte hathe geuen
Maieſtie vnto his Body yet he hathe not taken awaye from it the Nature of a Body: this is not to be
ſtretched to Chriſtes Body in the Sacrament, where, it is not after condition of Nature, but by the almightie
power of his worde. And although he hathe not taken awaye from his Body the Nature of
a very Body, yet may it pleaſe him to do with his Body, being God noleſſe then man, that, whiche is beſides
and aboue the Nature of a Body.Matthae. 26. So it pleaſed him to do, when he ſaid, This is my Body. And ſo it

pleaſeth him it be done,Vūtruthe. There is neither ſutche Inſtitution, nor ſutche commaſidemēt. wheſoeuer the ſame Body is offered in the daily ſacrifice of the Churche according
to his cōmandement and inſtitution.Diuerſitie of creedes That Vigilius ſaithe,Contra Eutychē Lib. 1. Hovve Chriſte hathe lefte to be novv in Earthe. 1. Ioan. 1. Chriſte hathe lefte vs touching his Humaine
Nature, but hathe not left vs as touching his Diuine Nature: it is to be vnderſtāded of his viſible
ſhape, in whiche he ſhewed his Humaine Nature, whē he walked here on Earthe, when he was ſo cō
                     uerſant
with men ſenſibly, that as S. Iohn writethe they heard him with theire eares, they ſaw him
with theire eies, they behelde him, and touched him withe theire handes. As touchinge his Humaine
Nature in this ſenſible wiſe,Expoſitionis in Epiſt. Iohan. Tract. 10. Chriſte hathe left vs, after whiche S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Iam non inuenis
Chriſtum loqui in Terra: Nowe thou findeſt not Chriſte to ſpeake on the Earthe. This maner of
Chriſtes Humaine Nature beinge taken from vs withſtandeth not, but that we may haue the ſubſtance
of his natural Body and Bloud preſent in the bleſſed Sacrament in a myſterie by the Almighty power
of his word: whiche Faithe theſe defenders trauatle to impugne. And (as God would) the Penneman of
this Apologie bringeth vn wares, as it ſemethe, for confirmation of his Sacramentarie Doctrine, that
out of 
                        •
                     ulgētius,Ad Thraſymundum Regem. whiche ouerthroweth al that he wēt about to builde againſt the real preſence. That
Father, as he is by him alleaged, ſaithe, Chriſtum, cùm abſit à nobis per Formā Serui, tamen
ſemper eſſe nobiſcum per Formā Dei: That whereas Chriſte is abſent from vs accordinge to the
Forme of a ſeruant, yet he is euer preſent with vs accordinge to the Forme of God. VVhereby he meaneth,
that Chriſte is nomore here amonge men, as he was before his deathe, in Forme and ſhape of man,
in ſutche wiſe as we ſee men liue on the Earthe. VVhiche woordes bicauſe they ſeme to daſshe theire
whole purpoſe,Vntruthe. For Forme and Subſtance are bothe one. the Prelates of this newe Engliſhe Churche haue altered the ſenſe of them, by ſhifting
in this worde (Manhed) in ſtede of (the Forme or ſhape of a ſeruant) whiche the Latine hathe, and this
worde (Godhed) in ſtede of (the Forme of God).
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  I marueile, M. Hardinge, that ye can publiſhe ſo manifeſte Vntruthe without
bluſſhinge. Ye ſaie, that before theſe fewe late yeeres, there was but one Fourme
of Faithe throughout the world. Yet beinge learned, & hauinge trauailed through
the Auncient Writers, you muſte néedes haue ſéene the Apoſtles Creede: the Nic
                        •
                     ne
Créede: S. Baſiles Créede: Damaſus Créede: S. Hieromes Créede: S. Cypriās.
or Rufines Créede: Gregories Créede: the Créede called, Quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vult, written,
as ſome thinke, by Athanaſius, as ſome others, by Euſebius Vercellenſis: the
Créede conteined in the Hymne called, Te Deum, whether it were written by S.
Auguſtine, or by S. Ambroſe: euery of theſe vnder ſeueral, and ſundrie fourmes.
You knowe, that in diuers of the Oldeſt Councelles, as occaſion was offered, ſo
ſomewhat was either added to the Creede, or diminiſhed, or altered: as it may appeare
by Euſebius, Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, Euagrius, Nicephorus,
and others. You know, that S. Auguſtine vnto Laurentius, S. Hierome vnto Cyrilius,
S. Ambroſe vnto the Emperour Gratianus, and others moe in declaration
of the Chriſtian Faithe, haue not alwaies vſed one preciſe fourme of Woordes: and
that the Emperoure Conſtantine maketh open Proteſtation of his Faithe, as it
is recorded in your Countrefeite Donation, in Senſe, & Subſtance agréeing with
al others, that were Catholique: but in Woordes, far diſagréeinge from al others,
and peculiar onely to him ſelfe. To be ſhorte, you knowe, that betwéene your Maſſe
Créede, & the peoples Common Créede, as touching the Woordes, there was greate
difference. It were too longe, to rehearſe al. Neither was it neceſſarie, to ſay ſo
mutche, ſauinge onely to ſhewe the manifeſte vanitie of your talke. To expreſſe
one Subſtance of Faithe in ſundrie Fourmes of Woordes, I neuer heard, it was
forbidden, ſauinge onely nowe at the laſte by this late Decrée of M. Hardinge.
                  Where you ſaie, the whole people before theſe fewe late yéeres had one Faithe,
ye ſhoulde rather haue ſaide, they were al taught by you in a ſtraunge vnknowen
Tongue, to pronounce, as they could, a ſtrange vnknowē Fourme of Faithe. For,
God knowethe, they vnderſtoode not one woorde, what they ſaide, nor ſcarcely one
Article of theire Beléeue. S. Hilarie ſaithe, of the people deceiued by the Arians, as

theſe haue benne by you,To beleue In God. 
                     Credunt, quod non credunt: Intelligunt, quod non intelligunt:
They Beleeue that,
                     
                     Hilari. ad Conſtantium Imperatore
                           ••
                        . Coelius Rhodigin Antiquitat. Lib 3. Cap. 32. Auguſt. De cap. 
                           〈◊〉
                         contra Dona
                           •
                        iſt. Lib 3. Cap 14. 
                     whiche thei Beleeue not: they Vnderſtande that, whiche they Vnderſtand
not. Cardinal Aſcanius had a Popiniay, that was taught to ſay diſtinctly al the
Articles of the Creede, from the beginninge to the ende. Yet, I trowe, ye wil not
ſay, the ſame Popiniay Beléeued in God, or vnderſtoode the Chriſtian Faithe. For
Faithe is in the Harte, not in the Tonge. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Fieri poteſt, vt
integra quis teneat Verba Symboli, & tamen non rectè credat: It is poſſible, that a man may
pronounce the whole woordes of the Creede: and yet not haue the right Faithe.
                     
                  
                  In deede S. Hilarie, of whom ye ſpeake, woorthily reproued the Arian He retiques,
for that they had altered the whole Faithe of Chriſte, not onely in Woor
                        •
                     es,
but alſo in Subſtance. But wee hauinge publiſhed ſundrie Confeſſions of our Religion,
as the Multitudes of your Abuſes, and Errours offered occaſiō, and that in
ſundrie Countries, and Kingdomes, in ſutche diſtance of places, and diuerſitie of
Speaches, yet notwithſtanding in the Subſtance, & groundes of the Truthe haue
euermore ioined togeather, and neuer altered.
                  Where wee ſaie, Wée beleeue, there is one God, M. Hardinge anſweareth, He
cannot wel allow this Fourme of Speache. Wee ſhould rather haue ſaid, ſaithe he,
wee beléeue In God. Were not this Controller ſo importune, ſutche ſimple petite
quarcelles ſhould not be anſweared. I could neuer haue thought, it had ben ſo great
a ſinne, to Beleeue, that God is God Verily, M Hardinge, if euery of y
                        •
                     ur Popes,
and Cardinalles had beléeued ſo mutche, I trow, Cornelius the Biſhop of Bito
                        •
                     to
in your late Councel at Tridente woulde not ſo bitterly, and in ſo open ſorte haue
cried out of them,Cornelius Bitontinus in Concil. Trident. 
                     Vtinam non à Fide ad Infidelitatē, à Deo ad Epicurum, velut prorſus
vnanimes declinaſſent, dicentes in corde Impio, & ore impudico, Non eſt Deus:
Would God they were not gonne, as it were with one conſent, from the Faithe to Infidelitie,
from God to Epicure, ſaieing with wicked h
                              •
                           rte, and ſhameleſſe mouthe, There is no God.
                     
                  
                  If no Catholique Writer had euer vſed this ſelfe ſame Fourme of ſpeache before,
then might M. Hardinges quarrel ſeeme to haue ſome reaſonable ground. But
bothe S. Paule, and alſo many other Catholique Fathers haue often vſed it. S.
Paule ſaithe,Hebrae. 11. 
                     Accedentem ad Deum oportet Credere, Deum eſſe: He that commeth to
God, must beleeue, that there is a God:
                      And Hermes, S Paules Scholar, commonly
called Paſtor Nuntius,
                     
                        Paſtor Nuntius. Origen. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , in prooemio. Hilar. De 
                           •
                        rinitat. Lib. 10. Symbolum Caroli Magni. 
                     Ante omnia crede Vnum Deum eſſe, qui condidit omnia: Before
al other thinges beleeue, that there is One God, that hathe made al.
                      Origen ſaithe,
Primùm credendus eſt Deus, qui omnia creauit: Firſte w
                              •
                           e muſt beleeue, there is a God, that
hathe created al thinges.
                      S. Hilarie ſaithe, In abſoluto nobis, & facilis eſt Acternitas,
Ieſum Chriſtum à mortuis ſuſcitatum Credere: Our euerlaſtinge life is ready, and caſi, to
beleeue, that Ieſus Chriſte is riſen againe from the deade:
                      Likewiſe Charles the Greate in
the Créede publiſhed in his name, Praedicandum eſt omnibus, vt credant, Patrem, Filium,
& Spiritum Sanctum Vnum eſſe Deum Omnipotentem: The Goſpel muſt be preached
vnto al, to the ende they may knowe, that the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghoſte is one
God Almighty.
                      To be ſhorte, euen in our late Fathers daies, this was counted a
Catholique Fourme of Faithe, and was commonly taught in al Scholes, Vnum
Crede Deum: Beleeue, that there is One God.
                      If this were then wel ſpoken, and vniuerſally
vſed, euen in the Churche of Rome, without rebuke, I truſte, M Hardinge
of his Courteſie wil nomore blame vs for ſpeakinge wel. As for theſe Phraſes (I
beleeue In God, I beleeue In Chriſte) although in deede they be better, & more effectual, &
carrie more force then the other,Exodi. 14. Exodt. 19. Baſilius de Spir. Sanct. cap. 14. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . yet are they not, neither ſo peculiare, and ſpecial
to God alone, nor ſo preciſely vſed, as M. Hardinge imagineth. For it is written in
the E
                        •
                     odus, as it is noted by the ſkilful in the Hebrewe tongue, Populus credidit In
Deum, & In Moſen: The people beleeued In God, and In Moſes:
                      And God him ſelfe ſaide
vnto Moſes, as it is likewiſe noted in ye Hebrewe: Deſcendam, vt populus In te credat:
I wil goe downe, that the people mai
                              •
                            beleeue In thee.
                      S. Baſile ſaithe, Baptizati ſunt In
Moſen, & crediderunt In illum: They were Baptized In Moſes, and beleeued In him.
                     
                     
And Hoſius ſaithe,To beleue In God. Chriſtes Aſcenſion 
                     Quid ſi In Sanctos quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         rectè credi docet Paulus?
                     Hoſius in Confeſſi. Petricouien. Ca. 58. Socrates Li. 1. Ca. 25. Paſchaſi. L. 1. de Spiritu Sancto. 
                     What if Paule
teache vs, that wee may alſo wel beleeue In Sainctes? And they of M. Hardinges ſide
haue euermore wel liked this Fourme of Speache, Credo in Sanctam Eccleſiam: I beleeue
In the Holy Churche.
                      Wherein alſo perhappes they wil allege theſe woordes of
Socrates, and of ſome others, Credo In vnam Catholicam Eccleſiam: I beleeue In
one Catholique Churche.
                      Notwithſtandinge beſide S. Auguſtine, and others, Paſchaſius
ſaithe, Credimus Eccleſiam, quaſi Regenerationis Martem: non Credimus In
Eccleſiam, quaſi Regenerationis Authorem. Recede ergo ab hac perſuaſione blaſphemiae.
Non enim licet, nec In Angelum Credere: Wee beleeue the Holy Churche, as the Mother
of Regeneration: But wee beleeue not In the Churche, as the Authour of Regeneration.
Leaue therefore this perſuaſion of Blaſphemie. For it is not lauful to beleeue, no not In
an Angel.
                     
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 29. Likewiſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Credimus Paulo, non credimus In Paulum:
Credimus Petro, non credimus In Petrum: Wee beleeue Paule, but we beleeue not In Paule:
Wee beleeue Peter, but wee beleeue not In Peter.
                     
                  
                  Hereby wée maie ſée, that whether wée ſaie, Wee beleeue that God is God, or, we
beleeue In God, both theſe phraſes are vſed of the godly, and are therfore both good, &
Catholique. Yf M. Hardinge finde any wante, or imperfection in our woordes, let
him ſupplie it with good fauoure: ſo he condemne not either S. Paule, or Hermes,
or Origen, or Hilarie, or Charles the Greate, or other Catholique, and godly
writers, as wel Gréekes, as Latines: who, as I haue ſhewed, haue vſed the like.
Certainely the General Confeſſion of al our people, and of our whole Churche, is
this, VVee beleeue In God: VVee beleeue In Chriſte: VVee beleeue In the Holy Ghoſte.
                  
                  But M. Hardinge ſaithe, wée grate ouer buſily vpon the Article of Chriſtes
Aſcenſion into Heauen. What then? Should wée haue leafte it out? Verily that
would haue benne ſome good countenance to your cauſe▪ An
                        •
                      therefore when Pope
Nicolas would haue brought vs your newe Article of Traſubſtantiation into the
Crede, he ſhould firſte haue vtterly remoued this whole Article of Chriſtes Aſcenſion.
For theſe twoo Articles maie not wel ſtande togeather by any conſtruction
in one Crede. As for vs, wée haue ſaide nothinge herein, but that hath often ben
ſaide, and auouched by the Holy Learned Fathers. Damaſus the Biſhoppe of
Rome, in his Creede grateth hereon as mutche, as wée. His woordes be theſe:
Deuicto mortis imperio,
                     Symbolum Damaſi, apud Hierony. To. 4. 
                     cum ea Carne, in qua natus, & paſſus, & mortuus fuerat, & reſurrexit,
Aſcendit ad Patrem, ſedet
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad Dextram eius in Gloria: Hauinge ouercome the
empiere of deathe, with the ſame fleaſhe, wherein he was borne, and ſuffred, and died, and
roſe againe, he Aſcended vnto the Father, and ſitteth at his Right hande in Glorie.
                      Whiche
woordes S. Hierome in larger manner expoundeth thus: Aſcendit ad Coelū, Sedet ad
Dextram Dei Patris,
                     Hierony. in explicatione Symboli, To. 4. 
                     manente ea Natura Carnis, in qua natus, & paſſus eſt, & in qua Reſurrexit.
Non enim exinanita eſt Humanitatis Subſtantia, ſed glorificata: Chriſte Aſcended
into Heauen, and ſitteth at the Right hande of the Father, the ſame Nature of Fleaſh,
wherein he was borne and ſuffred, and roſe againe, remaininge ſtil. For the Subſtance of his
Humaine Nature was not donne away, but glorified.
                      Howe be it, gentle Reader, for
thy better ſatiſfaction herein,In the ſixthe Article. I muſte referre thée ouer to my Former Replie to M.
Hardinge.
                  Here foloweth a piteous outcrie, that wée haue ſhamefully corrupted S. Auguſtines
woordes, ſhiftinge in, Oporter, in ſteede of, Poteſt. What newe fanſie
is ſuddainely fallen into M. Hardinges heade, I cannot tel. S. Auguſtines woordes,
as they be alleged by Gratian,De Conſecra. Dis. 2. Prima. Oportet. Poteſt.
                      are theſe: Corpus, in quo Reſurrexit, in Vno loco eſſe
Oportet: The Body, wherein Chriſte roſe againe, muſte needes be in One place. Here is
not, Oportet, in ſtéede of, Poteſt, as M. Hardinge ſaithe: but, Oportet, as it
ſhould be, for, Oportet. If there haue benne any corruption wrought herein, it
hath benne wrought by Gratian, welneare foure hundred yeres agoe, and not by

vs.Chriſtes Body in one place. Yet is Gratian one of the higheſt Doctours of M. Hardinges ſide. And wil
M. Hardinge make vs beléeue, that his owne Catholique Doctours would be ſo
bolde, to corrupte S. Auguſtine?
                  
                     As for this Verbe, Oportet, if it were wanting in the place alleged, yet
might it wel, and eaſily be ſupplied of other places. S. Peter ſaithe, Oportet
illum coelos capere vſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ad tempora reſtitutionis omnium:
                     
                     Actor. 3. Cyrill. in Iohan. Li. 11. Ca. 3. Auguſtin. contra Fauſtem li. 20. Ca. 11. Auguſtin. ad Dardan. Epiſt. 57. The Heauens Muſt conteine, or hold him, vntil the time, that al thinges be reſtored. So ſaithe Cyrillus, Chriſtus non poterat
cum Apoſtolis verſari in Carne, poſtquàm Aſcendiſſet ad Patrem:
                      Chriſte could not
be conuerſante with his Apoſtles in the Fleaſh, after he had Aſcended vnto the Father. Likewiſe
ſaithe S. Auguſtine, Chriſtus ſecundū Praeſentiā Corporalē in Sole, in Luna, & in
Cruce ſimul eſſe non potuit:
                      Chriſte, according to the Preſence of his Body, could not be in the
Some, in the Moone, and on the Croſſe at one time. And againe, Ne dubites, Chriſtum eſſe
in aliquo loco Coeli, propter Veri Corporis modum:
                      Doubt not, but Chriſt is in ſome
One Place of Heauen, bicauſe of the meaſure or fourm of a very Body. Therefore the Olde
Learned Father Origen ſaithe, Non eſt Homo, qui eſt vbicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            duo vel tres in eius
nomine fuerint congregati:
                     
                     Origen. in Matthae. tracta. 32. 
                     neque Homo nobiſcum eſt omnibus diebus vſque ad conſū
                        mationē
ſaeculi: neque congregatis vbique fidelibus Homo eſt praeſens: ſed virtus Diuina,
quae erat in Chriſto: It is not Chriſte, as being Man, that is where ſo euer twoo or three be
geathered together in his name: neither Chriſte, as being Man, is with vs al daies vntil the
worldes end: nor Chriſt, as being Man, is Preſent with the Faithful euery where geathered together:
but that Diuine power (or Nature) that was in Chriſte. And for that cauſe S.
Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 46. 
                     Videte Aſcendentem: Credite in Abſentem: Sperate Venientem:
Sed tamen per Miſ
                           •
                        ricordiam occultam etiam ſentite Praeſentem: See you Chriſte Aſcending
into Heauen: Beleeue in him being Abſent: Truſt in Chriſte, that is to come: And yet by
his ſecrete Mercie feele him Preſent. Thus, M. Hardinge, thus haue the Olde Catholique
Learned Fathers vſed tograte, as ye terme it, vpon the Article of
Chriſtes Aſcenſion.
                  
                  You ſaie, S. Auguſtine in his Epiſtle to Dardanus, ſpake not of Chriſtes
Body, as it is now Preſent in the Sacrament. No marueile. For S. Auguſtine
neuer vnderſtood any ſutch kinde of Preſence. And who taught you, M. Hardinge,
that Chriſte hath ſutche change of diuers Bodies: of one manner in the Sacrament,
and of an other manner in Heauen? Chriſtes Bleſſed Body, when it was borne
of the Virgine, when it died, when it roſe againe, when it Aſcended into Heauen,
was one, and vniforme. How became it afterward ſo diuerſe, and ſo vnlike it ſelfe?
If either Chriſte, or the Apoſtles, or the Anciente Fathers haue thus taught you,
why are they not alleged? If they haue not thus taught you, how came you by this
knowledge? Or if ye ſaie, ye know, that they knewe not, who wil beléeue you?
                  Ye tel vs, that the Body of Chriſte in Heauen hath the whole Stature, and
Fourme, and Proportion of a Man. This is true: It is the Doctrine of the Apoſtles,
and of the Anciente Doctours of the Churche. But ye tel vs farther of your
ſelfe, that the Body of Chriſte in the Sacrament is vtterly voyde of al manner either
Stature, or Fourme, or Proportion: that is to ſaie, is neither longe, nor ſhort:
nor high, nor low: nor thicke, nor thinne: &, being as you ſay, a very Natural Body,
yet hath neither likeneſſe, nor ſhape of a Body. This is your Doctrine, M. Hardinge:
and the more vnlikely to be true, the more likely to be yours.
                  Sutche fantaſtical imaginations the Arian Heretiques ſometime had of the
Godhed of Chriſte.Athanaſ. contra Arianos Sermane 3. For thus they wrote thereof, as ſaithe Athanaſius: Creatura
eſt: ſed non vt vlla ex rebus creatis: Opus eſt: ſed non vt vllum ex operibus: Res condita
eſt: ſed non vt vlla ex rebus conditis: It is a Creature: but not as any other of thinges created:
It is a thinge wrought: but not as any other thinge, that euer was wrought: &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     But what ſaith Athanaſius him ſelfe to al theſe fantaſies? his anſweare is this:
Iam videtis vafritiem, & dolos iſtius Haereſeos: quae non ignara, quàm amarulenta ſit iſta

ſua malitia,
                     
                     Fourme and Subſtance. 
                     fotos quaerit, & 
                           ••
                        nocinium ſibi 
                           〈◊〉
                         ex verborum diſertitudine: Nowe ye
ſee the crookedneſſe, and 
                        •
                     ſubtletie of this Hareſae: whiche knowinge her owne malice howe 
                        〈◊〉
                      it is, borowith ſome he wa
                        •
                      and colo
                        ••
                     e by ſleight of woordes.
                  
                     This Flauianus repreneth the Heretique Eutyches,
                     Epiſtola Flauiani ad Leon. inter Leon. Epiſtolas. 
                     Adiecit & aliam 
                           〈…〉
                         Corpus Domini quod en Maria factum eſt, non eſſe noſtrae Subſtantiae;
He added 
                        〈◊〉
                      in other wickedneſſe, ſaieinge, that the Body of Chriſte, that was borne of
Mary, is not nowe of our Subſtance.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the ma
                           •
                        er thus, Caro Chriſti ipſa eſt, per Eſſentiam: non ipſa
per Gloria
                              ••
                           :
                     
                     Leo. De Reſurrect. Domini. Sermo. 1. The Fleaſh of Chriſte in Subſtance is nowe the ſame, it was before: but 
                        〈◊〉
                     
Glorie it is not the ſame.
                  
                     Noman hereof writeth either more plainely, or more directely, then S.
Auguſtine.
                     Auguſtin. ad Dardanum epiſtſtol. 57. 
                     
                        His woordes be theſe, Chriſtus ſic Venturus eſt, quemadmodum ire viſus
eſt in Ceolum, id eſt, in eadem Carnis Forma, atque Subſtantia: Cui profectò. Immortalitatem
dedit, Na
                              •
                           turam non abſtulit. Secundum hanc Formam non eſt putandus
vbique diffuſus. Cauendum eſt enim, ne ita Diuinitatem aſtruamus Hominis, vt Veritatem
Corporis auferamus: Chriſte ſhal come againe (to Iudge) euen as he was ſeene goinge
into Heauen, that is to ſaie, in the ſelfe ſame Fourme, and Subſtance of his Fleaſh: Vnto
whiche Fleaſh vndoubtedly he hathe geuen Immortalitie: but he hathe not taken from it the
Nature of Fleaſhe. For wee muſte take heede, wee doo not ſo maineteine the Godhead of
Chriſtes Humanitie, that we denie the Truthe of his Body.
                  
                  And where ye fantaſie, that the Body of Chriſte in the Sacramente hathe
in it ſelfe neither Fourme, nor Proportion, nor Limitation of place, nor Diſtinction
of partes,Auguſtin. in ead. epiſt. ad Dardanum. S. Auguſtine telleth you, Spatia locorum tolle Corporibus, & nuſquam
erunt: & quia nuſquam erunt, nec erunt. Tolle ipſa Corpota qualitatibus Corporū,
non erit, vbi ſint: & ideo neceſſe eſt, vt non ſint: Take awaye from Bodyes Limitation
of place, and the Bodyes wil be no where: and bicauſe they be nowhere, they wil be nothing.
Take awaye from Bodyes the qualities of Bodyes, there wil be no place for them
to be in: and therefore the ſame Bodies muſte needes be no Bodies at al.
                      Hereof wée maye
conclude, that the Body of Chriſte, whiche you haue imagined to be conteined
Groſſely, and Carnally in the Sacramente, for as mutche as, by your owne Confeſſion,
it hathe neither Qualitie, nor Quantitie, nor Fourme, nor Place, nor
Proportion of Body, therefore, by S. Auguſtines Doctrine, it is no Body.
                  Here it is a worlde to ſée, what prety ſporte M. Hardinge maketh him
ſelfe with the poore Penneman of this Apologie. As God woulde, the Simple
Body vnwares alleged Fulgentius cleane againſte him ſelfe. For the woordes
of Fulgentius be theſe: Chriſtus, cùm Abſit à nobis per Formam Serui, tamen ſemper
eſt nobiſcum per Formam Dei: Whereas Chriſte is Abſent from vs by the Fourme of a
Seruaunte, yet is he euermore Preſent with vs by the Fourme of God.
                      Whereby, ſaithe
M. Hardinges Commentarie, he meaneth, that Chriſte is nomore here emonge
vs, in Fourme, and Shape of Man, in ſutche wiſe, as wée ſée menne liue in the
Earthe. And theſe woordes (ſaithe he) daſshe theire whole purpoſe: and therefore the Prelates
of this newe Engliſhe Churche, haue altered the ſenſe of them, by ſhiftinge in this woorde (Manhoode)
inſteede of (the Fourme of a Seruaunt): and this woorde (Godhead) in ſteede of
(the Fourme of God
                     ).
                  I beſéeche thée, Gentle Reader, ſpare me a litle thine indifferent eare, leaſte
in theſe myſty cloudes of M. Hardinges Diſtinctions, thou happen to wander, and
looſe thy way. Al this great adoo riſeth onely of ſome notable difference, that is
fanſied to be bitwéene theſe twoo woordes. Fourme, and, Subſtance. For M. Hardinge
would faine haue thée beléeue, that ye Subſtance of Chriſtes Body is in many
places: but the Fourme of the ſame Body can be onely in one place, & not in many.
                  If I ſhould demaund M. Hardinge this queſtion by the way, wherfore Chriſtes
Body in Fourme maye not as wel be in many places togeather, as the ſame in
Subſtance: or how he knoweth it: or what Doctour, or Father euer taught it: or

how wée may be wel aſſured of it: perhappes he would take a daie, to conſider it
better. For thus a man might put him in minde of the groundes of his Religion:
Sir, ye know, God is Omnipotent, and his power Infinite. Ye maie not make him
thral, & ſubiect to your ſenſes: That were Natural Reaſon that were Infidelitie.
Chriſte is as wel 
                        •
                     able to diſpoſe of the Fourme of his Body, as of the ſubſtance:
and can as wel preſent the one in many places, as the other. How be it, thus
mutche onely by the way.
                  But now, what i
                        •
                      al this great imagined Difference be no Difference▪ What
if theſe two woordes, Fourme, and Subſtance, as they be vſed by Fulgentius, be
al one? What then wil M. Hardinge doo with his prety Gloſe?
                  
                     Verily Athanalius ſaithe thus:
                     Athanaſ. De Definitionib. Na
                        ••
                     ura, Eſſentia. Genus, Forma Vnū ſunt: Nature,
Subſtance, Kinde and Fourme be al One thing. Leo ſaithe,
                     
                     Leo epiſio. 97. Cap. 3. Quid eſt, In Forma Dei: in
Natura Dei: What is it, To be in the Fourme of God? He anſweareth, It is, To be in the
Nature of God. Chryſoſtome ſaith,
                     
                     Chryſoſtom. ad Philippen. Homi. 6. Forma Dei, Natura Dei eſt: The Fourme of God, is y
                           •
                        
Nature of God. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     
                     Auguſtian. De Tempor. Sermo. 177. De Aſcetſio. Sermo. 4. Secūdum Formam Dei Chriſtus ipſe de ſe loquitur▪
Ego & Pater Vnum ſumus: As concerning the Former of God, Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe
of him ſelfe, I and my Father are bothe One.
                     Auguſtin. epiſt. 177. 
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe, Vna eſt Forma,
quia vna eſt Diuinitas: The Fourme is one, bicauſe the Godhed is One.
                  
                  
                     In like ſorte of the Fourme of a Seruant,
                     Leo. epi
                           •
                        . 97. Cap. 3. 
                     Leo ſaithe, Quaero quid ſit Formam
Serui accipere? Sine dubio Perfectionem Naturae, & Conditionis Humanae: What is it, To
take the Fourme of a Seruant? He anſweareth, Doubtleſſe it is, To take the perfection of Nature,
and ſtate of man.
                     Chryſoſtom. ad Philippen. Homi. 6. 
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Forma Serui Omnino eſt Natura Serui: The
Fourme of a Seruant verily is the Nature of a Seruant.
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. tract. 40. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Quando de
Forma Serui in Chriſto cogitas, Humanam Effigiem cogita, ſi eſt in te Fides: Whe
                           ••
                        
thou thinkeſt of the Fourme of a Seruant in Chriſt, thinke of the Shape of a man, if there be any
Faithe in thee.
                     Auguſtin. De Eſſentia Diuinitatis. 
                     Againe, Chriſtum ſecundum Humanitatem, Viſibilem, Corporeum, Localem,
at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      omnia membra Humana veraciter habentem credere conuenit, & confiteri:
VVee muſt beleue, and confeſſe, that Chriſt according to his Humanitie, is Viſible, hath the
Subſtance and Properties of a Body, is conteined in Place, and verily hath al the members, and
the whole Proportion of a man. To leaue al others,
                     
                     Haimo, in epiſt. ad Philip. ca. 2. 
                     Haimo ſaithe, Forman Serui accepit,
id eſt, in Veritate Hominem accepit: He tooke the Fourme of a Seruant, that is to
ſaye, In very Truthe he tooke Man.
                  
                  Ye ſée, M. Hardinge, by theſe Teſtimonies of the Ancient Learned Fathers,
farre contrarie to your vaine Diſtinction, y• the Fourme of God is nothing els, but
God: & the Fourme of Man is nothing els, but Man. Wherfore then haue you thus
diuiſed vs this new Difference? Wherfore ſaie you of your owne head, y• 
                     Fourme, &
Subſtance be ſo contrarie, ſeing the Catholique Fathers ſaie, they be both One?
Or wherefore be you ſo buſy, to trouble the Penneman without cauſe? Certainely
S. Auguſtine ioineth Fourme and Subſtance both togeather,Auguſtin. ad Dardan. epiſt. 57. & by the one expoundeth
the other: In eadem Forma, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Subſtantia: In the ſame Fourme, and Subſtance:
                      and
againe expoundeth the ſame Fourme, Veritatem Corporis: The Truthe of a Body.
                     
                  
                  By theſe it is plaine, that when Fulgentius ſaith, ye 
                     Fourme of God, he meaneth
therby the Subſtance, the Nature, & the Diuinitie of God: And when he ſaith,
the Fourme of a Seruant, he meaneth likewiſe, the Nature▪
                      the Subſtance, the
Truthe, the Perfection, & the Very Manhoode of a Man. And the whole drifte of
his diſcourſe is this, that Chriſte being bothe God, and Man, by the Nature, and
Subſtance of his Godhed is euerywhere: but by the Nature, and Subſtance of his Manhoode, & Truth of his Body, is onely in one place, and not in moe: agreing
therein with theſe woordes of S. Auguſtine before rehearſed,De conſe. diſt 2. Prima. 
                     Corpus, in quo Reſurrexit,
in vno Loco eſſe Oportet: The Body, wherin he roſe againe, muſt nedes be in oue Place.
                     
                  
                  Here are wée terribly charged with guileful dealing, with a ſpeciall note alſo
in the Margine, Fulgentius fo why falſified. Wée haue ſhifted in this woorde, Manhed,

in ſtéede of,Fourme of Man, ctc. 
                     the Fourme of a Seruante: and this woorde Godhed, in ſtéede of,
the Fourme of God. And therefore both the Penneman, and the Prelates of our
Newe Cleregie muſt néedes be brought foorth before the barre.
                  I wil not here tel you, M. Hardinge, how lewdely ye haue demeaned your
ſelfe towardes her, whom it liketh you ſo often, and ſo ſcornefully to cal the Lady
Interpreter: a Lady, I wil not ſaie, of what Learning, vertue, and grauitie: but
certainly, as far from al vnwoomanly Preſumption, wh
                        •
                     rwith ye ſo rudely touch
her, as you are from al manly modeſtie: and for ought, that maie appeare by theſe
toies, and trifles, ye haue ſent vs ouer, as ful of wiſedome, as you of folie. I beſéeche
you, cal your woordes againe to minde, if you can without bluſhing: So
roughly to handle ſo ſofte a Creature. This Phraſe of ſpeeche your very frendes
haue mutche miſliked, and, as it is in déede, ſo in plaine woordes they cal it Ruffianrie,
a vertue, although mutche agreable to your Profeſſion, yet vnméete for a
man, either of learning, or of ſober wiſedome. But this faulte, 
                        •
                     mong many others,
as I haue ſaide, I wil diſſemble. Although your whole Booke be vtterly voide of
Diuinitie, yet at the leaſt ſome ſenſe of Humanitie had benne commendable.
                  But the Prelates of this Newe Cleregie (you ſaie) haue fouly falſified both ye
woordes, & the ſenſe of Fulgentius. And wherin, M. Harding? Forſooth in ſtéede of
theſe woordes, The Fourme of Man, &, The Fourme of God, for y• better vnderſtanding
of ye vnlearned, they haue vſed theſe woordes, as more commonly knowen,
Godhed, and Manhed. If this be ſo faulte, wherefore then is the Olde
Father,Vigilius, Li. 
                           •
                        . Contra Eu
                           •
                        ych
                           •
                        
                        tem. & Martyr Vigilius ſuffered thus to ſaie, Dei Filius ſecundum Humanitatem
ſuam receſsit à nobis; Secundum Diuinitatem ſuam ſemper eſt nobiſcum: The Sonne of
God according to his Manhed is departed from vs: according to his Godhed is euer with vs?
                     
Or againe, Chriſtus eſt vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſecundum Naturam Diuinitatis ſuae: & loco continetur
ſecundum Naturam Humanitatis ſuae: Chriſte is in al places according to the Nature of his
Godhed: and is conteined in One place, according to the Nature of his Manhed.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wherefore dooth Cyrillus ſaie, Secundum Carnem Solam abiturus Crat: Adeſt
autem ſemper virtue Deitatis:Cyrill. in Iohan. li. 9. ca. 21. Gregor. De Paſcha. Homi. 30. 
                     According to the Fleaſh onely he woulde departe: But by
y• power of his Godhed he is euer preſent. Wherfore doth Gregorie ſaie.
                      Verbum Incarnatum
Manet, & Recedit: Manes Diuinitace, Recedit Corpore: The woord Incarnate bothe
abideth with vs, and departeth from vs. It abideth with vs by the Godhed: It departeth from
vs by the Body (or Manhed?) Wherefore dooth S. Auguſtine ſaie,
                      Ibat per id, quod
Homo erat: Manebat per id,Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 78. quod Deus erat. Ibat per id, quod Vno Loco erat: Manebat
per id, quod vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      erat: Chriſt departed by that he was Man: and aboade by that he was
God. He departed by that, that was in One Place: He aboad by that, that is in al Places.
                  
                  
                     If ye wil yet ſtand in doubte, what theſe Holy Fathers meante by y• Manhed
of Chriſte, that departed from vs, let S. Auguſtine open bothe his owne, and
their meaninges. Thus he writeth in expreſſe & plaine woordes touching the ſame:
Secundum Carnem,
                     
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 50. 
                     quam Verbum aſſumpſit: ſecundum id, quòd de Virgine natus eſt:
Secundum id, quòd à Iudaeis prehenſus eſt: quòd ligno confixus: quòd de Cruce depoſitus:
quod linteis inuolutus: quòd in ſepulchro conditus: quòd in Reſurrectione manifeſtatus,
me non ſemper habebitis vobiſcum: According to the Fleaſh, that the Woorde receiued:
according to that, he was borne of the Virgine: according to that, he was taken of the
Iewes: According to that, he was nailed to the Tree, taken downe from the Croſſe, lapte in
a ſheete, laide in the graue, and was declared in his Reſurrection (theſe woordes are true)
Ye ſhal not haue me alwaies with you.Auguſtin. in Sermo. in feri. 2. Paſchat. 
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe, Dominus noſter abſentauit
ſe Corpore ab omni Eccleſia, & Aſcendit in Coelum:
                      Our Lord, as touching his Body,
Abſented him ſelfe from his whole Churche, and Aſcended into Heauen.
                  
                     To be ſhort, if it be ſo hainous an errour in this caſe to vſe theſe woordes,
Godhed, and Manhed,
                     
                     Fulgentius ad Regem Thra
                           ••
                        mun Li. 2. 
                     wherefore is not Fulgentius him ſelfe reproued for ſo
often vſing the ſame? Theſe be his woordes, Secundum Humanitatem ſuam, Localiter

erat in Terra:The Holy Ghoſte is God. Secundum Diuinitatem, & Coelum impleuit, & Terram. Vera Humanitas
Chriſti Localis eſ: Vera Diuinitas ſemper immenſa eſt. Caro Chriſti abſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            dubitatione
Localis eſt: Diuinitas tamen eius vbique ſemper eſt. Permanſit in Chriſto Immenſa
Diuinitas: Suſcepta eſt ab eo Localis Humanitas. Quomodò Aſcendit in Coelum, niſi
quia Localis, & Verus eſt Homo? Quomodò adeſt Fidelibus, nifi quia idem Immenſus,
& Verus eſt Deus?
                      Chriſte according to his Manhoode, was placed in Earthe: but according
to his Godhed he filled bothe Heauen, and Earthe. The Manhoode of Chriſte is conteined
in Place: The Godhed of Chriſte is Infinite, and in al places. The Pleaſh of Chriſte
is doubteleſſe in (One) place: The Godhead of Chriſte is for euer in euery place. There remained
ſtil in Chriſte the Infinite Godhed: There was receiued of him a Local Manhoode.
How Aſcended he i
                        •
                     to Heauen, ſauing that he is very Man conteined in Place? How is he
preſent with the Faithful, ſauing that he is Infinite, and True God? Laſt of al he ſaithe,
Vnus idem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Chriſtus, Secundum Humanam Subſtantiam, aberat Coelo, cùm eſſet in
Terra: & dereliquit Terram, cùm Aſcendiſſet in Coelum: Chriſte being One, accodinge
to the Subſtance of his Manhoode, was abſent from Heauen, when he was in Earthe: and forſooke
the Earthe, when he Aſcended into Heauen.
                  
                  Thus many times, M. Hardinge, ye haue theſe woordes in one place togeather
in Fulgentius him ſelfe: The Godhed: the Manhoode: very God: very
Man: The Fleaſh of Chriſte: The Subſtance of the Manhoode. And theſe 
                        •
                     e the
ſelfe ſame woordes, that you reproue.
                  Blotte out therefore for ſhame that vnaduiſed note in your Margine: Looke
better to your Booke: Woorke hereafter more discretely: and trouble not, neither
Pennemenne, nor others, without cauſe. Otherwiſe the Penneman wil tel you,
what birde bare the feather, that made you a Penne.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 2.
               Wee beleeue that the Holy Ghoſt, who is the thirde Perſon in
the Holy Trinitie, is very God: not made, not created, not begotten,
but proceding from bothe the Father, and the Sonne, by a certaine
meane vnknowen vnto man, and vnſpeakable: and that it is his propertie
to mollifie, & loften the hardneſſe of mans hart, when he is once
receiued thereinto, either by the holeſome preaching of the Goſpel,
or by any other waye: that he doth geue men light, and guide them
vnto the knowledge of God: to al way of Truthe: to newneſſe of
the whole life: and to euerlaſting hope of Saluation.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As wee acknowledge this article to be true and Catholike, ſo we demaunde of theſe Defenders.
how they can proue the ſame.Vntruthe. As ſhal appeare. Haue they either expreſſe Scripture for it, or any of the firſt foure general
Councels, whiche be eſtemed of moſt Authoritie? VVe are ſure they haue not. Therefore we do them
to vnderſtand, and if they heare vs not, we aduertiſe the Readers, that feare God, and loue his truth,
that al truthe neceſſarily to be beleuedO folie. vvho euer ſaide othervviſet expreſſed in the Scripture: and thatO folie. vvho euer ſaide othervviſet other Councels
be to be receiued beſides the foure firſt, which are allowed in England by Parlament.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie
                  Conſider, M. Hardinge, notwithſtanding ye euermore tel vs of Fathers, Fathers,
yet how contrarie oftentimes ye are in iudgement to the ſame Fathers. You
ſaie, that the Godhed of the Holy Ghoſt cannot be proued by expreſſe Woordes of
the Scriptures: and thereof, ye ſaie, ye are right ſure. Yet S. Auguſtine nothinge
douteth,Auguſtin. contra Literas Petiliani, Li. 3. Ca. 48. but it may wel be proued by plaine Scriptures. Thus he ſaith, Spiritus Sanctus
eſt Deus. Vnde Petrus, cùm dixiſſer
                           •
                         Auſus es mentiri Spiritui Sancto, continuò ſequutus
adiunxit, quid eſſe: Spiritus Sanctus: & ait, Non es mentitus Hominibus, ſed Deo:

                        The Holy Ghoſt is God. Therefore Peter when he had ſaide (vnto Ananias) thou haſt enterpriſed
to lie to the Holy Ghoſt, he followed readily, and tolde him, what was the Holy
Ghoſt: and ſaide, Thou haſt not ſied vnto Man, but vnto God.
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. De Morib. Eccle. Catholi. Li. 1. Cap. 16. Oſtendit Paulus, Deum eſſe Spiritum Sanctum, & idò non eſſe
Creaturam: S. Paule ſheweth vs, that the Holy Ghoſt is God: and therefore is no Creature.
                  
                  Likewiſe againe he ſaith, Ne quiſquam Spiritum Sanctum negaret Deum, continuò
ſequutus ait, Glorificate, & portate Deum in Corpore veſtro: Leaſt any man ſhould
denie,
                     
                     Auguſtin. Epiſto. 174. 
                     that the Holy Ghoſt is God, Paule added immediately theſe woordes: Glorifie you therefore,
and beare God in your Body. Here haue wée S. Auguſtines Yea, and M. Hardinges
Nay. S. Auguſtine aſſureth vs, he hath Scriptures, to proue the Godhed of
the Holy Ghoſte: M. Hardinge ſaithe, wée are ſure, he hath none at al. Iudge thou
nowe, Gentle Reader, whether of theſe Doctours thou wilt beléeue.
                  But what a vaine vanitie, and folie is this? wil M. Hardinge haue vs beléeue,
that God cannot be God, onleſſe he be allowed by the Churche of Rome, and by the
Pope? Then are wée come againe to that, ye Tertullian writeth merily of the Heathens:
Niſi Homini Deus placuerit,
                     Tertull. in Apologetico. 
                     Deus non erit: Homo iam Deo propitius eſſe debebit:
Onleſſe God pleaſe Man wel
                      (though he be God) he ſhal be no God. And ſo nowe Man
muſt be frendely, and fauourable vnto God.
                  
                  Wée beleeue, M. Hardinge, that the Holy Ghoſt is very God in déede, not vpon
the Popes, or his Cleregies credite, but, as S. Auguſtine ſaith, vpon the ſpecial
warrante of the Woorde of God.
                  
                     And therefore Nazianzene ſaithe,
                     Nazianzenus De Spiritu Sancto. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Dicet aliquis, non eſſe ſcriptum, Spiritum
Sanctum eſſe Deū. Atqui proponetur tibi examen Teſtimoniorum, ex quibus oſtendetur,
Diuinitatem Sancti Spiritus teſtatam eſſe in Sacris Literis: niſi quis valde inſulſus ſit,
& alienus à Spiritu Sancto: Some Man wil ſaie, It is not written, that the Holy Ghoſt is
God. But I wil bring thee foorth a whole Svvarme of Authorities, whereby it ſhal wel appeare
that the Godhed of the Holy Ghoſt is plainely witneſſed in the Holy Scriptures: Onleſſe
a Man be very dul, and vtterly voide of the Holy Ghoſte.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 1.
               We beleue, that there is one Churche of God, & that the ſame is
not ſhutte vp (as in times paſt emong the Iewes) into ſome One corner
or Kingdome, but that it is Catholique, & Vniuerſal, and diſperſed
throughout the whole world. So that there is now no Nation,
which may truely complaine, y• they be ſhutte foorth, & may not be one
of the Churche & people of God: and y• this Church is the Kingdome,
the Body, and the Spouſe of Chriſte: that Chriſte alone is the
Prince of this Kingedome: that Chriſte alone is the Head of this
Body: and that Chriſte alone is the Bridegroome of this Spouſe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  It is a world to ſee theſe Defenders: They, whiche haue not kepte Vnitie of Spirite in the
band of Charitie,Epheſ. 4. which S. Paule requireth, but haue ſeuered them ſelues from the Body of the Church,
tel vs now forſooth, they beleeue, that there is one Churche of God. But what maie wee thinke this
one Churche to be? Can they ſeme to meane any other (what ſo euer they pretend) then this new Church
of late yeeres ſet vp by Sathan, through the miniſterie of Martine Luther and thoſe other Apoſtates his
companions, if it maie be named a Churche, and not rather a Babylonical Tower? For as touchinge
that Churche, whereofVntruth. For the Fathers in the Primitiue Churche neuer toke him ſo. al Chriſten People hath euer taken the Succeſſour of Peter to be the Heade
vnder Chriſte, whiche is the true Catholike Churche, in theire Apologie they ſticke not to ſaie plainely,
that it is clene fallen downe longe agone. And therefore the beginning of Luthers Seditious, and

Heretical preaching they cal Herbam, as muche to ſaie, as the greene Graſſe, or firſt ſpring (this interpreter
nameth it the very firſt appearing) of the Goſpel,Looke in the leafe H. 7. b. leafe. F. 7. And in the leafe. F. 8. they ſaie that
fortie yeeres agone and vpward, that is at the firſt ſetting foorth of Luther and Zuinglius, the Truth
was vnknowen and vnheard of, and that they firſt came to the knowledge and preaching of the Goſpel.
Likewiſe in an other place they graunt,Leafe E. 2: In Latine they terme it exortam Euangelii. that certaine and very ſtrange ſectes haue ben ſtirringe in the
worlde euer ſince the Goſpel did ſpring, meaning the time when Luther firſt brinced to Germanie the
poiſoned Cuppe of his Hereſies, Blaſphemies, and Sathaniſmer.
                  Thus hauing condemned the Churche of God, whiche was before Luthers time, and allowinge
that for the true Churche, the Goſpel whereof firſt ſprang out of Luther: how can they auouche theire
belefe, and by what reaſon and learning can they make good, that there is one Churche of God? VVee
would faine knowe, whiche and where it is. Is Luther and his congregation that one Churche of
God, or Zuinglius and his rable, or Oſiunder and his ſort, or Zuenckfeldius and his ſecte, or Stancarus
and his band, or Balthaſar Pacimontane and his rancke? For al theſe, and certaine other ſectes
haueVntruth, As ſhal appeare. Luther for their founder, and for their Radix Ieſſe, as it were, from whence they ſpring: And
in deede euery learned man eaſely ſeeth, how the gutters of their Doctrines runne out of Luthers ſincke.
Of al theſe there is none, but ſtoutly claimeth the name of the Churche.
                  Then how ſaie ye, Defenders, whiche Churche be ye? name the Childe. Yf ye name one, wee
ſette the others againſt you. &c.
                  How often in his bookes putteth Luther you, and your Captaines in the rolle of thoſe, that he vtterly
condemneth, naminge roundly togeather, Infidels, Turkes, Epicures, Heretikes, Papiſtes, Sacramentaries?
And nowe if he ſhould heare you chalenge the name of the one Churche of God to you, and
denie him and his folowers that claimed title: would he not (thinke ye) ſtampe and rage, would he
not whetie his dogge eloquence vpon you, and cal you worſe then theſe aboue rekened, yea and if he
wiſt how, worſe then ſome of you be your ſelues? The like courteſie maieye looke for at thoſe other
ſectes,
of whiche euery one claimeth the name of this one Churche of God.
                  But ye ſaie, that this One Churche is not ſhutte vp into ſome one corner, or Kingdome,
but that it is Catholike, and Vniuerſal, and diſperſed through out the whole world. True it is, that
ye ſaie,Catholike Churche. VVhy is the Churche called Catholike. Threefold Vniuerſalitie an infallible marke to knovve the Churche by. what ſo euer ye thinke. But the Holy learned and auncien: Fathers, where they cal and beleeue
the Catholike Churche, they meane (as Vincentius Liriuenſis declareth) the Churche to be Catholike,
that is to ſaie Vniuerſal, (for ſo the word ſignifieth) in reſpecte of a threefold Vniuerſalitie:
of places, whiche this Defender here toucheth: of times, and of menne, whiche he toucheth not. In the
Catholike Churche we muſt haue a great care (ſaithe he.) that we hold that, whiche hath euery
where, euermore, and of al perſons ben beleeued. If theſe Defenders proue not the Churche, they profeſſe
them ſelues to be of, to haue this threefold Vntuer ſalitie, then is their Congregation not this one
Churche, nor of this one Churche of God, but the ſynagog of Antichriſte.
                  And although the Authours of this Apologie crake of the great increaſe, and ſpredding abroade
of their Goſpel, and now glorie in the number of Kingedomes, Dukedomes, Countries, common
VVeales, and Free Cities: Yet hath it not gone ſo farre abroade as the Arians hereſie did by three
partes of foure: VVhiche was at length vtterly extinguiſhed, as this ſhal be.
                  That the Catholike Churche is the Kingedome,Chriſte alone Prince, Head, Bridegrome, Spouſe of the Churche. In reſpect of outvvard gouernment the name of Head is attributed to others beſide Chriſte. the Body and the Spouſe of Chriſte, we acknowledge.
Of the ſame Kingdome we confeſſe and beleeue Chriſt to be Prince alone, ſo as he is Heade
of this Body alone, and ſo as he is Bridegrome of this spouſe alone. For Head and Spouſe alone
he is in one reſpect, not alone in an other reſpect. According to the in ward influence of Grace.
Chriſte properly and onely is Head of his Myſtical Body the Churche: But as touching the outwarde
Gouernment, the being of a Head is common to Chriſte with others. For in this reſpect certaine others
maie be called Heads of the Churche, as in Amos the Prophete theAmos. 6. ¶ Reg. 17. Pſal. 17. & Cor. 
                           •
                        . great States be called the
Heads of the People. So the Scripture ſpeaketh of Kinge Saule, VVhen thou were a litle one in thine
owne eies, thou waſtinade Head emong the Tribes of Iſrael. So Dauid ſaithe of him ſelfe, he hath made
me Head of Nations.
                  Men be called Heads, in as muche as they be in ſtede of Chriſte, and vnder Chriſte: after which
meaning S. Paule ſaith to the Corinthians, For if I forgaue any thing, to whom I forgaue it, for your
ſakes forgaue I, it, In perſona Chriſti, In the Perſon of Chriſte. And in an other place, VVee

are Ambaſſadours in the ſtede of Chriſte,Catholique in many, or fevve. as though God did exhort you through vs. To conclude in
fewe, according to inwarde influence of grace into euery faithful member, Chriſte onely is Head of the
Churche: according to outward gourning theVntruthe. vvhat Scripture, or Doctour euer ſaid ſo? Pope vnde Chriſt and in ſted of Chriſt is hed of y• ſame.
                  As touching the Bridegromeſbip, we ſaie and beleeue, that if we would ſpeake properly,2. Corin. 5. Chriſt the true Bridegrome, the Pope vnderbridgrome of the Churche, Ioan. 3. Chriſt
is the onely Bridegrome of the Church his spouſe of whom it is ſaid he that hath a spouſe, is a Bridegrome.
For from one of the Churche he begetteth children to himſelfe. But others are called Bridegromes.
Working together with Chriſte outwardly to the begetting of ſpiritual children, whom neuertheleſſe
they begette not to them ſelues, but to Chriſte. And ſuche are called the miniſters of the
Bridegrome, in as muche as they done his ſtede. And therefore the Pope, who is inſtede of Chriſte the
Bridegrome of the whole Churche, isVntruthe: For the Aucient Fathers neuer called him ſo. called alſo the Bridegrome of the vniuerſal Churche: a man
maie terme him the vicegerent Bridegrome.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  I truſt, Gentle Reader, thou wilt not looke, I ſhould anſweare al M. Hardinges
ordinarie idle talke. So ſhould I loſe good time without cauſe, and be ouer
troubleſome to thine eates. O, ſaithe he, VVhat a world it is, to ſee theſe Defenders? They,
whiche haue not keapt the vnitie of the Sprite, in the band of Charitie, whiche S. Paule requireth,
but haue ſeuered them ſelues from the Body of the Churche, tel vs nowe for ſoothe, that they beleeue,
that there is one Churche of God. O, M. Hardinge, if wée haue herein ſaide il, then beare
witneſſe of the il: If wée haue ſaide wel, wherefore make you theſe vitter outcries?
What ſo euer ye haue conceiued vs to be, yet might ye ſuffer vs quietly to ſaie the
Truthe, ſpecially ſutche Truthe, as you imagine maketh ſo mutche for your ſelfe.
                  Ye ſay, wée confeſſe, that our Churche beganne onely about fourtie yeeres
ſithence, and was neuer before. No, M. Hardinge, wée confeſſe it not: and you your
ſelfe wel knowe, wée confeſſe it not. It is your tale: it is not ours. Wée ſaie, and
haue ſufficiently proued, and you knowe it right wel, if ye would be knowen of that
ye know, y• our Doctrine is y• Olde, & yours is y• Newe, Yf ye wil néedes force your
ſelfe to the denial, it may eaſily be proued, & that by ſutch Authoritie, as your ſelfe
may not wel denie: onleſſe ye wil once againe do now, as ye haue twiſe done before.
                  Wée ſaie, that our Doctrine, & the order of our Churches is older then yours
by fiue hundred whole yeeres and more. If ye wil not beleeue vs, yet beleeue M.
Hardinge:M. Hardinge Foli. 15. a. he wil tel you euen the ſame. Marke wel his woordes: Theſe they be: It
ſtandeth not with Chriſte his promiſes made to the Churche, that he ſhould ſuffer his Church to continue
in darkeneſſe theſe thouſand yeeres paſt.
                  
                  And thus by ſecrete confeſſion, he leaueth vs fiuehundred three ſcore and ſixe
whole yeeres at the leaſt: that is to ſaie, the whole time of Chriſte, of his Apoſtles,
and of al the Godly Learned Doctours, and Fathers of the Primitiue Churche.
Whiche time notwithſtanding is thought a great deale better, and purer, then al
the time, that hath folowed afterwarde. In this Diuiſion M. hardinge being attente,
and eger vpon his cauſe, and claiming as mutche, as he thought with any
modeſtie he might be hable, hath claimed to him ſelfe onely a thouſand yeeres of
the night: and hath leafte vs welneare ſixe hundred yeeres of the daie.
                  This is your owne witneſſe, M. Harding: Conſider wel of it. It is your owne.
Therefore ye doo your ſelfe great wronge, and mutche deface your owne credite,
ſo ſuddainely to ſaie, our Doctrine is Newe. Gods name be bleſſed, it hath the
Teſtimonie, not onely of Chriſte, and his Apoſtles, but alſo of the olde Learned
Catholique Fathers of the Churche. And this is it, that ſo mutche greeueth you,
that wee refourme our Churches nowe according to the paterne, and ſamplar of
Chriſtes, and his Apoſtles firſte Inſtitution. For thereby the diſorder, and deformitie
of your Churches the more appeareth.
                  Lirinenſis ſaithe,Vincentius Lirinenſis 
                     That thing muſt be holden for Catholique, that euerywhere, euermore,
and of al menne hath benne beleeued. Theſe general notes muſt be limited with

this ſpecial reſtrainte:Catholique in many, or fevve. 
                     VVhere as the Churches vvere not corrupted. For otherwiſe
there was neuer any Doctrine ſo Catholique, ne not the Confeſſed Doctrine
of Chriſte him ſelfe, that hath benne receiued, Euermore, &, Eueryvvhere,
and of al menne without any exception. But, M. Hardinge, theſe ſelfe ſame notes
of Lirineſts vtterly euerthrowe the greateſt part of that whole Doctrine, that
you would ſo ſaine haue counted Catholique. For neither reacheth to within fiue
hundred yeeres of the Apoſtles time: nor hath it that Antiquitte indeed, that in
face, and countenance is pretended, as it is plaine by your owne former Confeſſion:
nor was it euer vniuerſally receiued, as herafter by Particulares it ſhal be proued.
It had neuer that vniuerſalitie, neither of al times, and ages: nor of al places, and
countries: nor was it euer vniuerſally receiued & allowed of al men. Therefore,
what ſo euer ye cal it, ye cannot by your owne Definition cal it Catholique.
                  The Catholique Churche of God ſtandeth not in multitude of Perſones,
but in weight of Truthe. Otherwiſe Chriſte him ſelfe, and his Apoſtles had not
ben Catholique. For his flocke was very litle: & the Catholique, or Vniuerſal conſent
of the World ſtoode againſt it. The Churche of God is compared to the Moone:
for that ſhe waxethe, and waneth, as the Moone dothe, & ſometime is ful, ſometime
is emptie:Auguſtin. de Gene. ad liter. Cap. 1. and therefore, as S. Auguſtine ſaith, is called Catholica, quia Vniuerſaliter
perfecta eſt, & in nullo claudicat, & per totum Orbem diffuſa eſt: Bicauſe ſhe is Vniuerſally
perfite, and halteth in nothing, and is
                      (not now ſhut vp in one onely Countrie,
as was the Churche of the Iewes, but) powred throughout the whole World. Though
the hartes of men haue often changes, yet Gods Truthe is euermore one: and, be it
in many, or in fewe, is euer Catholique. Thus, M. Hardinge, it is written by one
of your owne ſide:Fortalitium Fidei, Li. 5. 
                     Etſi non niſi duo Homines remanerent in Mundo, tamen in eis ſaluaretur
Eccleſia, quae eſt Vnitas Fidelium: Although there were but two men remaining in the
world, yet euen in them two the Churche, whiche is the Vnitie of the Faithful, ſhould be ſoued.
                     
                  
                  Luthers dogge eloquence, for ſo, M. Hardinge, it liketh you of your modeſtie
to cal it, were it neuer ſo rough, and vehement, the iuſt zele of Gods glorie, and of
his Holy Temple, whiche you ſo miſerably had defaced, ſo enforcing him, yet was
it neuer any thing comparable to your eloquence. For, I beſéeche you, if ye maie
haue leaſure, harken a litle, & heare your ſelfe talke. Behold your owne woordes,
ſo many, ſo vaine, ſo bitter, ſo firie, ſo furious, al togeather in one place: This newe
Churche, ye ſaie, ſet vp by Sathan: Martine Luther, and other Apoſtates his companions: This Babylonical
Tower: Luthers ſeditious, and Heretical preaching: Luther brinced to Germanie the poiſoned
Cuppe of his Hereſies, Blaſphemies, and Sathniſmes: Zuing lius, and his rable: The gutters of this
Doctrine runne out of Luthers ſincke: Luther would ſtamps, and rage, and whette his dogge eloquence
vpon you: You are the Synagog of Antichriſte. Theſe be the Figures, and Flowers of your
ſpeache. Yet muſt we thinke, that ye can neither ſtampe, nor rage: but vſe onely
Angelles eloquence. How be it. I truſt, no wiſe man wil iudge our cauſe the worſe,
for that your tongue can ſo readily ſerue you to ſpeake il.
                  To the mater, ye ſaie, that, touching the influence of Erace, Chriſte onely
is the Head of the Churche: but touching Direction, & Gouernment, the Pope onely
is the Head. Al this is but your owne tale, M. Hardinge: Ye ſpeake it onely of your
ſelfe: Other Authoritie of Scripture, or Doctour ye bringe ve-none.
                  And yet notwithſtanding, ye haue alleged Scriptures too, God wote, euen
as ye haue vſed to doo in other places.
                  Ye ſaie,2. Corin. 2. 2. Corin. 5. S. Paule ſaithe, Yf I forgaue any thing, for your ſakes I forgaue it, in the
perſonne of Chriſte: Wee are Embaſſadours in the ſteede of Chriſte, euen as though God did exhorte
you through vs: Hereof ye conclude, Ergo, The Pope vnder Chriſte, and in the ſteede
of Chriſte is Heade of the Churche.
                      Yf ye conclude not thus, ye wander idlely, and
ſpeake in vaine, & condlude nothing. Theſe woordes of S. Paule nothing touche y•
Pope, but onely the faithful, & zelous Preacher of the Goſpel. For wherein dothe

the Pope reſemble S. Paule?Heade Wherein doothe he reproſente the Perſonne of
Chriſte? What exhorteth he? What teacheth he? What ſaithe he? What doothe
he? And yet if he would do any one part of his whole duetie, how might this Argument
ſtand for good: S. Paule being at y• Cittie of Philippi in Maerdonia, exhorted
the Corinthians, as in the Perſonne of Chriſte: Ergo, the Pope being at Rome
in Italie, although he neither exhorte, nor preache, yet is he the Head of the Vniuerſal
Churche? Although Diuinitie goe harde with you, yet ye ſhoulde haue ſeens
better to your Logique.
                  
                     I graunte, Biſhoppes may be called the Heades of theire ſeneral Churches.
So Chryſoſtome calleth
                     Chryſoſtom in Epiſt ad Roma. hom. 18. 
                     Elias Caput Prophetarum, The Head of the prophetee: So Amos
ſaith,
                     Amos. 6. The Princes are the Heades of y• people: So Saul is called
                     1. Regum. 15. the Head of the
Tribes of Iſrael: So Dauid was made
                     Pſalm. 17. 
                     Caput Gentiū, The Head of Nations: Sondrie
ſutch other like examples I alleged in my Former
                     Articul. 4. Diui. 32. 
                     Replie to M. Hardinge: As that
Cyrillius the Biſhop of Alexandria, in the Councel of Epheſus was called
                     Cyrill. tomo. 4. Epiſt. 5. 
                     Caput
Epiſcoporum congregatotum, The Head of the Biſhoppes, that theſe were aſſembled: That
S. Gregorie ſaith,
                     Gregor. in. 1. Regum. lib. 4. Cap. 4. 
                     Paulus ad Chriſtum conuerſus Caput effectus eſt Natlonūm Paule
being once conuerted to Chriſte, was made the Head of Nation: That Prudentius ſaithe,
                     Prudentius in Enchiridio. 
                     Sancta Bethlem Capur eitorbis: Holy Bethlem is the Head of the World. In this ſenſe
Optatus ſaithe,
                     Optatus Li. 1. & 2. There be foure ſortes of Heades in the Churche, the Biſhops, the Prieſtes,
the Deacons, The Faithful: And al this onely in a certaine kinde of phraſe, and manner
of ſpeache. But in déede and verily S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin contra Liter. Petil. Li. 1. Ca. 5. 
                     Paulus ipſe non poterat
Caput eſſe eorum, quos plantauerat: Paule him ſelfe could not be the Head of them,
whom he had planted, Therefore Gregorie ſaithe,
                     Gregor. Li. 4. Epiſt. 38. 
                     Petrus Apoſtolus Primum, Membrū
Sanctae & Vniuerſalis Eccleſiae eſt. Paulus, Andreas, Iohannes, quid aliud, quam ſingulariū
ſunt plebium Capita? Tamen ſub Vno Capite omnes Membra ſunt Eccleſiae, Arque
ve cuncta breui cingulo locutionis aſtringam, sancti ante Legem, Sacti in Lege, Sancti
ſub Gratia: Omnes hi perficientes Corpus Domini in Membris ſunt Eccleſiae conſtituti.
Et nemo ſe vnquam Vniueiſalem vocari voluit: Peter the Apoſtle is (not the Head, but)
the chiefe Member of the Holy Vniuerſal Churche. Paule, Andrewe, and Iohn, what are
they els, but the Heades of ſeueral Nations? Yet notwithſtandinge vnder one Head
(Chriſte) they are al Members of the Churche. And to ſpeake ſhortely, the Sainctes
before the Lawe,Peter was a member of the Churche but not the Heade. the Sainctes in the time of Grace, al accompliſſhing
the Lordes Body, are placed emonge the Members of the Churche, And there was neuer
yet one, that would haue him ſelfe called the Vniuerſal Biſhop, Therfore where as M.
Hardinge ſaithe, Al Chriſtian People haue euer taken the Succeſſour of Peter
to be the Heade of the Catholique Churche vnder Chriſt, he ſpeaketh it onely of
him ſelfe.
                     Iohan. 8. 
                     And though the compariſon be odious, yet Chriſte ſaithe, Cùm loquitur
mendacium, ex proprijs loquitur:
                      when he ſpeakethe Vntruthe, he ſpeaketh it of his
owne. S. Gregorie ſaithe, Peter was the chiefe Member of the Churche of Chriſte:
but not the Head.
                  
                  But the Biſhop of Rome,De Election. ca. Licet Abb. and his hired Proctours haue taught vs farre
otherwiſe. Panormitane ſaithe: Chriſtus & Papa faciunt vnum Conſiſtortum: &,
excepto peccaio, Papa poteſt, quicquid Deus ipſe poteſt: Chriſte, and the Pope make one
Conſiſtone, and keepe one Courte: And, ſinne onely excepted, the Pope can doo, what ſo
euer God him ſelfe can doo.
                      This, I trowe, is that Head of Direction, and Gouernmente,
that M. Hardinge meaneth.
                  As for the reſte, that the Churche is the Kingedome of Chriſte, and the
Pope the Prince thereof,Extra. Noult ille, In gloſſ. M. Hardinge in ſpecial woordes anſweareth nothinge.
Notwithſtandinge ſome others haue ſaide, Petro & Coeleſtis, & Terreni Imperij iura
commiſſa ſunt: Vnto Peter was committed the right both of the Heauenly, and alſo of the
Earthely Empiere.
                     
                  
                  
                     
Laſt of al he doubteth not,Orders. but the Pope maye be called the Spouſe, or Bridegrome
of the Vniuerſal Churche: and yet the ſame without the Authoritie of any
Doctour. He allegeth onely S. Bernarde: But the ſame S. Bernarde in the
ſelfe ſame place ſaithe, and that by M. Hardinges owne confeſſion, that the Pope
is not the Bridegrome of the Churche. And therefore he was faine to expounde
his meaninge, and to weigh him downe of the other ſide with his prety Gloſe. But
S. Bernarde, without Gloſe ſaithe plainely: Non ſunt omnes amici Spouſi, qui
hodiè ſunt Sponſi Eccleſae:
                     Bernard in Concil. Remenſi. Bernard ad Euigeni. de Conſidera. Li. 3. 
                     They be not al the Bridegromes frendes, that are this daye
the Spouſes of the Churche, O miſerandain Sponſam ralibus creditam Paranymohis. Non
accici Sponſi, ſed aemuli ſunt: O miſerable is that Spouſe, that is committed to ſutche Leaders.
They are not the frendes, they are the enimies of the Bridegrome.
                  
                  How be it wée néede not greatly to recke, what ſtyles, and titles the Pope can
voucheſaue to allowe him ſelfe. As he may be called the Heade, the Prince, and
the Spouſe: euen ſo, and by like authoritie, and truthe, may he be called the
Light, the Life, the Saueour, and the God of the Churche.
                  God geue him an harte to vnderſtande, that hée maie be, although not the
Heade, yet a Member of that Body although not the Prince, yet a Subiecte in that
Kingedome: although not the Bridegrome, yet a Childe of the Churche of God.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 1.
               Furthermore (wee Beleeue) that there be diuers degrees of
Miniſters in the Churche: whereof ſome be Deacons, ſome Prieſtes,
ſome Biſhoppes: to whom is committed the office to inſtructe the
people, and the whole charge, and ſettinge foorthe of Religion.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Here it had ben your parte to haue declared your faithe touching the Holy Sacrament of Order,Sacramonte of Order By good reaſon.
agreable to the faith of the Catholike Churche: That there be ſeuen orders in the Churche, foure leſſer,
and three greater:Vntruthes boldly preſumed, as by the aunſvveare it may appeare. for ſo by good reaſon they are called. And as for the inſtitution, auctoritie, and eſtimation
of the greater, ſpecially of Prieſthood and Deaconſhip, ye might haue alleged the Scriptures:
ſo for the Leſſer the example of Chriſte, the Tradition of the Apoſtles, and the teſtimonies
written of the Apoſtles ſcholers, of thoſe that bothe nexte, and ſone after folowed them, namely
Dionyſ. cap. 3. Hierarch. Eccleſiaſt. Ignatius epiſt. 8. ad Eccleſiam Antiochenam, Tertullian
in praeſcript. aduerſus Hereticos, Gaius Pope and Martyr in Diocletians time, Sozimus
in S. Auguſtines time, Iſychius, Euſebius Caeſarienſis is his Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie, and Epiphanius in the
ende of his Booke contra Haereſes.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie
                  Gentle Reader, if I ſhould leaue theſe, and other like M. Hardinges woordes
vnanſweared, thou mighteſt happily thinke, he had ſaide ſomewhat. Here, he
ſaithe, it had benne our Parte to haue tolde thée of Seuen Orders in the Churche,
thrée Greatter, and foure Leſſe: Hauing in déede him ſelfe cleane forgotten his
owne Parte. For notwithſtandinge this controlment, and accoumpte of ſo many
Orders, yet he nameth no moe Orders, then wée haue named. And verily, if he
would haue folowed his owne Authorities, it had benne hard for him, in any good
Order to haue made vp his owne accoumpte.
                  For his owne Anacletus ſaithe, Ampliùs, quàm iſti Duo Ordines Sacerdotum,
(Epiſcopi, & Preſbyteri) nec nobis à Deo collati ſunt,
                     Anacletus Epiſtola. 3. Hieronym. ad Euagrium 
                     nec Apoſtoli docuerunt: More then
theſe two Orders of Prieſtes (Biſhoppes, and Elders) neither hathe God appointed vs, nor hauē
the Apoſtles tought vs.
                      And yet of theſe ſame Two ſeueral Orders, S. Hierome ſemeth
to make onely One Order. For thus he writeth: Audio, quendam in tantam erupiſſe

vecordiam,
                     Orders. 
                     vt Diaconos Preſbyteris, id eſt, Epiſcopis anteferret: I heare ſaye, there is a man
broken out vnto ſutche wilful furie,
                     
                     Hieronym. in eadem Epiſtola. 
                     that he placeth Deacons before Prieſtes, that is to ſaye, before
Biſhops: And againe: Apoſtolus praecipué docer, eoſdem eſſe Preſbyteros, quos
Epiſcopos: The Apoſtle, Paule, ſpecially teacheth vs, that Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes be al
one.
                     
                     Hierony in Eſai, Cap 19. Catechumeni. The ſame S. Hierome writinge vpon the Prophete Eſai, reckenethe onely
fiue Orders, or Degrees in the whole Churche: The Biſhoppes, the Prieſtes,
the Deacons, the Entrers, or Beginners, and the Faitheful. And other Order
of the Churche he knoweth none.
                  
                     Clemens ſaithe,
                     Clemens Epiſt. 2. De con. 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſt 3. Tribus gradibus 
                     Tribus gradibus eommiſſa ſunt Sacramenta Diuinorum Secretorū,
id eſt, Preſbytero, Diacono, & Miniſtro: The Myſteries of the Holy Secreſies be committed
vnto three Orders: that is, vnto the Prieſtes, vnto the Deacons, and vnto the Miniſters: And
yet Deacons, and Miniſters, as touchinge the name, are al one.
                  
                  Dionyſius likewiſe hathe thrée Orders,Dionyſi Eccle. Hierar. Cap. 5. but not the ſame: For he rekenethe
Biſhoppes, Prieſtes, & Deacons. And whereas M. Hardinge maketh his accoumpte
of Foure of the Leſſe, or Inferiour Orders, meaning thereby, Oſtiarios,
Lectores, Exorciſtas, Acoluthos: The Doore keepers, the Readers, the conuerers, and the
Waiters, or Folowers:
                     
                     Ignatius ad Antiochen 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Hierony. De 7. ordinibus Eccl. His owne Ignatius addethe thereto thrée other Orders:
Cantores, Laboratores, Confitentes: The Chounters or Singers, the Labourers, and the Confeſſours.
                     
Elemens addeth thereto, Catechiſtas, The Infourmers, or Teachers
                      of them
that were entringe into the Faithe. A litle vaine Booke, bearinge the name of S.
Hierome, De Septē Ordinibus Eccleſiae, addeth yet an other Order, and calleth them
Foſſarios, that is, The Sextines, or Ouerſeers of the Graues. And, leaſt you ſhould
thinke he rekeneth this Order, as emongſt other neceſſarie offices to ſerue the
people, and not as any parte of the Cleregie, his wordes be theſe, Primus in Clericis
Foſſariorum Ordo eſt: qui in ſimilitudinem Tobiae Sancti ſepelire morruos admonet:
The Firſte Order of the Cleregie, is the Order of the Sextines: whiche, as Holy Tob
                              •
                           e was
woonte to doo, caſſe vppon the people for the burial of the deade.
                     
                  
                  Likewiſe to the thrée greater Orders Iſidorus addeth an other diſtincte & ſeueral
Order of Biſhoppes:Iſidor. Elymolog. Lib. 1. Cap. 12. Scotui in 4. Sen. Diſtin. 24. Qu. 1. Ambroſ in Epiſt. Ad Ephe. Cap. 4. vnto whom agréethe Gulielmus Altiſiodorenſis, & Gottofredus
Pictauienſis, as appeareth by Iohannes Scotus. Againe of the other Inferiour
Orders, S. Hierome leaueth out the Coniurers, & VVaiters: S. Ambroſe
leaueth out the VVaiters, and Doore Keepers: The Canons of the Apoſtles leaue
out Coniurers, VVaiters, and Doore keepers, al thrée togeather.
                  In this ſo greate diſſenſion, & darkeneſſe, what waie wil M. Hardinge take, to
folow? By Anacletus, there be Two Orders: by Clemens, & S. Hierome, Thrée: by
Hierome Countrefeite, Seuē: by others Eight, by other Nine, by others Tenne.
                  At this notwithſtandinge, he telleth vs, our parte had benne, to haue ſhewed,
that there be iuſte Seuen Orders in the Churche, Thrée greate, and Foure Leſſe,
withoute doubte, or queſtion.
                  Here, gentle Reader, it had benne M. Hardinges parte to haue ſhewed vs the
Reaſons, and Groundes of this Diuinitie: Theſe they be, as they are alleged by
the beſte of that ſide:Petrus Lombar. senten Lib. 4. Diſtin. 24. 
                     Chriſte ſaith, I am the Doore: Ergo, there muſte be in the Churche an
Order of Doore Keepers. Chriſte ſaithe, I am the Light of the World: Hereupon haue thei
founded the Order of Acolutes, to carrie Tapers. And ſo for the reſte. Thus
mutche maie ſerue for a taſte.
                  Now let vs conſider, what theſe Orders haue to doo, and with how Holy, and
weighty offices they ſtand charged in the Churche of God. Firſte Clemens (of
whoes Authoritie M. Hardinge maket be no ſmal accoumpte, for he calleth him
the Apoſtles folowe) writeth thus:Clement conſi. Apoſt. Li. 8. Ca. 15. 
                     Vnus Hypodiaconus det aquam manibus Sacerdotum:
Duo Diaconi ex vtàque parte Altaris teneat flabellum confectum ex tenuibus
membranis, vel ex Pauonum pennis, quibus leuiter abigant praeteruclantes

beſtiolas,
                     Orders. 
                     ne in Pocula incidant: Let one of the Subdeacons geue Water to the
Prieſtes handes: Let two Deacons ſtande at the two endes of the Auſtore: either of them with
a fanne made of fine Parchemente, or of Pecockes taiſes, therewith ſoftely to chaſe awaie the
fl
                        •
                     es, that they fal not into the Communion Cuppes. The offices of other Inferioure Orders
be theſe, as they be noted by one of M. Hardinges owne ſide:
                     Aureum Speculum Pap
                           •
                        . 
                     Ad Minores Ordines
haec ſpectant: Portare Cereos, & Vrceolum: & Canes expellere de Eccleſia:
To the ſeſſe Orders theſe thinges belonge: to carrie Tapers, and Holy Water ſtockes: and to
dr
                        •
                     ue Doogges of the Churche. Theſe, I trowe, be the Myſtical Holy Orders, whereof
M. Hardinge ſaithe, Our parte had benne, to haue made ſomme ſonge diſcourſe: beinge
him ſelfe aſhamed, as it maie appeare by his ſilence, either to name them in particulare,
or to open the Secretes of theire offices.
                  
                  Howe be it in deede, good Chriſtian Reader, ſundrie of theſe offices in the Primitiue
Churche were appointed to very good, & ſober purpoſes: The Doore keepers
office was then, to keepe out Excommunicate perſonnes, that they ſhould not
preſſe in emonge the Faithful: The Pſalmiſtes, or Singers office was, to ſinge
the Pſalmes, thereby to moue the peoples hartes to deuotion: The Exorciſtes
office was, by a ſpecial gifte of God▪ ſeruinge onely for that time, to cal foorth ſoule
Sprites out of the Bodies of them, that were poſſeſſed. The Readers office was,
openly, and plainely, and diſtinctely to pronounce the Scriptures vnto the people:
and to this vſe the Biſhop deliuered vnto him a Booke with this charge:
                        
                           •
                        iſt 23. Lector. 
                     Accipe, &
eſto relator Verbi Dei: Take thou this Booke, and be thou a pronounc
                              •
                           r of the Woorde
of God.
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        iſt. 23. Cleros. And therefore Iſidorus ſaithe, Tanta, & 
                           •
                        am clara erit eius vox, vt quamuis
long
                           •
                         poſitorum aures adimpleat: The Readers voice muſte be ſo ſowd, and ſo cleare, that
it maye be hable to fille the eates of them, that ſtande far of.
                      The Acolothes, or VVaiters
office was, to attende vpon the Biſhop, as a witneſſe of his conuerſation.
                  To ſutche good vſes theſe offices then ſerued in the Churche of God. But now
there is nothinge leafte, ſauinge the bare name onely, without any maner vſe, or
Office. For neither doothe the Oſtiarius kéepe out the Excommunicates: Nor
doothe the Acoluthus waite vpō the Biſhop: Nor doothe the Exorciſte caſt foorthe
Diuels: Nor doothe the Pſalmiſte Singe the Pſalmes: Nor doothe the Reader openly
pronounce the Scriptures: (I might yet ſteppe alitle farther, to open the
whole bewtie of the Cleregte of Rome) nor doothe the Deacon make prouiſion for
the poore: nor doothe the Biſhop preache the Woorde of God.
                  This had benne our parte to haue opened at large: And for leaning of the ſame,
we were woorthy by M. Hardinges iudgemente, to be reproued.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 2.
               Yet notwithſtanding, wee ſaie, that there neither is, nor can be
any one man, whiche may haue the whole Superioritie in this Vuiuerſal
ſtate: for that Chriſte is euer preſente to aſſiſte his Churche,
and needeth not any man, to ſupplie his roome, as his onely heire to
al his Subſtance: and y• there cā be no one mortal creature, whiche is
hable to comprehend, or conceiue in his mind the Vniuerſal Churche,
that is to wite, al the partes of the world: mutche leſſe hable rightly,
and duely to put them in order, and to Gouerne them.
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     M. Hardinges anſweare hereto is longe, and tedious. The Subſtance therof
in ſhort is this: Where wée ſaie, No one Mortal Man is hable to wealde the burthen
of the whole Churche of God, M. Hardinge anſweareth: VVhere any thinge is in
deede, there whether it may be, or no▪ to diſcuſſe, it is needleſſe. Therefore whether any one man can

be ſuperiour, and chiefe ouer the whole Churche, wee leaue to ſpeake: that ſo it is, thus wee proue:
Euery Parriſhe hathe his ſeueral Vicare,1. or Perſonne: And euery Dioces his owne Biſhop. Ergo, what
reaſon is it, there be not one Chiefe Gouernoure of the whole Chriſten people?
                  VVhen queſtions be moued in maters of Faithe,2. throughe diuerſities of iudgementes the Churche
ſhould be diuided, onleſſe by Authoritie of One it were kepte in Vnitie.
                  They,3. that ſaie otherwiſe, take from Chriſte the Glorie of his prouidence, and the praiſe of his
greate loue towardes his Churche.
                  The Peace of the Churche is more conueniently procured by one,4. then by many.
                  It is moſte meete, that the Churche Militante, touchinge Gouernment,5. reſemble the Churche Triumphante.
But in the Triumphante Churche one is Gouernoure ouer the whole, that is God: Therfore in
the Churche Militant order requireth, that one beare rule ouer al accordinge to that the Holy Captaine
Ioſue ſeemeth to ſpeake,Ioſue, 1. The Children of Iuda, and the Children of Iſrael ſhal aeſſemble togeather,A greate ouerfight: For theſe be the vvoordes, not of the Captaine Ioſua, but of the Prophete Oſee. and
they ſhal make to them ſelues one Head: Thereof our Lord ſaithe in S. Iohn,Iohan. 10. There ſhalbe One Folde, and
One Shephearde.
                  In deede Chriſte is Heade of his Body. Yet neede it is, for as mutche as Chriſte nowe dwelleth not
with vs in Viſible Preſence, his Churche haue one Man to doo his ſteede of outwarde rulinge in Earthe:
And therefore he ſaide vnto Peter, Feede my Flocke: Confirme they Brethren.
                  Thus wee ſee theſe Defenders Negatiue Doctrine, That no One Man maie haue the Superioritie
ouer the whole ſtate of the Churche, diſproued, as vtterly falſe.
                  To theire ſeconde reaſon,Loe. we graunt, Chriſte needed not any man to ſupplie his roome, that ſhould
ſuccede in his whole Subſtance. Neither is Man of Capacitie of ſutche ſucceſsion:Vntruthe. For Panormitane ſaithe, Papa poteſt, quic quid Deus ipſe poteſt. neither hathe there
any ſutche fonde ſaieinge ben vttered by the Diuines.
                  But bicauſe Chriſte ſawe the knot of Vnitie ſhould be moſte ſurely kepte knit by Gouernmente of
one, heVntruthe. committed the regimēt of the whole Churche vnto One: whoes Viſible Miniſterie he might vſe
in ſteede of him ſelfe.
                  To the thirde we ſaye, that Man is not onely hable to comprehende in his minde, and conceiue
the Vniuerſal Churche, but alſo to put it in order, and to Gouerne it ſo far as is expedient.
                  Laſte of al, who ſo euer wil not be fedde nor ruled by this one Shepheard, and breaketh out of this
one Folde, he is not of the Flocke of Chriſte, but of the Hearde of Antichriſte.
                  Here, Gentle Reader, M. Hardinge hathe brought thée, not the Authoritie of
any one Catholique Doctour, or Learned Father, but onely a few colde Reaſons of
his owne, with certaine Scriptures vnaduiſedly alleged, and violently forced from
theire meaninge, as ſhal ſoone appeare.
                  His firſte Reaſon concludeth very weakely: Euery pariſhe is gouerned by One
Vicare,1. or Perſonne: & euery Dioceſe is gouerned by One ſeueral Biſhop: Ergo,
ther is One Vniuerſal Gouernour ouer the whole Churche of Chriſte. Here is neither
order in Reaſon, nor ſequele in nature. Therefore if any man woulde denie
the Argument, M. Hardinge were neuer hable to make it good. He might as wel,
and in as good order reaſon thus: Euery Kingdome, or Common Weale hathe
One Prince, or Magiſtrate to rule ouer it: Ergo, There is One Vniuerſal Prince,
to rule ouer the whole worlde. Or thus, Euery Flocke of Shéepe bathe One Seueral
Shephearde to ouerſée them: Ergo, al the Flockes through the world are
ouerſéene by One General Shephearde. Otherwiſe, M. Hardinge imagineth,
this fowle abſurditie muſte néedes folowe, that the parte is better Gouerned, then
the whole.
                  The other thrée Reaſons,2. 3. 4. In the fourthe Article, and in the 18. and 19. touchinge the Prouidence of God, the Debatinge of
queſtions in Faithe, and conſeruinge of Peace, and Vnitie in the Churche, are anſweared
already in my Former Replie to M. Hardinge.Diuiſions. In déede, I remember, to auouche
al that M.De Maior. & Obedien. Vnam Sanctam. In Gloſſa. Hardinge hathe here ſaide, one ſometimes wel inclined to that
ſide, ſaide thus: Non videretur Dominus diſcretus fuiſſe (vt cum reuerentia eius loquar)
niſi Vnicum poſt ſe talem Vicarium reliquiſſet, qui haec omnia poſſet: Chriſte our Lorde

ſhould not haue ſeemed to haue dealte diſcretely (to ſpeake it with reuerence) onleſſe he had
leafte One ſutche Ʋicare behinde him,
                     
                     Vnitie by one Pope. 
                     that might haue donne al theſe thinges.
                  
                  I graunte, Diſſenſion, and quarrelles be the ſooner ended, when al thinges be
put ouer to one Man: So that the ſame one Man maye liue for euer, and ſtil continewe
in one minde, and neuer alter. But oftentimes one Pope is ſounde contrarie
to an other:Platyna in Sabini ano. Sabellicus Enneade. 9. Lib. 1. Platyna, in Stephano Sexto. Platyna, in Romano. 1. & ſometimes one Pope hathe benne found contrarie to him ſelfe.
Pope Sabinianus would haue burnte al Pope Gregories Bookes: And, as it is
ſaide before, Pope Romanus vtterly aboliſhed al the Actes of his Predeceſſour
Pope Steuin: The ſame Pope Steuin vnburied his Predeceſſour Pope Formoſus,
and defaced, and mangled his naked carkeſſe, and vtterly condemned al, that
had benne donne by him before: And Platina geuethe this general iudgemente of
them, Nihil aliud iſti Pontificuli cogitabant, quàm vt Nomen, & Dignitatem Maiorum
ſuorum extinguerent: Theſe litle Petite Popes had none other care in the world, but howe
to deface the Name, and Eſtimation of other Popes, that had benne before them.
                      And thus,
that one Pope liketh, an other miſliketh: that one alloweth, an other condemneth.
And yet by M Hardinges iudgement, wée haue none other rule to ſtaie by in doubtful
caſes, but onely the Wil, and Pleaſure of the Pope.
                  Howe be it, this, I trowe, is not the readieſte waie to procure Peace, and to
mainteine Vnitie in the Churche. And therefore Gregorie ſaithe of Iohn the Biſhop
of Conſtantinople,Gregori. Lib 4. that claimed to him ſelfe this Vniuerſal Power,Epiſt. 34. 38. 
                     Si
hanc cauſam aequanimiter portamus,
                     Gregori. Lib. 4. 
                     totius Eccleſiae Fidem corrumpimus:
                     Epiſt. 76. 
                     Corruit Vniuerſa
Eccleſia à ſtatu ſuo, ſi is, qui Vniuerſalis dicitur, cadit: If wee quietly ſuffer this mater
thus to procede
                      (that one Man ſhal be called the Vniuerſal Biſhop, wée ſeeke not
waies to mainteine Vnitie, but) wee ouerthrowe the Faithe of the whole Churche: Yf
be, that is called the Ʋniuerſal Biſhop, happen to falle, the whole Churche fallethe from her
ſtate. Thus therefore, to allowe any one Man Vniuerſal Authoritie ouer the whole
Churche, is a mater, not behoueful, and profitable, as M. Hardinge fanſieth, but, as
Gregorie ſaithe, doubteful, and dangerous to the Churche. For althoughe al the
world either would, or could geue eare, and credite to one Man, yet were not that
therefore alwaies Chriſtian Vnitie.Auguſt. De Vera Relig ione Ca. 45 S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Habet & Superbia appetitum
quendam Vnitatis, & Omnipotentiae: Pride it ſelfe hathe a certaine deſire of Vnitie,
and of Vniuerſal Power.
                     
                  
                  An other of M. Hardinges Reaſons is this: The Churche Labouringe here in
Earthe muſt reſemble the Churche of the Sainctes Triumphing in Heauē. But in
Heauen God onely is the Gouernoure ouer the whole: Therefore, in the Churche
beneathe, the Pope likewiſe muſte needes be Gouernoure ouer the whole. Thus
God muſte be rated to Gouerne aboue, and the Pope beneath: & ſo, as one ſometime
ſaide, Diuiſum Imperium cum loue Caeſar habet.
                  
                  This is a valiante kinde of Argument. It holdeth from Heauen to Earthe:
from Angelles to Menne: from God to the Pope.
                  But how knoweth M. Hardinge, what Orders of Angelles, and Archangelles
there be in Heauen? what they doo: howe they deale: who ruleth: who are ruled:
what Lawes, and Policies they haue emongſte them? They ſaie, thei would frame
theire Churche accordinge to the Samplar: And yet good menne they neuer
knewe, nor ſawe the Samplar. But onely of them ſelues they imagine Common
Weales, and Orders in Heauen: and accordinge to the ſame, they woulde ſhape,
and faſhon theire owne Churche in Earthe. The better waye, M. Hardinge, had
benne, ſeeinge the whole mater hangeth onely vppon your fantaſies, to ſaie, that
God hathe appointed one Principal Archangel to be Pope in Heauen: and al other
Powers, Angelles, & Dominions to be his Subiectes. Thus might ye eaſily haue
made your frame to agree with your Paterne, and the one of your fanſies to anſweare
the other.
                  
                     
                     For to ſaie,
                     Ioſua for Oſee. 
                     as you ſaie,
                     Churche Triumphante, & Militāte. 
                     God ruleth al in Heauen aboue: Therefore the Pope
muſt rule al in the worlde beneath, it is but a ſclender kinde of reaſoninge. S. Auguſtine
ſaithe, Quid aliud in Pompa huius mundi homo appetit, niſi Solus eſſe, ſi fieri
poſſit, cui multa ſubiecta ſint:
                     
                     Auguſt. De V
                           •
                        ra Religione, Ca. 4
                           •
                        
                      
                     Peruerſa, ſcil
                           ••
                        et, imitatione Omnipotentis Dei? In the Ʋaine
Pompe of this worlde what thinge els is 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ that a man doothe deſire, but, if it were poſſible,
to make him ſelfe alone ſutche a one, vnto whom many thinges maye be obedient: and that by a
peeuiſhe countrefeitinge of God Omnipotente?
                  And this is it, that Gregorie ſaithe of Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople:
Illum, videlicet, imitatur, qui ſpreta Angelorum ſocietate, aſcendere conatus eſt ad culmen
Singularitatis:
                     Gregori. Lib. 4. 
                     He foloweth Lucifer,
                     Epiſt. 78. 
                     who deſpiſinge the felowſhip of the Angelles, laboured
to geate vp to the toppe of Singularitie, and ſaide, I wil mounte vp aboue the Northe,
and wilbe like vnto the Higheſt.
                  
                  Verily, Dionyſius writinge purpoſely of the Policie, and Gouernmente of the
Churche, & comparinge the ſame withe the Glorious Gouernmente of the Angels
and powers in Heauen, yet neuer vttered one Woorde of the Vniuerſal Gouernmente
of the Pope. Nay rather in the late Councel of Conſtance, out of this
very place is Fourmed an Argumente to the contrarie: In Coeleſti Hierarchia
tota Congregatio Angelorum non habet Caput Vnum,
                     In Opere Triparti. Li. 2. Ca. 
                           •
                        
                      
                     praeter ſolum Deum: Ergo, à
Simili, in Eceleſiaſtica Hierarchia Hominū nō debet eſſe Vnum Caput, praeter Solum Deū:
In the Heauenly Gouernemente the whole Companie of the Angels hathe none other One
Heade, but onely God: Therefore of the like, in the Eccleſiaſtical Gouernmente emongſte
Menne, there ought not to be any One Heade, but onely God.
                     
                  
                  Neuertheleſſe M. Hardinge is wel hable to fortifie al theſe thinges by the
Authoritie of the Scriptures. And here in ſteede of the firſte Chapter of the
Prophete Oſee,Joſua for Oſee. be allegeth the firſte Chapter of the Booke of Ioſua. And leſte
thou ſhouldeſt thinke, it were onely a marginal errour, brought in by ſomme ouerſight
of the Printer, as he vſethe ſometimes to excuſe, and to ſhifte the mater, he
hathe thus laide it wide open in his owne texte, Hereof the Holy Captaine Ioſue
ſeemeth to ſpeake. Howe be it, one errour maie the better be diſſembled emongſt
ſo many.
                  In deede the Prophete Oſee, and not the Holy Captaine Ioſua, ſpeaketh theſe
woordes: but not, as M. Hardinge imagineth▪ of the ſtate of al Chriſtendome vnder
One Pope, but of that Vnitie, and Conſente, that al the Faithful of the worlde, as
wel Iewes, as Gentiles ſhould haue vnder One Chriſte: as it is moſte euident by
the whole diſcourſe of the texte.
                  
                     Thus lie the Woordes:
                     Oſee Cap. 
                           •
                        
                      The number of the Children of Iſrael ſhalbe as the Sande of
the Sea ſhoare, that cannot be numbred: And it ſhal comme to paſſe in the place, where
it was ſaide vnto them, Ye are no people of mine, There ſhal it be ſaide vnto them, Ye
are the Children of the Liuinge God. And the Children of Juda, and the Children of Iſrael
ſhal aſſemble togeather, and ſhal appointe vnto them ſelues one Heade. Vppon whiche
Woordes S. Hierome Writethe thus: Haec omnia fient, quia magnus eſt Dies Seminis
Dei,
                        Hierony. in Oſe
                              •
                            Cap. 1. 
                        qui interpretatur Chriſtus:
                      Al theſe thinges ſhal comme to paſſe, bicauſe it
is the greate daye of the Seede of God, whiche Seede is expounded (not the Pope, but)
Chriſte.
                  
                     Likewiſe Nicolas Lyra, Congregabuntur Filij Iuda, id eſt, Apoſtoli: & Filij Iſrael,
id eſt,
                        Nicol. Lyra in Oſee Cap 1. 
                        Gentiles conuerſi: Pariter, id eſt, in Vna Eccleſia: & ponent ſibi Caput Vnum, id eſt,
Chriſtum:
                      There ſhal aſſemble togeather the Children of Iuda, that is to ſaie, the Apoſtles:
and the Children of Iſrael, that is to ſaie, the Heathens conuerted: Togeather,
that is to ſaie, in One Churche: and ſhal appointe vnto them ſelues One Head, that is to ſaie,
(not one Pope, as M. Hardinge woulde haue it, but) One Chriſte.
                  
                     
S. Auguſtine expoundinge the ſame wordes ſaithe thus:One Shepheard &c. Augu. De Ciuitate. Li. 18. Ca 28 
                     Recolatur Lapis ille
Angularis, & duo illi parietes, vnus ex Iudaeis, & alter ex Gentibus: Let vs remember
that Corner Stone (that is Chriſte, and not the Pope) and the twoo VValles, the one of
the Iewes, the other of the Heathens.
                  
                  
                     The other woordes,
                     Iohan. 10. 
                     whiche M. Hardinge allegeth out of S. Iohn, Chriſte him
ſelfe expoundeth, not of the Pope, but of him ſelfe: I am the good Shephearde: I
yelde my life for my Sheepe: I knowe my Sheepe, and am knowen of them: I haue other Sheepe.
that be not of this Flocke. Them muſte I bringe, that they maye heare my Voice: and ſo ſhal
there be one Shepheard, and one Flocke. Theſe woordes Chryſoſtome expoundeth by
the woordes of S. Paule:
                     Epheſ. 2 Chryſoſt. in Iohan Homil. 59. Vt duos conderet in Semetipſo in Vnum nouum Hominem:
That he might woorke twoo people into One newe Man (not in the Pope, but) in
him ſelfe.
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine expoundinge the ſame ſaithe thus,
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tract. 47. Duobus iſtis Gregibus, tāquam
duobus Parietibus, Chriſtus factus eſt Lapis Augularis: Vnto theſe twoo Flockes, as vnto
twoo VValles (not the Pope, but) Chriſte was made the Corner Stone.
                  
                  And what ſhould I allege any other the Olde Fathers?Nicolaus Lyra in Iohan. Ca. 10. Nicolas Lyra, as ſimple
an Interpreter, as he was, yet he likewiſe ſaithe the ſame: Fiet Vnus Paſtor, id
eſt, Chriſtus: There ſhalbe One Shephearde, that is to ſaie,
                      (not the Pope, but)
(Chriſte.) Neither is M. Hardinge hable to ſhewe vs any Learned allowed Interpreter,
Olde, or Newe, that hathe expounded this place otherwiſe.
                  Al theſe thinges notwithſtandinge, as wel theſe woordes of Chriſte, as alſo
the other of the Prophete Oſee, M. Hardinge applieth onely to the Pope. The
Pope muſte be the Heade: The Pope muſte be the Shephearde. Bothe Chriſte, and Oſee
Propheſied theſe thinges of the Glorie, and Kingdome of the Pope. Iuda and Iſrael
ſhal chuſe Chriſte to be theire Heade: Al the Faitheful through the worlde
are one Flocke, and Chriſte is the Shephearde: Ergo, the Pope is the General
Heade of the Vniuerſal Churche of God.
                  Sutche Logique M. Hardinge is hable to teache vs: and with ſutche feare, and
reuerence can he vſe Goddes Holy Woorde.S
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        on. Trāquil. in Caligula. And like as the Emperour Caligula
ſometimes tooke of the Heade of his greate God Iuppiter, and ſet on an other Head
of his owne: Euen ſo by theſe Interpretations, and Gloſes, M. Hardinge ſmiteth
of Chriſte, the Onely Heade of the Churche, and ſetteth on the Pope. For Iohannes
de Pariſijs (out of whom, or ſomme other the like, he hathe borowed this
whole mater) nothinge doubteth to telle vs, that Chriſte is not, nor cannot be the
Heade of this Body,Iohan. De Pariſi
                           •
                        s, de poteſtate Regia, & Papal
                           •
                        , Cap. 3. or the Shephearde of this Flocke. And, leſte M. Hardinge
ſhould charge me with vntrue reporte, his woordes be theſe: Congregabūtur Filij Iuda,
& Filij Iſrael, vt ponāt ſibi Caput Vnum: Et Iohan. 10. Fiet Vnū Ouile, & Vnus Paſtor.
Quod quidē de Chriſto intelligi nō poteſt: ſed de alio aliquo Miniſtro, qui praeſit loco eius:
The Children of Juda, and the Children of Iſral ſhal aſſemble togeather, to appointe vnto them
ſelues One Heade: And in the tenthe of Iohn, There ſhalbe made One Folde, and One Shephearde:
Whiche thinge doubteleſſe cannot be expounded of Chriſte: but muſte be taken of ſome
other Miniſter, that maye rule in his ſteede.
                     
                  
                  Thus wée are taught, that Chriſte is neither the Heade of his owne Body,
the Churche: nor the Shephearde of his owne Flocke, but onely the Pope. And
yet Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Qui non vtitur Sacra Scriptura, ſed aſcendit aliunde, id eſt, non
conceſſa via,
                     Chryſoſt. in Iohan. Honal. 58. 
                     hic non Paſtor eſt, ſed Fur: VVho ſo euer vſeth not the Holy Scripture, but commeth

                              〈◊〉
                            an other waie that is not lawful,
                      (whiche is by Falſe Gloſes, and Corruptions)
he is not the Shephearde of the Flocke: he is the Theefe.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Auguſtine,
                     Auguſti. Contra Donatiſt. Lib. 6. 1. Q. 3. Vocantur Cane 
                           •
                        . 
                     Ipſum characterem multi & Lupi, & Lupis imprimunt:
The note, or marke of a Biſhop many geue vnto Wolues, and be VVolues them ſelues.
                  M. Hardinge ſaithe farther: For as mutche as Chriſte is Aſcendedinto Heauen,

and is nowe nomore conuerſante emongſt vs in Viſible Forme,Feede my Sheepe. as he was before,
it behooued ſome one man to be put in Commiſſion for bearinge the charge, and
takinge care of the whole Churche. Therefore he ſaide vnto Peter, Feede my
Flocke: Confirme thy Brethren. Firſte, what Ancient Learned Father euer
thus ſcanned the woordes of the Popes Commiſſion? Or why dothe M. Hardinge
auouche ſo greate a mater of him ſelfe onely, without farther Authoritie?
And if this ſo large Commiſſion be to Feede, & to Feede ſo many, why then doothe
the Pope Féede ſo litle? Or rather, why Feedeth he nothinge at al? Or howe can
he claime by Féedinge, that neuer Feedeth?
                  Againe, where learned M Hardinge to reaſon thus: Chriſte is Aſcended into
Heauen: Ergo, the Pope is Heade of the whole Worlde? Or thus, Chriſte ſaide to
Peter, Feede my Flocke: Ergo, the Pope hath Vniuerſal Power ouer the whole
Churche of God? How can he make theſe Argumentes to holde, I wil not ſaie
by Diuinitie, but by any reaſonable ſhifte of Logique?
                  But ye ſaie, God ſpeaketh not nowe vnto vs mouthe to mouthe: nor ſendeth vs
downe his Angels from Heauen: nor inſtructeth vs nowe by Viſions, as he did others
in Olde times. What of that? wil it therefore folowe, that al the worlde
muſte geue eare to the Pope? Nay, M. Hardinge, Chryſoſtome ſaithe mutche
better:Chryſoſt. In Geneſin, Homil. 2. Bicauſe God ſpeaketh not nowe vnto vs in ſutche familiare ſorte, Ergo,
Suam erga Homines amicitiam innouare volens, quaſi longè abſentibus literas mittit,
conciliaturus ſibi Vniuerſam hominum Naturam: Therefore God mindinge to renewe his
fauour to wardes Man, ſente (his Holy Scriptures, as it were) his Letters, thereby to reconcile
to him ſelfe al Mankinde.
                      God ſpeaketh not nowe vnto vs by his Angels: but he hath
already ſpoken vnto vs,Hebrae. 1. as S. Paule ſaithe,Cala. 1. by the mouthe, and preſence of his
Onely Sonne. And therefore he ſaithe againe, Yf an Angel from Heauen woulde
nowe Preache vnto vs otherwiſe, then wee haue receiued, wée ſhoulde holde him accurſed.
                  
                  
                     But for the Vnitie, and quiet gouernmente of the Churche of God, S. Paule
ſaithe,
                     Epheſ. 4. Chriſte Aſcendinge aboue al the Heauens, hathe geuen (not One Vniuerſal Pope
to rule the whole, but) ſome Apoſtles, ſome prophetes, ſome Euangeliſtes, ſome Paſtours,
ſome Doctours, for the perfitinge of the Sainctes, for the woorke of the Miniſterie, for the
buildinge vp of the Body of Chriſte, that wee maye al comme into the Ʋnitie of Faithe, and
of the knowledge of the Sonne of God. By theſe meanes God thought it ſufficient, to
preſerue his Churche in Vnitie, and neuer made mention of One Vniuerſal Pope.
                  
                  Therefore S. Cyprian ſaithe,Cyprian. De Simplicit. Praelatorum. 
                     Vnus eſt Epiſcopatus, cuius à ſingulis in ſolidum
pars tenetur: There is but One Biſhoprike, parte whereof of euery ſeueral Biſhop is holden
in whole.
                      And againe, Ideò plures ſunt in Eccleſia Sacerdotes, vt, vno Haereſim faciente,
coeteri ſubueniant: Therefore are there many Biſhoppes in the Churche, that if one fal
into Hereſie,
                     
                     Cyprian. Lib. 3. 
                     the reſte maye healpe.
                     Epiſt 13. Thus, when Peter walked not vprightly to the
Goſpel,Galat. 2. Paule came with healpe,Euſeb. li. 5. ca. 26. and reproued him openly euen to his face:Auguſti. Epiſto. 28. Thus
Irenaeus reprooued Pope Victor: thus ſundrie godly Fathers haue reprooued others.
Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Deus docuit Petrum per poſteriorem Paulum.
A quocunque enim Verum dicitur, illo donante, dicitur, qui eſt ipſa Veritas:
Thus God inſtructed Peter by Paule his p
                              •
                           n
                              •
                           e, that was called after him. For by whom ſo euer
the Truthe is ſpoken, it is ſpoken by his gifte, that is Truthe it ſelfe.
                     
                  
                  Ye ſaye, the Pope ſuccedeth not Chriſte in al his Subſtance, yt is to ſaie, in al his
Power:In Concil. Lateran. ſub Iulio. neither hath there any ſutche fonde ſayinge benne vttered (ſaie you) at any
time by the Diuines. Yf this be true, wherefore then be theſe woordes written,
and ſo wel allowed of in the Councel of Laterane,In Concil. Lateranen. ſub Leone, In Oratione Stephani Patracenſis. 
                     Tibi data eſt Omnis Poteſtas, in
Coelo, & in Terra? Vnto your Holineſſe al Power is geuen, as wel in Heeuen, as in Earth.
                     
Wherefore is Bernarde ſo wel allowed to force the ſame farther with theſe
woordes: Qui totum dedit, nihil excludit: He that hath geuē thee Al, hath excepted Nothinge.
                     
Wherefore is Panormitane allowed to ſaie,To Foreſake the Pope. 
                     Papa poteſt omnia, quae Deus
ipſe poteſt? The Pope is hable by his power to doo, what ſo euer God him ſelfe can doo.
                  
                  For the reſte,Panormitan. De Electio. Ca. Licet. M. Hardinge ſaithe, One Kinge is hable to rule One Kingedome:
Ergo, One Pope is hable to rule the whole Churche. This Reaſon is very
ſimple, and is anſweared before. Of the gouernmente of Princes wée haue dayly
Practiſe: But of Popes, that euer exerciſed this Vniuerſal Dominion ouer the
whole Churche of God, M. Hardinge is not hable to ſhewe vs one. Wel were it
with him, if he were but a Member of Chriſtes Body, and a Sheepe of his Flocke.
S. Gregorie ſaide ſometime to Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, claiminge
vnto him ſelfe the ſame Title, and thinkinge him ſelfe hable yenough to rule the
whole,Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 38. 
                     Quid tu Chriſto Vniuerſalis Eccleſiae Capiti in Extremi Iudicij reſponſurus es
examine, qui cuncta eius Membra tibimet conaris Vniuerſalis appellatione ſupponere?
What anſweare wilt thou make in the trial of the Laſte Iudgemente, vnto Chriſte the Head
of his Vniuerſal Churche, that thus by the name of Vniuerſal Piſhop, ſeekeſt to bringe vnder
thee al the Members of his Body?
                     
                  
                  Laſte of al, M. Harding concludeth without premiſſes: Who ſo euer wil not be
ruled by this Shepheard, the Pope, is of the Hearde of Antichriſte. So ſaithe one
of the Popes hired Proctours:De Maiorlt. & Obedient, Vnam Sanct. In Gloſſ. 
                     Quicquid Saluatur, eſt ſub Summo Pontifice: VVhat
ſo euer Soule is ſaued, it is vnder the Pope.
                      This one thinge beinge graunted, M. Hardinges
whole cauſe paſſeth cleare.
                  But, God be thanked, it appeareth already to al them, that haue eles to ſee, that
wee haue not departed from the ſeruile Obedience of that See, but vpon iuſte
cauſe, and good aduiſe. And in ſutche ſorte the Pope him ſelfe wil not denie, but
it is lawful for any Churche to diſſente from the Churche of Rome. Theſe he his
woordes,Diſt. 12. Non. decet. whiche muſte be holden for a Lawe: Quicquid ſine diſcretione Iuſtitiae contra
Romanae Eccleſiae Diſciplinā actum fuerit, ratum haberi nulla ratio permittit: VVhat
ſo euer thinge is donne without diſcretion of Iuſtice, againſte the Order of the Churche of
Rome, it maye not by any meanes be allowed.
                      By whiche woordes it appeareth,
Ex contrario Senſu, By an Argument of the contrarie,
                      that, what ſo euer is donne by
diſcretion of Iuſtice, notwithſtandinge it be againſt the Order of the Churche of
Rome, yet ought it to wel allowed.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Vnitate Eccle. Catholica, Ca. 10. 
                     Ne Catholicis quidem Epiſcopis conſentiendum eſt, ſicubi
fortè falluntur, vt contra Canonicas Scripturas aliquid ſentiant: VVee maye not geue our
conſente vnto any Biſhoppes, be they neuer ſo Catholique, if they happen to be deceiued, and
to determine centrarie to the Scriptures.
                  
                     And Pope Pius.
                     Abbas Vrſper. Pag. 443. 2 him ſelfe ſaithe, Reſiſtendum eſt quibuſcunque in faciem, ſiue
Paulus, ſiue Petrus ſit, qui ad Veritatem non ambulat Euangelij: VVee are bounde to
withſtande any man to the face, be it Peter, be it Pauſe, yf be walke not to the Truthe of the
Goſpel.
                  
                  To conclude, where the Woulfe is broken in, it is beſte for the poore Sheepe,
to breake out. That the Woulfe was broken in, beſide the cruel ſpoile, and raueninge
of Chriſtian Bloude, it is plaine by the woordes of S. Bernarde. For
thus he ſpeaketh thereof in Open Councel, & in the preſence of ſundrie Biſhoppes:
Non cuſtodiunt Gregem Domini,
                     Bernardus in Concil. Remen. In eodem Concilio. Numer. 16. 
                     ſes mactant, & deuorant: They keepe not the Lordes
Flocke: but they kille it, and deuoure it.
                      Againe he ſaithe, Propterea relinquamus
iſtos, quia non ſunt Paſtores, ſed Traditores: Therefore ſet vs leaue them: For they
are not Poſtours, but Traitours.
                      And therefore God thus warneth vs in the like caſe:
Exite de medio horum hominum, ne cum illis pereatis: Goe foorthe from the middes of
thoſe Menne, leſte periſhe al togeather.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 3.
               For al the Apoſtles,The other Apoſtles equal vvith Peter. as Cyprian ſaithe, were of like power emong
them ſelues, and the reſt were the ſame, that Peter was.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Power is double,Peters Povver Ordinarie. The Apoſtles povver Extraordinarie. Peter is the Shepheard: The Apoſtles are the Sheepe. Manifeſt, and mere Vntruthes. the one Ordinary, the other by priuilege or Extraordinary. Ordinary Power
is that whiche contineweth in one and the ſame courſe for euer. Accordinge to whiche Power Peter
was Head of the Churche, and his Succeſſours after him. Power by Priuilege, or Extraordinary
is that whiche is geuen beſides the common courſe by waie of diſpenſation. As where the other
Apoſtles ſhoulde haue receiued Ordinarely theire Power from Peter, as who had commiſsion
ouer al, bothe Lambes and Sheepe, amonge whome the Apoſtles had theire place: Chriſie by ſpecial
grace preuenteth ordinarie courſe, and maketh them for the time, and in their Perſons equal with
Peter in the office of Apoſtleſhip. Thus concerninge ordinarie Power, Peter is Head of the Apoſtles,
and by that reaſon they are ſubiecte vnto him, as Sheepe vnto their Shepheard. But by Priuilege
true it is, as S. Cyprian ſaithe, They were of like power amonge them ſelues.Peter hath Povver to him, and to his Heires for euer: The Apoſtles haue Povver onely for terme of Life. Nowe what
oddes there is berwixt an Ordinarie auctoritie of iudginge geuen to any Officer, for him ſelfe, and
his Succeſſours in that Office for euer, and a ſpecial Commiſsion for life time onely: ſo mutche is
berwixte Peter and the reſte of the Apoſtles.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     S. Cyprians woordes be plaine: Hoc erant vtique & Coeteri Apoſtoli, quod fuit
Petrus,
                     
                     Cyprian. De Simplicita. Praelatorum. 
                     pari conſortio praediti & Honoris, & Poteſtatis, Sed exordium ab Vnitate proficiſcitur,
vt Eccleſia vna monſtretur: The reſte of the Apoſtles were the ſame, that Peter
was, al endewed with one felowſhip bothe of Honour, and of Power. Yet the Beginninge
is taken of One, to ſhewe, that the Churche is One. But al theſe woordes, 
                           •
                        e they neuer
ſo plaine, are ſoone ſhifted by a Prety Diſtinction, ſutche as neither S. Cyprian,
nor any other Learned Father, or Doctour euer knewe.
                  
                  Wée are taught here to vnderſtande, that there are twoo Powers: The one
Ordinarie, the other Ertraordinarie. By Ordinarie Power, ſaithe M. Harindge,
that is the ſaie, by Order, and of Common Courſe, Peter appointed al the reſte of
the Apoſtles, and gaue them Authoritie. And Chriſte alſo likewiſe gaue them
Authoritie, but by Extraordinarie Power, that is to ſate, biſtoes Order, and out of
Courſe. Or, to vtter the mater in plainer wiſe, Peter gaue power to the Apoſtles
by his Vſual Authoritie, and by dowe fourme of Lawe: But Chriſte gaue
them Power, as M. Hardinge ſaithe, Onely for the time, and by waie of Diſpenſation,
and biſides the Lawe. And thus Peter is the Ordinarie Heade of the Apoſtles:
Chriſte is theire Head too, how be it, not in like ſorte, but Extraordinarie.
For, as touchinge Order of gouernmente, Peter is the Shephearde, and the Apoſtles
are the Sheepe. Al other the Apoſtles holde theire Power, as by Copie,
for terme of Life: Peter onely holdeth the ſame in Fée Simple, to him, and to his
Heires for euer.
                  And, good Chriſtian Reader, leaſt thou ſhouldeſt thinke, I haue in ſcorne, and
willfully wreaſted M. Hardinges woordes, whiche otherwiſe might be vttered by
him in ſome ſober meaninge: maye it pleaſe thée by theſe fewe to conſider, what
certaine others of that ſide haue vttered, and publiſhed, touchinge the ſame.
                  Petrus de Palude ſaithe thus:
                     Petrus de Palude De Poteſtae. Apoſtolor. Ar. 2. Petr. de Palade In eodem Arti. Dico▪ quòd nullus Apoſtolorum, praeter Perrum,
factus eſt à Chriſto Epiſcopus: I ſaie, that none of the Apoſtles, ſauinge onely Peter, was
made Biſhop by Chriſte. And againe,
                      Videretur, in Nouo Teſtamento, quòd alij Apoſtoli
à Chriſto Nullam Poteſtatem Iuriſdictionis receperunt: & per conſequens relinguitur,
quòd Omnis Poteſtas Iuriſdictionis, quam habuerunt Apoſtoli, Specialiter poſt

Chriſti Aſcenſum, fuit collata eis à Petro: It woulde appeare, that in the Newe Teſtament
the reſte of the Apoſtles receiued no manner Power of Juriſdiction at Chriſtes hādes: and
ſo conſequently it foloweth, that al the Power of Juriſdiction, that the Apoſtles had, ſpecially
after Chriſtes Aſcenſion, was geuen vnto them by Peter. Againe, he imagineth
God the Father thus to ſaie vnto Chriſte:
                     
                     Petr. de Palude In eodem Cap. Petr. de Palude De Poteſtate Curator. Ar. 6. Conſtitues eos Principes, non per te, ſed
per tuum Vicarium: Thou ſhalte make the Apoſtles gouernours ouer al the Earth, not by
thee ſelfe, but by Peter thy Vicare. And againe,
                      Paulus, & alij Apoſtoli à Petro, non
debuerunt praedicare in Eccleſia ſpecialiter Petro commiſſa, niſi de eius licentia. Vnde à
Chriſto habuerunt idoneitatem: à Petro autem Authoritatem: Paule, and the other Apoſtles
mighte not Preache in the Churche committed vnto Pet
                           •
                        r, but with Peters Licence.
For of Chriſte they had onely Habilitie: but of Peter they receiued Authoritie.
                  
                  
                     In like manner writeth Pope Nicolas,
                     Extra. De Elect. & Electi poteſt. Fundamēta. Petrum in Conſortium Indiuiduae Trinitatis
aſſumptum, id, quod ipſe erat, Dominus voluit nominari: Our Lorde tooke Peter
into the Felowſhip of the Holy Trinitie, and would haue him called the ſame, that he was
him ſelfe.
                  
                  By ſutche Amplifications, and outrage in ſpeache, it woulde appeare, Chriſte
were Peters Vicare: and not Peter Vicare vnto Chriſte. In this Senſe, and meaninge
M. Hardinge ſéemeth to ſaie, that by Ordinarie, and common Courſe of
Lawe, the Apoſtles had al theire Power, not from Chriſte, but onely from Peter.
                  But here M. Hardinge vnwares falleth into a marueilous inconuenience.
For, theſe thinges thus graunted, it muſte néedes folowe, that duringe the time of
Chriſtes aboade in Earthe, the Apoſtles had no manner Ordinarie Power at al:
neither to Preache, nor to Baptize, nor to Binde, nor to Looſe. For Heruaeus a
Doctour of M. Hardinges ſide ſaithe thus,Hernaeus, De Poteſtate Papae, Ca. 21. 
                     Sciendum, quòd, cùm Chriſtus conuerſabatur
cum hominibus, non fuit alius Papa praeter ipſum: nec Petrus tunc habuit poteſtatem
Papalem: Wee muſte vnderſtande, that while Chriſte was conuerſante emongſt
menne in Earthe, there was none other Pope, but be alone: Neither then had Peter the
Popes Authoritie.
                     
                  
                  
                     So likewiſe ſaithe Petrus de Palude:Petr. de Palude De Poteſta. A poſtolorwn. Non decebat eſſe ſimul, niſi Vnum Summum
Pontificem. Vnde, Chriſto Aſcenſuro, debuit Petrus fieri Epiſcopus Summus, &
non anteà: It was not meete there ſhoulde be more then one Higheſt Biſhop at one time.
Therefore, when Chriſte was ready to Aſcende into Heaven, it was conuenient to make Peter
the Higheſt Biſhop, and not before.
                  
                  For ſo longe time, Chriſte coulde not geue his Apoſtles any Ordinarie Authoritie:
for M. Hardinge telleth vs, that his Power herein was Onely Ertraordinarie:
Of the other ſide, Peter coulde geue them none: for as Heruaeus, and Paladenſis
ſaie, Vntil Chriſtes Aſcenſion he was not Pope.
                  
                     But to leaue theſe vaine Fantaſies, not woorth the hearinge, S. Paule wil
ſoone remooue al theſe doubtes.
                     Gala. 1. 
                     Thus he writeth of him ſelfe: Paule the Apoſtle,
not of Menne, nor appointed by Menne, but by Jeſus Chriſte, and God the Father. And
S. Chryſoſtome hereof writeth thus,
                     Chryſoſt in Epiſ. ad Galat. Ca. 2. 
                     Paulus nihil opus habebat Petro, nec illius
egebat voce: ſed Honore Par erat illi. Nihil enim hic dicam amplius: Paule had no manner
lacke of Peter: nor ſtoode in neede of his voice, or allowance: but in Honour was his Felowe.
For I wil here ſaie no more. His meaninge is, He was his better.
                  
                  Howe be it, what néede woordes? Set contention aparte: the caſe is cleare.
For it was not Peter, that breathed ouer the Apoſtles: It was not Peter, that
ſaide vnto them,Iohn. 20. Marke. 16. 
                     Goe to the loſte Sheepe of the houſe of Iſrael: Receiue the Holy Ghoſte:
Goe into al the Worlde, and Preache the Goſpel. Al this Power was geuen them by
Chriſte alone, and not by Peter.
                  
                     Nowe, where as M. Hardinge teacheth vs, that Peter was the Shephearde,
and the Apoſtles the Sheepe, makinge them al as mutche inferiour vnto Peter, as

the Shéepe is inferiour vnto the Shepheard,
                     The other Apoſtles equal vvith Peter. 
                     S. Hierome ſaithe, Dices, Super Petrum
fundatur Eccleſia: Licerid ipſum in alio loco ſuper Omnes Apoſtolos fiat, & cuncti
claues Regni Coelorum accipiant, & Ex Aequo ſuper eos Eccleſiae fortitudo ſolidetur:
                     
Ye wil ſaye, The Churche is founded vpon Peter. Notwithſtandinge in an other
place the ſame thinge is donne vpon al the Apoſtles: and al receiue the keies of the Kingdome
of Heauen:Hierony. Aduer. Ioui
                           •
                        tan. Li 1. Origen. in Matthae. Tracta. 1. and the ſtrengthe of the Churche is founded Equally vpon them al. Likewiſe
the Learned Father Origen ſaithe, Quòd ſi ſuper vnum illum Petrum tantùm exiſtimas
aediſicari toram Eccleſiam, quid dicturus es de Iohanne Filio Tonitrui, & Apoſtolorum
vnoquoque?
                      Yf thou thinke, the whole Churche was builded onely vpon Peter, what
wilt thou then ſaie of Iohn the Sonne of the Thunder, and of euery of the Apoſtles? Therefore
S. Chryſoſtome of Peter ſaithe thus:
                     Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 83. 
                     Duplex crimen erat: ium quia repugnauit,
tum quia coeteris ſeipſum praepoſuit: Peter was in double faulte: bothe for that he
withſtoode Chriſte, and alſo for that he ſet him ſelfe before the reſte. S. Auguſtine maketh
Peter Felowe, and Equal with the other Apoſtles: Inter ſe concorditer vixerunt
Petrus,
                     
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 86 
                     & Condiſcipuli eius: Peter and his Felowes liued agreeably togeather. And
againe, Chriſtus ſine perſonarum acceptione hoc dedit Paulo, vt Miniſtraret Gentibus,
quod etiam Petro dederat,
                     
                     Auguſt. in Epiſt. Ad Galat. Ca. 2. 
                     vt Miniſtraret Iudaeis: Chriſte without any choiſe of Perſonnes,
gaue the ſame (Authoritie) to Paule, to Miniſter emongſt the Heathens, that he gaue to Peter,
to Miniſter emongſt the Iewes. And the very Ordinarie Gloſe geoeth theſe
woordes to S. Paule: Non didici ab. alijs, tanquam à Maioribus: ſed contuli cū illis, tanquam
cum amicis,
                     
                     Gloſſ. Galat. 2. 
                     & Paribus: I learned not of (Peter, and) others, as of my betters: but I
had conference with them, as with my Equalles, and Frendes. Likewiſe Paule him ſelfe
ſaithe, Iacobus, Petrus, Iohannes, qui videbantur Columnae eſſe, dextras dederunt
mihi,
                     
                     Gala. 2. 
                     & Barnabae Societatis: James, Peter, and John, that ſeemed to be the Pillers, gaue vnto
me, and Barnabas the righte handes of Felowſhip: Whiche the Gloſe expoundeth
thus, Societatis, id eſt, Aequalitatis:
                      Of Felowſhip, that is to ſaye, of Equalitie.
                  Therefore, notwithſtandinge M. Hardinges Ordinarie, and Extraordinarie
Diſtinctions, S. Cyprians woordes are plaine, and true, The reſte of the Apoſtles
were euen the ſame (in Authoritie) that Peter was, al end
                           •
                        wed with One Felowſhip, bothe
of Honoure, and of Power.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 4.
               And that it was ſaide indifferently to them al, Feede ye: indifferently
to them al, Goe into the vvhole vvorlde: indifferently to them al,
Teache ye the Goſpel.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Wee denie, that it was ſaide indifferently to them al, Feede ye. Yea, or that it was ſaide
at al, Feede ye.Vntruthe moſt vaine, and manifeſt. To Peter and none els was it ſaide, Feede my Lambes, Feede my Sheepe.Iohn. 21. VVhiche
Woorde of Feedinge ſo ſingularly ſpoken to Peter in the preſence of the other Apoſtles, prooueth, that
it was not indifferently ſaide to al, Feede ye. That they were ſente into the whole VVorlde, and
that they were commaunded to teache,Marke. 16. and in that reſpect alſo to Feede, wee confeſſe vnder the diſtinction
of Ordinarie and Extraordinarie Power before mentioned.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It forceth not greately, what M. Hardinge denie, or graunte, hauinge neither
Reaſon, nor Authoritie, but onely his owne. But if Power were not geuen indifferently
to al the Apoſtles, tel vs then, wherein is the oddes? What had Peter
more? What had the others leſſe? Or what Olde Doctour, or Learned Father euer
ſawe this Difference?
                  Chriſte ſaide equally vnto them al, Rece
                           •••
                         the Holy Ghoſte: Whoſe Sinnes yee

forge
                           •
                        ue, they are forgeeuen: Goe into the whole Worlde: Preache the Goſpel to euery Creature.
Theſe woordes perteine equally vnto al. Peter had nomore the Holy
Ghoſt, nomore Power to forgéeue Sinnes, nomore Commiſſion to goe into the
whole Worlde, nomore Authoritie to Preache the Goſpel, then others had.
                  
                     M. Hardinge ſaithe, To the reſte of the Apoſtles it was not ſaide at al, Feede
ye.Iohn. 21. Marc. 13. 
                     To Peter, and to none els, was it ſaide, Feede my Lambes: Feede my Sheepe.
Yet Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe, Quod Vni dico, Omnibus dico:
                      That I ſaie to One, I
ſaie to Al.Hierony. contra Jouinian. Li. 1. 1. Cor. 3. 
                     And S. Hierome ſaithe, as it is before alleged, Al the Apoſtles receiued
the Keies of the Kingedome of Heauen: and the ſtrength of the Churche was builte Equally
vpon them al. S. Paule ſaithe: What is Peter, what is Paule, but the Miniſters of
Chriſte, through whome ye haue beleeued? Paule hath planted: Apollo hath watered. He
that planteth,Chryſo. in Epiſt. Ad Gala. Ca. 1. is nothinge: He that watreth, is nothinge. Chryſoſtome ſaithe: Angeli,
quamliber magni, tamen Serui ſunt, ac Miniſtri:
                      The Angels of God, be they neuer ſo
greate, yet are they but Seruantes, and Miniſters. Therefore, to conclude, he ſaithe:
Ne Paulo quidem obedire Oportet,
                     
                     Chryſoſto. in Epiſt. Ad Timoth. 2. Homi. 2. 
                     ſi quid proprium dixerit, ſi quid humanum: ſed Apoſtolo
Chriſtum in ſe loquentem circumferenti: Wee maye not beleeue Paule him ſelfe,
if he ſpeake any thinge of his owne, or of worldly reaſon: but wee muſte beleeue the Apoſtle
bearinge aboute Chriſte ſpeakinge within him.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 5.
               And,Ad Euagrium. as Hierome ſaithe, Al Biſhoppes where ſo euer they be, be
they at Rome, be they at Eugubium, be they at Conſtantinople, be
they at Rhegium, be al of like Preeminence, and of like Prieſthood.
And,De Simpl. Pelator. as Cyprian ſaithe, There is but one Biſhop
                     •
                  ike, and a peece
thereof is perfitely and wholy holden of euery particular Biſhop.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Interpreter, not without the wil and aduiſe of this Defender, hath altered the Senſe of
the Latine,Vntruthe: Reade the Anſvveare. as the Authour of the Latine hath altered the woordes of S. Hierome. For neither ſpeaketh
S. Hierome of Biſhoppes in the plural number, neither ſaithe the Latine Apologie, that the Biſhoppes
be al of like Preeminence, whiche this Tranſlation hath, but of the ſame Merite, and of the
ſame Prieſthood. VVith the woorde Preeminence guilefully ſhifted into the ſentence in place of this
woorde Merite, theſe falſe players thought to winne the Game. That is, that al Biſhoppes, after
the minde of S. Hierome be of like Preeminence, and ſo that al be of like Power, and auctoritie▪
and none aboue other.
                  Concerninge the place alleged,Hieromes place diſcuſſed. S. Hierome in an Epiſtle to Euagrius ſpeakinge againſt that, a
particular cuſtome of the Churche of Rome ſhoulde Preiudicate the Auctoritie of the whole worlde,
in preferringe Deacons before Prieſtes, compareth Biſhoppes of great Cities and litle Townes togeather,
and ſaithe, that as touchinge the Honour, Dignitie, and Power of Biſhoply Order and Office.
and of Prieſthood, as good and as greate a Biſhop in that reſpect is the One, as the other: and that
the Biſhop of Eugubium, and Rhegium, two litle Townes in Italie, and of Thebes an other litle
Towne in Egypte, are Biſhoppes and Prieſtes, and haue as greateThis vvas no parte of the queſtiō. Merite in regarde of any their Vertues,
and as greate Power concerninge the order of Prieſthood, as the Biſhoppes of Rome, of Conſtantinople,
of Alexandria. Yet as touchinge Power and Auctoritie of regiment, the Patriarkes of
Conſtantinople, Alexandria, and Antiochia be aboue Biſhoppes of other Dioceſes, and the Biſhop of
Rome Peters Succeſſour isVntruth: For the B. of Rome is equal vvith the other foure Patriarkes, as ſhal appeare. aboue al. For we beinge many are one Body in Chriſte, and euery man amonge
our ſelues one an others members. This knotte requireth a mutual conſent of the whole Bod
                        •
                     e,
but chiefly the concorde of Prieſtes:Epiſt. 84. Amonge Biſhoppes is difference of Povver vvith likeneſſe of Honour. amonge whome although dignitie be not common to them al, yet
order is general, as Leo writeth. For euen among the moſte Bleſſed Apoſtles (ſaithe he) in likeneſſe of
Honour there was oddes of Power. And whereas the Election of them al was equal, yet to One was
it geuen to be ouer the reſte. Out of whiche platte roſe the diſtinction alſo of Biſhoppes, and with

greate Prouidence it hath benne diſpoſed,Equalitie of Biſhoppes. that al ſhoulde not take al vpon them, but that in euery
prouince there ſhoulde be one, who might firſte geue his ſentence amonge his brethren: and againe
that in the greate Citties ſome ſhoulde be ordeined for takinge vpon them matters of greater care,
through whome the charge of the vniuerſal Churche ſhoulde haue courſe to the one ſee of Peter, and
that nothinge ſhoulde euer diſſent from the Head.
                  Howe greate, and Honorable ſo euer the roume is, that any Biſhop is placed in, be he Archbiſhop,
Metropolitane, Primat, Patriarke, or Pope himſelfe: He is nomore a Biſhop, then any other of thoſe,
who occupie the loweſt roume.The diuerſitie bitvveene Biſhops, vvherein it conſiſteth. The diuerſitie conſiſteth in this, that they are called to parte of charge
in ſundry proportions, as the Biſhoprikes are greater or leſſer: the Pope hath committed vnto himVntruth: For Chriſte neuer gaue the Pope any ſutche charge. the
charge of the whole Folde of Chriſte, and hath the fulnes of Power. For if al were of like Power,
as theſe Defenders teache, Vnitie coulde not be mainteined. VVhereforeVntruth: For Chriſte neuer gaue ſutche order. by very order of Chriſte
himſelfe it hath benne ordeined, that maters touchinge Faith and Religion; at leaſt ſutche as be
weighty, be referred to that one Prince of Paſtours, who ſitteth in the chaire of Peter, the Higheſt
Biſhop, whiche hathVntruth: For it hath not alvvaies benne obſerued. alwaies benne done and obſerued from the Apoſtles time to our daies by Catholikes,
and not ſeldom alſo by Heretikes.
                  The ſentence that this Defender alleageth out of S. Cyprian, it ſeemeth he vnderſtoode it not.
Ye ſaie, that a piece of that one Biſhoprike is perfitly and wholy holden of euery particular Biſhop.
But what meane ye by that? If by this woorde, In ſolidum, perfitly and wholy holden,
ye meane, that euery particular Biſhop without is a Biſhop dependinge of any other, then ye ſpeake
againſt the woordes yee bringe out of S. Cyprian.De Simplicitate Praelatorum. VVho ſaithe, that as there are many beames of
one Sunne, many boughes of one roote▪ many Riuers of one Fountaine: ſo there are many Biſhoppes
of one Biſhoprike. Therefore this Biſhoprike is vnto particular Biſhoppes, as the Sunne, as the
Roote, as the Fountaine.Vatruth, impudente aboue meaſure. VVhat the Fountaine, roote, and Sunne of this Biſhoprike is, S. Cyprian
declareth a litle before, ſhe winge that it was ſaide to Peter, To thee I wil geue the ketes of the Kingdome
of Heauen. And, Feede my sheepe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here M. Hardinge chargeth vs with twoo of his owne common faultes: Firſt
with Corruption: nexte with Ignorance. With Corruption, in the woordes, and
ſenſe of S. Hierome: with Ignorance, in the place of S. Cyprian. But if wee be
hable ſufficiently, and truely to anſweare bothe, I truſte, M. Hardinge ſhal
haue no great cauſe, mutche to vaunte him ſelfe, either of his plaine dealinge
herein, or of his knowledge.
                  And here, to diſſemble theſe childiſhe cauſilati
                        •
                     ns of the altering of Numbers,
the Singulare into the Plural: and of the changinge of this woorde, Merite, into
this woorde, Preeminence: whiche greate faulte, if it were any, by M. Hardinges
owne Confeſſion, proceeded onely from the Interpreter, and not from the
Authour: I ſaie, to diſſemble, and to paſſe by al theſe ſéely quarrels, what S. Hierome
meante hereby, Eraſmus a man of great Learninge, and iudgement, expoundeth
thus:
                        
                           •
                        raſm, in Schol. in Epiſt. ad Euagrium. 
                     Hieronymus aequare videtur omnes Epiſcopos inter ſe, perinde quaſi omnes
ex aequo Apoſtolis ſucceſſerint. Nec putat vllum Epiſcopum alio minorem eſſe, quód
ſit humilior: aut Maiorem, quód ſit Opulentior: Nam aequat Eugubienſem Epiſcopum
cum Romano, Deinde non putat, Epiſcopum quouis Preſbytero praeſtantiorem eſſe, niſi
quód ius habeat Ordinandi: Hierome ſeemeth to matche al Biſhoppes togeather, as if they
were al equally the Apoſtles Succeſſours. And he thinketh not any Biſhop to be ſeſſe then
other, for that he is poorer: or greatter then other, for that he is richer. For he maketh the
Biſhop of Eugubium
                      (a poore towne) equal with the Biſhop of Rome. And farther he
thinketh, that a Biſhop is no better then any Prieſte, ſauinge that the Biſhop hath Authoritie
to Order Miniſters.
                     
                  
                  
                     But S. Hieromes woordes are plaine of them ſelfe, and haue no neede of other
Expoſitour.
                     Hierony. ad Euagrium. 
                     Thus he writeth: Quid facit, excepta Ordinatione, Epiſcopus,
quod Preſbyter non faciat? Nec altera Romanae Vibis Eccleſia, altera totius Orbis

exiſtimanda eſt. Et Galliae, & Britannia, & Aphrica, & Perſis, & Oriens, & India,
& Omnes Barbarae Nationes Vnum Chriſtum adorant: vnam obſeruant regulam Veritatis.
Si Authoritas quaeritur, Orbis maior eſt Vrbe. Vbicunque fuerit Epiſcopus,
ſiue Eugubij, ſiue Conſtantinopoli, ſiue Alexendriae, ſiue Tanai, eiuſdem
Meriti, eiuſdem eſt Sacerdotij. Potentia diuitiarum, & paupertatis humilitas vel ſublimiorem,
vel Inferiorem Epiſcopum non facit. Coeterùm omnes Apoſtolorum Succeſſores
ſunt. Quid mihi profers Vnius Vrbis conſuetudinem?
                      What doothe a Biſhop,
ſau
                        •
                     nge onely the Orderinge of Miniſters, but a Prieſte maye doo the ſame? Neither maye
wee thinke that the Churche of Rome is one, and the Churche of al the worlde biſide is
another. Fraunce, Englande, Aphrica, Perſia, Leu
                        •
                     nte, India, and al the Barbarous
Nations woorſhip one Chriſte, and keepe one rule of the Truthe. If vvee ſeeke for
Authoritie, The whole worlde is greater then the Cittie of Rome. Where ſo euer
there be a Biſhop, be it at Eugubium, be it at Rome, be it at Conſtantinople, be it at Rhegium,
be it at Alexandria, be it at Tanais, they are al of one woorthineſſe, they are al of
one Biſhoprike. The Power of the Richeſſe, and the baſeneſſe of Pouertie, maketh not a
Biſhop either Higher, or Lower. For they are al the Apoſtles Succeſſours. What bringe
you me the Cuſtome of Rome, beinge but one Cittie?
                  
                  Nowe, if M. Hardinge wil ſteale awaie in the darke, as his manner is, and
ſaie, that S. Hierome ſpake onely of the Merite of Life, or of the Office of Prieſthoode,
ſette ſome man telle him, that this was no parte, neither of the queſtion
mooued, nor of the anſweare of S. Hierome: And S. Hierome in plaine, and
expreſſe woordes ſaithe, Si Authoritas quaeritur, If vvee ſeeke (not for
Merite of Life, but) for Authoritie in gouernmente, therein the whole
worlde is greatte, then the Cittie of Rome.
                      M. Hardinge imagineth, S. Hierome
ſpake onely of, I knowe no what: but S. Hierome him ſelfe ſaithe, he ſpeaketh
namely of Authoritie.
                  
                  And whereas M. Hardinge is ſo highly offended with the chaunginge of this
woorde, Merite, into this woorde, Preeminence, and ſaithe farther, that theſe
Falſe Platers thought thereby to winne the game, it maye pleaſe him to remember,
that, howe ſo euer the game goe, S. Hierome him ſelfe plainely plaide the
ſelfe ſame game: I meane, that S. Hierome vſinge this woorde, Merite, without
queſtion meante, Preeminence. For thus he ſaithe, Potentia Diuitiarum, & Paupertatis
humilitas, vel Sublimiorem, vel Inferiorem Epiſcopum non facit: The Power of
Richeſſe, and the baſeneſſe of Pouertie maketh not a Biſhop either Higher, or Lower.
                     
M. Hardinge mighte eaſily hauè ſeene, that Higher, and Lower, perteine not to
Merite of Life, but to Preeminence. Therefore lette him looke better vpon his
Booke, before he thus lightly condemne others for corruption.
                  I graunt, it is true, as M. Hardinge ſaithe, This quarrel firſt beganne aboute
a particulare Cuſtome of the Churche of Rome, where as the Dra
                        •
                     ons Vaunted
them ſelues, and would be placed aboue the Prieſtes. But here M. Hardinge, as
his manner is, willingly diſſembleth, and ſuppreſſeth ſomewhat. S. Auguſtine
more liuely,Auguſt. in quaeſ. veter. & Noui Teſtament. quae. 101. and fully expreſſeth the ſame. For thereof he writeth thus: Quidam,
qui nomen liabet Falcidij, Duce ſtultitia, & Romanae Ciuitatis Iactantia, Leuîtas Sacerdotibus,
& Diaconos Preſbyteris coaequare contendit: One Falcidius, Fooliſhneſſe,
and the Pride of the Cittie of Rome leadinge him thereto, laboureth to make the Deacons
Equal with the Prieſtes.
                     
                  
                  This lewde diſorder S. Hierome controlleth by the Examples of other
Churches, and ſaithe, that therein the Authoritie of the whole worlde is greatter,
then the Authoritie of the Churche of Rome: Of whiche alſo he ſeemeth to ſpeake
ſcornefully, and with ſome diſdeigne. For thus he ſaithe, Quid mihi profers Vnius
Vrbis Conſuerudinem? What bringe you me the Cuſtome of
                      (Rome, beinge but)

                     One Cittie? By whiche woordes it ſeemeth,Pope Leo. he made ſmal accoumpte of the Cittie
of Rome.
                  
                     But M. Hardinge ſaithe, The Primates had Authoritie ouer other Inferiour
Biſhops I graunte: they had ſo. How be it, thei had it by agreemente, & Cuſtome:
But neither by Chriſte, nor by Peter or Paule, nor by any Kighte of Goddes
Woorde.
                     Hieronym. in Epiſt. ad Titum. Cap. 1. 
                     S. Hierome ſaith, Nouerint Epiſcopi, ſe magis Conſuetudine, quàm Diſpofitionis
Dominicae Veritate, Preſbyteris eſſe Maiotes, & in cōmune debere Eccleſiam 
                              •
                           egere:
                     
Let Biſhoppes vnderſtande, that they are aboue the Prieſtes, rather of Cuſtome, the
                        •
                      of
any Truthe, or Right of Chriſtes Inſtitution: and that they ought to rule the Churche al togeather.
And againe, Idem ergo eſt Preſbyter,
                        Hieronym. eod. loco. 
                        qui Epiſcopus: Etantequam Diaboli
inſtinctuſtudia in Religione fierent, & diceretur in populis, Ego ſum Pauli, Ego
Apollo, Ego Cephae, Cōmuni Preſbyterorum Conſilio Eccleſiae gubernabantur:
                     
Therefore a Prieſte, and a Biſhop are bothe one thinge: And, before that by the inflaiminge of
the Diuel, partes were taken in Religion, and theſe woordes were vttered emonge the people,
I holde of Paule, I holde of Apollo, I holde of Peter, the Churches
were gouerned by the Common Aduiſe of the Prieſtes.Auguſt. Epiſt. 19. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Secundum
honorum vocabula, quae iam Eccleſiae vſus obtinuit, Epiſcopatus Preſbyterio maior eſt:
                     
The office of a Biſhop is aboue the office of a Prieſte, (not by Authoritie of the Scriptuces,
but) after the Names of Honour, whiche the Cuſtome of the Churche hath nowe
obteined.
                  As for Pope Leo,ff. Li. 2. De Iuriſdict. omnium Iudicum. his owne Authoritie in his owne cauſe cannot be greate.
The Emperoure ſaithe, Nemo debet ſibiius dicere: Noman maie miniſter Lowe vnto
him ſelfe.
                      And it is noted thus in the Decrées, Papa non debet eſſe Iudex in cauſa
propria: The Pope maie not be iudge in his owne cauſe.
                     
                  
                  It is wel knowen,16. q. 6. Conſuetudo: In Mar
                           •
                        gine. that the Pope hath ſought for, and claimed this Vniuerſal
Authoritie theſe many hundred yeeres. Pope Innocentius was therefore reprooued
of Pride, and worldly Lordlineſſe by the whole Councel of Aphrica:Concil. Aphrica. Ca. 105. Superbum ſaeculi typhum. Inter Decretaé Bonifacij 2. Pope Bonifacius
2. condemned 
                        •
                     . Auguſtine, & al the ſaide whole Councel of Aphrica, &
called them al Heretiques, and Schiſmatiques, for the ſame, and ſaid, they were
al
                        Inſtigante Diabolo. Leo Epiſt. 89. leadde by the Diuel: Pope Zoſimus, to mainteine this claime, corrupted the
Holy Councel of Nice: S. Hilarie, and other Learned Biſhoppes of France, for
vſurpinge ſutche vnlawful Authoritie, charged this ſame Pape Leo, of whom
we ſpeake, with Pride, and Ambition.
                  But, gentle Reader, that thou ma
                        •
                     ſte the better vnderſtande, what credite
thou oughteſt to geue to this Pope Leo, ſpecially ſettinge foorthe his owne Authoritie,
I beſéethe thée, conſider, with what Maieſtie of woordes, and howe far
aboue meaſure, he auanceth the Authoritie of S. Peter. Theſe be his woordes:
Chriſtus Petrum in Conſortium Indiuiduae Vnitatis aſſumpſit: Chriſte receiued Peter into
the Companie of the Indiuiſible Vnitie:
                     
                     Leo Epiſt. 89. Leo Epiſt. 52. Leo Epiſt. 89. Leo in cadem Epiſt. 
                     Authoritate Domini mei Petri Apoſtoli: By
the Authoritie
                      (not of Chriſte, but) of my Lorde Peter the Apoſtle: Deo Inſpirante, &
Beatiſsimo Petro Apoſtolo: By the Inſpiration of God, and of S. Peter the Apoſtle: Deus à
Petro, velut à quodam Capite, dona ſua velut in Corpus omne diffudit: God frō Peter,
as from the Heade,
                     Leo in Sermo. De Natali Petri & Pauli. 
                     hath powred cut his giftes into al the Body: Nihil erit ligatum, aut ſolutum,
niſi quod Petrus ligauerit, aut ſoluerit: There ſhalbe nothinge bounde, or looſed,
but that Peter ſhal binde, or looſe: Nunc quoque Petrus paſcit Oues, & mandatum
Domini Pius Paſtor exequitur:
                        Leo in Sermo. 3. In Anniucrſario die Aſſumptionis. Euen nowe Peter feedeth the Sheepe, and as a Godly
Shephearde, he fulfilleth the commoundement of his Maiſter. Sutche immoderate, and
ambitious Dignitie Leo was contente to yeelde to Peter, to thende that the poſſeſſion,
and fruite thereof might redounde whelely vnto him ſelfe.
                  Some others haue thought, that as wel theſe Epiſtles of Leo, as alſo others

moe,Equalitie of Biſhoppes. of other the Ancient Biſhoppes of Rome, haue benne interlaced, and falſified
by the ambitious Popes, that folowed afterwarde. Whiche thinge is the
more likely,Epiſt. Iulij 1. Extra De Elect. Fundamenta. Concil Aphrica. Cap. 105. Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 36. bothe for that the ſelfe ſame woordes be likewiſe alleged, partely vnder
the name of Pope Iulius, partely vnder the name of Pope Nicolas: and alſo
for that Pope Zoſimus, whiche was the fifthe before Leo, as it is ſaide before,
doubted not for an aduantage to falſifie the Holy Councel of Nice.
                  Verily, when the Councel of Chalcedon had offered vnto this ſame Leo the
Title of Vniverſal Biſhop, as Gregorie witneſſeth, he vtterly refuſed it, and
woulde none of it.
                  Nowe touchinge that S. Hierome ſaithe, the poore Biſhop of Eugubium,
and the Biſhop of Rome are bothe of one Authoritie (For of Authoritie he ſpeaketh,Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epiſt. 3. Niſi paucis deſperatis, & perditis.
as it is prooued before): S. Cyrian alſo ſaithe the ſame, that the Authoritie
of the Biſhoppes in Aphrica is as good, as the Authoritie of the Biſhop of
Rome: and calleth them al Lewd, and Deſperate Perſonnes, that wil, as M. Hardinge
doothe, ſafe the contrarie.
                  Therefore, whereas M. Hardinge ſaithe, By very Order of Chriſte him ſelfe
it hath benne Ordeined, that maters touchinge Faithe, and Religion be referred
to that One Prince of Paſtours, who ſitteth in the Chaire of Peter, the Higheſt
Biſhop, and that the ſame hath alwaies benne donne, and obſerued from the Apoſtles
time vntil our daies: He bringeth vs twoo manifeſt Vntruthes togeather,
without any manner proufe at al, onely auouched vpon him ſelfe. For it appeareth
not, that Chriſte euer tooke this Order, or euer made any ſutche mention, either
of any ſutche Prince of Paſtours, or of Peters Chaire. And in the Councel
of Aphrica it was decreed, that no maters ſhoulde be remooued from thence to
Rome.Concil. Aphrican. Cap. 92. The woordes of the Councel are theſe, Ad tranſmarina Iudicia qui pu
                           •
                        auerit
appellandum, à nullo intra Aphricam in Communionem ſuſcipiatur: Who ſo euer
ſhal thinke be ought to appeale to the Judgementes beyond the Seas
                      (that is, to the Biſhop
of Rome) let no man within Aphrica receiue him to the Communion.
                  
                  Touchinge that M. Hardinge calleth the Pope the Prince of Paſtours, he
mighte haue remembred, that the righte of this name belongeth onely vnto
Chriſte.1. Petr. 5. S. Peter ſaithe, That when Chriſte, the Prince of Paſtours ſhal appeare, ye
maie receiue the Vncorruptible Crowne. Nowe, to infea
                        •
                     fe the P
                        •
                     pe with Chriſtes
peculiare Titles, a man mighte thinke it were greate blaſphemie. Certainely
S. Cyprian ſaithe,In Concil. Carthaginen. Concil. Conſtantinop. 2. Ca. 36. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Cyprian. De Simpl. Praelator. 
                     Nemo noſtrum Epiſcopum ſe eſſe Epiſcoporum conſtituit:
None of vs appointeth him ſelfe Biſhop of Biſhoppes:
                      mutche leſſe the Prince
of al Paſtours. And in the Councel of Conſtantinople it was Decreed, that
the Biſhop there ſhoulde haue Euen, and Equal Authoritie with the Biſhop of
Rome.
                  As for the other Authoritie of S. Cyprian, M. Hardinge ſaithe, wée vnderſtoode
it not: and therefore he willeth vs, to looke better vpon our Bookes. The
counſel is good. But if M. Hardinge wil graunte, that S. Cyprian him ſelfe
knew, what he him ſelfe wrote, and vnderſtoode his owne meaninge, it ſhalbe ſufficient.
Verily the woordes that he vſeth, ſéeme not ſo darke. For thus he
writeth: Epiſcopatus Vnus eſt, cuius à ſingulis in ſolidum pars tenetur: Eccleſia Vna
eſt, quae in multiudinem lati
                           •
                        s incremento Foecunditatis ex
                           •
                        enditur: Quomodò Solis
multi radij, ſed lumen Vnum: & ramiarboris multi, ſed robur Vnum: The Biſhoprike is
One, a parte whereof of euery ſeueral Biſhop is poſſeſſed in whole. The Churche is One,
whiche by her greate increaſe is extended vnto many: As in the Sonne the beames be many,
but the lighte is one: and in a Tree the boughes be many, but the body is One.
                     
                  
                  
                     If there appeare any greate darkeneſſe, or doubte in theſe woordes, S. Cyprian
him ſelf in other places thus expoundeth his owne meaning in plainer wiſe:
                     
Vna eſt Eccleſia à Chriſto per totum Mundum in plura membra diuiſa:One Biſhoprike. Item Epiſcopatus
Vnus,Cyprian. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 2. Epiſcoporum multorum concordi numeroſitate diffuſus: There is One Churche
diuided by Chriſte into many Members throughout the worlde: Likewiſe One Biſhoprike
powred farre abroade by the agreeable multitude of many Biſhoppes, Againe,
                      Eccleſia
Vna eſt,Cyprian. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 9. & connexa, & cohaerentium ſibi inuicem Sacerdotum glutino copulata:
There is One Churche, ioined, and faſtened in One, by the conſente of Biſhoppes agreei
                           •
                        ge togeather.
Againe,
                      Quando Oramus, non pro Vno Oramus, ſed pro toto populo:Cyprian. In Oration. Dominicam.
Quia totus populus Vnum ſumus: When wee praie, we praie not for One, but for the
whole people: For wee the whole people are but One. Againe, immediately before theſe
woordes, whiche, M. Hardinge ſaithe, wée are not hable to vnderſtande, he ſaithe:
                     
Hanc Vnitatem firmiter tenere,Cyprian. De Simpli. Praelat. & vendicare debemus, maximé Epiſcopi, qui in Eccleſia
prae
                        •
                     idemus: vt Epiſcopatum quoque ipſum Vnum, & Indiuiſum probemus:
This Vnitie muſte wee holde, ſpecially Biſhoppes, that fitte as Rulers in the Churche: that
wee maye declare our Biſhoprike to be One,
                     Cyprian. Lib. 3. Epiſt. 13. 
                     and without diuiſion. Againe,
                      Etſi Paſtores
multi ſumus, Vnum tamen Gregem Paſcimus: & Oues Vniuerſas, quas Chriſtus
Sangume ſuo, & Paſsione quaeſiuit, colligere, & fouere debemus: Notwithſtandinge
wee be many Shepheardes, yet wee Feede but One Flocke: and wee are al bounde to geather
vp, and to nourriſhe al the Sheepe, that Chriſte hath wonne with his Bloude, and
Paſſion.
                  
                  If either the Authour of the Apologie, or the Interpreter vnderſtoode not
S. Cyprian, yet, M. Hardinge, ye maye geue S. Cyprian leaue, to vnderſtande
him ſelfe.
                  
                     And in this ſenſe S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. in Epiſt. ad Tit. Ca. 1. 
                     Communi Preſbyterorum Conſilio Eccleſiae
gubernabantur: The Churches were ordred (not by the Vniuerſal Authoritie of
the Biſhop of Rome, but) by the Common Aduiſe of the Prieſtes. Likewiſe S. Cyprian
ſaithe,
                     Cyprian. Lib. 3. Epiſt. 13. 
                     Ideircò copioſum eſt Corpus Sacerdotum, Cōcordiae mutuae glutine, atque Vniratis
vinculo copulatum, vt ſi quis ex Collegio noſtro Haereſim facere, & Gregem Chriſti
laccrare, ac vaſtare tentauerit, ſubueniant coeteri: Therefore is the Body, or companie
of Prieſtes ſo copious, ioined togeather with conſente of Concorde and Vnitie, that
if any one of our Companie entrepriſe to raiſe an Hereſie, and to ſcatter and waſte the Flocke
of Chriſte,Baſili. ad Neocaeſarienſes. the reſte ſhoulde healpe. So likewiſe S. Baſile: Interrogate Patres Veſtros,
& renuntiabunt vobis, quòd etiamſi loci ſitu diuiſae inter ſe ſint Paroeciae, tamen
veluti Coronamento quodam Vnitae, vna
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ſententia gubernatae fuerunt. Aſsidua quidem
populi fuit inter ſe commixtio: Ipſi verò Paſtores tanta praediti fuerunt mutua inter
ipſos Charitate, vt alius alio Praeceptore, ac Duce vſi fuerint:
                      Aſke of your Fathers,
and they wil telle you, that although Biſhoprikes be diuided, and ſundred by diſtance of
place, yet were they euer knitte togeather as with a Garlande, and euer ruled by One Aduiſe.
In deede the People was euer mingled togeather: But the Biſhoppes were al ſo ioined in
Charitie, that euery of them was contente to be taught, and to be leadde by other.
                  Therefore, as many Faithes in ſundrie Faithefulles are but One Faithe:
as many Churches are but one Churche: as many Baptiſmes are but one Baptiſme:
Euen ſo, ſaithe S. Cyprian, many Biſhoprikes are but One Biſhoprike:
and therein, as wel the Biſhop of Rome, as alſo euery other ſeucral Biſhop,
hath his portion.
                  I ſaie, The Biſhoprike of Rome is not this Whole Biſhoprike, but a Parte:
Not the Body of the Sunne, but a beame: Not the ſtemme of the Trée, but a
braunche.
                  And thus, by S. Cyprians minde, neither doothe one Biſhop holde of an other:
Nor is any One Biſhop Heade of the Whole: Nor is One Biſhop al in al:
but al Biſhoppes are onely One.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 6.
               And accordinge to the iudgement of the Nicene Councel, wee ſaie,
that the Biſhop of Rome hath no more iuriſdiction ouer the Churche
of God, then the reſte of the Patriarkes, either of Alexandria, or
of Antioche haue.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If it be a ſhame to belie the Deuil, accordinge to the olde Prouerbe, what is it to belie the Churche
of God repreſented in the Nicene Councel?
                  The ſixth Canon amonge al others of the Nicene Councel is that you grounde your ſurmiſe vpon,The ſixth Canon of the Nicene Councel declared to make againſte the Defenders,
I knowe wel. For that hath benne wreaſted to your purpoſe by certaine of your ſide. And the ſame
rightly conſtruedVntruth: For the expreſſe vvordes are plaine to the contrarie. maketh moſte againſte you. For it ſeemeth to acknowledge the Biſhoppe of
Rome his Supremacie and Soueraigntie of iudgement ouer other Patriarkes. Theſe be the woordes of
the Canon rightly Engliſhed hed. Let the Auncient cuſtome continewe in force whiche is in Egypte, Lybia▪
and Pentapoli: ſo that the Biſhop of Alexandria haue Power ouer them al. Quandoquidem
etiam Epiſcopo Romano hoc conſuetum eſt.
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . For aſmuch as the B. of Rome hath thus vſed.
Likewiſe in Antiochia alſo, and in other Prouinces let the Churches keepe theire Prerogatiue. VVhat
can be gathered of the woordes of this Canon, but that for ratefiynge the iuriſdiction of the Patriarkes
of Alexandria, and Antiochia, the Fathers of the Nicene Councel thought good to alter nothinge:
but to folowe the Auncient cuſtome of Olde time vſed and allowed by the B. of Rome? For it
is aſmuche to ſaie, as this: In aſmuche asVntruth Vaine and childiſhe. the B. of Rome hath benne wonte from the beginninge to
graunt to the B. of Alexandria iuriſdiction ouer Egypte, Lybia, and Pentapoli: theThis Expoſition is like a ſick
                           •
                         mannes dreame. Nicene Councel
folowinge his authoritie and rule, or at the leaſt his vſage, willeth and graunteth, that the ſaide Biſhop
retaine and keepe his auncient right. For if the B. of Alexandria had not receiued ſutche iuriſdiction
by Auctoritie and graunt of the B. of Rome of olde time, what reaſon ſhoulde haue moued
thoſe Fathers, for confirmation thereof to alleage the cuſtome of the B. of Rome? And in that caſe,
O folie. The vvordes are plaine: Quia Epiſcopo Romano parilis mos eſt. whereto perteined the additiō of the cauſe, Quia Epiſcopus Romanus hoc conſueuit, bicauſe
this was the Biſhop of Rome his cuſtome? If this had not benne theire meaninge, they would neuer
ſo haue ſpoken. For what was his cuſtome other,Vntruthe: For the B. of Rome neuer had Povver, to allotte Prouinces: but him ſelfe had his prouince allotted him, as vvel, as others. A Ne Recipiatur. then to allotte thoſe Prouinces to the B. of Alexandria?
If any other thinge be alleaged to haue benne his maner and cuſtome, beſides that the woordes of
the Canon beare it not, what had that benne to the purpoſe, what ſo euer it be, for cauſe and confirmation
of the B. of Alexandria his iuriſdiction ouer Egypte, Lybia, and Pentapoli? Alleage you, Defender,
for olde cuſtome of the B. of Rome, what elles you liſte, ſo that you make no violence to the
Canon, and thereupon make your argument, inferringe of your allegation the Concluſion, (Ergo,
the B. of Alexandria ought to haue iuriſdiction ouer Egypte, Lybia, and Pentapoli): and you ſhal
finde it to be ſuche an argument, as any Sotte woulde be aſhamed to make.
                  Againſt this if it ſhal like you to Replie, wee warne you before, that neither ye take aduantage
of a doubteful interpretation, as we knowe that Canon to be founde in diuerſe Bookes not ſo plainely
Tranſlated, and therefore we require you to ſtande to the Original, as it is in Greeke: neither that
ye defende your lie with the wreſted Expoſition of Theodore Balſamon,Theodore Balſamon. who hath written Greeke
Commentaries vpon the Canons of the Councels, ſithens the schiſme of the Greekes, him ſelfe beinge a
Schiſmatike. For he beinge a Greeke borne, and prick
                        •
                      with the hatred of his Nation againſt the
Latine Churche, and ſpecially the See of Rome: in thexpoſition of that ſixth Canon of the Nicene
Councel ſwarueth bothe from learninge, and alſo from reaſon.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  In déede it is a ſhame to belie any creature: for that lieinge is ſhameful of it
ſelfe. And therefore, M. Hardinge, ye mighte doo mutche better, to vſe it leſſe. You
haue brought vs here an Expoſition of the Councel of Nice, ſutche, as I thinke,
from that time vntil this time hath ſeldome benne hearde of. You ſaie, The

Biſhop of Romes Cuſtome was,TheConn cel of Nice to geue Iuriſdiction to the Patriarkes of Alexandria,
of Antioche, and of Hieruſalem: and that thei had none Authoritie of Gouernmente,
but onely ſo mutche, as was limited, and allowed by him. And this, you
ſaye, was the onely, and vndoubted meaninge of that Councel. This fantaſie is
not here auouched by any Auncient Doctour, or Learned Father. Therefore wée
muſte thinke, what ſo euer it be, it is your owne. And weighinge the ſtrangeneſſe
of the ſame, I muſte needes ſaie of yow, as S. Hierome ſaide ſometime of one Rheticius
in the like caſe,Hieronym. ad Marcellam. 
                     Rheticius eloquens quidem eſt, ſed ineptus Interpres: Rheticius
is an eloquente man in deede: and yet but a fonde Interpreter.
                      For it is certaine, and
knowen euen vnto Children, that the Biſhop of Rome, before the Councel of
Nice, had neither ſutche Cuſtome of Superioritie, nor ſutche dealinge of Iuriſdictions.
Pope Pius Secundus ſaithe,Aeneas Syluius. Epiſt. 288. 
                     Ante Nicenam Synodum vnuſquiſque ſibi vixit:
& paruus reſpectus ad Romanā Eccleſiam halebatur: Before the Councel of Nice, euery
Biſhop liued to him ſelfe: and there was then ſmal regarde had to the Churche of Rome.
                     
                  
                  As for our ſortiſhe Argumentes, ſutche as by your iudgemente any ſorte would
be aſhamed to make, I maye leaue them wel to you, M. Hardinge; not for that ye
lacke them greately, but for that, as it appeare the by your Bookes, ye knowe beſte
howe to vſe them.
                  Touchinge the ſixthe Canon of this Councel, whiche, you imagine, is ſo darke,
and doubteful, I truſte, it ſhalbe plainely, and clearely opened, by them that were
neuer hitherto accounted ſottiſhe.
                  The woordes thereof are plaine yenough. The ſenſe is this. The whole
Body of Chriſtendome was diuided into foure Patriarkſhippes: wherof the Firſt
was Rome: the Seconde Alexandria: the Thirde Antioche: the Fourthe Hieruſalem.
And eche of theſe was limited, and bounded within it ſelfe: Alexandria, to
haue the ouerſight ouer Egypte, & Pentapolis: Antioche, ouer Syria: Hieruſalem,
ouer Iurie: Rome,Lipomanus in Praefatione. Copus Dial. 1. 16
                           •
                         Balſamonem Virum cerie doctē
                      ouer Italie, and other Churches of the Weaſte. And herein wée
haue the Expoſition of Theodorus Balſamon, that liued fiue hundred yeeres agoe,
and was Patriarke of Antioche, and, as ſomme of M. Hardinges trendes haue
thought, a man of greate Learninge. Yet for as mutche as M. Hardinge here vtterly
refuſeth him, not onely as a Schiſmatique, but alſo as a man bothe of Learninge,
and Reaſon, let vs therefore ſée ſomme others.
                  
                     Nilus, a Gréeke Authour, hereof writeth thus: Sed vt etiam liquidiùs appareat,
                     
                     Nilus, De Primatu Romani Pontificis. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                     
                     Papam non imperare alijs omnibus Epiſcopis, legatur Sextus Canon Synodi Nicenae: quo
Diſertè praecipitur, vt alijs Eccleſijs alexandrinus, alijs Romanus, alijs Antiochenus
praeſit: vt non liceat alteri alterius prouinciam inuadere: That it maie the more plainely appeare,
that the Pope hathe no Gouernment ouer al other Biſhoppes, reade the Six the Canon
of the Councel of Nice. There it is expreſſely Commaunded, that the Biſhop of Alexandria
ſhal haue the rule ouer certaine Churches: and the Biſhop of Rome ouer certaine: and the Biſhop
of Antioche likewiſe ouer certaine: and that it be not lawful for any one of them to inuade an
others Iuriſdiction. Farther he ſaithe, Quòd ſi quis ſuis non contentus, aliena appetit,
ille ſan
                              •
                            meritò & Conſuetudinis, & Sanctorum Canonum violator haberi debet:
                     
Yf any one (of theſe Patriarkes) not contented with his owne, craue Dominion ouer others,
(as doothe the Pope) he ought of right to be called a breaker bothe of the Cuſtome, and alſo
of the Holy Canons.
                  
                     If M. Hardinge wil yet ſaie,
                     Ruffinus Eccle. Hiſtoriae Lib. 1. Cap. 6. 
                     this Expoſition is ſottiſhe, let vs ſée, in what
ſorte Others haue expounded the ſame. Rufinus openinge the ſame Canon ſaithe
thus: Statutum eſt in Concilio Niceno, vt apud Alexandriam, & in V
                              •
                           be Roma Vetuſta
Cōſue
                              •
                           udo ſeruetur:
                     
                     Suburbicaru Eccleſiarum 
                     vt vel ille Aegypti, vel hic Suburbicarum Eccleſiarum ſolicitudinem
gerat: It was decreed in the Councel of Nice, that in Alexandria, and in Rome the Olde
Cuſtome ſhould be kepte: that the Biſhop of Alexandria ſhould rule ouer Egypte: and the Biſhop

of Rome (not ouer al the world, but) ouer the Churches of his Suburbs.
                  
                     Likewiſe it was afterwarde ordred in the Councel holden at Conſtantinople:
Definimus Sedi Cōſtantinopolitanae Paria Iura,
                     
                     Concil. Conſtantinopo. 2. Cap. 36. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Nicepho. Lib. 12. Cap. 13. 
                     & Priuilegia cum Sede Veteris Romae:
Wee Decree, that the See of Conſtantinople ſhal haue Rightes, and Priuiſeges Equal (and
one
                     ) with the See of Olde Rome.
                  
                     Therefore Nicephorus ſaithe, Romano, & Conſtantinopolitano Epiſcopo Ex
Aequo Paria ſunt, & Dignitatis praemia, & Honorum iura: The Titles of Dignities, and
rightes of Honour, geuen to the Biſhop of Rome, and to the Biſhop of conſtantinople, are
One, and Equal.
                  For this cauſe Athanaſius ſaithe,Athanaſ. ad Solitariam Vitam agentes. Cod. De Sacroſanctis Eccleſijs: Omni innouatione. Concil. Aphrica. Cap. 105. Nilus, De Primatii Papa. 
                     Roma erat Meeopolis Romanae Ditionis:
Rome was the Moother Churche
                      (not of the Whole Worlde, but) of the Romaine Iuriſdiction.
In like ſorte the Emporour Iuſtinian ſaithe, Eccleſia Vrbis Conſtantinopolitanae
Romae Veteris Praerogatiua laetatur: The Churche of Conſtantinople enioieth the
Prerogatiue, or Priuilege of the Churche of Olde Rome.
                      So likewiſe S. Auguſtine,
and other Learned, and Godly Biſhoppes in the Councel of Aphrica, vnderſtoode
the ſame Canon. And therefore they called the Popes Preſumption, crauinge
Vniuerſal Iuriſdiction ouer al the Worlde, Fumoſum ſaeculi Typhum, The ſmoky
Pride of the world.
                      To conclude, Nilus ſaithe thus, Nunc, cùm aliae Regiones aſſigna
                           •
                        ae
ſint Romano, aliae Alexandrino, aliae Conſtantinopolitano, non magis hi ſub illo
ſunt, quàm ille ſub hiſce: Seeinge there be certaine Countries appointed out for the Biſhop of
Rome, certaine for the Biſhop of Alexandria, and certaine for the Biſhop of Conſtantinople,
they are nowe nomore ſubiecte vnto him, then he vnto them.
                     
                  
                  But al theſe perhaps were Sottes, and theire ſaieinges S
                        •
                     ttiſhe: and noman is
hable rightly to vnderſtande theſe maters, but he that can ſaie, Conſuetudo, is
Latine for a Commiſſion: or, Mos parilis, for Vniuerſal Iuriſdiction.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 7.
               And as for the Biſhop of Rome, who nowe calleth al maters before
him ſelfe alone, except he doo his duetie, as he ought to doo, except
he miniſter the Sacramentes, except he inſtructe the People, excepte
he warne them and teache them, wee ſaye that he ought not of right
once to be called a Biſhop, or ſo mutche as an Elder. For a Biſhop,
as ſaithe Auguſtine, is a name of labour, and not of Honour: that the
man, that ſeeketh to haue Preeminence, and not to profite, maye vnderſtande,
him ſelfe to be no Biſhop.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Neither the Biſhop of Rome,An euil Biſhop loſeth not the name of a Biſhop, though he loſe the metite of a Biſhop. Vide Auguſtin. Lib. 2. contra Epiſt. Parmen. Cap. 13. Tom. 7. 1. Tim. 2. nor any other Biſhop is worthy of the Name of a Biſhop, except he
do the duetie of a Biſhop. Al this wee graunt. But that he ought not of right to be ſo called, of thoſe
whom he hathe charge ouer, in caſe of omittinge his duetie: thereto we ſaie, that although in reſpect
of his domeanou
                        •
                      he be not worthy to be called a Biſhop▪ yet in respecte of the Vocation, Degree, and
Preeminence, though he leaue his duetie vndone, for whiche he incurreth daunger of damnation, that
Title perteineth vnto him of good right, and ſo continually he is and ought to be acknowleged for a
Biſhop, though an euil and an vnworthy Biſhop: likewiſe a Prieſt. And whereas S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
that a Biſhop is a name of labour, and not of Honour, he is to be vnderſtand ſo as the Scripture is:
VVhiche in ſome places ſpeakinge of two thinges, that are bothe in dede to be affirmed, the one beinge
of more importance then the other, denieth the one in compariſon of the other, &c.
                  Yet it ſemeth to be a ſecrete preparation towarde a purpoſe againſte ſutche time, as the Princes
Gouernemente ſhal miſlike theire phantaſies. For where they Learned this Opinion, concerning Biſhops,
there Learned they alſo the like, concerninge Ciuil Magiſtrates. I meane VVicklef. Amonge

whoſe Heretical articles condemned by the Churche in the Councel of Conſtance,A Biſhop no Biſhop▪
                      this is rekened for
the fiftenth: Nullus eſt Dominus Ciuilis, nullus eſt Praelatus, nullus eſt Epiſcopus dum
eſt in peccato mortali. That is to ſaie, None is a Temporal Lorde, none is a Prelate, none is a
Biſhop, ſo longe as he is in deadly ſinne.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     This mater ſhal néede no greate contention. The like woordes haue benne
vttered by ſundrie other Holy Fathers. S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Multi Sacerdotes,
                     
                     Chryſo. in Matthae. Homil. 43. Chryſoſt. in eod. Homil.
                     & Pauci Sacerdotes: Multi nomine, Pauci Opere: Many Prieſtes there be, and few Prieſtes
there be: Many in name, and fewe in Laboure. Againe, Quomodò poteſt eſſe Magiſter,
qui Diſcipulum non habet? Acquire Diſcipulum, & eſto Magiſter:
                      Howe can he be a
Maiſter,Ambro. De Dignita. Sacerdotali, Cap. 4. Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt 32. that 
                        •
                     ath no Scholare? Geate thee a Scholar, and then be a Maiſter. S. Ambroſe
ſaithe, Niſi bonum Opus amplectaris, Epiſcopus eſſe non potes:
                      Ouleſſe thou
embrace the good labour, a Biſhop thou canſte not be. S. Gregorie ſaithe, Sacerdotes
nominamur, & non ſumus:
                      Prieſtes wee are called, but Prieſtes wee are not.
                  
                     As for VVicklefe, he expoundeth plainely his owne meaninge, and that with
M. Hardinges owne Conſtruction. For theſe be his woordes, euen as they are alleged
by his enimies: Papa,
                     
                     In Concil. Conſtātien. Seſsion. 15 
                     vel Praelatus malus, & Praeſcitus, eſt aequiuocè Paſtor: & verè
Fur, & Latro: The Pope, or any other wicked Prelate, in double or doubteful ſpeache is a
Poſtour: but in very deede he is a Theefe, and a Murtherer. So Chryſoſtome ſaithe:
Qui ab hominibus ordinatus eſt,
                     
                     Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 53. 
                     quantum ad Deū artinet, nō eſt Sacerdos, aut Diaconus:
He that is appointed by menne (and not by God) before God, is neither Prieſt, nor Deacon.
                  If VVicklefe, vpon iuſte zele of the Houſe of God, for that he then ſawe, the Biſhoppes
either knew nothing, or did nothinge, or cared for nothinge, either ſpake,
or meante more, then Truthe maie beare, wée defende it not. Notwithſtandinge,
touchinge that is obiected of deadly ſinne, it ſéemeth, he folowed therein the Councel
of Valentia in France.Concil. Valentin. ſub Damaſ. ca. 4. The woordes be theſe: Quicunque ſub Ordinatione, vel
Diaconatus, vel Preſbyterij, vel Epiſcopatus, Mortali Crimine dixerint ſe eſſe pollusos, à
ſupradictis Ordinationibus ſubmoueātur: Who ſo eues after the Order, either of Deaconſhip,
or of Prieſthoode, or of Biſhoprike, ſhal ſaie they haue benne defiled with Mortal Sinne,
let them be remoued from the foreſaide Orders.
                     
                  
                  
                     So. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, as he is alleged by Gratian,2. Quae. 7. Qui nec regiminis. Qui nec sua crimina deterſit,
nec filiorum crimen correxit, Canis impudicus dicendus eſt magis, quàm Epiſcopus:
He that neither hath wiped of his owne finnes, nor corrected the Sinnes of his Children, ought
rather to be called a ſhameleſſe Dogge, then a Biſhop.
                  
                  Yet notwithſtanding, to remoue al ſtrife, what ſo euer the Biſhop of Rome be,
or what ſo euer he doo, let him hardly be called a Biſhop, bicauſe, as M. Hardinge
ſaithe, he ſtandeth in roome of a Biſhop: Or, as VVicklefe ſaithe, let him ſo be called.
Aequiuocè, that is to ſaie, by a woorde of double meaning: as Vnſauery Salte
is called Salte: Or as the Prophetes of Baal are called Prophetes: Or as a painted
Man is called a Man: And as S. Gregorie ſaithe, Let him he called a Prieſte, although
in deede he be no Prieſte. Let him be called a Teacher, although he Teache not:
Let him be called a Féeder, although he Feéde not. S. Cyprian ſaith of S. Paule,
Ipſum,
                     Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epiſt. 3. Concil. Trident. De Sacramente Ordinis. Athanaſius Ad Solitariam Vitam agentes. Hieron. in Soph
                           •
                        
                        niam, Cap. 1▪
                      
                     quamuis inane Nomen, & Vmbram quandam Sacerdotis cogitans, expauit:
S. Paule was afroide, conſideringe onely the emptie Name, and Shadowe of a Biſhop.
                      And
in the late Councel of Tridente the mater is concluded thus, Qui dicit, cos, qui non
exercent Miniſterium Verbi, & Sacramentorum, non eſſe Sacerdotes, Anathema ſit:
Who ſo euer ſaie, that they, that Miniſter neither the Woorde of God, nor the Sacramentes,
be no Prieſtes, Accurſed be he.
                      But Athanaſius ſaithe, Quid opus eſt hominibus titulo
Epiſcopis? What neede haue wee of theſe menne, that beare onely the name of Eiſhoppes?
                     
Therefore S. Hierome ſaithe, Auferet Dominus Nomina Vanae gloriae, &
Admirationis falſae, quae verſantur in Eccleſia. Sed & Nomina Sacerdotum cum Sacerdotibus

dotibus aufere
                           •
                        ,
                     Provvde. Name. 
                     qui fruſtrà ſibi applaudunt in Epiſcopali, & in Preſbyterij Dignitate, &
non in Opere: The Lord ſhal take awaie the names of Vaine glorie, and of 
                        ••
                     ined woo
                        •
                     dering,
whiche are in the Churche: Yea he ſhal take awaie bothe the names of thoſe Prieſtes, and
the Prieſtes withal, whiche vaunte them ſelues in the Dignitie of Biſhoprike, and Prieſtehoode,
but not in the Laboure.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 1.
               And that neither the Pope, nor any other worldly Creature can
nomore be Head of the whole Churche, or a Biſhop ouer al, then he
can be the Bridegome, the Light, the Saluation, and Life of the
Churche. For theſe Priuileges, & Names belonge onely to Chriſte,
and be properly, and onely ſfitte for him alone.
               And that no Biſhop of Rome did euer ſuffer him ſelfe to be called
by ſutche a proude name & title, before Phocas the Emperours time
(who, as we know, by killing his owne Soueraine Mauritius the
Emperoure, did by a Traiterous Villanie aſpire to the Empire)
Whiche was aboute the ſixthe hundreth and thirteenth yeere after
Chriſte was borne.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The name of Vniuerſal Biſhop,Vniuerſal Biſhop. which this Interpreter meaneth, beinge taken in a right ſenſe, is
no proude name, in reſpecte of him,Vntruthe, For it belōgeth not vnto the Pope. to whom it belongeth. VVhether any Biſhop of Rome euer ſuffered
himſelfe to be called by that name, of no, as you denie it, and proue it not, ſo it forceth not whether
any did ſo, or no. If they refuſed it of humilitie, that proueth it not to be Vnla
                        •
                     ful.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  If the name of Vniuerſal Biſhop be a Prowde Name in others, why may it
not alſo be a Prowde Name in the Biſhop of Rome? Hath the Biſhop there ſutche
a ſpecial Priuilege for Pride aboue al others? May Pride be Humilitie, and Humilitie
Pride, onely in reſpecte of diuerſe Perſonnes? You ſaie, This Title of
right belonged to the Biſhop of Rome: and therefore in him it was no Pride.
This, M. Harding, is a fowle Vntruthe, as it ſhal appeare by the nexte Diuiſion.
For theſe be the woordes of the Councel of Carthage, as Gratian allegeth them:
Vniuerſalis autem (Epiſcopus) nec ipſe Romanus Pontifex appelletur:
                     Diſtin. 99. Primae Sedis. 
                     The Biſhop of
Rome him ſelfe maie not be called the Vniuerſal Biſhop.
                  
                  That the Olde Learned, and Godly Biſhoppes of Rome refuſed this Name,
as Prowde, and Arrogante, it is ſo plaine by S. Gregorie, that I marueile, any
Learned man woulde calle it in queſtion. His woordes thereof be theſe:
Nullus Deceſſorum meorum hoc tam Profano Vocabulo vti conſenſit:
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 32. & 36. 
                     Nullus Romanorum
Pontificum hoc Singularitatis Nomen aſſumpſit: Nos hunc honorem nolumus oblatum
ſuſcipere: None of my Predeceſſours Biſhoppes of Rome, euer conſented to vſe this
Vngodly Name: No Biſhop of Rome euer toke vpon him this Name of Singularitie: Wee,
the Biſhoppes of Rome, wil not receiue this honour beinge offred vnto vs.
                     
                  
                  If the Biſhoppes of Rome in Olde times refuſed this Name, not for wante of
right, but onely, as M. Hardinge ſaithe, of Humilitie, wherefore then did theire
Succeſſours, that folowed afterwarde, ſo ambitiouſly laboure to geate the ſame?
Platina ſaithe,Platina in Bonifa
                           •
                        io. 3. 
                     Bonifacius Tertius obtinuit à Phoca, Magna tamen Contentione:
Pope Bonifacius the thirde obteined of the Emperour Phocas y• Rome ſhould be called the
Heade of al Churches) but with Greate Contention, and mutche adoo.
                      Wherefore
then dooth S. Auguſtine, & the whole Councel of Aphrica condemne the attempt

of this vſurped Iuriſdiction,Provvde Name. and calle it Fumoſum Saeculi Typhum? The
ſmoky Pride of the VVorlde: And that euen in the Biſhoppes of Rome.
                  If the Biſhop of Rome be ſo fulle of Humilitie, as wée are here borne in hande,
why auaunceth he him ſelfe ſo High aboue al General Councelles? Why ſaithe
he, that no Creature may iudge his dooinges? Why claimeth he the Swerde and
Scepter of al the World? Why ſaithe he, that Chriſtes Conſiſtorie, and his Conſiſtorie
are al One, and that he can doo, al that God him ſelfe can doo? Why doothe
he ſaye, That the Emperoure is but the Proctour, or Bailife of the Churche of
Rome:Diſtinct. 98. Si Imperator. In gloſs. 
                     Procurator, ſfiue Defenſor Romanae Eccleſiae? Why doothe he ſuffer Kinges,
and Emperours to holde his Stirope, to leade his Palfrai, and to kiſſe his foote?
Verily this kinde of Humilitie in other places might goe for Pride. Heſychius
ſaithe,Heſychius. Sen. Lib. 4. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 17. Curerg
                           •
                        . Diſt. 40. Mul
                           •
                        i. 
                     Vbi Superbia regnat, & Hypocriſis, Humilitas locum non habet: Where Pride,
and Hypocriſie beare the ſwaie, there Humilitie can haue no place.
                      Likewiſe Chryſoſtome
ſaithe, Quicunque deſiderauerit Primatum in Terra, inuenie
                           •
                         in Coelo confuſionem: nec
inter Seruos Chriſti computabitur, qui de Primatu tractauerit: Who ſo euer defireth Primacie
in Earthe, in Heauen he ſhal finde Confuſion: Neither ſhal he be accumpted emong the
Seruauntes of Chriſte, that wil once intreate of Primacie.
                     
                  
                  
                     To conclude, a Learned Man, one of M. Hardinges owne ſide, hereupon hathe
noted thus:
                     Heruaeus, De poteſ
                           •
                        ate Papae. Cap. 13. 
                     Bonifacius obtinuit à Phoca, vt Eccleſia Romana eſſet Caput Omnium
Eccleſiarum. Ex quo poſſet modo conſimili ſumi Argumentum, qu
                           •
                        d ad Imperatorem
pertineat, Primatum Eccleſiae transferre, & de Eccleſijs Ordinare: Pope Bonifacius the
thirde obteined of the Emperour Phocas, that the Churche of Rome ſhould be the Head of al
Churches. Whereof wee maye in like caſe geather an Argumente, that it belongeth to the
Emperour, to tranſlate the Primacie of the Churche, and to take Order for the Churches.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 2.
               Alſo the Councel of Carthage did circumſpectly prouide, that no
Biſhop ſhould be called either the Higheſt Biſhop, or Chiefe Prieſte.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Here by your leaue, Syr Defender, you playe falſe, and are taken, as it were, with falſe Dyſe, and
therefore ye ought iuſtly to loſe al that ye haue vniuſtly wonne by your falſe playe,Falſefieinge of a Councel. and falſe Dyſe:
I meane your ſhameful falſefieinge of this Councel by you alleaged. And for this and other your falſehed
it is right you loſe the credite, whiche vniuſtly (bicauſe by falſe Teachinge) you haue wonne amonge
the Vnlearned.M. Harding is a mery man. That your falſe plaie might not ſone be eſpted, you doo as like to Maiſ
                        •
                     er Iuel,
as though you were his Fathers Sonne. For that falſe ſleight he vſeth more, then any that euer I
readde. For where as we haue ſeuen Councelles of Carthage, nether ſhewe you, whiche of them it is
that you alleage, nor geue any notice of the number, where the Canon maye be founde. But contrariwiſe
as the Lap winge with her buſie crie leadeth a man from her neſte, ſo you leade vs from the Place,
where it is, by puttinge in the Margent of your Booke the number, 47. that not findinge it by your
note,Iohan. 5. we ſhould geue ouer further lookinge for it. VVho dothe euil, hateth Light, ſaithe Chriſte.
So here falſefieingVntruthe. For, this Canon vvil ſoone be founde. and forginge a Canon of a Councel, you would faine walke in clowdes, that your
lieing might not be deprehended, &c. So had it ben done more circumſpectly for furtherance of your
falſ hed, if the matter ſhould neuer come to trial of Learninge.
                  Nowe, who ſo euer examineth the place truly, muſt nedes crie out ſhame on you, Defender, who
are thauctour.The 26. Canon of the thirds Councel of Carthage diſcuſ. ſed. The woordes, if you had liſted to haue alleged them without falſhed, be theſe, VVhiche
we finde in the 26. Canon of the thirde Councel of Carthage, whiche Councel was Authorized by the
ſixth general Councel holden at Conſtantinople in Trullo. Vt primae ſedis Epiſcopus non appelletur
Princeps Sacerdotū, aut Summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid huiuſmodi, Sed tātùm, Primae
Sedis Epiſcopus. And thus they are to be Engliſhed. It hathe liked vs (ſaie the Fathers of that
Councel) that a Biſhop of a Firſt See be not called Prince of Prieſtes, or Higheſt Prieſt, or any ſutche other

thinge,Higheſte Biſhop, Prince of Prieſtes. but onely a Biſhop of a Firſte see. Nowe commeth me this iotly Defender, and ſaith
                        •
                     
the Councel of Carthage hathe by expreſſe wordes, (for ſo mutche his Latine foundeth) that no Biſhop
ſhould be called either the Higheſt Biſhop, or Chiefe Pr
                        •
                     eſt. By whiche Canon thus by him vntruely
vttered, he thought to deprtue the Pope of thisVntruthe, as ſhal appeare. Auncient Title, that al the worlde hathe euer at
                        •
                     ributed
vnto him, ſo as he be called nomore Summus Pontifex.
                  
                  For the right vnderſtandinge of this Canon two thinges are to be conſidered.Vile Epiſtolam 
                           〈◊〉
                         9. ad Petrum & Iohannem Aph
                           •
                        ic
                           •
                         Epiſcopos. Howe farre the
Authoritie of this Councel ought to be extended, and what is meant by a Firſte See.Vntruthe. For this Councel namely reſtreineth the B. of Rome. The Decrees of
this Councel perteined but to the Prouince of Aphrike. For prouinc
                        •
                     al Councelles binde onely the prouinces,
in whiche, and for Order of whiche they be kepte. Onely the General Councelles are to be
receiued of al.
                  By theſe two woordes,Prima Sedes, vvhat it meaneth. 
                     Prima Sedes thoſe Fathers vnderſtode any Citie, in whiche a Patriarke
of Primate, who are of one office, though of diuerſe names, hathe his see. I cal it a firſt see, or rather
(if it might be permitted) a Primate see.Vntruthe▪ grounded vpon a fable In greate Citties where the Higheſt courtes for iuſtice
were kept,Diſtin. 99. de Primatibus. and where the chiefe Pagane Prieſtes of the Latines named, Primi Flamines, were reſident
before the comminge of Chriſte, there after Chriſtes comminge were Patriarkes or Primates placed:
by whom the weighte matters of Biſhops ſhould be decidedVntruthe, grounded as the Former. VVhiche Order was taken firſte
by commaundement of S. Peter,Diſt. 99. C. Proninciae. as Clement writeth: by the Apoſtles and Clement, as Anacletus witneſſeth:
by the Apoſtles and theire Succeſſours afterward, as Lucius the Pope ſaithe.
                  Nowe the Councel of Carthage by this Defender alleaged, and likewiſe the Aphrican Councel
ordeined and willed, that a Biſhop of any of the Primate Sees of Aphr
                        •
                     ke ſhoulde not be called,
Princeps Sacerdotum, aut Summus Sacerdos, Prince or chiefe of the Prieſtes, or High
                        •
                     ſt Prieſte:
by whiche woorde a Biſhop is there ſignified: But onely a Biſhop of the Primate See, whereof he was
Primate. By whiche Decree they willedMoſte manifeſte & moſte vaine Vntruthe. For the vvoordes of the Councel are theſe: Vniuerſalis autem nec etiam Romanus pontifex appelletur.
                      only theire Primates of Aphrike to kepe themſelues within
theire limites, and not preſumptuouſly to take vpon them more gloriouſe Titles, and further Iuriſdictiō,
then to them pertetned, Leſt ſurely they might ſeme to preiudicate the Popes Supremacie. Thus it
is euident, thauctoritie of that Charthage Councel, being reſtrained to 
                        •
                     phrike onely, that by this Canon
the Popes Prima ie and Title is no Whit dim
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     ſhed or diſproued. And ſo for al this Defender, he
remaineth as he hatheA greate Vntruthe. euer, Higheſt Biſhop.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  What, M. Hardinge, ſo mutche falſehed vpon vs at one time? Falſifieinge of
Councelles: Shameful Falſifieinge: Falſe teachinge: Falſe ſleight: Falſe Diſe:
Falſe Plaie: and al Falſe? Yet Chriſte ſaithe of him ſelfe, I am the Truthe. God
geue you grace, to credite him. For the errour of quotation in the margin, wherin
you ſpende ſo many woordes, it maye pleaſe you to knowe, that I neither was the
Printer, nor coulde be preſente at the Printinge. For the reſte, if there can be any
one pointe of Falſehed founde in me, touchinge the allegation of this Councel of
Carthage, I wil not refuſe to ſtande charged with the whole. But if euery of
theſe horrible Falſeheddes be found an euident, and plaine Truthe, then it maye
pleaſe you, to take home al theſe prety Titles to your ſelfe againe, as in euery of
theſe woordes ſo often doubled, and ſo heapte togeather, hauing your ſelfe committed
a ſeueral Falſehedde.
                  And herein for trial of your courteous dealinge, I am contente, your ſelfe ſhal
fit, and be the Iudge. For, notwithſtanding it be thought of many, that ye diſſemble
déepely, and wil not beſtowe your voice to ſaie the Truthe: Yet I doubte not,
but in this mater, if ye haue eles, ye maye eaſily looke vp, and ſée the Truthe.
                  You ſaye, Sir Defender hathe falſely alleged the Councel of Carthage. And
why ſo? For that he ſaithe, The Councel Decréed by expreſſe woordes, that the
Biſhop of Rome ſhould not be called the Vniuerſal Biſhop. This, you ſaie, is Forged,
and Falſified, and is no parte of that Councel. For indifferent trial bothe of
the Truthe, and of the Falſehed herein, I beſeche you, beholde the very woordes of

the Councel,Higheſte Biſhop, Prince of Prieſtes. Diſti. 99. Primae. euen as thei are alleged by your own Doctour Gratiā. Theſe thei are:
Primae Sedis Epiſcopus non appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum, vel Summus Sacerdos, vel aliquid
huiuſmodi: Sed tantùm, Primae Sedis Epiſcopus. Vniuerſalis autem nec
etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur: Let not the Biſhop of any of the
Firſte Sees be called the Prince of Prieſtes, Or the Higheſt Prieſte, or by any other like
name: but Onely, the Biſhop of the Firſte see. But let not the Biſhop of
Rome him ſelfe be called the Vniuerſal Biſhop. And in ye Gloſe thereupon
it is noted thus, In hac Diſtinctione dicitur, quod Papa non debet dici Vniuerſalis:
In this Diſtinction it is ſaide, that the Pope ought not to be called
the Vniuerſal Biſhop.
                  
                  Nowe, M. Hardinge compare our woordes, and the Councelles wordes bothe
togeather. Wée ſaie none otherwiſe, but as the Councel ſaithe, The Biſhop
of Rome him ſelfe ought not to be called the Vniuerſal Biſhop.
Herein wée doo neither adde, nor miniſhe, but reporte the woordes playnely, as wée
finde them. If you had lookte better on your Booke, and would haue tried this mater,
as you ſaye, by your Learninge, ye might wel haue reſerued theſe Vnciuile reproches
of Falſehedde to your ſelfe, and haue ſpared your Crieinge of Shame vpon
this Defender.
                  Touchinge, that you ſo pleaſantly cheare your ſelfe with theſe woordes, You doo as
like to M. Iewel, as if you were his Fathers Sonne▪
                      I muſte anſweare you, as S. Auguſtine
ſometime did the Heretique Creſconius:Auguſt. Contra Creſc. Li. 3. Ca. 38 
                     Serua potius Puerilia Pueris: Keepe ſutche
Childiſhe toies to plaie with your Children.
                      God make vs bothe like vnto our Father
that is in Heauen.
                  Where you ſaie, of your ſelfe onely, without farther witneſſe, that this Title
is the Popes Auncient right, euer géeuen to him by al the world, I doubte not, but
the vntruthe hereof by my Former Replie,Artic. 4. Gregor. Lib. 7 Epiſt. 30. touching the ſame, maie ſoone appeare.
Certainely, when the ſame Title was offered to S. Gregorie, he refuſed it vtterly,
as none of his.
                  In déede, this Councel of Carthage notwithſtanding, the Title of Higheſt Biſhop
was ſometimes geuen, not onely to the Biſhop of Rome, & other Patriarkes,
but alſo vnto al other Biſhoppes.M. Hardinge
                           •
                         Amphilochius. Rufinus, Lib. 2. Cap. 23. M. Hardinges owne Amphilochius calleth S.
Baſtle Principem Sacerdotum: The Prince, or Chiefe of Biſhoppes: Rufinus calleth
Athanaſius, Pontificem Maximum: The Higheſt Biſhop. Nazianzenus calleth the
ſame Athanaſius Archiſacerdotem Sacerdotum: The Chiefe Biſhop of Biſhoppes. Lactantius
calleth euery Biſhoprike Summum Sacerdotiū.
                     Nazian. Ad H
                           •
                        
                        ronem. Likewiſe S. Hierome ſaith,
Eccleſiae Salus in Summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet: The ſafetie of the Churche ſtandeth
in the dignitie of the Higheſt Prieſt.
                     
                     Lactan. Lib. 4. Cap. 30. By whiche Higheſt Prieſte, M. Hardinge him ſelfe
ſaithe, is meante euery ſeueral Biſhop within his owne Dioceſe. S. Auguſtine
ſaithe,Hieron, contra Luciferianos. M. Hardinge in his Anſweare to the Apologie, Fol. 204. b. 
                     Quid eſt Epiſcopus, niſi Primus Preſbyter, hoc eſt, Summus Sacerdos? What is a
Biſhop, but the Firſt, or Chiefe Prieſte, that is to ſaie, the Higheſt Prieſte?
                      Therefore wée
may ſafely ſpare the Pope this Title, of Higheſt Biſhop, not as Peculiar to him
alone, as M. Hardinge imagineth, but as Common, and General to al Biſhoppes.
                  Al that ye haue here alleged of the Iuriſdiction of the Flamines, is a mere fantaſie▪
grounded onely vpō an vnſauery Fable of Anacletus, and Clemens. Neither
are you hable to finde,In Quaeſt. Ex vtro
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Teſtamen▪ mixtim, Qu. 10
                           •
                        . either theſe names, Archiflamines, or Protoflamines,
whiche here are imagined, in any Ancient allowed Writer, or any ſutche Vniuerſal
Iuriſdiction to them belonginge.
                  The Firſte, or Principal, or Mother Sees were limited, not by the Flamines,
but by the Prince.Concil. Chalced. Cap. 12. So it is written in the Councel of Chalcedon: Quaſcunque

Ciuitates per Literas Regias Metropolitico nomine honorarunt:
                     A Primate See. 
                     VVhat Citties ſo euer
by the Princes Charter, they honoured with the name of the Mother See. And
therefore the Emperour Theodoſius vpon diſpleaſure conceiued,Chryſ. ad Popul. Antiochen. Homi. 17. tooke that Name
of Honoure from the Cittie of Antioche, mindinge it ſhoulde be ſo called nomore.
And for that cauſe was the Cittie of Rome choſen emongeſt others to be a Primate,
or a Principal Mother Sée, not for that either Chriſte, or Peter had ſo appointed,
as M. Hardinge telleth vs, but for that it was the moſte Noble Cittie,
and of greatteſt renoume in al the world.Concil. Chalced. Ca. 28. The woordes be plaine: Sedi Veteris Romae
Patres meritò dederunt Primatum, Quòd illa Ciuitas aliis Imperaret:
The Fathers woorthily gaue the Chiefetie to the See of the Olde Rome: Bicauſe that
Cittie had the Princehood ouer others.
                  
                  
                     Nowe concerninge this Decrée of the Councel of Carthage, it touched as wel
the Biſhop of Rome, as other Primates. And therefore Pope Adriane afterward
alleging, and corrupting the ſame, added thereto this ſpecial Prouiſo for him ſelfe:
Nullus Archiepiſcoporum, niſi qui Primas Sedes renent, appelletur Primas, aut Princeps
Sacerdotum,Adri
                           ••
                        . Papa. In Capitulis ex Synodis, & Canonib. diuer. collec. To. 2. Pag. 611. aut Summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid huiuſmodi &c. Salua ſemper in omnibus
Authoritate Beati Petri Apoſtoli: Let no Archebiſhop, ſauinge ſutche, as heue the Principal,
or Firſte Sees, he called either the Primate, or the Prince of Prieſtes, or the Higheſt Prieſte, or
by any other like name, &c. Sauinge alwaies, and in al thinges the Authoritie of Bleſſed S. Peter
the Apoſtle.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 3.
               And therefore ſithence the Biſhop of Rome wil nowe a daies ſo be
called, & chalengeth vnto him ſelfe an Authoritie that is none of his:
biſides that he dothe plainely contrarie to the Ancient Councelles,
and contrarie to the Olde Fathers: Wee beleue, that he dothe geue to
him ſelfe, as it is written by his owne Companion Gregorie, a Preſumptuouſe,
a Prophane,Al theſe be the VVoordes of Gregorie. a Sacrilegious and Antichriſtian name:
that he is alſo the Kinge of Pride, that he is Lucifer, whiche preferreth
him ſelfe before his Bretherne: that he hathe forſaken the Faith,
and is the Forerunner of Antichriſte.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Here is mutche adoo aboute nought, and a number of bitter woordes pyked out of S. Gregorio
                        •
                     
Epiſtles, pretended to be writtē againſt the Biſhop of Rome, to no purpoſe. For if wee ſay,
                        Vntruthe. For Platina ſaithe, Bonifacius 3. Obtinuit à Phoca, Magna tamē Contentione. as wee may
ſaie truely, that he chalengeth to him ſelfe no ſutche name, then what hath this Defender to ſaie? Let
him ſhew vs how many Biſhops of that see euer tooke the name of the Vniuerſal Biſhop vpon them,
ſpecially as Gregorie vnderſtandeth it to ſignifie. If he can ſhewe none, why blotteth he ſo mutche
paper with ſo impudent lies?
                  
                     There appeareth no ſutche mater in al that Counc
                           •
                        l. In deede the ſix hundred and thirty Fathers of the general Councel of Chalcedon gaue to Pope Leo
that name, as Gregorie in three ſundrie Epiſtles writeth, and certaine other in theire writinges haue
attributed to the Pope the ſame. But that either Leo, or any other his SucceſſourVntruthe, As appear
                           •
                        th by the Former Authoritie of Platina. affected ſo to be
called, Gregorie denieth
                        •
                     
                     Vntruthe, As further appeareth by the Anſweare. And that any ſince Gregories time to our dayes euer called or wrote him
ſelfe Vniuerſal Biſhop, we denie.
                  VVhereas Pelagius, and Gregorie, writinge againſte the Preſumption of Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople
for takinge vpon him this name, are mutche alleged by the enimies of Vnitie, againſte
the Authoritie of Peters Succeſſour ouer the whole Churche: we ſaye, that they folowinge the ſleppes
of theire Predeceſſours refuſed the name of Vniuerſal Biſhop in ſutche ſenſe, as Pelagius, and ſpecially
Gregorie oftentimes declareth, that where one is called Vniuerſal Biſhop, he ſemeth to be called

                     Vntruthe, and moſt Vaine fantaſie. For no Biſhop of Conſtā
                        tinople euer dreamed of ſutche Authoritie. Biſhop alone,Vniuerſal ſo as Biſhoprike ſhould be taken away from al others. But they refuſed not ſo to be called
after this meaninge, as though by that refuſal the Auctoritie of the Biſhop of Rome ſhould be reſtrained,
and not extende ouer the whole Churche. They denie, that any man might ſo be Vniuerſal Biſhop,
as he ſhould be alſo the peculiar ruler, and Gouernour of euery particular Churche. For ſo al other
Biſhops had ben in vaine: and that is contrary to Chriſtes Inſtitution, who ordeined al the Apoſtles to
be Biſhops. To ſaie al in few, they refuſed the name that might odiouſly be taken, they refuſed not
the PrimacieVntruthe. For Chriſte neuer erected any ſutche Primacie. whiche Chriſte to them had committed. Therefore Gregorie writinge to Morice the
Emperour, alleaginge the woordes that make for Peters Auctoritie ouer the whole Flocke of Chriſte,
ſaithe of Peter,The like vvhole Charge vvas geuen to Paule, Iohn, and Mathevve: as ſhal appeare. The Charge of the whole Churche and Principalitie is committed to him, and yet is he
not called Vniuerſal Apoſtle. VVhere it is plaine, that Gregorie doth both affirme the charge of the
whole, and denieth the name of Vniuerſal. Let theſe Defenders graunte the thinge, and we ſtriue not
for the name.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here it pleaſethe M. Hardinge of his Courteſie to ſaye, Wée haue blotted our papers
with ſo many, & ſo many impudente Lies. His whole diſcourſe ſtandeth onely
in the Conſtruction of this woorde, Vniuerſal, in what ſenſe it maye be either refuſed,
or claimed. How be it, vnderſtand thou, gētle Reader, that al this is M. Hardinges
owne onely Commētarie. For other Doctour, or Father he allegeth none.
                  Firſte, where it is ſaide, that S. Gregorie by this woorde, Vniuerſal Biſhop,
meante him, that woulde be Biſhop alone ouer al the worlde, excludinge al others,
this expoſition is not onely ſtrange, but alſo vaine, and fonde, and voide of reaſon.
For what Biſhop of Conſtantinople euer was there, that called him ſelfe the Only
Biſhop, and excluded al others? Doubteleſſe Iohn, that firſte laide Claime
vnto this name, as he called him ſelfe the Vniuerſal Biſhop, ſo he wrote his Letters
vnto others, and neuer refuſed to calle them Biſhoppes.
                  But, to leaue theſe Gloſes, and fantaſies, by the Title of Vniuerſal Biſhop,
S▪ Gregorie meante ſutche a one, not, as would be Biſhop alone, but as woulde
claime Infinite Authoritie, and Vniuerſal Iuriſdiction ouer al other Biſhoppes
throughout the Worlde: and that, as S. Cyprian ſaithe, woulde calle him ſelfe,
Epiſcopum Epiſcoporum: The Biſhop of Biſhoppes.
                     
                  
                  Therefore S.Cyprian. in Con
                           •
                        
                        cil. Carthagin. Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 38. Gregorie thus writeth vnto Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople.
the Firſte Vſurper of this Title: Quid tu Chriſto Vniuerſalis Eccleſiae Capiti in Extremi
Iudicij reſponſurus es examine, qui cuncta eius Membra tibimet conaris Vniuerſalis
appellatione ſupponere? What anſweare wilt thou make vnto Chriſte the Heade of the Vniuerſal
Churche, when thou ſhalt be examined at the laſte Judgement,
                      (not that thou haſte
called thee ſelfe the Onely Biſhop, but) that thus goeſt aboute by the name of Vniuerſal
Biſhop to make al his Members ſubiecte vnto thee? It was this Immoderate Vniuerſal.
Iuriſdiction, that S. Gregorie reproued, and not the makinge of him ſelfe Biſhop
alone, excludinge al others.
                  
                     Likewiſe he writeth of him ſelfe vnto Eulogius:Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 30. Beatitudo veſtra mihi ſic loquitur,
Sicut Iuſsiſtis. Quod Verbum Iuſsionis, peto, à meo auditu remouete. Nō
Iuſsi: Sed quae vtilia viſa ſunt, indicare curaui: Your Holineſſe ſaithe thus vnto me, (beinge
the Biſhop of Rome
                     ) As you haue Commaunded. Haue awaye this woorde
of Commaundinge from my Hearinge, I beſeeche you. I Commaunded you
not: but that I tooke to be the beſte, I thought good to ſhewe you. The faulte therefore,
that Gregorie findeth with Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, ſtoode not in calling
him ſelfe the
                      Onely Biſhop, for ſo he neuer did, but in Bidding, & Commaunding,
& Claiming Vniuerſalitie of Iuriſdiction ouer the whole Churche of Chriſte.
And for that cauſe he ſaithe vnto Eulogius:Gregor. Lib. 7. Epiſt 30. Ecce in Praefatione Epiſtolae, quam ad

                        ••
                     eipſum, qui prohibui, direxiſtis, Superbae Appellationis Verbum, Vniuerſalem

me Papam dicentes imprimere Curaſtis.Vniuerſal. 
                     Quod, peto, dulciſsima mihi Sanctitas veſtra
vltra non faciat: quia vobis ſubtrahitur, quod alteri pluſquam ratio exigit praebetur:
Beholde euen in the Title of your Letter ye haue written this Prowde Poſee, naminge me
The Vniuerſal Pope: notwithſtanding I haue forbidden it. I beſeche your Holineſſe, to
doo ſo nomore. For what ſo euer is geuen vnto any other aboue reaſon, the ſame is taken from
your ſelues.
                     
                  
                  M. Hardinge ſaithe, Gregorie affirmeth the Charge of the whole, and denieth
the name of Vniuerſal. Let theſe Defenders (ſaithe he) graunte the thinge, and wée
ſtriue not for the name. Verily this plaie had benne to vaine for Childrē: to allow y•
thinge it ſelfe, and to cauil onely about the name: that is to receiue the Body, and
to ſhunne the Shadowe:Ma
                           •
                        t. 23. Appianus: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Or, as Chriſte ſaithe, to ſwalowe a Camel, and to ſtraine
a gnatte. So App
                        •
                     an ſaithe, Iulius Caeſar nicely refuſed to be called a Kinge:
and yet in al manner Authoritie, and Gouernmente bare him ſelfe none otherwiſe,
then as a Kinge.
                  It was not the bare Name of Vniuerſal Biſhop, that ſo mutche offended the
Holy Fathers: but the Pride, and Tyrannie, and Vniuerſal Gouernmente, & Iuriſdiction,
that is ſignified by that name. If the name were naught, then was the
Vſurpation of the thinge it ſelfe a greate deale woorſe.
                  
                     But S. Gregorie ſaithe, The Charge, and Principalitie of the whole Churche was
committed vnto Peter. This is not denied. In like ſorte Chryſoſtome ſaithe, The
like Charge, and Principalitie of the Churche was committed vnto Paule. For thus he
writeth,
                     Chryſ. in Sermo. De Eleemoſy. Chryſoſt. in Act. Homili. 53. 
                     Paulo Totus Orbis creditus eſt Paulus gubernat Orbis Eccleſiam: Paulus Vniuerſum
gubernat Orbem: Vnto Paule the whole World is committed: Paule gouerneth the
Churche of the VVorld. Paule ruleth y• vvhole vvorld. And yet Chryſoſtome meant not
hereby, y• Paule had the Vniuerſal Gouernmente of the whole: but that his care, &
Charge was general,
                     Chryſoſt. De Laudibus Pauli, Homil. 2. 
                     as not bound or limited vnto one place, but indifferente, & cō
                        mō
vnto al. So he ſaithe, Paulus tā anxi
                              •
                            omniū ſalutē curabat, 
                              •
                           c ſi Totus Mundus vnica
eſſet Domus:
                      Paule was ſo careful for the Saluation of al menne, as if the Whole Worlde had
benne but one Houſe.Chryſ. in Homil. De Profectu Euangelij. Chryſoſt. ad Popul. Antioche. Homil. 73. 
                     Againe, Paulum tangebat ſolicitudo Omnium Eccleſiarum: non
Vn
                              •
                           us, aut Duarum, aut Trium, ſed Omnium, quae erant per Orbem Terrarum:
                     
Paule was moued with the care of Al Churches: not of One, or Two, or Three, but of Al the
Churches throughout the World. Likewiſe he ſaithe of S. Iohn, Columna erat Omniū,
quae in Orbe ſunt, Eccleſia
                              •
                           um.
                      He was the Piller of Al the Churches in the Worlde. Likewiſe
againe of S. Mathewe, Matthaeus Vniuerſi Orbis curam gerebat:
                      The Whole
VVorlde was vnder Mathewes Charge.Chryſoſt. in Prologo in Iohan. Chryſ. in Matthae. Homil. 48.
                  
                  Therefore if M. Hardinge wil geather out of theſe thrée woordes of S. Gregorie
(Totius Eccleſiae Cura) that Peter had Vniuerſal Iuriſdiction ouer al, it
muſte néedes folowe by the ſame woordes, that Paule, Iohn, and Mathewe had the
ſame Iuriſdiction ouer al. What other thinge he hopeth to gaine by theſe Woordes
of S. Gregorie, I cannot tel: Onleſſe happily he wil founde his reaſon thus: S.
Gregorie ſaithe, Petrus Vniuerſalis Apoſtolus non vocatur: Peter is not called the Vniuerſal
Apoſtle: Ergo, The pope is the Vniuerſal Biſhop.
                     
                  
                  So handſomely theſe thinges are geathered togeather, to ſerue the Pourpoſe.
                  Pope Leo, ye ſaie, of Humilitie refuſed this Name openly in the Councel of
Chalcedon. In déede Pope Gregorie ſo reporteth it. Notwithſtandinge it appeareth
not by any thinge donne in that Coūcel, that this Title was euer offered him.
And to refuſe a thinge before it be offered, it is no greate pointe of Humilitie.
                  To be ſhorte, the beſte wée can geather hereof, is this: Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople
ambitiouſly craued this name: Pope Leo godly refuſed it being offered
vnto him: The Popes afterward gladly receiued it without offering. If it were

a good name,Vniuerſal why was it refuſed? If it were an il name, why was it receiued?
                  
                     Nowe let vs ſée, what they of M. Hardinges ſide haue meante by this woorde,
Vniuerſal, and with what Humilitie the Popes haue receiued the ſame. Thus
therefore they write:
                     
                     Abbas. De Cō
                        ceſſ. Praeben. Quia diuerſita. Papa eſt Ordinarius Totius Mundi: The Pope is the Ordinarie
of al the VVorld.
                     Extra, De Appel▪ Ve debitus, In Gloſſ. Papa eſt Ordinarius Omnium hominum. The Pope is the Ordinarie
of Al menne:
                     Extra. De ſtatu Regulari, Periculoſo. In Gloſſ. Papa Totius Orbis obtinet Principatum: The Pope hathe the Princehood
of Al the VVorlde: And when the Pope is Conſecrate, the Chiefe Miniſter ſaith
vnto him,
                     
                     Ceremoniar. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Ego inueſtio te de Papatu, vt Praeſis Vrbi, & Orbi: I doo inueſte thee with the
Popedome, that thou maiſte rule both the Cittie, and the VVorlde.
                  
                  And whereas M. Hardinge demaundeth, how many Popes haue claimed this
name, it may pleaſe him to remember, that in the late Councel of Conſtance it
was not onely claimed, but alſo publiſhed, as an Article of y• Faithe. The woordes
are theſe,Paralipome. Vrſpergen. De Diſputatione Lipſica. 
                     De neceſsitate Salutis eſt credere, Papam eſſe Oecumenicum: It is of the neceſsitie
of Saluation to beleue, that the Pope is the Vniuerſal Biſhop.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of this Vniuerſalitie of Power Franciſcus Zarabella writeth thus:
                     Franciſ. Zarabella. Papa iam
occupauit Omnia iura inferiorum Eccleſiarum, ira▪ vt inferiores Praelati ſint pro nihilo:
The Pope hathe nowe gotten the right of Al Inferiour Churches, ſo that the Inferiour Prelates
ſtande nowe for nothinge.
                  
                  For theſe cauſes Gregorie callethe the name of Vniuerſal Biſhop. a Prophane,
a Preſumptuous, a Wicked and Antichriſtian name: Comparinge the Vſurper
thereof with Lucifer, and Antichriſte.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 1.
               Further wee ſaye, that the Miniſter ought laufully, duely, and orderly
to be preferred to that office of the Churche of God, and that noman
hathe Power to wreaſte him ſelfe into the Holy Miniſterie at
his owne pleaſure. Wherefore theſe perſonnes doo vs the greatter
wronge, whiche haue nothinge ſo common in theire mouthes,
as that wee doo nothinge Orderly, and comely, but al thinges
troubleſomely, and without order: and that wee allowe euery man to
be a Prieſte, to be a Teacher, and to be an Interpreter of the Scriptures.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye ſaye, that the Miniſter ought laufully to be called (for ſo hathe your Latine) and duely and orderly
to be preferred to that office of the Churche of God. VVhy do ye not ſo? VVhy is not this obſerued
amonge you Goſpellers? VVhat ſo euer ye meane by your Miniſter, and by that office,Vntruthe. For it is knovven▪ vvee haue them. this are
wee aſſured of, that in this your newe Churche, Biſhops, Prieſtes, Deacons, Subdeacons, or any other Inferiour
Orders ye haue none.
                  For whereas after the Doctrine of your Newe Gospel, like the Forerenners of Antichriſte, ye
haueVntruthe. For vvee haue abandoned neither the Prieſthoode, nor the Sacrifice, that Chriſte appointed. abandoned thexternal sacrifice, and Prieſthood of the Newe Teſtamente, and haue not in your
Secte conſecrated Biſhops, and therefore beinge without Prieſtes made with lawful laieinge on of
handes, as Scripture requireth, al Holy Orders beinge geuen by Biſhops onely: howe can ye ſaie, that any
amonge you can lawfully Miniſter, or that ye haue any lawful Miniſters at al?
                  This then beinge ſo, let me haue leaue to oppoſe one of theſe Defenders conſciences. And that
for the better Vnderſtandinge I maye directe my woordes to a certaine perſon, let him be the Authour
of this Apologie, or bicauſe his name to me is vnknowen, let him be M. Iewel. For with
him gladly woulde I reaſon in this point, the rather for acquaintance, and for that he beareth the
name of a Biſhop in that Churche, where my ſelfe had a roume. Howe ſaye you, Sir Miniſter Biſhop,
ought the Miniſter to be lawfully called? ought he dewly and orderly to be preferred to that

office, or (as the Latine here hathe) promoted, or put in Auctoritie ouer the Churche? in the Apologie this
Defender ſaithe, yea.
                  Howe many Biſhops can you recken, whome in the Churche of Saleſbury you haue ſucceded as
wel in Doctrine, as in outwarde ſittinge in that Chaire? Howe many can you tel vs of, that beinge
your Predeceſſours in order before you, were of your Opinion, and taught the faitheful people of
that Dioces the Doctrine, that you teache? Did Biſhop Capon teache your Doctrine? did Shaxton
                        •
                      did
Campegius? did Biſhop Audley? Briefly, did euer any Biſhop of that See before you teache your Doctrine?
Vntruthe. For B. Shaxton, and B. Capon taught the ſame. It is moſte certaine they did not.
                  If you cannot ſhewe your Biſhoply Petigree, if you can proue no Succeſſion, then whereby holde
you? VVil you ſhewe vs the Letters Patentes of the Prince? VVel may they ſtande you in ſome ſteede
before men: before God, who ſhal cal you to accoumpt for preſwninge to take the Higheſt office in his
ChurcheVntruthe. For he vvas choſen by Canonical Election of the Chapter, as al other Biſhoppes haue benne before. not duely called thereto, they ſhal ſerue you to no propoſe.
                  You know what Tertullian ſaithe of ſutch as ye be:In praeſcriptionibus aduerſus Haereticos. Theſe be Tertullians vvoordes. 
                     Edāt Origines Eccleſiarum ſuarum, &c.
VVe ſaye likewiſe to you M. Iewel, and that we ſaye to you, we ſaye to eche one of your Companions:
Tel vs the Original and firſte ſpringe of your Churche. She we vs the Regiſter of your Biſhoppes
continually ſuccedinge one an other from the beginninge, ſo as that firſte Biſhop haue ſome one of
the Apoſtles, or of the Apoſtolike men for his Authour, and Predeceſſour. For by this waye the Apoſtolike
Churches ſhewe what reputation they be of. As the Churche of Smyrnae telleth vs of Polycarpe
by Iohn the Apoſtle placed there. The Churche of the Romaines telleth vs of Clement ordeined
by Peter.Epiſt. 165. S. Auguſtine hauinge reckened vp in order the Biſhoppes of Rome to An aſtaſius
Succeſſour to Siricius, who was the Eighte and thirteth after Peter, ſaithe that in al that Number
and rolle of Biſhoppes there is not founde One, that was a Donatiſie: and thereof he concludeth,
Ergo, the Donatiſtes be not Catholikes. So after that wee haue reckened al the Biſhoppes of
Saliſburie from Biſhop Capon vpwarde, we ſhal come at length in reſpecte of Doctrine and Orders
to S. Auguſtine the Apoſtle of the Engliſhe, who was made Biſhop by Gregorie, and from Gregorie
vpwarde to S. Peter. And in al that rewe of BiſhopsVntruthe, By your ovvne Confeſsion. wee ſhal finde neuer a one that beleued,
as M. Iewel beleueth. Ergo, your Zwinglian and Caluinian Belefe, M. Iewel, and of the reſt
of your felowes is not Catholike.
                  Therefore, to go from your Succeſsion, whiche ye cannot proue, and to come to your Vocation, how
ſaie you Syr? You beare your ſelfe as though you were Biſhop of Saliſburie. But howe can you
proue your Vocation? By what Authoritie Vſurpe you the Adminiſtration of Doctrine and Sacramentes?
VVhat can you alleage for the right and Proufe of your Miniſterie? who hathe called you?
VVho hathe laide handes on you? By what example hathe he done it? Howe and by whom are you
conſecrated? VVho hathe ſent you? VVho hathe committed to you th
                        •
                     ffice you take vpon you? Be you a
Prieſte, or be you not? If you be no▪ how dare you Vſurpe the name and Office of a Biſhop? If you be,
tel vsEuen he, that gaue M. Hardinge Orders in the time of K. Edvvarde. who gaue you Orders? The Inſtitution of a Prieſte, was neuer yet but in the Power of a
Biſhop. Biſhoppes haue alwaies after the Apoſtles time, accordinge to the Eccleſiaſtical Canons,
ben conſecrated byVntruths tvvo togeather in one Sentence: See the Anſvveare. three other Biſhoppes, with the conſente of the Metropolitane, and confirmation
* of the Biſhop of Rome.
                  Macarius a Prieſte of Athanaſius,Athanaſ. in Apologia. 
                           •
                        
                      (as it was laide to his Charge by his accuſers) pulled Iſchyras
frō the Aul
                        •
                     ar as he was atA vaine Vntruthe. For if it had benne any thinge, it had benne a Communion, & not a Maſſe. But Athanaſius ſaithe plainely, Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Eccleſia ibi erat, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Sacra ficbant, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tē
                        pus myſteriorum agebatur. Maſſe, ouerthrew the Holy Table brake the Chalice. The matter brought
to iudgement, Athanaſius and thoſe Biſhops both denied the facte and alſo though it were graunted,
yet defended the ſame as wel done, becauſe Iſchyras was not a lawful Miniſter of the Churche. And
why ſo? bicauſe he was not lawfully made Prieſte, nor with Churchely laieing on of handes cōſecrated.
By which example beſides other pointes wee are taught, what to iudge of your pretenſed Cōmunion.
                  Againe what ſaye you to Epiphanius,Contra H
                           •
                        
                        reſ. 
                           •
                         Lib a. In Dialog
                           •
                         contra Luciferianos. who writeth againſte one Zacchaeus of his time, for that
beinge but a Laye man, with wicked Preſumption tooke vpon him to * handle the Holy Myſteries, and
raſhely to do the office of a Prieſte? Hereof S. Hierome ſa
                        •
                     the not ably: Hilarius cùm Diaconus
de Eccleſia receſſerit, &c. Hilary for aſmutche as he went from the Churche beinge a Deacon,
and is onely (as he thinketh) the multitude of the worlde, can neither conſecrate the Sacramente of
Thaulter beinge without Biſhops and Prieſtes, nor deliuer Baptiſme without the 
                        •
                     uchariſte.

And whereas nowe the man is deade,Succeſſion. with the man alſo the ſecte is ended, becauſe beinge a Deacon
he coulde not conſecrate any Clerke that ſhoulde remaine after him. And Churche is there
none,Sacerdotē. whiche hath not a Prieſte. But lettinge goe theſe fewe of litle regarde, that to them ſelues
be bothe Laie and Biſhoppes, liſten what is to be thought of the Churche. Thus S. Hierome there.
In whome leauinge other thinges I note, that if there be no Churche, where is no Prieſte, VVhere
is your Churche like to become,M. Hardinges Brethren Apoſtates. after that our Apoſtates, that nowe be fledde from vs to you,
ſhalbe departed this Life? Therefore this beinge true, it remaineth, M. Iewel, you tel vs,
whether your Vocation be Ordinarie or Extraordinarie. If it be Ordinarie, ſhewe vs the letters
of your Orders. At leaſt ſhewe vs, that you haue receiued Power to doo the Office, you preſume to
exerciſe, by due order of laieinge on of handes and Conſecration.A manifeſt Vntruthe: For vvee haue bothe Order, and Co
                           •
                         ſecration. But Order, and Conſecration you
haue not. For who coulde geue that to you of al theſe Newe Miniſters, how ſo euer els you cal them
whiche he hath not him ſelfe? If it be Extraordinarie (as al that ye haue done hitherto is beſides
al good Order) ſhewe vs ſome Signe or Miracle. If you faile in al theſe, why ought not you
to be put awaie?
                  Finally what can you anſweare to that,Li. 1. Epiſt. 6 whiche maye be obiected to you out of S. Cyprians Epiſtle
to Magnus, touchinge Nouatian? It was at thoſe daies a queſtion, whether Nouatian Baptized
and offered, ſpecially where as he vſed the Forme, Maner, and Ceremonies of the Churche.
Cyprian denieth it. For he can not (ſaithe he) be compred a Biſhop, who ſettinge at nought the
Tradition of the Goſpel,Euſebius Eccleſ. Hiſt. Li. 6. ca. 43. in Graeco. and of the Apoſtles, Nemini ſuccedens à ſeipſo ordinatus eſt, Succedinge
no man is ordeined Biſhop of him ſelfe. For by no meanes maye one haue or holde a Churche,
that is not ordeined in the Churche.
                  This beinge ſo, we doo you no wronge, as ye complaine, in tellinge you and declaringe to the
VVorlde, that touchinge the exerciſe of your Miniſterie, ye doo nothinge orderly, or comely, but al
thinges troubleſomely and without Order. Onleſſe ye meane ſuche Order, and comelineſſe, as Theeues
obſ
                        •
                     rue amonge them ſelues in the diſtribution of their Robberies.
                  Laſtly,M. Hardinges modeſtie. if ye allowe not euery man, yea and euery VVoman to be a Prieſte, why driue ye not
ſome of your felowes to recante,An odious Vntruthe: For touchinge the Miniſterie of the Churche, vvee haue neither Preached ſo, not vvritten ſo. that ſo haue Preached? VVhy allow ye the Bookes of your Newe
Euangeliſtes, that ſo haue written?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here hath M. Hardinge taken ſome paines more then ordinarie. He thought,
if he coulde by any coloure make the worlde beléeue, wee haue neither Biſhoppes,
nor Prieſtes, nor Deacons this daie in the Churche of Englande, he
might the more eaſily claime the whole right vnto himſelfe. And in déede, if it
were certaine, that the Religion, and Truthe of God paſſeth euermore orderly by
Succeſsion, and none otherwiſe, then were Succeſsion, whereof he hath tolde
vs ſo longe a tale, a very good ſubſtantial Argumente of the Truthe. But Chriſte
ſaithe,Matthael▪ 23. 
                     In Cathedra Moſi ſedent Scribae, & Phariſaei: By order of Succeſsion, the
Scribes, and Phariſeis ſitte in Moſes Chaire.
                      Annas, and Ca
                        •
                     p
                        •
                     as, touchinge Succeſsion,
were as wel Biſhoppes, as Aaron, & Eleazar. Of Succeſsion, S. Paule
ſaithe to the Faithful at Epheſus:
                     Actor. 20. 
                     Scio, qu
                           •
                        d poſt diſceſſum meum intrabunt Lupirapaces.
Ex Vobis ipſis exurgent viri peruerſa loquentes: I knowe that after my departure
hence, R
                              •
                           ueninge Woulues ſhal enter, and Succede me. And out of your ſelues
there ſhal (by Succeſsion) ſpringe vp menne ſpeakinge peruerſely.
                      Therefore S.
Hierome ſaithe,Diſt 40. Non eſt Facile. 
                     Non Sanctorum filij ſunt, qui tenent loca Sanctorum: They be not
alwaies the Children of Holy Menne, that
                      (by Succeſsion) haue the places of Holy
Menne.
                     
                  
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge the Pope him ſelfe wil ſaie, as it is before alleged, In Papa
ſi deſint bona acquiſita per merirum,
                     
                     Diſt. 40. Non nos. 
                     ſufficiunt, quae à Loci Praedeceſſore Praeſtantur:
If the Pope wante good thinges gotten by his owne merites: the good thinges, whiche he
hath (by Succeſſion) of Peter his Predeceſſour, are ſufficient. And the Gloſe thereupon,
                     
Petrus fecit Papas Haeredes bouitatis ſuae:Succeſſion. 
                     Peter made the Popes Heires of his goodneſſe
by Succeſſion.
                     
                     Diſt 19. Sic Omn
                           ••
                        : In Gloſs. 
                     And againe, Papa Sanctitatem recipit à Cathedra: The Pope receiueth
his Holineſſe (by Succeſſion) of his Chaire.
                  
                  Sutche affiance ſometime had the Scribes, and Phariſeis in their Succeſsion.
Therefore they ſaide,Iohan. 8. Iohan. 9. 
                     VVee are the Children of Abraham: Vnto vs hath God made his
promiſes: Arte thou greatter then our Father Abraham? As for Chriſte, wee knowe not,
from whence he came, or what he can ſhewe for his Succeſsion. And, when Chriſte
beganne to refourme their Abuſes, and Errours, they ſaide vnto him, By what
Power dooeſt thou theſe thinges?
                     Lucae. 20. Mare. 11. Beda in Luc. Lib. 5. Ca. 80. Cyrill. in Cathena in Luc. 20. 
                     And who gaue thee this Authoritie? where is thy Succeſsion?
Vpon whiche woordes Beda ſaithe, Intelligi volunt, Diaboli eſſe, quod faci
                           •
                        :
They woulde haue the People vnderſtande
                      (for that he had no ſolemne Succeſſion) that
al that he did, was of the Diuel. And Cyrillus frameth their woordes in this ſorte:
Tu Ortus ex Iuda commiſſos nobis faſces vſurpas: Thou beinge of the Tribe of Juda,
(and therefore hauinge no right by Succeſſion vnto the Prieſthoode) takeſt vpon
thee the office, that is committed vnto vs. Likewiſe Chryſoſtome imagineth, the
Phariſeis thus to ſaie:Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homi. 39. 
                     Tu de Sacerdotali Familia natus non es: Senatus tibi hoc non
couceſsit: Caeſar non donauit: Thou arte not of the houſe of Prieſtes: The Councel hath
not graunted it thee: The Emperour hath not geeuen it thee.
                      Thus to maineteine them
ſelues in credite, for that they had Succeſsion, and continuance from Aaron, and
ſate in Moſes Chaire, they kepte Chriſte quite out of poſſeſſion: and ſaide vnto
him then, euen as M. Hardinge ſaithe nowe vnto vs: Who euer taught vs theſe
thinges before thee? What ordinarie Succeſsion, and Vocation haſte thou?
What Biſhop admitted thee? Who confirmed thee? Who allowed thee?
                  Therefore, good Chriſtian Reader, lette not theſe M. Hardinges greate
woordes mutche abaſſhe thee. The Scribes, and Phariſeis in the like caſes vſed
the like language longe agoe.
                  Touchinge the Churche of Rome, I wil ſaie nomore for this preſente, but onely,
that was ſpoken openly by Cornelius the Biſhop of Bitonto in the late Councel
of Tridente:Cornel. Epiſco. Bitontin. in Concil. Triden. 
                     Vtinam non à Religione ad Superſtitionem, à Fide ad Infidelitatem,
à Chriſto ad Antichriſtum, velut prorſus Vnanimes declinaſſent: VVoulde God they
were not al gonne by conſente togeather, from Religion to Superſtition: from Faithe to Jufidelitie:
from Chriſte to Antichriſte.
                      Theſe fewe woordes, conſideringe either the
ſpeaker, or the place, where they were ſpoken, maye ſeeme ſufficient. They are
gonne from Faithe to Infidelitie: from Chriſte to Antichriſte. And yet al other
thinges failinge, they muſte holde onely by Succeſsion: and, onely bicauſe they
ſitte in Moſes Chaire, they muſte claime the poſſeſſion of the whole. This is the
right, and vertue of their Succeſſion.
                  The woordes of Tertullian, M. Hardinge, whiche you haue here alleged,
were ſpoken of certaine your Ancient Fathers, that had raiſed vp a Newe Religion
of them ſelues, as you haue alſo donne, without either Woorde of God, or
example of the Apoſtles, and Holy Fathers. And therefore he ſaithe, not vnto
vs, but vnto you, and ſutche, as you be, Edant Origines Eccleſiarum ſuarum: Lette
them ſhewe foorthe the Originalles of theire Churches.
                      Euen ſo wée ſaie vnto you,
ſhewe vs the Originalles of your Doctrine: Shewe vs any one of the Apoſtles of
Chriſte, or of the Learned Catholique Doctours of the Churche, that euer ſaide
your Priuate Maſſe: Shewe one at the leaſte, either Greeke, or Latine. S. Auguſtine
ſaithe,Auguſt. Epiſt. 165. of ſo many Biſhoppes of Rome, there coulde not one be founde,
that had benne a Donatiſte. Euen ſo in like ſorte ſaie wée to you, of al the ſame
Biſhoppes of Rome, there cannot one be founde, that euer agreed with M. Hardinge
in ſaieinge Maſſe. Or if there were any ſutche, ſhewe vs his name, with
other Circumſtances, when, and where, and who were witneſſes of the dooinge.

Shewe vs your Originalles,Succeſsiō
                        ▪ Confirmation. M. Hardinge: Confeſſe the Truthe: Deceiue vs no
lenger: It is a newe Diuiſe: ye haue it onely of your ſelues: and not by Succeſſion
from the Apoſtles.
                  But wherefore telleth vs M. Hardinge this longe tale of Succeſsion? Haue
theſe menne their owne Succeſsion in ſo ſafe Recorde? Who was then the Biſhop
of Rome nexte by Succeſsion vnto Peter? Who was the Seconde? Who the
Thirde?Irenae. li. 3. ca. 3. Euſeb li. 5. cap. 5. Epiphan. L
                           •
                        b. 1. De Corpoerat. Optat. contra Donatiſt. lib. 2. Who the Fourthe? Irenaeus reckeneth them togeather in this order:
Petrus, Linus, Anacletus, Clemens: Epiphanius thus, Petrus, Linus,
Cletus, Clemens: Optatus thus. Petrus, Linus, Clemens, Anacletus.
Clemens ſaithe, that he him ſelfe was nexte vnto Peter: And then muſte the
reckeninge goe thus: Petrus, Clemens, Linus, Anacletus. Hereby it is cleare,
that of the foure firſte Biſhoppes of Rome, M. Hardinge cannot certainely telle
vs, who in order Succeded other. And thus talkinge ſo mutche of Succeſsion, they
are not wel hable to blaſe their owne Succeſsion.
                  
                  I might farther ſaie, that Peters See Apoſtolike was ouer the Iewes, and
not at Rome ouer the Heathene.Calat. 2. For ſo S. Paule ſaithe, Mihi concreditum eſt Euangelium
Praepuiij, ſicut Petro Circumciſionis: Qui potens erat Petro in Apoſtolatu
Circumciſionis, Potens erat in me inter Gentes: The Goſpel of the Vncircumciſion was
committed vnto me, as the Goſpel of the Circumciſion vnto Peter: God that was mighty in
Peter in the Apoſtleſhip of the Circumciſion, was mighty in me emonge the Heathens.
                      Therfore
if the Pope this daie wil claime onely by Peters Title, and require nomore,
then Peter had, then muſte he ſéeke his Primacie emongſt the Iewes, where Peter
had his Iuriſdiction limited, and not at Rome emonge the Heathen Chriſtians,
emonge whome, as S. Paule ſaithe, he had not mutche to doo.
                  Where you ſaie, that accordinge to the Eccleſiaſtical Canons, euer from the
Apoſtles time, Biſhoppes haue euermore benne Conſecrate by three other Biſhoppes,
with the Confirmation of the Biſhop of Rome, as if without him noman
might be allowed to be a Biſhop, ye ſhoulde not ſo vnaduiſedly reporte ſo manifeſt
Vntruthe. For, I beſeche you, where be theſe Eccleſiaſtical Canons? Who
diuiſed them? Who made them? Who gaue the Pope that ſingulare Priuilege,
that no Biſhop ſhoulde be admitted in al the Worlde, but onely by him? I remember,
your Canoniſtes haue ſaide,Felin▪ De Conſtitu. Ca. Canonum S
                           •
                        atuta. Colum. 6. Ver. Fallit. 
                     Papa poteſt Solo Verbo facere Epiſcopum: The
Pope maye make a Biſhop onely by his VVoorde,
                      without any farther Conſecration.
And Abbate Panormitane moueth a doubte, whether the Pope by the Fulneſſe
of his Power, maye depriue al the Biſhoppes in the Worlde at one time. But
thus they ſaie, that care not greatly, what they ſaie.
                  Verily,Panor. De Conſtitution. Tranſlato. 
                     Nilus a Gréeke Writer ſaithe thus, Conſtantinopolitanus Caeſa
                           •
                        ienſem
Epiſcopum, alioſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſibi ſubiectos ordina
                           •
                        : Romanus verò nec Conſtantinopolitanum,
nec alium quenquam Metropolitanum: The Biſhop of Conſtantinople doothe Order the
Biſhop of Caeſaria,
                     
                     Nilus de Primatu Romani Pontificis. 
                     and other Biſhoppes vnder him: But the Biſhop of Rome doothe Order
neither the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, nor any other Metropolitane. But hereof I
haue ſpoken more at large in my Former Replie to M. Hardinge. Certainely S.
Cyprian willeth,Artic. 4. Diu. 25. Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epiſt. 4. that Sabinus, beinge lawfully elected, and Conſecrate Biſhop in
Spaine, ſhould contine we Biſhop ſtil, yea although Cornelius, beinge then Biſhop
of Rome, would not Confirme him.
                  
                     In déede, touchinge euery Metropolitanes ſeueral Iuriſdiction, Gratianus noteth
thus:
                     Diſt 64. Cap. 
                           •
                        in. 
                     Illud generaliter clarum eſt, qu
                           •
                        d ſi quis praeter Sententiam Metropolitani
fuerit factus Epiſcopus, hunc magna Synodus definiuit Epiſcopum eſſe non Oportere:
This is generally cleare, that if any man be made Biſhop without the conſente of his Metropolitane,
the greate Councel (of Nice) hath decreed, that ſutche a one maye not be
Biſhop.
                  
                     
So likewiſe ſaithe Socrates of the Biſhop of Conſtantinople:Confirmation. Conſecration. 
                     Praeter Sententiam
Epiſcopi Conſtantinopolitani Electio Epiſcopi ne fiat: VVithout the Conſente of
the Biſhop of Conſtantinople let noman be choſen Biſhop.
                      Here is a right ſpecially reſerued
to the Biſhop of Conſtantinople,Socrates Lib 7. Cap. 28. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and to euery Metropolitane within his
owne Prouince: but of the Biſhop of Romes Vniuerſal right of Confirmation we
heare nothinge. Neither doothe M. Hardinges Countrefeite Anacletus claime
al the Biſhoppes through the worlde, as belonginge to his Admiſſion, but onely
a parte. Theſe be his woordes, Omnes Epiſcopi, qui huius Apoſtolicae Sedis Ordinationi
ſubiacent:
                     Ana
                           •
                        let. Epiſto. 3. Diſt. 95. Iuxta Sanctorum. 
                     Al the Biſhoppes, that are vnder the Orderinge, or Confirmation of
this Apoſtolike See. So likewiſe writeth Damaſus to the Biſhoppes of Illyricum,
Par eſt, omnes, qui ſunt in Orbe Romano, Magiſtros conſentire: It is meete,
that al the Teachers within the Romaine Juriſdiction,
                     
                     Sozomen. Lib. 6. Cap. 23. 
                     ſhould agree togeather.
                  
                  
                     Againe, that you ſaye, A Biſhop hath alwaies benne Conſecrate by other
thrée Biſhoppes, whether it be true, or no, it maye wel be called in queſtion, as
beinge of your parte hitherto very weakely affirmed. Surely Petrus de Palude,
one of your owne Doctours,
                     Petr. de Palude, De Poteſtate Apoſt
                           •
                        l. 
                     woulde haue tolde you thus: In Eccleſia Vnus Epiſcopus
ſuff
                              •
                           cit ad alium Conſecrandum: nec eſt, niſi propter Solennitatem ab Eccleſia inuentum,
vt Tres concurrant:
                      In the Churche One Biſhop is ſufficient to Conſecrate an other:
and it is nothinge els, but for the Solemnitie of the mater, that the Churche hath diuiſed,
that Three Biſhoppes ſhoulde ioine togeather. Likewiſe Ioha
                              ••
                           es Maior an other
of your owne Doctours woulde haue ſaide vnto you,
                     Iohannes Maior in. 4. Sen
                           •
                        . Diſt. 24. q. 3. 
                     Quis Ordinauit Petrum?
Non dabunt Tres Ordinatores. Dico ergo, eſſe Conſtitutionem Humanam, qu
                           •
                        d
Epiſcopus Ordinetur à Tribus. Paulus enim non quaeſiuit Duos pro Ordinatione Titi, &
Timothei: Who Ordered Peter, and made him Biſhop? They cannot ſhewe me Three
Biſhoppes that ordered him. Therefore I ſaie, that a Biſhop be Ordered by other Three Biſhoppes,
it is an Ordinance made by Man. For Paule, when he Ordered Titus, and Timotheus,
he ſought not aboute for other Twoo Biſhoppes.
                  Whereas it farther pleaſeth you, to calle for my Letters of Orders, and to
demaunde of me, as by ſomme Authoritie, whether I be a Prieſte, or no: what
handes were laide ouer me: and by what Order I was made: I anſweare you, I
am a Prieſte, made longe ſithence, by the ſame Order, and Ordinance, and, I
thinke, alſo by the ſame Man, and the ſame handes, that you, M. Hardinge, were
made Prieſte by, in the late time of that moſte Vertuous Prince Kinge Edward
                        •
                     
the Sixthe. Therefore ye cannot wel doubte of my Prieſthoode, without like
doubtinge of your owne.
                  Farther, as if ye were my Metropolitane, ye demaunde of me, whether I be
a Biſhoppe, or no. I anſweare you, I am a Biſhop, and that by the Frée and accuſtomed
Canonical Election of the whole Chapter of Sariſburie, aſſembled ſolemnely
togeather for that purpoſe. Of whiche companie you, M. Hardinge, were
then One, &, as I was enfourmed, beinge preſente there in your owne perſonne
emongeſt your Brethren, gaue free, and open conſente vnto the Election. If you
deite this, take heede, your owne breathe blowe not againſt you.
                  As for the impertinente tales of Iſchyras, and Zacchaeus, they touche vs
nothinge. They were none of ours: We knowe them not. Our Biſhoppes
are made in Fourme, and Order, as they haue benne euer, by Frée Election of the
Chapter: by Conſecration of the Archebiſhop, and other Three Biſhoppes: and
by the Admiſſion of the Prince. And in this ſorte, not longe ſithence, the Pope
him ſelfe was admitted: and,Platina in 
                           •
                        e
                        
                           •
                        erino Papa. as Platina ſaithe, without the Emperours letters
Patentes was no Pope: as hereafter it ſhalbe ſhewed more at large.
                  Therefore wée neither haue Biſhoppes without Churche, nor Churche
without Biſhoppes. Neither doothe the Churche of Englande this daie depend
                        •
                     
                     
of them,Succeſſion. whome you ſo often calle Apoſtates, as if our Churche were no Churche
without them. They are no Apoſtates, M. Hardinge: That is rather your owne
name, and of good righte belongeth vnto you. They are for a greate parte learned,
and graue, and Godly menne, and are mutche aſhamed to ſee your folies. Notwithſtandinge,
if there were not one, neither of them, nor of vs leafte aliue, yet
woulde not therefore the whole Churche of Englande fice to Louai
                        •
                     e. Tertullian
ſaithe, Nonne & Laici Sacerdotes ſumus? Scriptum eſt, Regnum quoque, & Sacerdotes
Deo,
                     Tertullian. 
                           〈◊〉
                         Exhorta. ad Caſtitatem. 
                     & Patri ſuo nos fecit. Differentiam inter Ordinem, & Plebem conſtituit
Eccleſiae Authoritas, & honor per Ordinis Conſeſſum Sanctificatus à Deo. Vbi Eccleſiaſtici
Ordinis non eſt Conſeſſus, & Offert, & T
                           ••
                        g
                           ••
                         Sacerdos, qui eſt ibi ſolus. Sed
& vbi Tres ſunt, Eccleſia eſt, licet Laici. Vnuſquiſque enim de ſua Fide viuit: And wee
beinge Laiemenne are wee not Prieſtes? It is written, Chriſte hath made vs bothe a Kingedome,
and Prieſtes vnto God his Father: The Authoritie of the Churche, and the Honour
by the Aſſemblie, or Councel of Order Sanctified of God hath made a difference bitwene the
Laie, and the Cleregie. Where as there is no Aſſemblie of Eccleſiaſtical Order, the Prieſte
beinge there alone
                      (without the companie of other Prieſtes) doothe bothe Miniſter
the Oblation, and alſo Baptize. Yea, and be there but Three togeather, and, though they
be Latemenne, yet is there a Churche. For euery man liueth of his owne Faithe.
                  
                  Againe, ye demaunde of me, what Biſhoppe of Saciſburie euer ſithence Augoſtines
time maineteined this Doctrine. I might likewiſe, and by as good Authoritie
demaunde of you, what Biſhop of Rome euer before the ſame Engliſhe
Auguſtines time maineteined your Doctrine? Or, as I ſaide before, what Biſhop
of Rome euer before that time either ſaide, or knewe your Priuate Maſſe?
Touchinge the Biſhoppes of Sariſburie, you your ſelfe haue already named
twoo, Biſhop Shaxton, and Biſhop Capon, bothe Learned, and graue Fathers,
and bothe Preachers, and profeſſours of the Goſpel. For the reſte of the Biſhops,
that were before them, what Faithe they helde, and what they either liked, or
miſliked, by their writinges, or Sermons it dothe not greately appeare. I truſte,
they helde the Fundation, and liued, and died in the Faithe of Chriſte. If they
had liued in theſe daies, and ſeene, that you ſee, they would not haue benne partakers
of your wilfulneſſe.
                  To be ſhorte, wée ſuccede the Biſhoppes, that haue benne before our daies.
Wee are Elected, Conſecrate, Confirmed, and Admitted, as they were. If
they were deceiued in any thinge, wee ſuccede them in place, but not in errour.
They were our Predeceſſours, but not the Rules, and Standardes of our Faithe.
Or rather, to ſette aparte al compariſon of Perſonnes, the Doctrine of Chriſte
this daie, M. Hardinge, Succedeth your Doctrine: as the Daie Succedeth the
Nighte: as the Lighte Succedeth Darkeneſſe: and as the Truthe Succedeth
Errour.
                  Nowe for as mutche, as ye haue thought it ſo good, to examine the Petite degree
of the Biſhoppes of Sariſburie, I truſte ye wil not thinke it il, if I al
                        •
                     tle
touche the like in the Biſhoppes of Rome: that wée maye thereby be the better
hable to ſée ſome of the branches of your Succeſſion. Therefore ſhortly to ſaie,
you knowe that Pope Marcellinus committed Idolatrie: that Pope Sylueſter. 2.
was a Coniurer, and gaue him ſelfe whole Body, and Soule vnto the Diuel, and
by the Diuels procuremente was made Pope: That Pope Zoſimus for ambition,
and claime of gouernmente corrupted the Holy Councel of Nice: That
Pope Liberius was an Arian Heretique: That Pope Leo, as appeareth by the
Legende, was likewiſe an Arian: That Pope Coeleſtinus was a Neſtorian Heretique:
Pope Honorius was a Monothelite Heretique: Pope Iohn. 22. was reprooued
by Gerſon, and the Schole of Pariſe for an Heretique: Petrarcha ſaithe,

Rome is a Sanctuarie of al Hereſies:Succeſsiō of Popes. Lyra ſaithe, that many Popes haue fallen
into Hereſies:Nicol. Lyra in Matthae. Ca. 16. you know, that Pope Hildebrande, as he was charged by the Councel
of Brixia, was an Aduouterer, a Churcherobber, a Periured man, a Mankiller,
a Sorcerer, and a Renegate of the Faithe: That Platina calleth the
Popes ſometimes in ſcorne,Platina in Romano. 1. 
                     Pontificulos, Litle Petite Popes:
                      ſometimes Monſtra,
& Portenta, Monſters, and Vnnatural, and il ſhapen Creatures.
                      Pope Adrian the
fourthe was woonte to ſaie, Succedimus, non Petro in paſcendo, ſed
Romulo in Parricidio: VVee Succede, not Peter in Feedinge, but
Romulus in Killinge. And to leaue Dame Iohane the woman Pope, with
many others moe of like Vertue, and Holineſſe, as hauinge no pleaſure in this
reherſal: And, for as mutche as M. Hardinge began this mater with Sariſburie, to
ende it with the ſame,Iohan. Sariſburien. in Polycratico. 
                     Iohannes Sariſburienſis ſaithe, In Romana Eccleſia ſedent
Scribae, & Phariſaei: In the Churche of Rome
                      (by Succeſſion) ſitte the Scribes, and the
Phariſeis.
                  
                  This is M. Hardinges holy Succeſsion. Though Faithe faile, yet Succeſsion
muſte holde. For vnto ſutche Succeſsion God hath bounde the Holy Ghoſte. For
lacke of this Succeſsion, for that in our Sees in the Churches of Englande, wée
finde not ſo many Idolaters, Necromancers, Heretiques, Aduouterours, Churchrobbers,
Periured Perſonnes, Mankillers, Renegates, Monſters, Scribes, and
Phariſies, as wée maie eaſily finde in the Churche of Rome, therefore, I trowe,
M. Hardinge ſaithe, wée haue no Succeſsion: wée are no Biſhoppes: wée haue no
Churche at al.
                  But S. Paule ſaithe, Faithe commeth (not by Succeſsion, but) by hearinge: and
hearinge commeth, (not of Legacie, or Enheritance from Biſhop to Biſhop, but) of the
Woorde of God. They are not alwaies Godly, that Succede the Godly. Manaſſes
ſucceded Ezechias: and Hieroboam ſucceded Dauid. By Succeſsion the Turke
this daie poſſeſſeth, and holdeth the foure greate Patriarkal Sées of the Churche,
Conſtantinople, Alexandria, Antioche, and Hieruſalem. By Succeſsion, Chriſte
ſaithe,Matthae. 24. 
                     Deſolation ſhal fitte in the Holy place: and Antichriſte ſhal preſſe into the
roume of Chriſte.
                  
                     It is not ſufficient to claime Succeſsion of place: It behooueth vs rather to
haue regarde to the Succeſsion of Doctrine.
                     Bernard. in Concilio Remen. 
                     S. Bernarde ſaithe, Quid prodeſt,
ſi Canonice eligantur, & non Canonicè viuant?
                      What auaileth it, if they be choſen in Order,
and liue out of Ordere So ſaithe S. Auguſtine,
                     Auguſt. Contra Donatiſt. Li. 6. 1. q. 3. vocantur Canes. 
                     Ipſum Characterem multi, & Lupi,
& Lupis imprimunt: The outwarde marke, or right of a Biſhop manie geue to Woulues,
and he Woulues them ſelues. Therefore the Ancient Father Irenaeus geueth vs
this good Councel: Eis, qui ſunt in Eccleſia, Preſbyteris, obaudire oportet, qui Succeſsionem
habent ab Apoſtolis,
                        Irenae. Li. 4. Cap. 43. 
                        qui cum Epiſcopatus Succeſsione, Chariſma Veritatis
certum, ſecundum beneplacitum Patris, acceperunt:
                      It becommeth vs, to obeie
thoſe Prieſtes in the Churche, whiche haue their Succeſsion from y• Apoſtles: and togeather
with the Succeſsion of their Biſhoprikes, accordinge to y• good wil of God the Father, haue
receiued the vndoubted gifte of the Truthe. S. Cyprian beinge likewiſe charged
for diſſentinge from his predeceſſours, anſweareth thus: Si quis de Anteceſſoribus
meis, non hoc obſeruauit, & tenuit, quod nos Dominus exemplo, & Magiſterio ſuo docuit,
poteſt ſimplicitati eius venia concedi: Nobis ver
                           •
                         ignoici non poteſt, qui nunc à
Domino admoniti, & inſtructi ſumus: If any of my Predeceſſours haue not obſerued, and
kepte the ſame, that our Lorde hath taught vs bothe by his example, and alſo by his Commaundemente,
his ſimplicitie maie be pardoned. But wee (if wée doo the like) can hope for
no pardonne, beinge nowe admoniſhed, and inſtructed of our Lorde.
                  
                     Compare the vſe, and order of our Churches, M. Hardinge, with the Primitiue
Churche of God, and ye ſhal eaſily ſee the right of our Succeſsion. S. Cyprian

ſaithe:
                     Confeſsion not neceſsary. Si Canalis aquae, quae copioſe prius, & la
                        •
                     g
                        •••
                     r proflu
                        •
                     ba
                        •
                     , ſubit
                        •
                      deficiat, nōne adfontē
pergitur? &c. Hoc & nūc facere oporte
                        •
                      Dei Sacerdotes. Praecepta Diuina ſeruantes,
vt in aliquo ſi nutauerit,Cyprian. ad Pompeium contra Epiſt. Stephani. & vacillauerit Veritas, ad originem Dominicam, &
Euangelicam at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Apoſtolicam Traditionem reuertamur: & inde ſurgat actus
noſtri ratio, vnde & Ordo, & Origo ſurrexit: If the Pipes of y• Conduit, which before ranne
with abundance, happen to faile, doo wee not vſe to ſearche to the Head: &c. The Prieſtes of
God keepinge Goddes commaundementes, muſt do the ſame: that if the Truthe haue fainted,
or failed in any pointe, vvee returne to the very Original of our Lorde, and to the
Tradition of the Goſpel, and of the Apoſtles: that ther
                           •
                        hence wee maie take the
diſcretion of our dooinges, from whence the Order it ſelfe, and Original firſte beganne.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 1.
               Moreouer wee ſaie, that Chriſte hathe geuen to his Miniſters
power to binde, to looſe: to open, to ſhutte.
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The difference, that is bitweene vs, and our Aduerſaries in this whole mater,
is not great: ſauinge that it liketh wel M. Hardinge, to buſte him ſelfe with
néedeleſſe quarrels, without cauſe. Three kindes of Confeſſion are expreſſed vnto
vs in the Scriptures. The Firſt made ſecretely vnto God alone: The Seconde Openly
before y• whole Congregation: The Thirde Priuately vnto our Brother. Of
the twoo former kindes there is no queſtion. Touchinge the thirde, if it be diſcretely
vſed, to the greatter comforte, and ſatiſfaction of the Penitente, without ſuperſtition,
or other il, it is not in any wiſe by vs reproued. The Abuſes, and Errours
ſette aparte, wée doo nomore miſlike a Priuate Confeſſion, then a Priuate
Sermon.
                  Thus mutche onely wée ſaie, that Priuate Confeſſion to be made vnto y• Miniſter,
is neither commaunded by Chriſte,Chryſoſt. ad Hebraeos, homil. 30. nor neceſſarie to Saluation. And therefore
Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Non dico tibi, vt te prodas in publicum, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vt te accuſes apud
alios: Sed obedire te volo Propherae dicenti, Reuela Domino viam tuam: I wil thee
not to bewraye thee ſelfe openly, nor to accuſe thee ſelfe before others: But I counſel thee, to
obeie the Prophete ſaieinge, Open thy waye vnto the Lorde.
                     
                  
                  
                     And Gratian, hauinge thorowly diſputed, and debated the whole mater of
bothe ſides,
                     De Poeniten di
                           ••
                         1. Quamuit plenitudo. 
                     in the ende leaueth it thus at large: Cui harum ſententiarum poti
                              •
                           s
                              •
                            adhaerendū
ſit, Lectoris iudicio reſeruatur: Vtra
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            enim fautores habet Sapientes, & Religioſos
Viros:
                      Whether of theſe twoo opinions it were better to folowe, it is leafte to the diſcretion
of the Reader: For either ſide is fauoured bothe by Wiſe, and alſo by Godly menne.
Therefore the Gloſe there concludeth thus:
                     De Poeniten. diſt. 5. In Poenitentia▪ In Gloſ. 
                     Meli
                           •
                        s dicitur, Confeſsionem inſtitutam
fuiſſe à quadam Vniuerſalis Eccleſiae Traditione potiùs, quàm ex Noui, vel Veteris Teſtamenti
Authoritate: It is better to ſaie, that Confeſſion was Ordeined by ſomme Tradition
of the Vniuerſal Churche, then by the Authoritie of the Newe, or Olde Teſtamente. Likewiſe
ſaithe Theodorus ſometime Archebiſhop of Canturburie a Gréeke borne:
                     De Poeniten. diſt. 1. Quidam.
                     Quidam Deo ſolummodò confiteri debe
                           •
                        e peccata dicunt, vt Graeci: Some ſaie, wee are
bounde to confeſſe our ſinnes onely to God, as doo the Greci
                        ••
                     s.De Poeniten diſt. 5. In Poeniten. 
                     Whereupon the Gloſe
noteth thus: Apud Graecos Confeſſio non eſt Neceſſaria: quia non emanauit ad illos
Traditio talis:
                      Emonge the Grecians Confeſſion is not Neceſſarie, for that no ſutche Tradition
euer came emongeſt them.
                  But what neede many woordes? M. Hardinge him ſelfe in the diſcourſe hereof
is forced to confeſſe,M. Har. ſoli. 71. 
                           •
                        
                      that the Expreſſe Terme of Auriculare, or Secrete Confeſſion is
Seldome mentioned in the Ancient Fathers. His tale had benne truer, if he had ſaide
thus, The Expreſſe terme of Auriculare, or Secrete Confeſſion is Neuer mentioned
in the Ancient Fathers.
                  
                     
Nowe to paſſe ouer certaine other M. Hardinges vnneceſſarie talkes, hée
groweth to the mater in this ſorte:
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Concerninge the miniſters of the Churche, wee ſaie that they open and ſhutte by diſpenſinge
the Sacramentes, who haue theire vertue of the merites of Chriſte. For where as the Sacramentes
haue iſſued and flowed out of the ſide of our ſauiour Chriſte ſleepinge on the Croſſe, (as by alluſion
wee maie vſe the woordes of the olde figure) wherewith the Churche is buylded, therefore in the
Sacramentes of the Churche the efficacie of the Paſſion remaineth. And for that cauſe to the Miniſters
alſo of the Churche,The Keie of the Church. who be diſpenſours of the Sacramentes, a certaine power is geeuen
to remoue the barre, that excludeth vs from Goddes fauour, not through their owne, but through
Goddes vertue and power, and merite of Chriſtes Paſſion. And this power is called by a metaphore
the Keie of the Churche, whiche is the Keie of Miniſterie: whereof we ſhal ſpeake hereafter.
This power, ſo muche as concerneth releaſſe of ſinnes, is exerciſed in the Sacramente of Penaunce to
the benefite of them,For vvhom ſerueth the Sacramente of Penance. Nouatians denied Penance. that after Baptiſme be relapſed, and fallen into ſinne againe. Of whiche
power no Chriſten man doubteth, onleſſe he holde the Hereſie of the Nouatians, who were condemned
for Heretikes by the Churche, becauſe they denied that Prieſtes in the Churche had authoritie
to remitte ſinnes,This ſauoureth of vntruth: For Nouatus denied not priuate, but open Penaunce. and ſo denied the Sacramente of Penaunce.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  That dewly receiuinge the Holy Sacramentes ordeined by Chriſte, wée receiue
alſo y• Remiſſion of Sinnes, it is not any way denied. For the Subſtance of
al Sacramentes is the Woorde of God,2. Corin. 5. whiche S. Paule calleth Verbum Reconciliationis,
The Woorde of atonemente. This Woorde is the Inſtrumente of Remiſſion
of Sinne: The Sacramentes are the Seales affixed vnto the ſame: The
Prieſte is the meane.Auguſtin in Iohan. tracta. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . S. Auguſtine ſaithe, In Aqua Verbum mundat. Detrahe
Verbum: quid eſt Aqua, niſi Aqua? In the Water it is the VVoorde of God, that maketh
cleane. Take the VVoorde awaye: and what is VVater els, but VVater? Hereof
wée ſhal haue cauſe to ſaie more hereafter.
                  Al that is here brought in touchinge Nouatus, it is vtterly from the purpoſe.
For Nouatus neuer denied, but a ſinner might Confeſſe his Sinnes, either ſecretely
to God alone, or publiquely, and openly before the whole Congregation. As
for Auriculare Confeſſion to the Prieſte, for ought that maie appeare, he neuer
heard of it. But herein ſtoode his whole erroure, that he thought, who ſo euer had
committed any great notorious Sinne after Baptiſme, notwithſtandinge any
Submiſſion, or Satiſfaction, he was hable to make, yet might he neuer be reconciled
vnto his Brethren, or be receiued againe into the Churche: not that he would
hereby driue the Penitent ſorowful ſinner to deſpaire of Goddes mercie, but (as
ſomme Learned menne haue thought) onely for example, and terrour vnto others.
And therefore Beatus Rhenanus ſaithe,B. Rhenanus in Argumento Libelli Tertull. de Poenitent. 
                     In hac ſententia Veterum permulti fuerunt: &
in ijs etiam Auguſtinus.
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Caut
                              •
                           , ſalub
                              ••
                           ter
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            prouiſum eſt, vt locus illius Humilimae
Poenitentiae ſemel in Eccleſia concedatur: ne medicina vilis minùs utilis eſſet aegrotis:
                      I
                        •
                     
hath benne diſcretely,Auguſtinus, Epiſtola. 54. and wholeſomely prouided, that it ſhould not be graunted to any
man, to doo that moſte humble Open Penaunce, but onely once in the Churche, and neuer
more afterwarde: leaſte the Medicine, beinge made ouer common, ſhould not bee profitable
to the Sicke.
                  Thus mutche difference therfore wee ſee, there was bitweene the Churche,
and Nouatus. The Churche graunteth the Open Sinner one onely time of Open
Reconciliation, and neuer more: But Nouatus graunteth none at al. Therefore
the whole mater of Nouatus might haue ſerued M. Hardinge to ſome other purpoſe:

For Confeſſion, whether it were Priuate, or Publique, was no parte of
his Erroure.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 2.
               And (wee ſaie) that the office of Looſing conſiſteth in this pointe,
that the Miniſter either by the Preachinge of the Goſpel offereth
the Merites of Chriſte, and ful pardon to ſutche as haue lowely, and
contrite hartes, and doo vnfainedly repente them ſelues, pronouncinge
vnto the ſame a ſure, and vndoubted forgeeueneſſe of theire
ſinnes, and hope of Euerlaſtinge Saluation: Or els that the ſame
Miniſter, when any haue offended theire Brothers mindes with
ſomme greate offence, or notable, and open crime, whereby they haue,
as it were, vanniſhed, and made them ſelues ſtraungers from the
Common Felowſhip, and from the Body of Chriſte, then after perfite
amendement of ſutche perſonnes, dothe reconcile them, and bring
them home againe, and reſtore them to the Companie, and Vnitie of
the Faithful.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The ſumme of all theſe gaye woordes abbridged dothe attribute Looſinge, or Abſolution firſte to
Preachinge, nexte to Aſſotlinge ſutche as be Excomminicate. As touchinge the firſte, theſe Defenders
confounde the offices of Preachinge and of Abſolution. The Preacher teacheth the hearers,
and reporteth the woordes of Chriſte, as out of the mouthe of Chriſte, ſaieinge, Thus ſaithe Chriſte
&c: The Prieſt, whiche is the Miniſter of Abſolution, accordinge to the Authoritie geuen to him by
Chriſte, in his owne perſon aſſoileth the Penitente, ſaieinge,Vntruthe. For Chriſte neuer gaue the prieſte any ſutch Commiſsion. I aſſoile thee in the name of the
Father, &c.Vntruthe. For S Hierome ſaithe, Soluunt Sermone Dei, & teſtimoniis Scripturarum. The Preacher in that he preacheth onely dothe not aſſoile ſinners, neither geueth he
the Merites of Chriſte, nor full pardon by pronouncinge vnto them the Goſpell.Vntruthe, By M. Hardinges ovvne Doctrine. Reade the Anſvveare. For if that greate
benefite conſiſte in pronouncinge or denouncinge of the Goſpell, then why might not euery laye
man, yea womenne, yea yonge boyes, and gyrles aſſoile ſinners? yea why might not euery man
aſſoile him ſelfe? And woulde ye Sirs appointe vnto vs ſuche for iudges conſtituted by Chriſte?
                  For the woordes of Chriſte be ſo plaine, as they cannot be ſo violently wreſted. For Chriſte
ſaide not, To whom ye offer by preachinge of the Goſpel my Merites, and Pardon, or whoſe ſinnes
ye pronounce by the Goſpell to be remitted, but quorumcunque remiſeritis, who ſoeuers ſinnes
ye remitte, they are remitted to them. For as the ſonne of man remitted ſinnes to him that was ſicke of
the Palſye,Iohan. 20. and to Mary Maudelen, that ye maye knowe (ſaithe he) that the ſonne of man hathe
Power to remitte ſinnes,Li. 3. de Dignitate Sacerdotali. &c: Euen ſo he hathe tranſferredThe ſame povver, bicauſe they haue the ſame woorde: and not othervviſe. the ſame power vnto Prieſtes, ſaithe
Chryſoſtome. VVhiche Prieſtes he hathe ſente, as the Father ſente him. And if Abſolution
conſiſte in pronouncinge of the Goſpell, whiche profiteth ſo muche as it is beleeued,Vntruthe. ioined vvith vaine Folie. then the power of
the Keies whiche Chriſte hathe geuen to the Churche, conſiſteth not ſo muche in the Miniſter, as in
the ſinner that heareth and beleeueth, and ſo is forgeuen by Luthers Opinion. And by this meanes
the Prieſte hathe no ſpeciall power. But wee ſaie with the Churche, that a Sacramente hath his
efficacie of the inſtitution of Chriſte in him, to whom it is adhibited. In this ſenſe the Catholike
Churche of Chriſte hath euer taughte, that God woorketh our Saluation by Sacramentes, and in
this faithe it hathe alwayes baptized infantes, that their ſinnes beinge remitted, they mighte be
made the children of GodVntruthe. For the Churche aſſoiled not mad menne: but only pronounced them to be aſſoiled before, vvhen they vvere ſober. Like wiſe by the Keyes of the Churche it hathe aſſoiled perſonnes berefte
of the vſe of ſpeache and reaſon, as the Learned and Auncient Holy Father Leo teacheth in
his Epiſtle ad Theodorum Epiſcopum Foroiulienſem, and S. Auguſtine de adulterinis conlugijs,
Lib. 1. Cap. 26. & vltimo.
                  
                  Finally if the office of Looſinge, that is Abſolution, conſiſted in Preachinge the Goſpell, and
offeringe the Merites of Chriſte by pronouncinge the woordes, in whiche the remiſſion of our ſinnes

is expreſſed, as this Denfender teacheth: then had not the Catechumens of olde time, neither nowe
ſhoulde they be in any danger, if they ſhoulde dye without Baptiſme, and the grace of reconciliation,
that is, not beinge aſſoiled. For they lacked no preachinge, as nowe they lacke not where
any ſuche bee. The contrarie whereof the Churche hathe euer taught, and for witneſſe of the
ſame,Tract. in Iohan. 13. beſides other fathers, wee haue the plaine Doctrine of S. Auguſtine: Who ſaithe, that a Catechumen,
howe mutche ſo euer he profitethe, beareth ſtill the burthen of his iniquitie ſo longe, as he is
not baptized.
                  I denie not, but caſes of iuſte neceſſitie be excepted in the one, and the other, hauinge right and
firme willes, and deſire in eche caſe: VVhen not the contempte of Religion, but the pointe of neceſſitie
excludethe the Myſterie of baptiſme, as S. Auguſtine ſaithe. Then how dangerous, and pernicious
is the Doctrine of theſe Defenders our Newe Miniſtringe Prelates, who more with ſweete and
Holy woordes, then withe truthe, teache Chriſten people, that the office of Looſinge conſiſteth in
offeringe by preachinge of the Goſpell (as they call it) the Merites of Chriſte, and full pardon,
and by pronouncinge (I knowe not howe) a ſure and vndoubted forgeeueneſſe of ſinnes and hope of
Euerlaſting Saluation to ſuche,O dangerous Doctrine. for ſoothe, as haue lowly and contrite hartes, and doe vnfainedly repente
them? The contrition of harte, they ſeeme to ſpeake of, ſufficethe not for Looſinge of ſinnes, onleſſe
it be contrition formed with charitie, as the Diuines teache. VVhiche charitie, ſeeketh and requireth
the Sacrament of Penaunce, and the grace of reconciliation. whiche cannot be miniſtred, but
by a prieſte.Vntruthe. Reade the aunſvveare. Neither is it poſſible, the prieſte to iudge truly, who are lowly and contrite of harte,
and repente them vnfainedly, foraſmutche as he cannot ſearche the harte, onleſſe the penitentes
humble them ſelues vnto him, and declare theire repentaunce by ſimple and lowly confeſſion of their
ſinnes.Lib. 50. Homiliarū, Homi. 49. VVhiche confeſſion theſe Newe Goſpellers haue abandoned out of theire Congregations.
Howe mutche is more the Catholike and holeſome Doctrine of S.Manifeſt Vntruthe For S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh theſe vvoordes of Open Confeſsion before the people. Auguſtine to be embraced and folowed,
whiche he vttereth in theſe woordes? Doo ye penaunce, ſutche as is done in the Churche,
that the Churche maie praie for you. Let noman ſaie to him ſelfe, I do penaunce ſecretely, before
God I do It: God, who forgeeueth me, knoweth, that I doo it in my harte. But what ſaith
S. Auguſtine hereunto? VVhy then (ſaithe he) it was ſaide in vaine, What thinges ye Looſe in
Earthe,Mat. 18. they ſhalbe Looſed in Heauen. Then without cauſe the Keies be geeuen to the Churche. VVe
make voide the Goſpell of God: wee make fruſtrate the woordes of Chriſte.
                  S. Auguſtine ſaithe, doo ye penaunce, not ſutche as liketh your ſelues, not ſutche as Newe
fangled ſelfe pleaſinge Preachers teache you, but ſutche, as is done in the Churche, whiche conſiſteth
in Contrition of harte, confeſſion of mouthe, and ſatiſfaction of worke, that ſo ye maie be aſſoiled,
and perfitely reconciled.
                  Touchinge the ſeconde pointe, wee doo not attribute the Looſinge of ſutche, as be excommunicate,
to the offeringe of Chriſtes Merites and pronouncinge of the Goſpell vnto them, as you doo, but
to the power of Iuriſdiction by Chriſte geeuen to the Churche.
                  By the fathers Excommunication in conſideration of the neceſſitee of it, is called neruus
Eccleſiaſticae diſciplinae, the ſinnowe of Churchely diſcipline: by the Canons, Mucro Epiſcopi,
the ſwerde of a Biſhop: by S. Auguſtine, Epiſcopalis iudicij damnatio, qua poena nulla in eccleſia
maior eſt. The condemnation of a man by Biſhoply Iudgemente, then the whiche there is no
greater puniſhmente in the Churche.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée commit the Keies of the Kingedome of Heauen onely vnto the Prieſteand,
to none other: and to him onely wee ſaie, What ſo euer thou bindeſte in Earthe,
ſhalbe Bounde in Heauen. Yet neuertheleſſe hath not euery Prieſte the vſe of theſe
Keies. Peter Lombarde him ſelfe ſaithe, Sanè dici poteſt, quòd alteram iſtarum
Clauium,
                     Senten. 4. Diſt. 19. 
                     id eſt Scientiam diſcernendi, non habent omnes Sacerdotes: Wee maie ſafely ſaye, that al Prieſtes haue not the one of theſe twoo Keies: I meane the Knowledge to diſcerne.
                      Yf they haue not the Keies, them can they neither Open, nor Shutte.
                  
                     Neither doothe it folowe of Our Doctrine, that either Children, or Laye

menne doo,
                     A Laiman remitteth Sinne. or maie forgéeue ſinnes. And yet Gods Woorde maie be mighty, be
the pronouncer of it neuer ſo ſimple. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Cùm Chriſtus Petro
dicerer,
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 124. 
                     Tibi dabo Claues Regni Coelorum, Vniuerſam ſignificabat Eccleſiam: When
Chriſte ſaide vnto Peter, Vnto thee I wil geeue the Keies of the Kingdome of Heauen, he
ſignified thereby the whole Churche. And againe, Quaecun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ligaueris ſuper Terram, erunt
ligara in Coelo.
                     
                     Auguſtin. De verb. Dom. Secund. matthae. Sermo. 16. 
                     Coepiſti habere Fratrem tuum, tanquam Publicanum: Ligas illum
in Terra. Cùm autem correxeris, & concordaueris cum Fratre tuo, ſoluiſti illum in terra.
Cùm ſolueris in terra, ſolutus erit in Coelo: What ſo euer thinges thou ſhalt Binde in
Earthe, they ſhalbe Bounde in Heauen. Thou (beinge a Lateman) haſt begonne to haue thy
Brother as a Publicane: Thou Bindeſt him in Earthe. But when thou haſt corrected him
and haſt agreed with thy Brother, thou haſt Looſed him in Earthe. And when thou haſte
Looſed him in Earthe, he ſhalbe Looſed in Heauen.
                  
                     Likewiſe Theophylacte ſaithe,
                     Theophylact. in Matthae. Cap. 18. 
                     Si tu offenſus habes eum, qui te affecit iniuria,
ſicut Publicanum, & Gentilem, erit ille & in Coelo talis: Si autem ſolueris eum, hoc eſt,
Si illi condonaueris, erit illi & in Coelo condonatum. Non enim ſolùm, quae ſoluunt Sacerdotes,
ſunt ſoluta: ſed quaecun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         & nos iniutia affecti vel ligamus, vel ſoluimus, &
ipſa erunt ligata, vel ſoluta: If thou beinge offended, haue him, that hathe donne thee
wronge, as a Publicane, and as an Heathen, ſutche ſhal he be alſo in Heauen. But if thou
Looſe him, that is to ſaie, if thou pardonne him, he ſhalbe pardonned alſo in Heauen. For not
onely the thinges, that Prieſtes Looſe, are Looſed: but alſo what ſo euer wee, (being Laimonne)
hauinge taken wronge, doo Binde, or Looſe, the ſame thinges ſhal alſo be Bounde,
or Looſed.
                  This Doctrine maie not ſéeme ſo ſtrange to M. Hardinge: Onleſſe he be
a ſtranger emongeſt his owne. For by the Order of his owne Churche of Rome,
an Olde wife, or a Yonge gyrle maie Miniſter the Sacramente of Baptiſme.
And, I trowe, he wil not ſaie, They maie Miniſter Baptiſme without Remiſſion
of Sinnes.
                  In his Churche of Rome the Power of the Keies is lapped vp oftentimes in
a Bulle of Lead, and ſente abroade into the world by a Laye Pardoner: and is
thought neuertheleſſe good, & ſufficient vnto the Receiuer for Remiſſion of Sinnes.
notwithſtandinge the meſſenger be no Prieſt.
                  Somme of the late Doctours of his ſaide Churche haue taught vs,De Poeniten. di
                           •
                         1. Quem poenitet. that a
man maie make his Confeſſion by a bille of his hande: and receiue Abſolution by
a Truſheman, or by a Broker. Peter Lombarde the Grande Maiſter of theire
whole Schole ſaithe,Scotus, 4 Sentē. Dis. 17. Arti. 3. Senten. 4. Dis. 17. Nunc priuſquam. 
                     Si tamen defuerit Sacerdos, Proximo, vel Socio eſt facienda Confeſsio:
If thou wante a Prieſte, thou muſte make thy Confeſsion vnto thy neighboure, or
vnto thy felowe.
                      And Beda ſaithe, as he is alleged by the ſaide Peter Lombarde,
Coaequalibus quotidiana, & leuia: grauiora verò Sacerdoti pandamus: Let vs open our
ſmal, and daily ſinnes vnto our felowes: and the greatter vnto the Prieſte.
                     
                  
                  
                     And to be ſhort,
                     Senten. 4. Eadem Diſt. 
                     vpon the Decretales it is noted thus, In neceſsitate Laicus
poteſt, & Audire Confeſsiones, & Abſoluere:
                      In caſe of neceſsitie a Laie man maie
bothe heare Confeſsions, and Abſolue.
                  This is the Order,Extra. De offi. Iudicis ordinar. Paſtoralis. In Gloſſa. and Doctrine of M. Hardinges owne Churche. His
owne Doctours tel him, that Laye Menne, and Wéemenne maie Abſolue the
Penitente, and Forgeeue Sinnes. Therefore hée hathe the leſſe cauſe to miſlike
it.
                  
                     M. Hardinge ſaithe further, Chriſte ſaithe not, To whom ye offer by preaching
of the Goſpel my Merites and Pardonne: or, whoſe ſinnes ye pronounce by the Goſpel to
be remitted: but, Quorumcunque remiſeritis, whoſe ſo euer ſinnes ye remitte, they are
remitted. Yf M. Hardinge wil Conclude of this Negatiue, Ergo, Sinnes be not

forgeuen by the preachinge of the Goſpel,
                     Sinnes Remitted bi hearing the vvord of God. 
                     I trowe, it wil be but a Simple Argumente.
For Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Clauicularij ſunt Sacerdotes, quibus creditum eſt
Verbum Docendi, & Interpretandi Scriptutas:
                      The Keiebearers be the Prieſtes, to whom
is committed the VVoorde of Teachinge and Expoundinge the Scriptures. And S. Hierome
ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. in Matthae. in Opere Imperfect. ca. 23. 
                     Quaecun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Solueritis ſuper Terram, erunt Soluta & in Coelo. Soluunt autem
eos Apoſtoli Sermone Dei, & teſtimonijs Scripturarum, & exhortatione virtutum:
What ſo euer thinges ye Looſe vpon Earthe, they ſhalbe Looſed alſo in Heauen. But the
Apoſtles Looſe them by the VVoorde of God, and by the Teſtimonies of the Scriptures,
and by exhortation vnto vertue.Hierony. in Eſai. Li. 6. Ca. 14. Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 80.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Iam vos Mundi eſtis propter verbum, quod
Ioquutus ſum vobis. Quare non ait, Mundi eſtis propter Baptiſmum, quo loti eſtis? Niſi
quia & in Aqua Verbum Mundat:
                      Now are you cleane bicauſe of the VVoorde, that I
haue ſpoken to you. VVhy ſaithe he not, you are cleane bicauſe of the Baptiſme, wherewith
ye are waſſhed? Sauinge that euen in the VVater, it is the VVoorde, that maketh Cleane.
Likewiſe S. Ambroſe,
                     Ambroſi. De Cain, & Abel. Cap. 4. Roman. 1. 2. Corin. 5. 
                     Remittuntur peccata per Verbū Dei, cuius Leuites eſt Interpres:
Sinnes be forgeeuen by the VVoorde of God, the Expounder whereof is the Leuite, or
Prieſte.
                  Al the Power is in the Woorde of God, whiche S. Paule calleth the Power
of God vnto Saluation: and, Verbum Reconciliationis: The VVorde, whereby wee be Reconciled
vnto God.
                     
                  
                  And for this cauſe Chryſoſtome ſaithe,Chryſoſt. De Sacerdot. Li. 3. as it is alleged by M. Hardinge, that
the Prieſte hathe the ſame Power that Chriſte had: For that he Preacheth the
ſame Woorde of God, that Chriſte Preached. And in this ſenſe Chriſte ſaithe vnto
his Diſciples,Iohan. 6. 
                     As my Liuinge Father ſente me, euen ſo, (and with like Commiſſion)
doo I ſende you.
                  
                  Otherwiſe the Power of Chriſte farre ſurmounteth, and paſſeth al Creatures,
not onely in Earthe,Matthae. 11. but alſo in Heauen. Chriſte him ſelfe thereof ſaithe
thus: Al thinges are deliuered to me of my Father, And the Prophete Eſai ſaithe,
Ponam Clauem Domus Dauid ſuper humerum eius. Aperiet, & nemo Claudet: Claudet,
& nemo Aperiet:
                     Eſai. Cap. 22. 
                     I wil ſet the Keie of the Houſe of Dauid vpon his ſhoulder. Hee
ſhal Open, and noman ſhal Shutte: Hee ſhal Shutte, and noman ſhal Open.
                  
                  Of this Doctrine, ſaithe M. Hardinge, foloweth a greate inconuenience.
For then, ſaithe he, the Power of the Keies conſiſteth not ſo mutche in the Miniſter,
as in the Sinner, that heareth, and beléeueth. This inconuenience is
nothinge ſo greate, as it is pretended. The errour hereof ſtandeth in the Equiuocation,
or doubtful taking of one Woorde. For one thing maie be in an other ſundrie
waies. As Remiſſion of Sinnes maie be in the Prieſte, as in the Meſſenger: In the
Woorde of God, as in the Inſtrument: In the Penitente partie, as in the Receiuer.
The offeringe hereof is in the Miniſter: but the effecte, and force is in the Sinner.
Therefore S. Luke ſaithe, God Opened the Harte of the Silck woman, that ſhe ſhould geue
Eare vnto the woordes,
                     Act. 16. Marke. 16. 4. Sent. Diſt. 18. Sed quaritur. Clemens, in Paraenetico. Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 39. 
                     that were ſpoken by S. Paule. And Chriſte ſaithe, VVho ſo euer
ſhal Beleeue, and be Baptized, ſhalbe ſaued: but he, that beleeueth not, ſhalbe damned. Likewiſe
Peter Lombarde him ſelfe ſaithe, Ex his apertè oſtenditur, quo'd Deus ipſe Poenitentem
ſoluit, quando intus illuminat inſpirando veram Cordis Contritionem: Hereby
it plainely appeareth, that God him ſelfe Looſeth the Penitente, when by geeuinge
him in warde lighte, hee inſpireth into him the true Contrition of the Harte.
                      And therefore
Clemens Alexandrinus ſaithe, Fides noſtra eſt Clauis Regni Coelorum: Our
Faithe is the Keie of the Kingedome of Heauen.
                      And S. Auguſtine likewiſe ſaithe,
Cor Clauſum habent, quia Clauem Fidei non habent: They haue theire hartes ſhutte,
bicauſe they lacke the Keie of Faithe.
                     
                     Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 101. Againe he ſaithe, Suſcitari mortuus, niſi int
                           •
                        is
clamante Domino, non poteſt: The deade man cannot be raiſed againe, onleſſe the

Lorde Crie within him.
                     
                     Abſolutiō of Madde menne.
                  
                  
                     And, to comme neare to the pourpoſe, Gratian him ſelfe ſaithe, Voluntas
Sacerdotis nec prodeſſe,
                     
                     1. quaeſ. 1. Dictum eſt. 
                     nec obeſſe poteſt: ſed meritum benedictionem poſcentis.
The wil of the Prieſte can neither further, nor hinder: but the Merite of him, that deſireth
Abſolution.
                  Touchinge the Obiection of Frantique Perſonnes, and maddemenne, in
what ſorte, and howe farre Abſolution taketh place in them, for as mutche, as
it is an extraordinarie caſe,Extra. De Baptiſmo, & etus Effectu. Maiores eccleſiae. §. Item quaeritur. I thinke it neither needeful, nor eaſy to define. In
deede a queſtion is moued by Pope Innocentius the thirde, whether, and in
what ſorte a man, either in his maddeneſſe, or in his ſleepe maye be Baptized.
And S. Auguſtine ſeemeth to witneſſe, that Children ſommetime were Baptized
in theire Mothers Wombe. Likewiſe he writeth of a fréende of his owne,
Cùm iaceret ſine ſenſu in dolore laetali,
                     Auguſtin. Contra Iulian. Li. 6. Cap. 5. 
                     & deſperaretur, Baptizatus eſt neſciens: Whereas
hee laye in a Traunſe, without ſenſe, in deadly paine, and was deſpaired of, hee was
Baptized, and knewe not of it.
                     
                  
                  
                     Bonauentura addeth ſomme force vnto the mater,Auguſtin. Confeſsion. Li. 3. Cap. 4. and demaundeth this
queſtion, An aliquis poſſit abſolui inuitus: VVhether a man maie be Abſolued againſte
his wil, or no.
                     
                  
                  But concerninge the Abſolution of madde menne in the time of theire
phreneſie:Bonauenturae in 4. Senten. Diſtin. 18. quaeſt. 6. It ſeemeth, this was bothe the meaninge of Leo, and the Godly diſcretion
of the Churche at that time, that if a man ſtandinge Excommunicate had
happened to be berefte of his ſenſes, and beinge in that caſe, had benne likely to
departe this life, vpon proufe of his former repentance, he ſhould be reſtoared, that
he might departe in peace, as a Member of the Churche of God. The practiſe
hereof wée finde in the Councel of Carthage by theſe woordes: Si is,
                     Concil. Carthaeginen. 4. Cap. 76. 
                     qui Poenitentiam
in infirmitate petit, in Phreneſim verſus fuerit, dent teſtimonium, qui eum audiuerunt,
& accipiat Poenitentiam: If he, that deſired reconciliation by Penaunce in his ſickneſſe,
afterward fal Madde, let them, that hearde him, beare witneſſe with him: and ſo
let him receiue Penance.
                     
                  
                  This was onely a publike Teſtimonie vnto the Churche, that the partie
Excommunicate was repentante before, when his minde was quiet. And what
thinge els M. Hardinge can geather hereof, I cannot tel. Certainely in this
Order, and manner they reſtoared, not onely Madde menne, but alſo deade menne
vnto the Churche.24. quae. 2. De Communione. In Gloſſa. For ſo it is noted vpon the Decrées: Ex quo, cùm per eum non
ſtabat, el communicare debemus. Et ita eſt abſoluendus poſt mortem: VVherefore ſeeinge
there was no lacke in his parte, wee ought to Communicate with him. And ſo he muſte
be Abſolued after his deathe.
                     
                  
                  The woordes, that S. Auguſtine often vſeth vnto Beginners, or Entrers of
the Faithe, called Catechumeni, are vttred rather for terrour of others, then for
rigoure of Truthe,Auguſtin. De Peccator. Meritis, & Remiſſ. Li. 2. Cap. 26. Auguſtin. ad Catechumen. Li. 2. Cap. 1. as ſhal appeare. For otherwheres he writeth thus: Catechumeni
ſecundum quendam modum per Signum Chriſti ſanctificantur: The Catechumeni,
or Beginners, after their ſorte, are ſanctified by the Signe of Chriſte.
                      Againe he ſaith to them,
Non dum renati eſtis: ſed per Crucis Signum in vtero Sanctae Matris Eccleſiae iam concepti
eſtis: Ye are not yet borne a newe, but by the Signe of the Croſſe, ye are already conceiued
in the VVombe of the Holy Churche your Mother.
                     
                  
                  Therefore hauinge thus once entred into ye Faithe of Chriſte, although they
happened afterwarde to departe this life without Baptiſme, yet the Churche oftentimes
thought it good,Ambroſi. De Obitu Valentiniani. to Iudge wel of them. S. Ambroſe doubted not, but the
Emperour Valentinian departed hence in Goddes fauoure: And yet was the ſame
Emperoure but a Beginner, and a Nouice in the Faithe, and departed hence
without Baptiſme.
                  
                     
M. Hardinge ſaithe further,The Iudge of Sinne. Onleſſe the Penitente make particulare rehearſal
of al his ſinnes, the Prieſte, or Miniſter can be no Iudge. Where vnto I adde
alſo further,Auguſtin. Confeſsion. Li. 10. Cap. 3. Notwithſtandinge any rehearſal that maye be made, yet can the
Prieſte neuer be, but a doubteful Iudge. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Quid ergo mihi
eſt cum Hominibus, vt audiant Confeſsiones meas, quaſi ſanaturi ſint Omnes Languores
meos? Vnde ſciunt, cùm à meipſo de meipſo audiunt, an verum dicam? Quandoquidem
nemo ſcit Hominum, quid agatur in Homine, niſi Spiritus Hominis, qui eſt in Homine.
VVhat haue I to doo with menne, that they ſhould heare my Confeſſions, as if they
weare bable to beale al my griefes? VVhen they heare me ſpeake of mee ſelfe, how can they
tel, whether I doo ſaie the truthe, or no? For noman knoweth, what is donne in Man, but
the sprite of Man, that is in Man.
                     
                  
                  How be it, hereof haue growen many vnneceſſarie, and curious queſtions,
what Yeeres,Beat. Rhenanus in Tertull. De Poenitentia: Vt Sacerdotes Poenitentialem Librum bene calleant. what Monethes, what Daies, what Houres, what Manner, what
Order of Penance ſhould ſerue for euer ſeueral ſinne. In Reſolution of whiche
doubtes ſtoode the Iudgement of the Prieſte. And therefore Carolus Magnus in
in his Lawes ſtraitely commaundeth, that the Prieſtes ſhould be ſkilful in the
Booke of Penance.
                  
                     But, as touchinge the Iudge of Sinnes, S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Ante Deum
confitere peccata tua. Apud Verum Iudicem cum Oratione delicta rua pronuntia:
Confeſſe they ſinnes before God.
                     Chryſoſt. ad Hebrae. Homil. 31. Chryſoſt. in Sermo. De Confeſſione & Poenitentia. 
                     Before the True Iudge with praier pronounce thine offenſes.
And againe,
                      Cogitatione fiat delictorum exquiſitio: Sine Teſte ſit hoc Iudicium:
Solus te Deus confitentem uideat: Let the examination of thy ſinnes be wrought in
thy Harte: Let this Iudgement be VVithout VVitneſſe: Let God Onely heare thee,
when thou makeſt thy Confeſsion. And againe he ſaithe,
                      Medicinae locus hîc eſt,
non Iudicij: non poenas, ſed peccatorum Remiſsionem tribuens. Deo Soli dic peccatum
tuum:Chryſoſt. Homil. 9. De Poenitentia. 
                     Heere is place of Medicine, and not of Iudgement: geuinge not puniſhement, but
Remiſsion of Sinnes. Open thy sinne to God Alone.
                  
                  
                     And therefore in M. Hardinges owne Canons it is noted thus, Confeſsio
fit ad oſtenſionem Poenitentiae:De Poeniten. dis. 1. Omnes qui. non ad impetrationem veniae: Confeſsion is made (vnto the
Prieſte) not thereby to obteine forgeueneſſe, but to declare our repentance. And againe,
                     
Confeſsio Sacerdoti offertur in Signum veniae acceprae: non Cauſam Remiſsionis accipiendae:
Confeſsion is made vnto the Prieſte in token of remiſsion already obteined:
                     In eod. Capite. 
                     and not
as a cauſe, whereby to procure Remiſsion.
                  
                  And yet is the Prieſte a Iudge, al this notwithſtandinge: and pronounceth
ſentence as a Iudge, of Doctrine, of Open Sinne, of ye Offence of the Churche,
and of the Humilitie, and Heauineſſe of the Penitent: and as a Iudge, togeather
with the Elders of the Congregation, hath Authoritie, bothe to Condemne, and to
Abſolue.4 Senten. diſt. 18. Non autem. Peter Lombarde him ſelfe ſaithe, Etſi aliquis apud Deum ſit ſolutus, non
tamen in facie Eccleſiae ſolutus habetur, niſi per indicium Sacerdotis: Al be it a man be
Abſolued before God, yet is be not accoumpted Abſolued in the face of the Churche, but by
the Iudgemente of the Prieſte.
                     
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe S. Auguſtine,
                     Auguſtin. De Eccleſiaſti. dogmatib. li. 1. ca. 53. Horror pritis publica Poenitentia ſatiſfacere, &
Sacerdotis Iudicio reconciliatum Communioni ſociari: I exhorte you firſt to make Satiſfaction
(vnto the Churche) by open penance: and ſo to be reſtoared to the Communion by
the diſcretion of the Prieſte.
                  
                  The order hereof,Cyprian. Li. 3. Epiſt. 15. as it is ſet foorthe by S. Cyprian, was this: Firſte the
Sinner by many outwarde geſtures, and tokens ſhewed him ſelfe to be penitent,
and ſorowful for his ſinne: After that he made humble Confeſſion thereof before
the whole Congregation,Origen. in Pſal. 37. and deſired his brethren to praie for him: Laſtly the Biſhop
and the Cleregie laide theire handes ouer him, and ſo reconciled him. So
ſaithe Origen, Qui lapſus eſt, procedit in medium, & Exomologeſin facit:
He that hathe offended, commeth foorthe into the middes
                      (of the People) and maketh his

Confeſsion. Sozomenus likewiſe deſcribinge the ſame Order ſaithe thus,Open Confeſsion.
                     Rei ad terram ſeſe pronos abijciunt cum planctu, & lamentatione. Epiſcopus ex aduerſo
occurrit cum Lachrymis,
                     Sozomen. Li. 7. Cap. 16. 
                     & ipſe ad Pauimentum lamentando prouoluitur: & vniuerſa
Eccleſiae multitudo Lachrymis ſuffunditur: They, that haue offended fal downe flat with
weepinge, and lamentation to the grounde. The Biſhoppe commeth to him with teares, and
him ſelfe likewiſe falleth downe: and the whole multitude of the Churche is powred ouer and
ouer with teares.
                     
                  
                  I vſe the moe woordes herein, for that the whole mater is longe ſithence
growen vtterly out of vſe. Notwithſtandinge this is the Confeſſion, and Penance,
that S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh of. Of Open Confeſſion, M. Hardinge, hee
ſaithe, The Keies were not geeuen to the Churche in vaine. Of Open Confeſſion hée
ſaithe, VVhat ſo euer ye Looſe in Earthe, ſhalbe Looſed in Heauen. Of Open Confeſſion
he ſpeaketh al theſe woordes: and not of any Auriculare, or Priuate dealinge.
Yf M. Hardinge happen to doubte hereof, let him looke better vpon his
Bookes. There ſhal he finde, euen in the verie ſame place, he hathe alleged,
theſe woordes partely goeinge before,Auguſtin in Li. 50. Homiliarum, Homil 49. partely folowinge: Agite Poenitentiam, qualis
agitur in Eccleſia, vt oret pro uobis Eccleſia: Iob dicit, Si erubui in conſpectu populi
confiteri peccata mea: Propterea Deus uoluit, vt Theodoſius ageret Poenitentiam publicam
in conſpectu populi: Nolite permittere Viros veſtros fornicari: Interpellate
contra eos Eccleſiam: Doo Penaunce, ſutche as is donne in the Churche, that the Churche
maie praie for you: Iob ſaithe, I was not aſhamed in the ſight of al the people to confeſſe
my ſinnes: Therefore God would, that Theodoſius
                      (beinge the Emperoure of the
worlde) ſhould doo Open Penaunce euen in the preſence of al y• people. Ye wiues, ſuffer not
your Huſbandes to liue in fornication: Comme before the Congregation, and crie againſt
them.
                  
                  This is the Confeſſion, that S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh of: not Secrete, or
Priuate, or in the Eare: but Publique, and Open, and in the Sight, and Hearing
of al the people.Ambroſ. De Poenitentia, Li. 2. Ca. 10. In like manner ſaithe S. Ambroſe, Multos neceſſe eſt vt ambias,
& obſecres, vt dignentur interuenire. Fleat pro te Mater Eccleſia, & culpam tuam
Lachymis lauet: Thou muſte needes humble thee ſelfe, and deſire many to intreate
for thee. Let the Churche thy Mother weepe for thee: and let her waſhe thy
offence with her teares.
                     
                  
                  This therefore, M. Hardinge, was no plaine dealinge, with ſutche ſleight
to turne Publique into Priuate: and the Open audience of the whole people, into
one onely mannes ſecrete eare: and ſo mutche to abuſe the ſimplicitie of your Reader.
Certainely theſe woordes of S. Auguſtine, Open Penaunce: Confeſſe
Openly: In the ſight of al the people: That the vvhole Churche maie praie:
theſe woordes, I ſaye, wil not eaſily ſerue to proue your pourpoſe, for Priuate
Confeſſion.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 3.
               Wee ſaie alſo, that the Miniſter doth execute the Authoritie of
Binding and Shutting, as often as he ſhutteth vp the Gate of the
Kingdome of Heauen againſt vnbeleeuing, and ſtubborne perſons,
denouncing vnto them Gods vengeaunce, and Euerlaſting puniſhment:
Or els when the dooth quite ſhut them out from the boſome of
y• Churche, by open Excommunication. Out of doubte, what ſentence
ſo euer the Miniſter of God ſhal geue in this ſorte, God him ſelfe doth
ſo wel alowe it, that what ſo euer here in Earthe by theire meanes
is Looſed and Bounde, God him ſelfe wil Looſe, and Binde, and confirme
the ſaine in Heauen.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     Vntruthe. For vve coufounde them not. Heare againe you confounde the Power of Bindinge and the office of Preachinge, as you did
before ſpeaking of the power of Looſinge. VVhereto wee ſaye, as wee ſaide before of that other,
that Bindinge and Shuttinge conſiſteth not in denouncinge of Goddes engeaunce, but in the exerciſe
of the Keie of Iuriſdiction committed to the Churche. The Miniſters whereof Binde ſinners, whom
for iuſt cauſe they Looſe not, but knowe that they are not to be looſed. And to that Keie perteineth
excommunication, and by the ſame it is exerciſed.
                  VVhat ſo euer by them is thus Looſed or Bounde in Earthe, God him ſelfe alloweth for looſed
and bounde in Heauen.Vntruthes, fiue togeather, as maie further appeare by the anſvveare. Suche Prieſtes becauſe ye 1. haue not in your Newe Churche, at leaſt after
this wiſe 2. vſinge Prieſtly Auctoritie. 3. and none wil ſuffer to be made, 4. nor ſuche
Auctoritie to be exerciſed: ye 5. defraude the faithful people of the greate benefite of the Sacrament
of penaunce, kepinge them faſte bounde to their ſinnes after baptiſme committed. And ſo ye cauſe
their Euerlaſting Damnation, for whom Chriſte hath ſhed his Bloud, the Price of their Redemption.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée Confounde not theſe Keies, M. Hardinge, but ſpeake plainely, and diſtinctely
of either other. Wée ſaie, that the Power, as wel of Looſinge, as alſo
of Bindinge ſtandeth in Gods Woorde: and the exerciſe, or execution of the ſame
ſtandeth either in Preaching, or els in Sentence of Correction, and Eccleſiaſtical
Diſcipline.
                  Of the later hereof, there is no queſtion: of the former, M. Harding pronounceth
preciſely, although, as it appeareth, not moſte aduiſedly: Bindinge, ſaithe he, and
Shuttinge ſtandeth not in denouncinge of Goddes Vengeaunce. And hereof he certainely aſſureth
vs, as of a moſt vndoubted Veritie. How be it, in ſo ſaieinge, he ſéemeth
not to conſider the Power, and Weight of the Woorde of God.
                  
                     Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe,
                     Iohn. 12. If any man ſhal heare my Woordes, and ſhal not Bèleèue,
I condemne him not. He that refuſethe me, and receiueth not my Woordes, hath one, that
condemneth him. The Woorde, that I haue ſpoken, is it, that ſhal Iudge him at the laſt daie.
Like wiſe ſaithe S. Paule,
                     2 Corin. 2. VVe are the good ſauour of Chriſte in them, that be ſaued, and
in them, that periſhe. Vnto them that periſhe, wee are the ſauoure of Death vnto Deathe:
In them that be ſaued,2 Corin. 4. wee be the ſauour of Life vnto Life. And againe, If the Goſpel be
hidden, it is hidden from them, that periſhe. So ſaith God vnto the Prophete Ezechiel,
If thou geue warninge to the wicked,Ezechiel. 3. and he wil not be turned from his wickedneſſe, he ſhal
periſhe in the ſame. Yet haſte thou diſcharged thine owne ſoule.
                  To be ſhorte,Auguſtin. epiſt 49 ad Deogratias. The whole Scriptures are ful hereof. And therefore S. Auguſtine
ſaithe, Praedicatur Euangelium, quibuſdam ad praemium, quibuſdam ad Iudicium:
The Goſpel is Preached, to ſomme vnto rewarde, to ſomme vnto Iudgemente.
                     
                  
                  
                     For the reſt, M. Hardinge ſaithe, Suche Prieſtes bicauſe ye haue not in your Newe
Churche, at leaſte after this wiſe vſinge Prieſtly Auctoritie, and none will ſuffer to be made, and
ſuche Auctoritie to be exerciſed, ye defraude the faitheful people of the great benefite of the Sacramente
of Penance, keepinge them faſt bounde to theire ſinnes after Baptiſme committed: And ſo ye
cauſe theire euerlaſtinge Damnation, for whom Chriſte hathe ſhead his Bloud, the Price of their
Redemption.
                  Theſe great woordes are not very wel ſeaſoned: They are bigge in ſounde,
and ſmal in weight: they are ful of terroure, and voide of witte. For the Churche
of Englande hath Authoritie this daie by Goddes Woorde to Binde, and Loſe, as
mutche as euer Chriſte gaue any to his Apoſtles: And by the ſame Authoritie is
hable to Binde, not onely M. Hardinge, and his Felowes, as Peter bound Simon

Magus,Sinne forgeuen vvithout Confeſsion. or as Paule bounde Elymas the Falſe Prophet: but alſo the Pope
himſelfe, if he be an Open Offender: and, as S. Paule ſaithe, to deliuer him
ouer vnto Sathan: And vndoubtedly beeinge ſo Bound in Earthe, he ſhal alſo
ſtande Bounde in Heauen.
                  Our People remaine not Bounde, nor periſhe in theire ſinnes, as theſe
menne ſo vncharitably, and fondly haue imagined. They be ſo certaine of the Remiſſion
of theire ſinnes in the Bloude of Chriſte, as if Chriſte himſelfe were preſente,
and ſpake it to them.1. Iohan. 1. Actor. 4. They are taught, and knowe that The Bloude of Chriſte,
the Sonne of God hath made vs cleane from al our ſinnes: and, that there is no name vnder
Heauen, whereby wee ſhalbe ſaued, but onely the name of Ieſus Chriſte.
                  
                  As for Priuate Confeſſion, Abuſes, and Errours ſet aparte, as it is ſaide
before, wée condemne it not, but leaue it at libertie. And therein wée maie ſéeme
to folowe the aduiſe of Charles the Emperoure in his late Interim:
                     Interim Caroli 5. anno. 1548. For thus he
writeth, Confeſſio, & Peccatorum Enumeratio, vt non nimis laxanda eſt, ita uiciſsim
non nimis eſt aſtringenda.
                  
                  Touchinge the Prieſtes of your makinge, M. Hardinge, of whom ye ſéeme
to make ſo great accoumpte,4. Senten. dist. 19. Poſt. your owne Peter Lombard ſaith of them, as it is ſaide
before, Sané dici poteſt, quòd alteram Clauem, id eſt, Scientiam diſcernendi multi Sacerdotes
non habent.
                     Bonauent. 4. Senten. diſt. 18. quae. 1. e. And in like manner ſaithe your owne Bonauentura, Omnes
ferè ita ſunt Simplices, & Idiotae poſt ſuſceptionem Sacerdotij, ficut antè: Al Prieſtes for
the moſt parte are as Simple, and Vnlearned after the receiuinge of Orders, as they were before.
                     
                  
                  
                     But be it graunted, that your Prieſt be fully furniſhed with al his Keies.
Yet is it not he,
                     De Poeniten. diſt. 1. Quis aliquā
                        do. 
                     that by any his Authoritie forgeueth ſinnes. Your owne Gratian
ſaithe, Euidentiſsime datur intelligi, quòd ſine Confeſsione Oris Peccata poſſunt
deleri: It is euidently geeuen vs to vnderſtande, that vvithout Confeſsion of mouthe,
Sinnes maie be forgeeuen.
                     De Poenit. diſt. 1. Conuertimin
                           •
                        . 
                     And againe, Ore tacente, veniam conſequi poſſumus:
Though vvee ſaie nothinge, yet wee maye haue pardonne. Againe,
                      Luce clariùs
conſtat, Cordis Contritione, non Oris Confeſsione, Peccata dimitti: It is apparente,
and more cleare then the light, that Sinnes be forgeeuen by Contrition of the Harte, and
not by Confeſsion of the mouthe. And againe, Dominus oſtendit, quòd non
Sacerdotali iudicio, ſed largitate Diuina Peccator mundatur: Our Lorde hathe taught
vs, that the sinner is made cleane, not by the Iudgement of the Prieſte, but by the
Mercie of God.
                  
                  Thus, M. Hardinge, it is plaine by the Iudgemente of your owne Doctours,
that, were your Auriculare Confeſſion quite aboliſhed, yet might the People notwithſtandinge
haue ful Remiſſion of theire Sinnes. But of you it maie he verified,
that Chriſte ſaide vnto the Phariſeis:Luk. 11. 
                     Ye haue taken awaye the Keies of the
Kingedome of Heauen: And neither doo ye enter your ſelues, nor wil your ſuffer others, that
would enter.
                     Veſelus, de Subditis, & Superiorib. Of your Keies Veſelus ſaide longe ſithence, Claues Papae, & Praelatorum
non aperiunt Regnum Dei, ſed claudunt potiùs: The Popes, and the Prelates
Keies doo not Open the Kingedome of God, but rather Shutte it.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 1.
               And touchinge the Keies, wherewith they maie either Shutte
or Open the Kingdome of Heauen, wee with Chryſoſtome ſaye,
They be the Knowledge of the Scriptures: with Tertullian we ſaie,
They be the Interpretation of the Lawe: and with Euſebius wee
cal them the Woorde of GOD.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The let,The vvoord is the Keie. where by the whole Nature of man is ſhutte out of Heauen by the ſinne of our Firſte
Parent, is taken a wait by the Paſſion of Chriſte. But becauſe before that benefite be receiued. Heauen
yet remaineth ſhutte bothe for ſinne Originall contracted, and ſinne actual committed: wee
haue neede of the Sacramentes, and Keies of the Churche.
                  The Holy Fathers for good conſiderations grounded vpon Scripture, haue diuided the Keies
into the Keie of Order, and the Keie of Iuriſdiction: And either of them into the Keie of Knowledge,
whiche they call alſo the Keie of Diſcretion, and into the Keie of Power.
                  To theſe Defenders wee ſaie, that they confounde the Keies, and ſeme not to knowe, what the
Keies are. Verely theſe be not onely the knowledge of the Scriptures, nor the Interpretation of the
lawe, nor the VVorde of God, although theſe alſo doo open or ſhute the Kingedome of Heauen in
their kinde, as Chryſoſtome, Tertullian, and Euſebius maye well ſaye: and not onely theſe, but
alſo Miracles, and Plagues, and all other thinges, whiche prepare the will, or vnderſtandinge
of man, whereby hee maye receiue the benefite of thoſe moſte principall Keies, that nowe
wee ſpeake of.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Gentle Reader, for the better vnderſtandinge hereof, it may pleaſe thée to
conſider, that the Woorde of God, according to the ſundrie effectes, and properties
thereof, hath ſundrie names. For example. For that it encreaſeth, and multiplieth,
it is called Seede: For that it cutteth the Harte, and diuideth the Fleaſh
from the Sprite, it is called a Swerde: For that it taketh, and encloſeth vs, and
bringeth vs togeather, it is called a Nette: For that it waſſheth vs cleane, it is
called Water: For that it Enflameth vs, it is called Fire: For that it Féedeth
vs, it is called Breade. And euen ſo, for that it openeth, and geueth vs an entrie
into the Houſe, it is called the Keie. This Houſe is the Kingedome of Heauen:
Chriſte is the Doore: the Woorde of GOD is the Keie.
                  For thus ſaieinge, M. Hardinge telleth vs, Wee confounde maters, and
ſéeme not to knowe, what wée ſaie. Notwithſtandinge herein we imagine
nothinge of our owne, but onely reporte the very Woordes, and Sentences of
the Ancient Learned Catholique Fathers.
                  
                     Tertullian ſaithe,
                     Tertull. contra Marc
                           •
                        on. Li. 4. 
                     Quam Clauem habebant Legis Doctores, niſi Interpretationem
Legis? What Keie had the Doctours of the Lawe, ſauinge the Expoſition of the
Lawe? S. Hierome ſaithe, Duces Eccleſiae habent Claues Scientiae, vt aperiant Scripturas
creditis ſibi Populis.
                     
                     Hieromy. in Eſaiam. Li. 6. ca. 24. 
                     Vnde praecipitur, vt Magiſtri aperiant, & Diſcipuli ingrediantur:
The Captaines of the Churche haue the Keies of Knowledge, to open the Scriptures vnto
the People to them committed. Therefore Commaundement is geuen, that the Maiſters
ſhould open,Ambroſ. De Cain. & Abel. Li. 2. and the Scholars ſhoulde enter. S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Remittuntur peccata
per Dei Verbum, cuius Leuites eſt Interpres:
                      Sinnes be forgeuen by the Woord of God, the
Expounder whereof is the Prieſt.
                  Thus theſe, and other like Ancient Fathers haue opened the meaninge of
theſe Keies.Chryſoſt in Matthae. Homil. 44. And yet were they neuer therfore condemned of ignorance, as menne,
y• wiſte not, what they ſaide. Certainely Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Clauis eſt Scientia
Scripturarum, per quam aperitur Ianua Veritatis: The Keie is the knowledge of the Scriptures,
whereby is opened the gate of the Truthe.
                      And S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Clauis eſt
dicenda,
                     Auguſti. De Sanctis, Homil. 27. 
                     qua ad Fidem pectorum dura reſerantur: That ought to be called the Keie, where
with the hardneſſe of mennes hartes is opened vnto Faithe.
                     
                  
                  Here hath M. Hardinge wel multiplied, and encreaſed his Keies, and hathe

brought vs foorthe a whole bunche of them altogeather:Multiplication of Keies. The Keies of Orders: The
Keies of Iuriſdiction: The Keies of Diſcretion: The Keies of Power: The keies
moſte Principal, and the Keies not ſo principal. And thus hath he keies of Order
without Iuriſdiction, and keies of Iuriſdiction without Order: keies of Diſcretion
without Power, & keies of Power without Diſcretion. And al theſe prety ſhiftes
of keies hath he diuiſed, to auoide Confuſion: and, to make vp his tale, as if the
Popes Croſſe Keies were not ſufficient, Plagues, and Miracles, and, I knowe not
what thinge els, are brought foorthe vnto vs in the likeneſſe of Keies. And this diſtinction,
and limitation of Keies, ſaithe he, hath vpon good conſiderations benne
diuiſed by the Holy Fathers. And yet of al theſe Holy Fathers, for modeſties
ſake, he nameth none.
                  
                     What anſweare were it beſte to make to ſutche Vanities? In deede, when the
right Keie of Knowledge was loſte, and gonne, it was time to diuiſe ſome other
pretie Pikelockes to woorke the feate. Bonauentura hereof writeth thus, as
it is partely alleged before:
                     Bonauen. 4. Sentent. Diſt. 18. Quae. 1. E. 
                     Omnes ferè Sacerdotes ita ſunt ſimplices, & idiotae poſt
ſuſceptionem Sacerdotij, ſicut anté. Dicendum ergo, quòd Scientia non eſt Clauis Principalis,
nec per ſe, ſed prout iuncta eſt Authoritati Ligandi, vel ſoluendi. Et haec Clauis
non eſt de Eſſe Ordinis, ſed de bene eſſe: Al Prieſtes, for the moſte parte, are as ſimple,
and as iude after the receiuinge of Prieſthoode, as they were before. Therefore we muſt
ſaie, that Knowledge is not the Principal Keie, not any Keie at al of it ſelfe: but as it is ioined
with the Authoritie of Bindinge, or Looſinge. And this Keie (of Knowledge) is not of
the Subſtance of the Order of Prieſthoode, but of the better beinge of the ſame. And therefore,
to encreaſe M. Hardinges number of Keies, he ſaithe, Quidam habent Scientiam
Clauium:
                     
                     Eodem loco. 
                     quidam Clauiculam: quidam nullam: Somme haue the Knowledge of the
Keies: ſomme a pretie litle Keie: ſomme no Keie at al. In this caſe it were good for M.
Hardinge to reſolue his Reader, when the Prieſte hath nothinge els but a Pretie
litle Keie, or no Keie at al, what Authoritie he hath, either to Open, or to Shutte.
                  
                  M. Hardinge replieth farther, VVee haue Remiſsion of Sinnes in the Miniſtration of the
Sacramentes: Therefore wee haue it not onely by the hearinge of the VVoorde of God. This Obiection
touched, and partely anſweared a litle before. S. Auguſtine calleth
the Sacramentes,Auguſtin. contra Fauſtum, Li. 19. Cap. 16. 
                     Verba Viſibilia: Woordes Viſible:
                      for that in them, as in liuely
Images, the Deathe of Chriſte is ſenſibly ſette before our eies. For the woorde of
God is the Subſtance, and Life of al Sacramentes: and without the ſame, Sacramentes,
what ſo euer, are no Sacramentes. And therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe.
as it is alleged before,Auguſt. in Iohan. Tracta. 80. 
                     Quare non ait, vos mundi eſtis propter Baptiſmum, quo lot
                           •
                        
eſtis: Sed ait, propter Verbum, quod locutus ſum vobis? Niſi quia & in Aqua Verbum
mundat. Detralie Verbum: & quid eſt Aqua, niſi Aqua? Why ſaithe not Chriſte, you
are cleane bicauſe of the Baptiſme, wherewith ye are waſſhed: But, Bicauſe of the Woorde,
that I haue ſpoken to you? Sauinge for that, it is the Woorde, that cleanſeth in the VVater.
Take the VVoorde awaie: and what is VVater els, but VVater?
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 2.
               Moreouer that Chriſtes Diſciples did receiue this Authoritie,
not that they ſhould heare the Priuate Confeſſions of the people, &
liſten to their whiſhperinges, as the common Maſſinge Prieſtes doo
euerywhere nowe adaies, and doo it ſo, as though in that one point
laye al the Vertue, and vſe of the Keies: but to the ende, they ſhoulde
Goe, they ſhould Teache, they ſhould Publiſhe abroade the Goſpel,
and be vnto the Beleuinge a ſweete Sauour of Life vnto Life: and
vnto the Vnbeleuinge, and Vnfaitheful a Sauour of Deathe vnto
Deathe: and that the mindes of Godly perſons beinge brought lowe

by the remorſe of theire former Life and errours, after they once begonne
to looke vp vnto the Light of the Goſpel, & beleue in Chriſte,
might be opened with the Woorde of God, euen as a dore is opened
with a Keie. Contrarie wiſe, that the Wicked, and wilful, and ſutche
as would not beleeue, nor returne into the right way, ſhould be leafte
ſtil as faſte locked,2. Timoth. 3. & ſhutte vp, &, as S. Paule ſaithe, waxe woorſe,
and woorſe. This take wee to be the meaninge of the Keies: and that
after this ſorte mennes Conſciences be either opened, or ſhutte.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Here ye Harpe muche vpon one ſtringe, whiche ſo iarreth in the eares of the Hearers, as your
confuſe Harmonie can like noman, onleſſe he be a Minſtrel of your owne Secte. The Auctoritie and
power of the Keies conſiſteth not altogeather, nor Principally in Preachinge, or pronouncinge of the
Goſpel, as already we haue proued. VVhat maye wee iudge of you? procedeth this of Malice, or of
Ignorance, that thus ye confounde the Keies, the Powers, and the Miniſteries?
                  Preachinge is one thinge, to gouerne the Churche is an other, to remitte and reteine ſinnes is an
other, to diſtribute the Sacramentes is an other. Dothe not S. Paule in cleare woordes ſpeake Seuerally,
and diſtinctly of Miniſteries,1. Corin. 1. where he ſaithe, that he was not ſent of Chriſte to Baptiſe, but to Preache
the Goſpel? This Doctrine of yours, whereby ye confounde the Keies, Powers, and Miniſteries, dothe
not onely obſcure the Scriptures, and bringe the people to greate errours: but alſo vnder pretence of a
loue towarde preachinge of the Goſpel, leadeth them into contempt of the Sacramentes, and ſpecially
of the Sacrament of Penaunce, without which, if after Baptiſme we haue ſinned, (not beinge letted
by caſe of neceſsitie, wherein VVil, Deſire, and Vowe is accepted)Vntruthe, as by the Anſvveare maye further appeare. we can not attaine to Saluation.
As you folow Caluine your Maiſter in this and ſundrie other falſe, and perilous Doctrines, ſo it is to
be feared, if your wicked temeritie be ſuffered to proceede, that at length hauinge brought al Religion
to bare Preachinge, ye wil abandon al the Sacramentes of the Churche, as thinges not neceſſarie.
For ſo that wicked Maiſter of yours teacheth:Caluines vvicked doctrine againſte the Sacramēts. That, where Chriſtes death maye be remembred otherwiſe,
thereA greate vntruthe, ioined vvith a ſclaunder. Reade the Anſvveare. al the Sacramentes be Superfluous. And that I ſeeme not to ſclaunder him. I remitte you
to his Commentaries vpon the firſte Epiſtle of S. Paule to the Corinthians, where expoundinge theſe
wooordes, Doo this in my remembraunce, he ſaithe thus: The Supper is a token of remembrance ordeined
to lifte vp, or helpe our infirmitie: for if otherwiſe we were mindeful inoughe of Chriſtes
deathe, this helpe (he meaneth the Bleſſed Sacrament of the Aultar) were ſuperfluous, whiche is common
to al the Sacramentes, for they be healpes of our infirmitte. Lo, by Caluines Doctrine, if we remember
the deathe of Chriſte, bothe the Euchariſte, and al other Holy Sacramentes be voide, and Superfluous.
And then, becauſe no other thinge bringeth to our remembrance the Deathe of Chriſte,
more then Preachinge, to what purpoſe ſerue al the Sacramentes?
                  Thus theſe Defenders with their Maiſter Caluine haue founde a ſhorter waie to Heauen, then
was knowen before.
                  In an other place he ſeemeth to derogate muche of the neceſsitie of Baptiſme of Chriſten mens
Children.Contra Interim. VVhere he ſaithe, that by reaſon of Gods promiſe the iſſue whiche commeth of Faitheful
parētes,Theſe be not M. Caluines vvoordes, but S. Paules: Filij veſtri Sancti ſunt, 1. Corin. 7. is borne Holy, and is a Holy Progenie, and that the childrē of ſuche, beinge yet encloſed in the
wombe, before they drawe breathe of life, be neuertheleſſe choſen into the couenaunt of life euerlaſtinge.
This doctrine, when it ſhal take place, as by you Defenders it is ſette in a good furtherance,
what ſhal we looke for, but that the neceſſarie Sacrament of Baptiſme (without whiche who is to be
compted a Chriſten man?) and the moſte Bleſſed, and confortable Sacramente of the Aultar, and the
Holeſome Sacrament of Penance,Quid 
                           •
                         Coelum ruat? and Abſolution, and the reſte of the Sacramentes, ſhal be nomore eſteemed
and vſed, then nowe ye eſteeme, and vſe the Maſſe, Holy Breade, and Holy VVater? This beinge
once brought to paſſe, ſhal not the people eaſely be induced either to receiue Mahometes Religion, or
ſomme other, as farre from God, as that is: or to allowe the pleaſant trade of life of theOthervviſe called the Romaines. Epicureans,
the moſte parte beinge already thereto inclined, and no ſmal number wel entread?
                  
                     
But to returne againe to the Keies, whiche ſeme to you to haue no force ne vſe but in Preachinge:
Firſt, as touchinge the ſcorneful ſcoffer vttered by you, Sir Defender, in Latine, and by your interpreter
in Engliſhe, againſte Priuate Confeſsions, and againſt the Miniſters of the Churche appointed by
God for grace of reconciliation to be imparted to penitentes: your light mockinge ſprite deliteth
your ſelues not ſo muche, as it pitieth vs to ſee you bothe ſo faſte bounde in Satans fetters. Nexte
concerninge ConfeſsionVntruthe. For it is not required of neceſsitie, as ſhal appeare. neceſſarely required to the vſe, and power of the Keies, whiche you ſpeake
of at your pleaſure, thus we ſaye accordinge to the Scriptures: Amonge ſundry effectes, for whiche
Chriſte gaue the Keies to the Apoſtles, and their Succeſſours, this is one, that by Power of them they
ſhould remitte,Mat. 16. & 18. and reteine Sinnes, as himſelfe ſaide, VVhoſe ſinnes ye remitte, they are remitted vnto
them: and whoſe ſinnes ye reteine, they are reteined,Vntruthes, tvvo togeather. See the Anſvveare. But ſinnes can not duely be remitted or reteined,
onleſſe they be knowen to him,Iohan. 20. that hath auctoritie thereto: and knowledge of ſinnes (ſpecially
ſuche as are priuie) can not be had of man, who can not ſee into the harte of man, 
                        •
                      but by Confeſſion
of the ſinner: VVherefore conſequently it foloweth, that they receiued this auctoritie to heare
the Confeſsion of Chriſten people deſirous to be aſſolted, and reconciled.
                  VVherefore the Confeſsiō, yea of Secrete ſinnes, is neceſſary to Saluatiō byVntruthe. For M. Hardinges ovvne Doctours ſaie, It vvas ordeined by Tradition, and not by Chriſte. thinſtitution of Chriſte.
For in that he inſtituted the ende, he inſtituted alſo the meanes, whiche ſhoulde be neceſſarie to the
obteininge of the ende: onleſſe we woulde make Chriſte our Lawemaker to haue failed his Churche
in thinges neceſſarie. That ſinnes can not either be remitted, or reteined, excepte the Prieſte knowe
them,Mat. 16. Comment. in Mat. 16. we are bolde ſo to ſaye with the Fathers, and ſpecially with S. Hierome, who ſoVntruthe, In miſtakinge, and abbridginge S. Hieromes vvoordes. vnderſtoode
the woordes of Chriſte: where he promiſed the Keies of the Kingedome of Heauen to Peter.
Sacerdos pro officio ſuo cùm peccatorum audierit Varietates, ſcit qui ligandus, ſit qui
Soluendus: The Prieſte (ſaithe he) when as accordinge to his office he hath hearde the diuerſities
of ſinnes, knoweth who is to be bounde, who is to be looſed. Right ſo as in the time of Moſes lawe
he pronounced not, who was cleane of Lepre, who was not, before that he had vewed the colour,
the bunches, and al other tokens of that diſeaſe. And thus it foloweth of the woordes of Chriſte,
that Confeſsion of al Sinnes, at leaſte deadly, muſte be made to the Prieſte, before they can be remitted.
VVhiche Prieſte is the Miniſter of this Sacramente, and hath auctoritie to abſolue, either Ordinarie,
or by Commiſsion of the Superiour.
                  Againe, for proufe that Confeſsion is neceſſarie, wee ſate, that to remitte and reteine ſinnes
committed againſte God, as to binde and to looſe, be iudicial actes. And therefore by theſe
woordes Chriſte ordeined a Courte,This Conſiſtorie ſtoode ſometime in Excommunication, ſometime in Preachinge. a Conſiſtorie, a ſeate of Iudgemente in the Churche, and appointed
the Apoſtles and their Succeſſours to be Iudges. And that this maye appeare not to be a
fantaſie of our owne heades, S. Auguſtine ſo expoundeth thoſe woordes of S. Iohn in his Reuelation:
Et vidi ledes, &c. And I ſawe ſeates, and ſome ſittinge on them, and iudgement was geuen.
VVe muſte not thinke (
                        •
                     aithe he) this to be ſpoken of the laſte iudgement, but we muſte vnderſtande
the Seates of the Rulers, and the Rulers themſelues, by whome nowe the Churche is gouerned.
And as for the Iudgement geuen, it ſemeth not to be taken for any other, then for that, whereof
it was ſaide, VVhat thinges yee binde in Earthe, they ſhalbe boūde alſo in Heauen: and what thinges
ye looſe on Earthe, they ſhal be looſed alſo in Heauen. Sundrie other Fathers haue vttered in their
writinges the ſame Doctrine.In Mat. Cap. 16. Hilarius vpon the ſixtenth Chapter of Matthewe ſaithe, Beatus
Coeli ianitor, &c. Bleſſed is the Porter of Heauen, whoſe earthly iudgement (that is to
ſaie, whiche is geuen here on Earthe) is a foreiudged auctoritie in Heauen, that what thinges be
bounde,Li. 1. Epi. 2. De dignit. ſacerd. li. 3. or looſed in Earthe, they haue the condition of the ſame Statute alſo in Heauen. S. Cyprian
hath the like ſayinge in an Epiſtle to Cornelius. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, that Chriſte hath tranſlated al
iudgemente, whiche he receiued of the Father, vnto the Apoſtles, and Prieſtes. Gregorie Nazianzene
in an Oration to the Emperour and his Princes, ſaithe to the Emperour, Ouis mea es, & nos habemus
Tribunalia:
                     This ſaieinge perteineth, no
                           •
                         to Confeſsion, but to the Authoritie of Gods vvoorde. Thou arte my Sheepe, and we haue our ſeates of iudgement. S. Gregorie the Pope
compareth the Sacrament of Penaunce with a courte of Iuſtice, in which cauſes be firſt examined and
tried, and afterwarde Iudged. That the ſame is to be donne by the Prieſte. S. Bernarde ſheweth: VVho,
as alſo the learned Father Hugo de S. Victore, be not afraide to ſaie after S. Cyprian, Hilarie,
and Chryſoſtome, that the ſentence of Peter remittinge Sinnes, goeth before the ſentence of Heauen.

This Ordinance of Chriſte requireth, that al. Treſpaſſes, Offences, Diſorders, Tranſgreſsions, and
Sinnes committed againſt him and his Lawes, be referred to this Conſiſtorie.
                  VVhether theſe Defenders allowe Publike Confeſsion, or no, we knowe not: but whereas they inueigh
againſt Priuate Confeſsion, and ſaie in ſpiteful woordes, which they haue learned in the Schole
of Satan, beinge lothe the Sinnes of the People, whereby he holdeth his Kingdome, ſhoulde be remitted,
that Chriſtes Diſciples receiued not the auctoritie of the Keies, that they ſhoulde heare priuate Confeſsions
of the People, and liſten to their whiſperinges: VVe tel them that Confeſsion of al deadly Sinnes
is of theVntruthe. As it is prooued before. Confeſsion grounded vpon Natural Reaſon. Inſtitution of God, not of Man. But concerninge the maner of confeſsinge ſecretely to a
Prieſte alone, it is moſte agreable to Natural Reaſon, that ſecrete Sinnes be confeſſed ſecretely
                  
                     A vaine forgerie. Clement amongeſt thoſe thinges that he acknowledgeth him ſelfe to haue receiued of Peter,
this is One, as he writeth in his firſte Epiſtle tranſlated by Rufine the Prieſte: That, if it fortune
either enuie or Infidelitie priuely to crepe into any mans harte, or any other like euil: he whiche regardeth
his Soule, be not aſhamed to confeſſe thoſe thinges to him, that is in Office ouer him, to
the ende that by him, through the woorde of God, and holeſome counſel, he maye be healed. So as by
perfite Faithe and good woorkes he maye eſcape the paines of euerlaſtinge fire, and come to the rewardes
of Life that endureth for euer. No man ſpeaketh more plainely of Secrete Confeſsion
Vntruthe. For he ſpeaketh onely of open Confeſsion. then Origen, and that in ſundry places, to whiche for Breuities ſake I remitte the Reader.
In. 2. Ca. Leuitici, Homil. 2. De Principijs, Lib. 3. In Pſal. 37. Homil. 2. VVhere he compareth
the ſtate of a sinner to a man, that hath euil and vndigeſted humours in his Stomake. And
ſaithe that as by remaininge of ſuche euil matter, the man feleth him ſelfe very ſicke, and by vomitinge
of it foorthe, he is eaſed: ſo the ſinner by keepinge his ſinnes ſecrete, is the more greuouſely
charged in his owne conſcience, and ſtandeth in daunger to be choked with the Fleume and humour
of his ſinnes. But if he accuſe him ſelfe, and confeſſe his faultes, he bothe vomiteth foorthe his
ſinnes,Al this belongeth to open Confeſsion. and digeſteth the cauſe of the ſame. S. Cyprian as in many other places, ſo moſte plainely
ſpeaketh of Secrete Confeſsion. Sermone. 5. de lapſis. Although (ſaithe he of certaine deuoute
perſons) they be entangled with no greate Sinne,Confeſsion of euil thought. yet becauſe at leaſte they thought of it, the ſame
vnto the Prieſtes of God Confeſſe they ſorowfully and ſimply. They make Confeſsion of their Conſcience,
they laie foorthe the burthen of their minde, &c.
                  S. Auguſtine treatinge of the Power of the Keies in many places, but ſpecially of Confeſsion in
Pſal. 60. VVhere ſpeakinge muche of the neceſsitie of Confeſsion, he ſaithe thus: VVhy feareſt
thou to be Confeſſed? If not beinge Confeſſed thou remaine hidden, not beinge Confeſſed thou ſhalt
be damned. And afterwardes thus: To this ende God requireth Confeſsion, to deliuer the humble:
to this ende he damneth him that confeſſeth not, to puniſhe the Proude. Therefore be thou ſorie
before thou be Confeſſed: beinge Confeſſed, Reioyſe: thou ſhalt be hole.
                  By theſe and many other Holy Fathers, of whome there is no doubte, but they had the Holy Ghoſte
for their Teacher and prompter of al Truthe, the Catholike Churche hath benne perſuaded, that
the recital and reherſinge ofVntruthe: Reade the Anſvveare. al sinnes before the Prieſte is neceſſarie to Saluation: onleſſe neceſsitie
for lacke of a Prieſte or other wiſe, exclude vs from it: and that aVntruthes, many, and manifeſte, as ſhal appeare. General Confeſsion in no wiſe
ſuffiſeth. True Faithe acknowlegeth, that Confeſsion is to be made of al 
                        •
                      Sinnes, as 
                        •
                      commaunded
by Chriſte, and the Apoſtles, commended to vs by the 
                        •
                      Fathers of the Primitiue Churche, by al 
                        •
                      learned
Doctours, and general vſe of the 
                        •
                      whole Churche. And if the expreſſe terme of Secrete or auricular
Cōfeſsion beVntruthe. For it is neuer founde. Othervviſe let him ſhevve it. Seldome mētioned in the Auncient Fathers, as that of Publike Confeſsion is often
times, as in the Nicene Councel, and in ſundry other places: that is nothinge repugnant to the Doctrine
of the Catholike Churche.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Al this greate ſhewe of Authorities of Fathers, and Doctours, M. Hardinge
him ſelfe in the ende diſchargeth eaſily with one Woorde. For, notwithſtandinge
al, that be coulde beſte diuiſe to ſaie herein, his Concluſion at the laſte is this,
The Expreſſe Terme of Secrete, or Auriculare Confeſſion is Seldome mentioned in the Ancient
Fathers. Seldome,
                      he ſaithe, as if it were ſometimes vſed, although but

                     Seldome. But if he had leafte, Seldome, and ſaide, Neuer, I trowe, his tale had
benne the truer.
                  For the reſte, wée ſaie, as before: Wée make no Confuſion of the Keies. Our
Doctrine is plaine, that there be twoo Keies in the Churche of God: The one of
Inſtruction, the other of Correction. Whereof the one woorketh inwardly, the
other outwardly: The one before God, the other before the Congregation. And
yet either of theſe ſtandeth wholy in the Woorde of God. And therefore S. Paule
ſaithe,2. Timoth. 3. 
                     Omnis Scriptura Diuinitùs inſpirata vtilis eſt ad Doctrinā, ad Redargutionem,
ad Correctionem, ad Inſtitutionem, &c: Al Scriptures inſpired from God are profitable,
To teache the Truthe: To reprooue Falſehedde: To correcte the Wicked: To Nourtoure,
and infourme the Godly.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of the Former of theſe Keies S. Paule ſaithe,
                     Actor. 16. Beleeue in the Lorde Ieſus: and
thou ſhalt be ſafe, with al thy Houſe.
                  
                     Of the other he ſaith.
                     2. Corinth. 10. The Weapons of our warfare are not Fleaſhely: but mighty through
God, to throwe downe holdes, caſtinge downe euery Highe thinge, that is builded vp againſte
the knowledge of God, and to bringe al vnderſtandinge captiue to the Obedience of Chriſte.
                  This Doctrine ſéemeth to be ſimple, and plaine, and without Confuſion.
                  Touchinge M. Caluine, it is great wronge, vntruely to reporte ſo Reuerende
a Father, and ſo Woorthie an Ornamente of the Churche of God. If you had euer
knowen the order of the Churche of Geneua, & had ſéene foure thouſande people, or
moe receiuinge the Holy Myſteries togeather at one Communion, ye coulde not
without your great ſhame, & wante of modeſtie, thus vntruely haue publiſhed to
the worlde, that by M. Caluines doctrine, the Sacramentes of Chriſte are Superfluous.
Certainely to leaue al, that he hath otherwiſe ſpoken of the Sacramentes
in general, Of the Sacramente of Chriſtes laſte Supper he writeth thus:
Magnum Conſolationis,
                     Inſtitution. Cap. 18. 2. 
                     ac ſuauitatis fructum ex hoc Sacramento colligere poſſunt piae
animae: quòd illîc Teſtimonium habeant, Chriſtum ſic nobis adunatum eſſe, ſic nos illi
viciſsim inſertos, adeo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in vnum Corpus cum ipſo coaluiſſe, vt quicquid ipſius eſt, noſtrum
vocare liceat: The Godly mindes maye take greate fruite of pleaſure, and Comforte
of this Sacramente: for that therein they haue a witneſſe, that Chriſte is ſo made one with
vs, and wee ſo graffed into him, and are ſo growen bothe into one Bodie, that what ſo euer
is his, wee maie nowe calle it ours.
                     
                  
                  
                     But he ſaithe, The Supper is a token of remēbrance, to lifte vp, or to healpe our infirmitie.
For if otherwiſe we were mindeful yenough of Chriſtes Deathe, this healpe were Superfluous.
                  O M. Hardinge, howe farre maie malice beare a man? Bicauſe M. Caluine
ſaithe, Wée are weake, and haue néede of out warde Sacramentes, to quicken the
dulneſſe of our Senſes, ſaithe he therefore, that the Sacramentes be Superfluous?
If he had likewiſe ſaide, Our bodies be weake, and haue néede to be refreaſhed with
Meate, and Drinke, would ye geather thereof, that Meate, and Drinke are Superfluous?
Nay contrariewiſe he concludeth, Wee haue neede of Sacramentes: Therefore
Sacramentes be needeful: and the greatter our weakeneſſe is, the more néede haue
wée of ſutche remedies. His woordes emongſt many others of like ſenſe be theſe:
Sic eſt exigua noſtra Fides,
                     Inſtitution. Cap. 16. 3. 
                     vt niſi vndique fulciatur, atque omnibus modis ſuſtentetur,
ſtatim concutiatur, fluctuet, vacillet: So ſmal is our Faithe, that onleſſe it be borne vp of
euery ſide, and by al meanes be mainteined, it ſhaketh, it wauereth, and is like to falle.
                     
                  
                  
                     If this be ſo dangerous a Doctrine, as you telle vs, why then are the Ancient
Catholique Fathers ſuffered to holde and maineteine the ſame? Dionyſius,
whome you ſo often calle S. Paules Scholar, writeth thus,
                     Ecleſiaſt. Hicrarch. Cap. 1. 
                     Nos imaginibus ſenſibilibus,
quantum fieri poteſt, ad Diuinas adducimur Contemplationes: Wee, as mutche
as maie be, by Senſible Images, or Sacramentes are brought vnto Diuine Contemplations.
Likewiſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     In Quaeſtion. Vet. Teſtamen. 
                     Sacramenta propter Carnales Viſibilia inſtituta ſunt:
vt ab illis, quae oculis cernuntur, ad illa, quae intelliguntur, Sacramentorum gradibus

transferamur: Viſible Sacramentes are ordeined for Carnal Menne: that by the ſteppes of Sacramentes
we maie be leadde from the thinges, that wee ſee with eie, vnto the thinges, that
wee vnderſtande.Cap
                           •
                        ian. De Coena Domini. Chryſoſt. ad Pop
                           •
                        l. Antiochen. Homil. 60. 
                     So ſaithe S. Cyprian, Fidei noſtrae infirmitas Symboli argumento
edocta eſt, &c.
                      The weakeneſſe of our Faithe is taught by the vnderſtandinge of the Sacramente,
&c. So S. Chryſoſtome, Si incorporei eſſemus, nuda, & incorporea nobis
haec ipſa daret. Nunc quia Corporibus inſertas habemus animas, ſub viſibilibus ſpiritualia
tradit:
                      If wee were Bodileſſe, God woulde geue vs theſe thinges bare, and Bodileſſe.
But for as mutche, as wee haue Soules faſtened vnto our Bodies, therefore God geueth vs
thinges Spiritual vnder thinges Viſible.Chryſoſt in Matthae. Homil. 22. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Rectis, & Fidelibus Scripturae
non ſunt Neceſſariae, dicente Apoſtolo, Lex iuſtis non eſt poſita:
                      To the Godly,
and Faithful the Scriptures are not Neceſſarie: For ſo the Apoſtle ſaithe, There is no Lawe
prouided for the Iuſte. And againe, Oportuerat quidem nos nihil indigere auxilio Literarum,
ſed tam nudam in omnibus vitam exhibere,Chryſo. in Matthae. Homi. 1. vt Librorum vice Gratia Spiritus
vteremur: It behooued vs to haue no neede of the Scriptures: but in al thinges to ſhewe our
Liues ſo pure, and cleane, that in ſteede of Bookes wee mighte vſe the Grace of the Holy
Ghoſte.Hieron. in Pro
                        
                           ••
                        mio in Lamen. Hieremiae. 
                     In like manner S. Hierome ſaithe, Cùm meruerimus eſſe cum Chriſto, &
ſimiles Angelis fuerimus, tunc Librorum Doctrina ceſſabit:
                      When wee ſhal obteine to
be with Chriſte, and ſhalbe like vnto the Angels, then the Doctrine of Bookes ſhal geue
place.
                  
                     Nowe tel vs, M. Hardinge, muſte wee hereof conclude, as you doo, y• theſe Holy
Fathers, S. Cyprian, S. Auguſtine, S. Hierome, S. Chryſoſtome, helde falſe, & perillous
Doctrines, & with wicked temeritie woulde abandonne bothe Scriptures,
and Sacramentes, as thinges not Neceſſarie? Certainely for ful reſolution hereof,
M. Caluine him ſelfe ſaithe thus,
                     Iohan Caluinus in Antidoto ad 7. Seſsionem Cō
                        ciſij Tridentini. Facilè patior, vt, quae Chriſtus nobis dedit,
Salutis adiumenta, eorum vſus Neceſſarius dicatur: quando, ſcilicet, datur facultas.
Quanquam Semper admonendi ſunt Fideles, non aliam eſſe cuiuſuis Sacramenti
Neceſsitatem, quàm Inſtrumentalis Cauſae, cui nequaquam alliganda eſt Dei vittus.
Vocem ſanè illam nemo pius eſt, qui non toto pectore exhorreat, Sacramenta res
eſſe Superfluas: I can wel ſuffer, that what ſo euer healpes of Saluation Chriſte
hath geuen vs, the vſe thereof be coumpted Neceſſarie: I meane, when we maye haue oportunitie,
and time to vſe them. How be it thus mutche the faitheful muſte be warned, that the
Neceſsitie of any Sacramente is none otherwiſe, but as of a Cauſe Inſtrumental: vnto
whiche Cauſe wee maye not in any wiſe binde the Power of God. But that the Sacramentes
be thinges Superfluous, no Godly man can abide to heare it.
                  Where you further charge M. Caluine, for ſaieinge, The Children of the Faithful
are borne Holy, ye ſhoulde rather herewith haue charged S. Paule. For
thus he ſaithe,1. Corinth. 7. 
                     Nunc Liberi veſtri Sancti ſunt: Nowe are your children Holy.
                      Ye ſhould
haue remembred, M. Hardinge, that theſe be S. Paules woordes, and not M. Caluines.
His meaninge is, that the Children of the Faitheful, notwithſtandinge
by Nature they be the Children of Anger, yet by Goddes Frée Election they be
Pure, and Holy. This is S. Paules vndoubted Doctrine: Whiche notwithſtandinge,
be neuer neither deſpiſed the Sacramentes of Chriſte, nor leadde the people▪
as you ſaie, to Mahomete, or Epicure.
                  Here at the laſte, M. Hardinge, to returne, as he ſaithe, to his Keies, firſt beginneth
with the ſpiteful woordes, and ſcorneful ſcoffes, and light Sprite of Sir Defender:
whiche, he ſaithe, he learned in the Schoole of Sathan, & nowe lieth bounds
in Sathans fetters.
                  To anſweare al ſ
                        •
                     tche M. Hardinges vanities, it were but vaine. Wiſe
menne wil not greatly weigh theſe childiſhe Tragedies.
                  But he ſaithe, The Prieſte holdeth a Conſiſtorie, & is a Iudge ouer the ſinnes
of the People. But beinge a Iudge he cannot diſcerne Sinnes, onleſſe he knowe
them. Neither can he knowe them, but by Confeſſion. Therfore, ſaithe M. Harding,

                     VVee tel them,
                     Inſtitution. Venial. 
                     that Confeſsion of al Deadly Sinnes is of the Inſtitution of God: and not of Man.
Mary, he ſaithe, touchinge the manner of Confeſſion, ſecretely to the Prieſt alone,
it is moſte agréeable to Natural Reaſon, that ſecrete Sinnes be Confeſſed ſecretely.
                  Here, I beſeche thée, good Chriſtian Reader, note this one thinge by the waye:
M. Hardinge, contrarie to common order, hathe brought vs the Inſtitution of God
without any manner Woorde of God. And thus, he ſaithe, Wee tel them: as if his
bare tellinge ſhould ſtande for proufe.
                  Verily notwithſtandinge Chriſte gaue his Apoſtles Power of Bindinge, and
Looſing, yet it appeareth not, y• he ſpake any one woord of Secrete Confeſſion. And
Gratian a Famouſe Doctour of that ſide doubteth not to ſaye,De POenit. diſt. 1. Quis aliquādo. De Poenit. Diſi. 1. Conuertimini. 
                     Latentia peccata
non probantur Neceſſariò Sacerdoti Confitenda: It is not proued, that Priuie ſinnes ought
of Neceſsitie to be Confeſſed vnto the Prieſte.
                      And againe, Datur intelligi, quòd etiam
ore tacente. Veniam Conſequi poſſumus: Wee are geuen to vnderſtande, that although
wee vtter nothing vvith our mouthe, yet wee may obteine pardonne, or Abſolution
of our ſinnes.
                      Therefore notwithſtanding al this M. Hardinges tellinge, his owne
Doctour Gratian telleth him, that Auriculare Confeſſion is not of Goddes Inſtitution.
                  But wherefore ſpeaketh M. Hardinge ſo preciſely, and ſpecially of Deadly
Sinnes? Or why maie not his Venial Sinnes comme likewiſe in the rekeninge
as wel,Concil. Trident. Cap. 5. De Confeſsione. Rob. Holcot in 4. Senten. Qu. 4. 4. Senten. Qu. 83 Artic. 3. as others? In déede it is ſpecially prouided in y• late Chapter at Tridente,
that Litle Petite Sinnes néede not to be vttered in Confeſſion. And Rob. Holcote
ſaithe, De Venialibus Confiteri, magis eſt Supererogationis, quàm Neceſsitatis: To
make Confeſsion of Venial Sinnes, is more of Deuotion, then of Neceſsitie.
                      And Thomas
of Aquine ſaithe, Quidam probabiliter dicunt, quòd per ingreſſum Eccleſiae Conſecratae
homo cōſequitur Remiſsionem peccatorū Venialium: Somme ſaie, and that not without
good reaſon, that a man maye obteine Remiſsion of his Venial Sinnes, onely by entri
                              •
                           
into a Churche that is Conſecrate.
                     
                     Extra, De p
                           ••
                        niten. & Remiſs. Omnis vtrius
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        . In 
                           •
                        loſſ
                           •
                        . And it is pourpoſely noted in the Gloſe vpō the Decretales,
Venialia tolluntur, vel per Orationem Dominicā, vel per Aquam Benedictam:
Venial Sinnes may be remoued, either by a Pater noſter, or by Holy Water.
                      And therefore
perhaps M. Hardinge wil ſaie, accordinge to the iudgemente of theſe, and others
his owne Doctours, that his Litle Prety Venial Sinnes ought not of dewtie
to be rekened: but maie otherwiſe be remitted, and haue no neede of Chriſtes
Bloude. This is a ſhorter waie to Heauen, then either Chriſte, or his Apoſtles
euer taught vs.
                  Howe be it, al this errour ſéemeth firſte to haue growen of miſtakinge theſe
woordes of Beda:Beda in 5. Cap. Iacobi. Citatur à Magiſtro. 4. Senten. Diſtin. 17. 
                     Coaequalibus quotidiana, & Leuia: grauiora verò Sacerdoti Pandamus:
Let vs open our ſmal, and daily Sinnes vnto our felowes: and our greate Sinnes vnto the
Prieſte.
                  For the reſte, M. Hardinges Reſolution maie ſtande withe good fauoure. For
ſéeing his Auricular Confeſſion can holde no better by Diuinitie, that it may ſéeme
to holde by ſomme what, he did wel, to ſaye, It holdeth wel by Natural Reaſon.
                  M. Hardinge ſaithe, The Prieſte can be no Iudge without particulare knowledge
of euery Sinne: Nor can he knowe without hearing: Nor can he heare without
Confeſſion. For anſweare hereto, Chryſoſtome ſaithe, as he is before alleged:
Medicinae locus hic eſt,
                     Chryſoſtom. De Poenit. Homil. 9. 
                     non Iudicij: Non Poenas, ſed Peccatorum Remiſsionem tribuens:
Deo Soli die Peccatum tuum: Here is a place of Medicine, and not of Iudgemente: rendring
not puniſhement, but Remiſsion of Sinnes. Open thine offences to God Onely.
                     
                  
                  But if the Prieſte can be no Iudge without knowledge, then doubteleſſe, M.
Hardinge, your Prieſtes for the more parte can be no Iudges. For your owne
Peter Lombarde ſaithe,4. Senten. Diſt. 19 Poſiquam. 
                     Scientiam diſcernendi Omnes Sacerdotes non habent: Al

Prieſtes haue not knowledge to diſcerne bitwene ſinne,
                     
                     Iudge ouer Sinne. 
                     and ſinne. And many of them be
vtterly ignorant, and knowe nothinge.
                  Notwithſtandinge, be the Prieſte neuer ſo wiſe, or wel learned, yet howe is
be hable to enter into the breaſte of man, and to knowe the Secretes of the harte?
S.1. Cor. 2. 3. Regum. 8. Roma 8. Auguſti. Confeſſion Lib. 10. Ca. 3 Paule ſaithe, What man knoweth, what is in man, but the ſprite of man, that is within
him? Salomon ſaithe, God Onely knoweth the thoughtes of menne. S. Paule
ſaithe, God Onely ſearcheth the Harte, and reines. And S. Auguſtine pourpoſely
ſpeakinge hereof, as it is ſaide before, ſaithe thus, Vnde ſciunt, cùm à me ipſo de me
ipſo audiunt, an verum dicam? Howe knowe they, when they heare me ſpeake of mee ſelfe,
whether I ſaie Truthe, or no?
                      Therefore the Prieſte iudginge that, y• he cannot knowmuſte
néedes wander vncertainely, and be a very doubteful Iudge.
                  Neuertheleſſe, admittinge the Prieſte to be a Iudge, yet, if it may be proued,
either that he maye be a Iudge ouer the ſinnes of the people, without Particulare
knowledge of the ſame: or that he may comme to certaine, and particulare knowledge
therof without any manner Auriculare Confeſſion, then, I truſt, this whole
mater wil ſoone be anſweared.
                  Firſte therefore I ſaye, that a Prieſte hauinge Authoritie to pronounce the
Woorde of God, is thereby a Iudge ouer Sinne. For the Woorde, that he ſpeaketh,
is the Power of God vnto Saluatiō:
                     Roma. 1. Hebrae. 4. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     and a twoo edged ſwerd, hable to ſunder the Soule▪
and the Sprite, and the marie from the bones: and is hable to Iudge,
                      (for ſo S. Paule
ſaith) the thoughtes, and cogitations of the Harte. And thus M. Harding him ſelfe graū
                     teth,
that a Prieſte pronouncinge Goddes Woorde, maye therewithe bothe Binde,
and Looſe: that is, in this caſe, to doo the office of a Iudge. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Clauis ea dicenda eſt, qua pectorum dura referantur: That thinge ought to be called the
Keie,
                     
                     Auguſt. De Sanctis, Homil. 27. Tertullian. De Pudicitia. Actor. 2. 
                     wherewith the hardneſſe of the harte is opened.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe Tertullian, Ipſe Clauem imbuit. Vides, quam? Viri Iſraelitae, auribus
mandate, quae dico: Ieſum Nazarenum Virum à Deo nobis deſtinatum:
                      He endewed the
Keie. And knowe you, what Keie? This Keie, I meane: Ye menne of Iſrael, make, what I
ſaie: Ieſus of Nazareth, a man appointed vnto you from God. So ſaith S. Auguſtine.
Loquimur in auribus veſtris. Vnde ſcimus, quid agatur in Cordibus veſtris? Quod autem
intus agitur, nō à nobis, ſed ab illo agitur. Proſpexit ergo Deus, vt Soluat filios mortificatorum:
                     
Wee ſpeake in your eares.Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 101. But howe knowe wee, what is wrought in your
hartes? How be it, what ſo euer is wrought within you, it is wrought, not by vs, but by God.
God therefore hathe looked foorthe, to Looſe the Children of them, that were appointed to
death. Thus is the Prieſte a Iudge, and Bindethe, and Looſethe, withoute any
hearinge of Priuate Confeſſions.
                  
                  Of the other ſide, I ſay, that in open crimes, and Publike Penance, the Prieſt
is like wiſe appointed to be a Iudge. For notwithſtandinge in the Primitiue
Churche, either the whole people, or the Elders of the Congregation had Authoritie
herein, yet the direction, and Iudgemente reſted euermore in the Prieſte. And
in this ſenſe S.2. Tim. 5. Paule ſaithe vnto Timothee, Receiue no accuſation againſte an
Elder, onleſſe it be vnder twoo, or three witneſſes.
                  
                  And notwithſtandinge theſe Orders, for the greateſt parte thereof, be nowe
vtterly out of vſe, yet, I truſte, it ſhal not be, neither impertinente to the mater,
nor vnpleaſante vnto the Reader, to conſider, how ye ſame were vſed in olde times.
Therefore, as it is Learnedly noted by Beatus Rhenanus, The Sinner, when he
beganne to miſlike him ſelfe, and to be penitente for his wicked life, for that he had
offended God, and his Churche, came firſte vnto the Biſhop, and Prieſtes, as vnto
the Mouthes of the Churche, and opened vnto them the whole burthen of his harte.
Afterwarde he was by them brought into the Congregation, and there made the

ſame Confeſſion Openly before his Brethren: & further was appointed to make
Satiſfaction by Open Penance. Whiche Penance being dewly, and humbly donne,
he was reſtored againe openly vnto the Churche, by laieinge on of the handes of
the Prieſtes, and Elders.
                  
                     Hereof S. Paule ſaithe vnto the Corinthians,
                     2. Cor. 2. If you haue forgeeuen any thinge to
any man, I haue likewiſe foregeeuen it. For I mee ſelfe, what ſo euer I haue foregeeuen, I
haue foregeeuen it for your ſakes in the Perſonne of Chriſte. In this Limitation of Penance,
leſte any thing ſhould paſſe vnaduiſedly, and out of Order, the Prieſte was
appointed to be the Iudge.
                     Baſili. Quae. 288. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Augu. in Enchirid. ad Laurentium, Cap. 65. 
                     S. Baſile ſaith, Modus Conuerſionis debet eſſe conueniens
illi, qui peccauit:
                      The Order of Conuerſion, or Open Penance, muſt be agreeable vnto him,
that hathe offended. And therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Quia Plaerun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            &c.
                      For
as mutche as, for the moſte parte, the griefe of one mannes harte is vnknowen vnto an other,
neither commeth foorthe into the knowledge of others, either by woordes, or by other tokens,
as beinge before him, vnto whom it is ſaide, My mourninge is not hidde from thee,
therefore it is very wel, that by them, that haue the ouerſight of the Churche, certaine times
of Penance are appointed, that the Congregation maye be ſatisfied. Againe he ſaithe,
Hortor Priùs Publica Poenitentia ſatisfacere:
                     
                     Auguſti. De Eccleſiaſt. Dogmatib. Cap. 53. Caſsiodor. Lib. 9 Cap. 35. 
                     & ita Sacerdotis Iudicio reconciliatum
Communioni ſociari: I Counſel him, that firſte he make Satisfaction by Open Penance: that
being ſo reconciled, he maie afterwarde be reſtored vnto the Communion by the Iudgement,
and Diſcretion of the Prieſte. Likewiſe ſaithe Caſsiodorus, Rei expectant
Communionis tempus, quod decreuit Epiſcopus: The Peintente parties waite for the
Communion time, appointed vnto them by the Biſhop.
                  
                  
                     S. Ambroſe demaunded of the Emperoure Theodoſius, beinge then excommunicate,
Quibus Medicamentis incurabilia vulnera tua,
                     
                     Caſsiodor. Lib. 9. Cap. 30. 
                     plagas
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         curaſti? By what
Medicines haue you healed your woundes, and cuttes, that were incurable? The Emperoure
anſweared, Tuum Opus eſt, & Docere, & Medicamenta temperare: Meum verò
oblata ſucipere:
                      It is your parte to Inſtructe me, and to Miniſter Medicines: and it is my
parte to receiue that you Miniſter.4. Senten. Diſt. 18. Non autem. 
                     And therefore Peter Lombarde ſaithe, Etſi aliquis
apud Deum ſit ſolutus, non tamen in facie Eccleſiae ſolutus habetur, niſi per
Iudicium Sacerdotis:
                      Although a man be aſſoiled before God, yet is he not accoumpted
aſſoiled in the Face or Sight of the Churche, but by the Iudgement of the Prieſte.
                  
                  By theiſe, M. Hardinge, I doubte not, but ye maie ſee, that the Prieſt maie be
a Iudge ouer Sinne, notwithſtandinge he neither heare Priuate Confeſſions, nor
haue particulare knowledge of euery ſeueral ſinne.
                  This is that Confeſſion, that the Holy Fathers haue ſo often ſpoken of. It
was made not ſecretely, or in a corner: but publiquely, and openly, and in the ſight
of the Congregation.Origen. in Pſalm 37. Hereof Origen ſaithe, as it is reported before: Si quis ſibi
ſit conſcius, Procedat in Medium, & ipſe ſui accuſator exiſtat: If any man finde him ſelfe
guilty, let him comme foorth into the middes of the Churche, and let him be his owne accuſer.
                     
Likewiſe Tertullian ſaithe,Tertullian. De Poenitentia. 
                     Aduolui Preſbyteris, & Aris Dei adgeniculari, & Omnibus
Fratribus legationes deprecationis ſuae iniūgere: To falſe down before the Prieſtes: To
kneele before the Aultar, or Communion Table: and to deſire Al the Brethren to praie for him.
                     
                  
                  Touchinge S. Hierome, M. Hardinge, ye laie in his woordes as faithefully, as
Ananias ſometime laide in his monie at the Apoſtles féete. Ye ſerue vs with a
parcel, and holde backe the reſte. It is true, that S. Hierome ſaithe, It is the
Prieſtes parte to diſcerne the diuerſitie bitwéene ſinne, and ſinne, as in caſes of
Excommunication, and Publique offences. But wherefore could ye not eſpie:
or rather, why woulde you ſo cloſely diſſemble ſo many, and ſo plaine Woordes
goeinge immediately before? For thus S. Hierome writeth of the Power of the
Keies,Heronym. in Matthae. Cap. 16. and of the vſe of Confeſſion: Iſtum locum Epiſcopi▪ & Presbyteri non intelligentes,
aliquid ſibi de Phariſaeorum aſſumunt Supercilio: vt vel damnent innocentes, vel

ſoluere ſe noxios arbitrentur: cùm apud Deum non ſententia Sacerdotum, ſed reorum
vita quaeratur: This place the Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes not vnderſtandinge, take vnto
them ſomme parte of the Proude looke of the Phariſeis: thinkinge them ſelues hable either
to Condemne the innocente, or to Abſolue the guiltie: VVhereas in deede it is not the
Abſolution of the Prieſte, but the life of the Sinner, that is VVeighed before
God. Theſe woordes, M. Hardinge, woulde not thus haue benne diſſembled, if
ye had meante ſimple dealinge. S. Hierome ſaithe plainely, that your Biſhoppes,
and Prieſtes vnderſtande not the vſe of the Keies: That ye haue taken vpon you
ſomme parte of the Proude lookes of the Phariſeis: And that it is not the Abſolution
of the Prieſte, but the life of the partie, that is accepted before God.
                  
                     In the ende, he concludeth thus, Alligat, vel ſoluit Epiſcopus, vel Presbyter, non
eos, qui inſontes ſunt, vel noxij: Sed pro officio ſuo, cùm Peccatorum audierit varietates,
ſcit, qui ligandus ſit, qui ſoluendus: The Biſhop, or Prieſte neither Bindeth the innocente,
nor Looſethe the guiltie: but accordinge to his office, when he hathe heard the diuerſitie
of ſinnes, (as in Publique offences) he knoweth, who ought to be Bounde, who ought to be
Looſed.
                     4. Senten. Diſt. 18. Nec ideo. 
                     In like ſorte writeth Peter Lombarde, Dominus tribuit Sacerdotibus poteſtatem
Ligandi, & Soluendi: id eſt, oſtendendi hominibus Ligatos, vel Solutos:
God hath geuen to Prieſtes Power to Binde, and to Looſe: that is to ſaie, to declare vnto menne,
that the Penitentes be either Bounde, or Looſed.
                  
                  Al this notwithſtandinge, al be it M. Hardinge were hable to proue, that the
Fathers had ſommewhere made mention of Confeſſion in Secrete, yet ſhould not
that greately either further his pourpoſe, or hinder ours. For, Abuſes, and Errours
remoued, and ſpecially the Prieſte beinge Learned, as wee haue ſaide before,
wée miſlike no manner Confeſſion, whether it be Priuate, or Publike. For as
wée thinke it not vnlawful, to make open Confeſſion before many, ſo wée thinke it
not vnlawful. Abuſes alwaies excepted, to make the like Confeſſion in Priuate, either
before a fewe, or before one alone. And, as the Holy Fathers, vpon good conſiderations,
were forced to remoue the vſe of Open Confeſſion, euen ſo wée ſaye,
that vpon like good Conſiderations Priuate Confeſſion alſo maye be remoued.
                  Onely this wée ſaie, that Chriſte, when he ſente his Diſciples into the Worlde,
and gaue them Authoritie, to Binde, and to Looſe, made no manner mention of
any ſutche Hearinge of Confeſſions, but Onely bade them goe, and Preache the
Goſpel.
                  Hilarie, Bernarde, and Huge, as ye haue alleged them, ſéeme to ſaye, that the
Iudgemente of Man goethe before the Iudgemente of God. Other the like, or rather
more vehemente ſpeaches ye might haue founde in Chryſoſtome:Chryſoſt. in Eſai. Homil. 5. 
                     Coelum accipit
Authoritatem ludicandi à Terra. Index ſeder in Terris: Dominus ſequitur Seruum:
Heauen taketh Authoritie of Iudgemente from the Earthe. In Earthe ſitteth the Iudge:
The Lorde followeth the Seruante.
                      Theſe, and ſutche other the like extraordinarie
ſpeaches, with good Conſtruction, maie be comfortable to the afflicted minde. But,
as one ſaide ſommetime, they muſte be receiued with a Graine of Salte: For otherwiſe
of them ſelues they be vnſauerie. For S. Hierome ſaithe, as I haue alleged
before,Hierony. in Matthae. Cap. 16. 11. Quaeſt. 3. Tunc vera. 
                     Apud Deum, non ſententia Sacerdotis, ſed reorum vita quaeritur: It is not the
Sentence, or Abſolution of the Prieſte, but the life of the Penitente, that is accepted before
God.
                      And againe, Tunc vera eſt ſententia Praeſidentis, quando Aeterni ſequitur ſententiam
Iudicis: Then the Iudgemente of the Preſidente, or Prieſte is true,
                      (not when
it goeth before, but) when it folowethe the Iudgement of the Euerlaſtinge Iudge. And
Gratian him ſelfe ſaithe,De Poenit. Diſt. 1 Conuertimini. 
                     Non Sacerdotali Iudicio, ſed largitate Diuinae Gratiae Peccator
emundatur: The Sinner is made Cleane, not by Iudgemente of the Prieſte, but by the abundance
of the Heauenly Grace.
                     
                  
                  But Nazianzene, as he is here alleged, ſaide vnto the Emperour, Ouis noſtra es:

                        Thou arte Oure Sheepe.
                     
                     Confeſſion nor Commaunded. No marueile. He meante, that the Emperoure was One
of the Flocke, and Folde of Chriſte. So S. Ambroſe ſaide ſometime vnto the Emperoure
Valentinian: Quid honorificentius, quàm vt Eccleſiae Filius dicatur Imperator?
Imperator enim bonus intra Eccleſiam,
                     Ambroſ. ad Valētinian. Epiſt. 32 Chryſoſtom. De Verbis Eſaiae, Homil. 5. 
                     non ſupra Eccleſiam eſt: What thinge is there more
honourable, then for the Emperour to be called a Childe of the Churche? For a good 
                              •
                           mperour is
Within the Churche: but not Aboue the Churche.
                      S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Deus ipſe ſubiecit
Caput Principis manui Sacerdotis: God him ſelfe hathe ſet the Heade of the Prince vnder
the Hande of the Prieſte.
                      For, as touchinge Faithe, and the Obedience of the Goſpel,
the Higheſt Prince is but a Subiecte. Al this proueth wel the Authoritie, and Dignitie
of Goddes Woorde: but it maketh nothinge for Confeſſion.
                  
                     To conclude, M. Hardinge ſaithe, It hath benne perſuaded, that the recitinge, and rehearſal
of al ſinnes before the Prieſte, is neceſſarie to Saluatiō: and that a General Confeſsion is in
no wiſe ſufficient. And againe he ſaithe, True Faithe acknowledgeth, that Confeſſion is to
be made of al Sinnes, as Commaunded by Chriſte, and his Apoſtles: Commended vnto vs by the
Fathers of the Primitiue Churche, and by al Learned Doctours, and General vſe of the whole
Churche.
                  Good Reader, Thou wouldeſt thinke, that emongeſt ſo many greate Woordes,
there were ſomme Truthe: and that M. Hardinge of his modeſtie, and for his Credites
ſake, would not ſpeake ſo boldly without ſomme ground. But, I beſeche thee,
Conſider theſe fewe: and thereby Iudge indifferently of the reſte.
                  
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Pſal 50. Homil. 2 Chryſoſtom. in Homil. De Poeniten. & Confeſsione. Beat. Rhenan. in Argum. Libelli Tertull. De Poenitentia. Non dico, vt Confitearis Conſeruo tuo peccata tua. Dicito
Deo, qui curet ea: I wil thee not to Confeſſe thy Sinnes vnto the Prieſte, that is
thy felowe ſeruante. Confeſſe them vnto God, that maie heale them. Againe,
                      Cogitatione
tua fiat delictorum exquiſitio: Sine teſte ſit hoc Iudicium: Solus Deus te Conſitentem
videat: Examine thy Sinnes in thy harte within thee. Let this Iudgemente be vvithout
vvitneſſe: Let God onely ſee thee makinge thy Confeſsion. Beatus Rhenanus, a man
of greate readinge, and ſingulare Iudgemente, hereof writeth thus: Tertullianus
de Clancularia iſta Confeſsione admiſſorum nihil loquitur. Neque eam vſquam olim
Praeceptam legimus: Tertullian of this Priuie Confeſsion of Sinnes ſaithe nothinge.
Neither doo wee reade, that the ſame Kinde of Priuie Confeſsion in Olde times vvas
euer Commaunded. M. Hardinge ſaith, It vvas Commaunded: Rhenanus ſaith,
It vvas not Commaunded. If Rhenanus woordes be true, as they be in deede, their
are M. Hardinges woordes moſt vntrue. Likewiſe it is noted in the very Gloſe
vpon M. Hardinges owne Decrées:
                     De Poenit. diſt. 1. Petrus. In Gloſſ. Fortè tunc (tempore Ambroſij) non erat facta Inſtitutio
Confeſsionis, quae modò eſt: Perhaps then (in the time of S. Ambroſe,
whiche was foure hūdred yéres after Chriſte) the manner of Confeſsion, that now is vſed,
was not appointed.
                     De Poenit. Diſc 1. Conuertimini. 
                     And Gratian ſaith, Antequam Sacerdoti Ora noſtra oſtendamus,
id eſt, Peccata noſtra Confiteamur, à Lepra peccati mundamur: Before wee open our
mouthe vnto the Prieſte, that is to ſaie, before vvee make Confeſsion of our Sinnes,
the Leproſie of our Sinne is made cleane.
                     De Poenit. diſt. 1. Quidam. 
                     Theodorus ſaithe, Quidam Deo ſolummodò
confiteri debere peccata dicunt, vt Graeci: Somme ſaie, wee ought to Confeſſe our Sinnes
onely vnto God, as doo the Grecians. Peter Lombarde the Chiefe Founder of M.
Hardinges Diuinitie,
                     
                     4 Senten. diſt 17. Quid ergo. 
                     ſaithe thus: Sanè dici poteſt, quòd ſine Confeſsione Oris,
& ſolutione Poenae exterioris, Peccata delentur per Contritionem, & humilitatem Cordis:
Wee maie ſafely ſaye, that vvithout Confeſsion of the Mouthe, and Abſolution of
the out warde paine, Sinnes be foregeeuen by the Contrition, and humilitie of the Harte.
                  
                  
                     Briefely, Gratian hauinge thorowly debated the mater of bothe ſides, that is
to ſaie, bothe for Confeſſion, and againſte Confeſſion, in the ende concludeth thus,
as it is ſaide before:
                     De Poenit. diſt. 1. Quamuis. Cui harum ſententiarum potiùs adhaerendum ſit, Lectoris Iudicio
reſeruatur. Vtrá
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim ſententia fautores habet Sapientes, & Religioſos Viros:
Whether of theſe ſaieinges it is beſte to folowe, it is leafte to the Iudgemente of the Reader:
                     
For either Saieinge is mainteined, and fauoured, both by vviſe, and by Godly
Menne. And, whereas M. Hardinge ſaithe, Confeſſion of al Sinnes is Commaunded
by Chriſte, and his Apoſtles, his owne Gloſe vpon his owne Decrees openly
reproueth his erroure,
                     De Poenit. diſt. 5. In Poenitentia, In Gloſſ. 
                     and teacheth him the contrarie. The woordes be theſe:
Meliùs dicitur. Confeſsionem inſtitutam fuiſſe à quadam Vniuerſalis Eccleſiae Traditione,
potiùs quàm ex Noui, vel Veteris Teſtamenti Authoritate: It is better ſaide, that
Confeſsion was appointed by ſomme Tradition of the Vniuerſal Churche, then by
any Authoritie, or Comm
                           •
                        undemente of the Newe, or Olde Teſtamente.
                  
                  Nowe, good Chriſtian Reader, I beſeche thee, examine alitle the Truthe of M.
Hardinges tale. Firſte he ſaithe, The Recitinge, and Rehearſal of al Sinnes before
the Prieſte is Neceſſarie to Saluation:
                     1. Chryſoſtome anſweareth, Let God
Onely heare thy Confeſsion. There is one Vntruthe. M. Hardinge ſaithe, General
Confeſsion is not ſufficiente:
                     2. Peter Lombarde anſweareth, Sine Confeſſione
Oris, &c. VVithout any Confeſsion made by mouthe our Sinnes maie be
foregeeuen.
                      There are twoo Vntruthes.
                  M. Hardinge ſaith,3. Confeſſion of al Sinnes is commaunded by Chriſte, and
his Apoſtles: His owne Gloſe ſaithe, It is Onely a Tradition of the Churche,
commaunded neither in the Olde Teſtamente, nor in the Newe. There are thrée
Vntruthes.4. 5. M. Hardinge ſaithe, It was commended vnto vs by the * Doctours,
and Fathers of the * Primitiue Churche: Rhenanus ſaithe, Wée reade not, that
this kinde of Priuie Confeſſion in the Olde times vvas euer Commaunded:
And his owne Gloſe ſaithe, In the time of S. Ambroſe (whiche was foure hundred
yéeres after Chriſte) perhaps it was not vſed. There are Foure, & Fiue Vntruthes.
M.6. Harding ſaithe, It hathe euer ben allovved by al the Learned Doctours:
                      His
owne Gratian anſweareth him, The Contrarie hath benne mainteined, and fauoured
bothe bi VViſe, and by Godly Fathers. There are ſixe Vntruthes.
                  To be ſhorte, M. Hardinge ſaithe: It hathe benne Commended vnto vs by the
General vſe of the vvhole Churche:
                     7. Theodorus anſweareth him, The vvhole
Churche of Grecia vſeth it not. There are Seuen apparente, and greate Vntruthes,
diſcloſed by M. Hardinges owne Doctours. He coulde not haue compriſed
ſo mutche Vntruthe in ſo narrowe roome without ſomme ſtudie.
                  
                     Eraſmus a man of greate Iudgemente ſaithe thus,
                     Eraſm. in Schol. in Epitaphium Fabiolae. Apparet, tempore Hieronymi
nondum Inſtitutam fuiſſe Secrètam admiſſorum Confeſsionem: quam poſted
Eccleſia ſalubriter inſtituit: ſi modò rectè vtantur ea & Sacerdotes, & Laici. Verùm in
hoc labuntur Theologi quidam parùm attenti, quòd, quae Veteres ſcribunt de huruſmodi
Publica, & Generali Confeſsione, ea trahunt ad hanc Occultam, & longè diuerſi
generis: It appeareth, that in the time of S. Hierome (whiche was foure hundred yéeres
after Chriſte
                     ) Secrete Confeſsion of Sinnes vvas not yet ordeyned: Whiche
notwithſtandinge was afterwarde wholeſomely, and profitably appointed by the Churche, ſo
that it be wel vſed, as wel by the Prieſtes, as by the People. But herein certaine Diuines, not
conſideringe aduiſedly, what they ſaie, are mutche deceiued: for what ſo euer the Auncient Fathers
write of General, and Open Confeſsion, they wreaſte, and drawe the ſame to this
Priuie, and Secrete kinde, whiche is far of an other ſorte.
                  
                  Here, M. Hardinge, Eraſmus telleth you, yée are fowly deceiued: and ſheweth
you alſo the cauſe of your erroure: for that, as he ſaithe, ye conſider not aduiſedly,
what ye either reade, or write: but where ſo euer ye heare this worde Confeſsion,
ye imagine ſtreight waie, It muſte needes be your owne Auriculare Confeſsion,
and can be none other.
                  Laſte of al, ye graunte, The expreſſe Terme of Auriculare, or Secrete Confeſsion
is ſeldome mentioned in the Aunciente Fathers. Here, M Hardinge,
wanteth ſomme parte of your ſimplicitie. If ye would haue your Reader to beleeue

you,Authoritie, and Povver. ye ſhoulde haue alleged certaine of the Auncient Fathers. One at the leaſte,
if ye coulde haue founde ſo many, that had at any time vſed the expreſſe terme of
Auriculare, or Secrete Confeſsion. Otherwiſe it had benne the better, and plainer
waie, to haue Confeſſed expreſſely, that the ſame expreſſe terme is neuer vſed
in any one of al the Ancient Fathers. Howe be it, if Auriculare, or Secrete Confeſsion
had then benne vſed, it coulde neuer ſo longe haue lackte a name.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 3.
               Wee ſaie, that the Prieſte in deede is a Iudge in this caſe, but
yet hath no manner of Right to chalenge an Authoritie, or Power,
as ſaithe Ambroſe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhereas ye make preachinge of the Goſpel to be the Keies, howe cal ye the Prieſte Iudge in
this caſe? Preache ye neuer ſo mutche, the conſcience of man beinge ſo ſecrete a thinge as it is, howe can
ye iudge, who in wardly and throughly repenteth, and who repenteth not? And though one repente,
and be ſory, and haue remorſe of his former life, though he looke vnto the light of the Gospel as ye ſay,
and beleue in Chriſte, what then? howe can ye iudge of ſutche a Perſone?And doo ye knovv his harte by tootinge in his eare? Do ye knowe his harte by
lokinge in his face?
                  The Prieſte dewly vſinge the Keie of knowledge and diſcretion, doth the office of a Iudge, and
as he ſeethe cauſe, either Looſeth or Bindeth. As touchinge the Prieſtes Authoritie, or Power, which
to chalenge he hath no right,De Poenit. Diſt. 1. C. Verbū Dei. for ſo your Interpreter maketh you to ſpeake, and impute it to S. Ambroſe:
we denie, that S. Ambroſe ſaieth
                        Vntruthe. For the vvord
                              •
                           s be theſe. Nullius poteſtatis iura exercet. euen very ſo▪ But▪ as we maye gather of his woordes,
as he meaneth that a Prieſte exerciſeth not the right of any his owne proper power in remittinge
ſinnes: ſo in the very place by you alleaged, he ſaith the contrary to your Doctrine. For the Right of
looſinge and bindinge (ſaieth he) is graunted to Prieſtes onely, and therefore the Churche chalengeth
it rightly, whiche hath true Prieſtes. Lo he vſeth the woorde of chalenge. Againe in the ſame
place he auoucheth, that he whiche receiueth the Holy Ghoſte, (whom Prieſtes receiue, when they be
Conſecrated in the Sacrament of Order) receiue alſo power to Looſe and Binde Sinnes. For prouſe
thereof he alleageth the Scripture:Iohan. 20. Take ye the Holy Ghoſte, whole ſinnes ye remitte, they are remitted:
and whoſe ſinnes ye reteine, they are reteined. And if you, Defender, were accuſtomed to make your
humble Confeſsiō, and ſo to be aſſoiled, you ſhould heare ſome Ghoſtly Fathers ſaie to you, after certaine
other woordes, Auctoritate mihi commiſſa ego te Abſoluo, &c.
                  
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  In what ſenſe the Prieſte without hearinge Confeſſions maie be a Iudge, wée
haue ſufficiently ſaide before. Neither knowe I, what fanſie M. Hardinge can
haue in ſo often rehearſal of one thinge. With what woordes, or coloure of Commiſſion,
M. Hardinge can furniſhe out his Authoritie, it forceth not greately.
Verily without ſomme ſhew, or countenance, his credite would not holde. In deede,
Hugo, and Bernarde ſaie, The Iudgemente of God foloweth the Iudgemente of man.
And Pope Iulius ſaithe,Concil. Tom. 1. De Primatis Rom. Eccleſiae. 
                     Habet Sacroſancta Romana Eccleſia Poteſtatem, ſingulari
ſibi Priuilegio Conceſſam, Aperire, & Claudere ianuas Regni Coeleſtis, quibus voluerit:
The Holy Churche of Rome hath Power grounted vnto her by Singul
                              •
                           re Priuilege, to
Open, and to Shutte the gates of the Kingedome of Heauen, to vvhom ſhe liſteth. And
Cardinal Cuſanus ſaithe,Nicol Cuſanus. De Aut
                           •••••
                        a. Eccle & on. Supra & Contra Scripturam. 
                     Haee Ligandi, & 
                           •
                        oluendi Poteſtas, non minor eſt in Eccleſia,
quàm in Chriſto: This Power of Bindinge, and Looſing is no leſſe in the Churche.
then it is in Chriſte.
                     
                  
                  But it is no greate wiſedome to geue ouer mutche credite vnto them, that ſo
often haue deceiued vs. If theire Authoritie be ſo greate, as they make it, let them
ſhewe the woordes of theire Commiſſion.

                     The ſaieing of S. Ambroſe is cleare, and plaine: Verbum Dei dimittit Peccata.
Sacerdos eſt Iudex.De Poenit. diſ 1. Verbum Dei. Sacerdos quidē officium ſuum exhibet: Sed nullius poteſtatis iura
exercet. The Woorde of God foregeeueth Sinnes. The Prieſte is the Judge. The Prieſte
executeth his office: But he exerciſeth the right of no Povver. And to this ende
in an other place he allegeth the woordes of the Prophete Eſai, ſpoken in the perſon
of God, Ego ſum,Ambroſ. De Noë & Arca, Ca 13. Eſaiae 4. Augu. De Scalis Paradiſi. ego ſum, qui deleo iniquitates tuas: I am he, I am he, that put a waie
thine iniquities.
                  
                  
                     And to laie more weight to S. Ambroſes woordes, S. Auguſtine ſaithe in like
ſenſe, Officium Baptizandi Dominus conceſsit multis: Poteſtatem verò, & Authoritatem
in Baptiſmo remittendi peccata ſibi Soli reſeruauit: Our Lorde hath graunted the office of
Baptizinge vnto many: but the Power, and Authoritie in Baptiſme to foregeeue Sinnes, he
hath reſerued Onely to him ſelfe.Ambroſ. De poeviten. li. 2. Ca. 7 
                     So ſaithe S. Ambroſe, Noſtrum eſt onera remittere:
Illius eſt reſuſcitare: Illius eſt educere de Sepulchro: It is our parte, to remoue
the ſtone from the graue (by Preachinge, by Counſel, and by Exhortation)
But it is the Lordes woorke to raiſe vp the deade: It is the Lordes woorke, to bring him from
the pitte.Ambroſ. Lib. 9. Epiſt. 76 
                        Likewiſe againe he ſaithe,
                      Neque Legatus, neque nuntius, ſed ipſe Dominus
ſaluum fecit populum ſuum. Solus remanet: quia non poteſt hoc cuiquam
hominum cum Chriſto eſſe commune, vt peccata condonet. Solius hoc munus
eſt Chriſti, qui tulit peccata mundi. It is not the Embaſſadoure: It is not the Meſſenger,
but the Lorde him ſelfe, that hath ſaued his people. The Lorde remaineth
alone. For noman can be partener vvith God in foregeeuinge of Sinnes.
This is Chriſtes Onely office, that hath taken awaie the ſinnes of the World.
                  
                  And yet is not the Prieſtes office voide of Power. He hath Power, and Commiſſion
to open the Wil of God,2 Corin 5. Tertull. De Baptiſmo. Auguſtinus. and, as S. Paule ſaith, to ſpeake vnto the people,
euen as in the Perſon of Chriſte. So Tertullian ſaithe, Dandi Baptiſmi ius habet
Summus Sacerdos, id eſt, Epiſcopus: The Chiefe Prieſte, yt is to ſaie, the Biſhop, hath Right,
and Power to geeue Baptiſme.
                      But S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Miniſterium dedit ſeruis:
Poteſtatem ſibi retinuit: God gone the Miniſterie (of Remiſsion of Sinnes) vnto his
Seru
                              •
                           untes:
                     
                     Luk. 10. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     But the Povver thereof he reteined to him ſelfe. So, when
Chriſte ſent out his Diſciples to Preache the Goſpel, he gaue them Authoritie, &
Power.
                  If M. Hardinge wil ſaie, There is no Power, or Authoritie in the Reading.
or Publiſhinge of Goddes Woorde, his owne Doctour Hoſius wil telle him, that
when the Biſhop Ordereth a Reader, euen after the manner of the Churche of
Rome, he ſaithe vnto him,Hoſius in Confeſſione Petricouien. Cap. 52. 
                     Habe Poteſtatem legendi Epiſtolas in Eccleſia Sancta Dei,
tam pro viuis, quàm pro defunctis: Haue thou Power to Reade the Epiſtles in the Holy
Churche of God, as wel for the quicke, as for the Deade.
                     
                  
                  In deede this is a very ſpecial Power, ſutche as, I trowe, Chriſte and his Apoſtles
neuer taught vs. Neither woulde I haue noted it in this place, ſauing that
Hoſius, the profoundeſt Proctour of that ſide, thought it a mater woorthe the notinge.
Sutche power therefore belongeth to Prieſtes, and Miniſters in the
Churche of God. But the Power of Geuinge Remiſſion of Sinne belongeth to
God alone, and to none other.Hieronym. in Matthae. Cap. 16. If any man wil preſume further, S. Hierome
ſaithe, as it is alleged before, He hath put on the proude looke of the Phariſeis: And
ſaithe further, that ſutche Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes vnderſtande not the Woordes
of Chriſte. For, ſaithe he, It is not the Iudgemente or Abſolution of the Prieſte, but
the Life of the Penitente, that is regarded before God: And therefore S. Auguſtine ſaith,
Inde nata ſunt Schiſmata,
                     Auguſt. De Fide & Operibus. Cap. 14. 
                     cùm homines dicunt, Nos Sanctificamus immundos: Nos Iuſtificamus
impios: nos petimus: nos impetramus: Hereof grow Schiſmes, and Diuiſions in the
Churche, when menne ſaie, wee Sanctifie the vncleane: wee Juſtifie the wicked: wee deſire:
wee obteine.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Howe he it, here commeth in Richardus de Sancto Victore, God wate, with a
ful colde diſtinction. For thus he ſaithe, Chriſtus potuit Dimittere Peccara: Nos vero'
non poſſumus Dimittere Peccata, ſed tantùm Remittere.
                  
                     Peter Lombarde ſaithe mutche better:
                     Richa De Sācte Victore, De Poteſta. Ligan. & Soluen. Par. 1 Cap. 24. 
                     Chriſtus Sacerdotibus tribuit poteſtatem
Ligandi, & Soluendi, id eſt, oſtendendi hominibus Ligatos, vel Solutos: Chriſte hath geuen
Power vnto Prieſtes to Binde, and to Looſe: that is to ſaie, to declare vnto menne, whoe be
Bounde, whoe be Looſe.
                  
                     Sa ſaithe Bonauentura of the Prieſtes vnder the Lawe of Maſes:
                     4 Senten. diſt 18. Nec ideo. Bonauen. 4. Sen. diſt. 1. In Prooemio. 1 qu. 1. Dictū eſt. De Ioenit. diſt. 1. Verbum Dei. Mundare
dicebantur, quia mundatum oſtendebant: They were ſaide to cleanſe the Leproſie, bicouſe
they ſhewed, who was cleanſed. So ſaith S. Auguſtine,
                      Nec voluntas Sacerdotis
obeſſe vel prodeſſe poteſt, ſed Meritum Benedictionem Poſcentis: The vvil of the
Prieſte can neither further, nor hinder: But the Merite of him, that deſueth Abſolutiō.
                  
                  
                     Thus therfore S. Ambroſe meaneth, The Prieſte is a Iudge to diſcerne bitweene ſinne,
and ſinne, as wel Priuate, as Publique, But Right, Power, or Authoritie to foregeeue fianes,
he hath none.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 4.
               And therefore our Saueour Ieſus Chriſte, to reproue the Negligence
of the Scribes, and Phariſeis in teachinge, did with theſe
woordes rebuke them, ſaieing: Woe be vnto you Scribes, & Phariſeis,
whiche haue taken away the Keyes of knowledge, & haue ſhutte
vp the Kingedome of Heauen before menne. Seeinge then the Keie
whereby the way, and entrie to the Kingdome of God is opened vnto
vs, is the Woorde of the Goſpel, and the Expoundinge of the Lawe,
and Scriptures, wee ſaie plainely, where the ſame Woorde is not,
there is not the Keie.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  By this wee are induced to graunte,the knovvledge of the Scripture is a Keie. that the knowledge of the Scripture is a Keie, whereby the
gate to the Truthe is opened, the vſe whereof conſiſieth in expoundinge of the Lawe, and Prophetes,
as they ſhewe Chriſte. But wee ſay, this not to be the ſpecial Keies, whiche Chriſte gaue to the church,
but one Keie alone. And ſo Chriſte calleth it, where he rebuked the Scribes and Phariſeis. Though
you haue put it otherwiſe then the Goſpel hath, in the Plural number. And this Keie is common to the
Lawe, and to the Goſpel. But the Keies, whiche we ſpeake of, are another thinge. By the name of
theſe leies, We vnderſtande the whole ſpiritual Power, whiche Chriſte firſte promiſed to Peter, and afterwarde
gaue to the Apoſtles, and from them is transferred to al Biſhoppes and Prieſtes. By whiche
Power Prieſtes teache the Goſpel, Conſecrate the Body and Bloude of Chriſte, and Miniſter the Sacramentes,
through Auctoritie of the VVoorde Abſolue Penitētes, and excommunicate Publike and hainous
ſinners. The Keie that you confuſely ſpeake of, naminge it to be the VVoorde of the Goſpel, and Expoundinge
of the Lawe, and Scriptures, is one parte perteininge to this ſpiritual Power: it is not the
whole Power. And where this VVoorde is not, that is to ſaie, where the Scriptures be not taught, and
the Goſpel preached, there is not the Keie, ſaie ye: there is not the exerciſe of that Keie, ſaie we. Yet
ther is this ſpiritual Power, that is to witte, ther be the Keies. Ye we ſay that a ſimple PrieſteVntruth. The Keie of Knovveledge, vvithout knowledge. though
he haue no greate learninge, yet hath he the Keies, though he might do better, and more worthely vſe
them, hauinge learninge and knowledge.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  M. Hardinge mutche and often complaineth of the Confuſion of the Keies: that
wée appointe not diſtinctly eche Keie to his ſeueral office. Marke therefore, I beſeche
thée, Gentle Reader, hewe diſtinctly, and plainely M. Hardinge him ſelfe intreateth
of the ſame.
                  
                     
Firſte,confuſion of Keies. of the twoo Keies, that Chriſte hath deliuered vs in the Goſpel, he hathe
made a greate many of Keies: The Keie of knowledge: The keie of Order: The
Keie of Power: The Keie of Diſcretion: The Keie of Sacramentes: And for as
mutche, as Sacramentes by his Doctrine be Seuen in number, there muſte alſo be
of this ſorte Seuen other ſeueral Keies. And yet ouer and biſides al theſe Keies béeing
ſo many, the Pope hath alſo One Special Maiſter Keie. Afterward by a ſleight.
and by nimbleneſſe of his fingers, he conueigheth al this heape of Keies into twoo
Onely Keies: whereof the One he calleth the Keie of knowledge, and the other the
Keie of Power: Whiche twoo Keies notwithſtandinge in the ende are ſuddainely
conſumed both into One onely Keie. For where as the Keie of knowledge is loſt,
there, by M. Hardinges Iudgement, Power onely remaineth without knowledge:
And that Keie alone diſchargeth al offices, and is vtterly al in al.
                  This Keie of Power without knowledge, muſte néedes be y• Keie of Ignorance:
Or, as they them ſelues haue vſed to cal it, Clauis Errans, The Keie of Errour.
                      Or
whiche Keie vndoubtedly Chriſte ſaide ſommetime,Luk. 22. 4. Senten. Diſt. 19. Poſtquam. Alexand. De Hales, Par. 4. Qu. 79. 
                     Hoc eſt tempus veſtrum, & Poteſtas
Tenebrarum: This is your time, and the Power of Darkeneſſe.
                      Peter Lombarde him
ſelfe ſaithe, Many Prieſtes be Ignorante, and haue not the Keie of knowledge: Alexander
of Hales ſaithe, Scientia non eſt Clauis: Knowledge is no Keie at al.
                     
                  
                  Yet M. Hardinge anſweareth vs, that the ſimple ignorant Prieſte, that knoweth
nothinge, hath not onely One Keie, but both Keies (for ſo he calleth them in
the Plural number) that is to ſaie, as wel the Keie of knowledge, as the Keie of
Power. And thus haue they forged a Keie of knowledge without knowledge: and
with the ſame keie they expounde, and open the Scriptures: they Miniſter the Sacramentes:
they Binde: they Looſe: and breake vp a by way into the Kingedome of
Heauen. Yet muſte wée beleue, that they ſpeake ſimply, and plainely of theſe Keies,
and without confuſion.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 5.
               And ſeeinge one manner of Woorde is geuen to al, and one onely
Keie belongeth to al, wee ſay, there is but one onely Power of al Miniſters,
as concerning Openinge, and Shuttinge. And as touchinge
the Biſhop of Rome, for al that his Flatteringe Paraſites ſinge theſe
woordes in his eares, To thee wil I geue the Keies of the Kingedome
of Heauen, (as though theſe Keies were fitte for him alone, and
for no body els) excepte he goe ſo to woorke, as Mennes Conſciences
maie be made pliaunte, and be ſubdued to the Woorde of God, wee denie,
that he doth either Open, or Shutte, or hath the Keies at al.
               And although the taught, and inſtructed the People (as woulde
God he might once truely doo, and perſwade him ſelfe, it were at the
leaſte any peece of his dewtie) yet wee thinke his Keie to be neuer a
white better or of greater force, then other mennes. For who hath
ſeuered him from the reſte? Who hath taught him more conningely to
Open, or better to Abſolue then his bretherne?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Your grounde beinge falſe, what ye buylde thereon ſome faileth. The whole Power of the Keies
pardy (howe often times muſte we tell you one thinge?) ſtandeth not in preachinge onely, but in ſundry
other excellent miniſteries alſo, as wee haue proued. If the Biſhop of Rome preache not, he doth neis
the Open, nor shut by preachinge: wee graunte. Yet mens Conſciences beinge made plaint and

ſubdued by the VVoorde of God by others,Preache by a Deputie. that preache at his appointement, he maie by vertue of the
Keies either Open or Shut, Looſe or Binde, as by diſcretion he ſeeth cauſe. And whereas Chriſte ſaide
to Peter, and therefore to the Biſhop of Rome Peters Succeſſour, To thee wil I geue the Keies of the
Kingdome of Heauen:Matthae. 16. wil ye call them flatteringe Pariſites, that yelde to him that, whiche Chriſte
gaue to him? Sutche vomite ſheweth what humour your ſtomake is charged withal. Denyinge the B. of
Rome, whom for al the ſpite ye beare towarde him, ye muſt acknowledge to be a Biſhop, to haue the
Keies at al, onleſſe he preache in his own Perſonne, ye declare your greate ignorance, and fowle temeritie.
Know ye not, that a Power annexed to an Order, and Vocation is not taken away from one by not
exerciſinge the ſame in his owne Perſon?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The effecte hereof, beſides other ordinarie idle talke, ſtandeth in twoo pointes.
Firſte, M. Harding ſaithe, The Pope, though he doo nothing him ſelfe in his owne
Perſonne, yet he maye ſufficiently féede the Flocke of Chriſte, and Binde, & Looſe,
and diſcharge al dewties by his Deputies, and Vnderuicars, that is to ſaye, by his
Cardinalles, and Biſhoppes, whiche are as careful, and zelous for their offices, and
tender theire charge, as mutch, as he. This ground, I trow, is not falſe: and therefore,
what ſo euer M. Harding ſhal builde thereon, it can neuer faile. Notwithſtanding,
I doo not remember, that either Chriſte, or his Apoſtles euer vſed to doo y• like.
One ſaide ſommetime,Titus Liuius Decade. 3. Lib. 6. 
                     Impudens eſt Imperator, qui, cùm alienis oculis omnia ei agenda
ſint, poſtulat ſibi aliorum Capita, & Fortunas cōmitti: He is a ſhameleſſe Captaine, that,
whereas he muſt guide al thinges by the eies of others, wil require other mennes liues, ad goodes
to be committed to his handes.
                     
                  
                  
                     Pope Damaſus ſaithe,
                     Damaſus Papa Epiſtola 4. 
                     Illi Epiſcopi, qui talia ſibi praeſumunt, videntur mihi ſimiles
eſſe Meretricibus. quae ſtarim, vt pariunt, infantes ſuos al
                           •
                        s nutricibus tradunt educandos:
vt ſuam citiùs libidinem explere valeant. Sic & iſti Infantes ſuos, id eſt, populos ſibi Commiſſos,
alijs educan dos tradunt, vt ipſi ſuas libidines expleant, id eſt, vt pro ſuo libitu Saecularibus
curis inhient, &, quod cuique viſum fuerit, liberitis agant: Sutche Biſhoppes takinge
ſutche maters vpon them ſelues, ſeeme like vnto H
                        •
                     rſottes: Whiche as ſoone, as they be once
deliuered, ſtreight waie deliuer out theire Children vnto N
                        •
                     urces, that they maie the rather folow
their pleaſures. Euen ſo theſe Biſhoppes diliuer ouer theire children, that is to ſaie, the people
committed to theire Charges, to be reared, and brought vp by others▪ that they maie the better
accompliſhe theire pleaſures, that is to ſaie, that they maie geeue them ſelues ouer to worldly
cares, and doo what ſo euer ſhal like them beſte.
                  
                     Further ſaith M. Harding, Chriſt ſaid vnto Peter, To thee wil I geeue the Keies:
Feede my Sheepe: Confirme thy Brethren:
                      Ergo, the Pope is a Lorde Paramounte, and
hathe a Power Piercleſſe ouer al the world. Peter of Palus hereof writeth thus:
Chriſtus dixit Apoſtolis,Petrus De Palude, De Poteſtate collata Apoſtolis, Arti. 1. Quaecunque ligaueritis in terra, erunt ligata & in Coelo,
Non dixit, In Coelis, ſicut Petro dixerat: Sed in Coelo Vno. Vnde non ſunt tantae perfectionis,
ſicut Petrus: Chriſte ſaide vnto the Apoſtles, what ſo euer ye ſhal Binde in Earthe, it
ſhalbe bounde in Heauen. He ſaide not, It ſhalbe bounde in Heauens, as he ſaide to Peter:
But in One Heauen. Therefore the other Apoſtles were not of ſutche perfection, as
Peter was.
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Petr. de Palude. Illa verba, Quaecunque ligaueris, intelliguntur de Vtro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Foro,
& de Vtra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Poteſtate. Illa autem Verba, Quorumcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ligaueritis, intelliguntur anúm
de Foro Conſcientiae: Theſe woordes (ſpoken vnto Peter)
                      VVhat ſo euer thou
ſhalt Binde, are vnderſtoode of bothe Courtes, as wel of the Courte of Judgemente, as of
the Courte of Conſcience. But theſe other woordes (Spoken vnto the other Apoſtles
                     )
VVhat ſo euer you ſhal Binde, &c. are vnderſtoode onely of the Courte of Conſcience.
                  
                  
                     
                     This fantaſie,
                     Equal Povver. 
                     it ſéemeth, he learned out of theſe woordes of Origen: Non modica
differentia eſt,Orizen. in Mattha. Tractatu 6. quòd Petro quidem datae ſunt Claues, non Vnius Coeli, ſed multorum
Caelorum: vt quaecuque I gauerit ſuper tertam, ſint ligata, non tantùm Vno in Caelo,
ſed euam in omnibus Coelis. Ad alios dicit, vt ſoluant, & ligent, non in Coelis, ſicut
Petrus, ſed in Vno Caelo. quia nō ſunt in tanta perfectione, ſicut Petrus, vt ligēt, & ſoluāt
in omnibus Coelis. The difference is greate: For vnto Peter are geeuen the Keies, not of
one Heauen but of many Heauens: that, what ſo euer he bindeth in Earth, ſhalbe bound,
not onely in One Heauen, but alſo in al the heauens. But vnto the reſte he geeueth
Power to Binde, and Looſe, not in the Heauens, as Peter doo the, but in One Heauen:
for that they were not in ſutche perfection, as Peter was, to Binde, or Looſe in al the
Heauens.
                  This Multiplication of Heauens, as I haue ſaide, is but a fantaſie: and yet to
M. Hardinges pourpoſe it maketh nothing. For Origen by this woorde Peter,
meante not Peter the Apoſtle, but any other Godly Learned Prieſte, or Biſhop:
whom he expreſſeth here vnder the name of Peter. For it foloweth immediately,
Ergo, quantò melior fuerit, qui ſoluit, tantò beatior erit, qui ſoluitur: quoniam in omnibus
ſolutus eſt Coelis: Therefore the better man he is, that looſeth, the moore bleſſed is he,
that is Looſed:
                     
                     Origen in Matthae. Tracta. 1. 
                     for that he is Looſed in al the Heauens.
                      Againe he ſaithe, Quod ſi nos
idem loquimur, quod Petrus locutus eſt, efficimur Petrus. Et nobis dicetur, Tu es
Petrus. Petra enim eſt, quiſquis eſt Diſcipulus Chriſti: If wee ſpeake the ſame, that
Peter ſpake, wee are made Peter: And vnto vs it ſhalbe ſaide, Thou arte Peter. For he
is the Rocke, that is the Diſciple of Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     And againe he ſaithe,
                     In eodem Tractatu. Hoc dictum, Tibi dabo Claues Regni Coelorum, Coeteris
quoque commune eſt. Et, quae ſequuntur, velut ad Petrum dicta, ſunt omnium
Communia: This ſaieinge, To thee wil I geue the Keies of the Kingdome of Heauen, is
common to the reſte of the Apoſtles. And the woordes, that folow, as ſpoken vnto Peter,
are common vnto al.
                  
                     So ſaith S. Auguſtine,
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 50. Baſili. in Vtia Solitaria, Ca. 23. Petrus, quando accepit Claues, Eccleſiam Sanctā ſignificauit:
Peter, when he receiued the Keies, ſignified the Holy Churche. So ſaithe S. Baſile,
                     
Petre, inquit, amas me
                        •
                      Paſce Oues meas: Et conſequenter Omnibus Paſtoribus, & Doctoribus
eandem poteſtatem tribuit. Cuius ſignum eſt, quo'd omnes ex Aequo & ligant,
& Abſoluunt, quemadmodum ille: Chriſte ſaide vnto Peter, 
                           •
                        oueſt thou me?
Feede my Sheepe. And in like ſorte vnto Al Paſtours, and Doctours he gaue the ſame
Povver. A tokē wherof is this, that al others Binde, & Looſe Equally, as vvel as he.
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe S. Ambroſe,
                     Ambroſ. De Dign
                           •
                        ta. Sacerdotali, Cap. 2. Dominus dixit Petro, Paſce Oues meas. Quas Oues,
& quem Gregem non ſolùm tune Beatus Petrus ſuſcepit, ſed & nobiſcum eas ſuſcepit:
& cum illo cas nos ſuſcepimus omnes: Our Lorde ſaide vnto Peter, Feede my Sheepe.
Whiche Sheepe, and Flocke, not Onely Bleſſed Peter then receiued, but he receiued the
ſa ne togeather vvith vs: And al wee haue receiued the ſame togeather vvith him.
Likewiſe S. Cyprian,
                     Cyprian De Sim peicetrate Praetatorum. Beda in Homil. in 
                           •
                        uangel. Quē ine dicunt. 
                     Chriſtus eandem dedit Apoſtolis omnibus poteſtatem: Chriſte
gaue vnto al his Apoſtles like and Equal Power.
                  
                  
                     So likewiſe ſaithe Beda, Poteſtas Ligandi, & Soluēdi, quamuis Soli Petro à Domino
data videatur, tamen abſque vlla dubietate noſcendum eſt, quòd & Coeteris Apoſtolis
data eſt:
                      The Power of Bindinge, and Looſinge, notwithſtanding it ſeeme to be geeuen Onely
vnto peter, yet without al doubte wee muſte vnderſtande, that it was geeuen alſo to the reſte
of the Apoſtles.
                  Briefly, M. Hardinges owne Scholaſtical Doctours Confeſſe, that the Power
of the Apoſtles was One, and Equal. But they ſaye, that the whole multitude of
the Churche was committed onely vnto Peter: and not likewiſe to any other: and
that therein onely ſtandeth al the difference.Heruaeus De poteſtate Papae Cap. 12. 
                     Heruaeus ſaithe, Quamuis Apoſtoli
eandem habuerint à Chriſto, & aequalem poteſtatem Clauium, & Iuriſdictionis,

tamen Iuriſdictionem,
                     Equal Povver. 
                     ſiuè Materiam ſubiectam, non habuit, niſi Petrus, & cui eam Petrus
committere voluit: Notwithſtandinge the Apoſtles receiued of Chriſte equal Povver
of the Keies, and Iuriſdiction, yet the Iuriſdiction, or mater wherein to vſe their Power,
none had, but Onely Peter, and to whome ſo euer Peter woulde commit the ſame.
                      And
thus he imagineth, that al the Apoſtles, ſauinge Onely Peter, had Keies geuen
them, but no Houſe to Open: and Iuriſdiction, but no people to gouerne.
                  
                     Verily Alphonſus de Caſtro ſaithe,
                     Alphonſus Aduerſus Haereſ. Li. 2. De Abſolutione. Quando abſoluit Simplex Sacerdos, tantùm
abſoluit de Culpa, ſicut Papa: VVhen a Simple Prieſte Abſolueth, he abſolueth as
mutche, touchinge Sinne, as doothe the Pope.
                  But touchinge the Pope, howe greate ſo euer he fanſie his Keie to be aboue al
others, if he neuer vſe the ſame, & if he either knowe not, or vtter not the Woorde
of God, wee ſaie, as before, wel maie he ſhut vp the Kingedome of God before
menne:Origen. in Matthae Tracta. 1. but open it he cannot. Origen ſaithe, Qui funibus Peccatorum ſuorum
conſtringitur, fruſtrà vel Ligar, vel Soluit: He that is bounde with the bandes of his owne
Sinnes, Bindeth and Looſeth but in vaine.
                     
                  
                  
                     To conclude, S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. De Agone Chriſtiano Ca. 30. Auguſt. De Agone Chriſtiano Ca. 31. 
                     Cùm Petro dicitur, Omnibus dicitur, Amas
me? Paſce Oues meas: Theſe woordes of Chriſte, Loueſt thou mee? Feede my Sheepe:
when they are ſpoken vnto Peter, they are ſpoken vnto Al Prieſtes, or Miniſters. He addeth
further, traque miſeri, dum in Petro Petram non intelligunt, & nolunt credere,
datas Eccleſiae Claues Regni Coelorum, ipſi eas de manibus amiſerunt:
                      Therefore
wretched menne, while in Peter they vnderſtande not Chriſte that is) the Rocke, and while
they wil not beleeue, that the Keies of the Kingedome of Heauen are geuen (not vnto Peter
alone, but) vnto the Churche, they haue quite loſte the Keies out of their handes.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wee ſaie, that Matrimonie is Holy, and Honorable in al ſortes
and ſtates of Perſonnes: as in the Patriarches, in the Prophetes,
in the Apoſtles, in the Holy Martyrs, in the Miniſters of the
Churche, and in Biſhoppes: & that it is an honeſt and lawful thinge
(as Chryſoſtome ſaithe) for a man liuinge in Matrimonie, to take
vpon him therewith the Dignitie of a Biſhop.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Matrimonie is Holy and Honorable in al perſons,Hebre. 13. and an vndefiled bedde, as ſaithe S. Paule. Yet
is it not lauful for them to marieVntruthes, tvvo togeather, as better appeareth by the Anſvveare. whiche either haue by deliberate vowe dedicated al maner their
chaſtitie vnto God.Vntruthes, tvvo togeather, as better appearcth by the anſvveare. or haue receiued Holy Order. For the vowed be forbidden Mariage by expreſſe
VVoorde of God: Thoſe that haue taken Holy Orders, by Tradition of the Apoſtles, and Auncient
ordinaunce of the Churche.
                  Touchinge the firſte,Pſal. 75. the Scripture is plaine: becauſe a Vowe is to be performed, Vouete & reddite
Domino Deo veſtro: Vowe ye and paye (or render that ye vowe) to your Lorde God. Chriſte
alſo ſaithe in the Goſpel,Matth. 19. there be ſome Eunuches that haue made thē ſelues Eunuches for the Kingedome
of Heauens ſake. He that can take, let him take. Againe S. Paule ſpeakinge of younge VVidowes,
whiche haue vowed and promiſed Chaſtitie, ſaithe, that when they waxe wanton againſt Chriſte,
they wil marie,The Firſt Faith, S. Hierome expoundeth, The Faithe of Baptiſme. See the Anſvveare. hauinge danmation, becauſe they haue broken their firſte Faithe. VVhether theſe
Scriptures perteine hereto, and be thus to be vnderſtanded, we referre vs to the Primitiue Churche,
and to al the Holy Fathers.
                  Sutche Mariages, or rather ſlidinges and falles from the holier Chaſtitie, that is Vowed to God,
S. Auguſtine doubteth not but they be woorſe then aduoutries. S. Cyprian calleth this caſe plaine inceſte.
S. Baſile accompteth the mariages of vailed virgins to be voide, of no force, and Sacrilegious.
                  She that hath deſpouſed her ſelfe to our Lorde (ſaithe S. Baſile) is not free. For her huſbande
is not deade, that ſhee maye marie to whome ſhe liſte. And whiles her immortal huſbande liueth,

ſhee ſhal be called an Aduoutreſſe, whiche for luſtes of the Fleaſhe hath brought a mortal man into
our Lordes Chamber.
                  Touchinge the ſeconde,Clerkes bounde to continēcie. Lib. 1. C. 11. Paphoutius Li. 1. Ca. 23. the Apoſtles forbidde thoſe, that come ſingle to the Cleregie, to marie, excepte
ſuche as remaine in the inferiour Orders, and procede not to the greater, as we finde in their
Canons: Can 25. Paphnutius, as Socrates, and Sozomenus recorde in their Eccleſiaſtical ſtorie, ſaide
at the Nicene Councel, that it was an Olde Tradition of the Churche, that ſuche as come to the Degree
or Order of Prieſthood ſingle, ſhould not marie wiues. And this is that Holy Biſhop Paphnutius,
whome theſe Euangelicall Vowebreakers pretende to be their proctour for theire vnlauful Mariages.
                  Reade who liſte the Epiſtle of Siricius ad Himerium Tarraconenſem, Cap. 7.This Pope Siricius ſhamefully abeſeth the vvoordes of S. Paule and condemneth al Marriage. the ſeconde
Epiſtle of Innocentius to Victricius Biſhop of Roen, Cap. 9. and his thirde Epiſitle to Exuperius B. of
Tolouſe, Cap. 1. And weighi
                        •
                     ge wel theſe places, he ſhal perceiue, that theſe Holy Popes forbad the
Miniſters of the Churche the vſe of VVedlocke by the ſame Reaſon, by whiche the Prieſtes of Moſes
Lawe were forebidden to come within their owne houſes in the time, when their courſe came to
ſerue in the Holy Miniſteries.1. Corin. 7. By the ſame reaſon alſo by whiche S. Paule requireth maried folke for
a time to forbeare the vſe of their wiues, that they might attende Prayinge.
                  The place of Chryſoſtome,Anſvvere to Chryſoſtomes place. In. 1. Cap. ad Timo. Homil. 2. alleaged by this Defender, wel conſidered, diſproueth no parte of the
Catholike Doctrine in this behalfe, but condemneth bothe the Doctrine, and common Practiſe of his
companions theſe newe fleaſhly Goſpellers. His woordes be theſe vpon the ſaieinge of S. Paule, that
a Biſhop ought to be without crime, the Huſbande of one wife. The Apoſtle (ſaithe he) ſtoppeth the
mouthes of Heretikes, whiche condemne mariage, ſhe winge, that it is not an vncleane thinge, but
ſo reuerend that with the ſame a man maye Aſcende to the Holy throne or ſeate (he meaneth the ſtate
of a Biſhop) and herewith he Chaſtiſeth and reſtraineth the Vnchaſte perſons, not permittinge them,
who haue twiſe maried, to attaine ſuche a roume.Tvviſe married maye not be Biſhopes, and vvhy. For whereas he kepeth no beneuolence towarde
his wifeVntruthe. For M. Hardinge fovvly miſtaketh S. Chryſoſtomes meaninge. deceaſed, how can he be a good gouernour? yea what greeuous accuſations ſhal not he
be ſubiecte vnto daielie? For ye al knowe righte wel, that albeit by the lawes the ſeconde Mariages
be permitted, yet that mater lieth open to many accuſations. And therefore he would a Biſhop
to geue no occaſion (of euil) to thoſe that be vnder him. He putteth begamie,Vntruthe: ſtandigne in falſe expoſition. that is to witte, maryinge
an other after the firſte or a VVidowe, to be lauful rather then commendable.
                  So we ſee the impure Bigamie of our Holy Goſpellers condemned bothe by Chryſoſtome, and S.
Paule, of whome many beinge Prieſtes, and (as they ſaye) Biſhops, at leaſt preſuminge to occupie that
Holy ſeate, for cuſtodie of their Chaſtitie, after their former olde yoke fellowes deceaſe, ſolace them
ſelues with newe Strompetes.Strōpetes. By a better name I would cal them, If I wiſhe I ſhoulde not offende.
For what woman ſo euer coupleth her ſelfe in ſuche damnable yokinge, how can ſhe appeare either
to be honeſt, or to haue care of her ſoule Healthe? As for the ſimple that be deceiued by the importunitie
and crafte of thoſe lurdens, as they are not to be borne withal, ſo yet I thinke them to be pitied.
                  But if this Defender Preſſe vs with Chryſoſtome, we anſweare, that though Chryſoſtome graunte,
that a maried man maie aſcende to the holy ſeate, yet he ſaithe not, that a man maye deſcende from
that Holy ſeate to the Bride Bedde.After holy orders receiued, mariage neuer coumpted lavvful amonge Catholikes. Prieſt
                           •
                         maried in Englande in the time of Anſelmus. For wee denie vtterly, that any man after that he hath receiued
holy Orders, maie marie.Vntruthe: For it vvas vndoubtedly coumpted lavvful. Neither can it be ſhewed, that the mariage of ſuche was euer
accompted lawful in the Catholike Churche. In deede we knowe that in Germanie and in Englande
and certaine other Prouinces at diſſolute times, when the Diſcipline of the Churche was ſhaken of,
Prieſtes haue benne maried, as we reade of the time in whiche Anſelinus was Biſhop of Cantorbury.
But that diſorder was alwaies byThat is by allovvinge of Concubines. due correction of Biſhoppes puniſhed, and readreſſed.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, I graunte, M. Hardinge is like to finde ſome good aduantage, as hauinge
vndoubtedly a greate number of the Holy Fathers of his ſide. For Single
life in the eies of Politique wiſe menne, for many cauſes ſeemeth woorthie of fauoure.
But, good Chriſtian Reader, that thou maiſte be the better hable to ſee,
and iudge, how vprightly, & indifferently the Fathers haue dealte herein, either

in the auancinge of Virginitie,Marriage Condemned. or els in the diſgracinge of Lawful Matrimonie, it
maie pleaſe thée to conſider the fourme, and manner of their ſaieinges.
                  
                     In déede Origen ſaithe,
                     Origen. in Epiſt. ad Roman. Cap. 12. Lib. 9. Hierony. in Malachi. Ca. 2. Vos autem receſsiſtis. Poteſt aliquis de Caſtitate plus ſapere, quàm oporteat ſapere:
A man maie thinke more of Chaſtitie, then is conuenient. Likewiſe ſaithe S.
Hierome,
                      Declinare ad Dextram, eſt abſtinere à Cibis, quos Deus creauit, & Condemnare
Matrimonium: & incurrere in illud, quod dictum eſt, Noli iuſtus eſſe nimiùm:
To turne to the righte hande, is to abſteine from meates, whiche God hath made, and
to condemne Matrimonie: and to falſe into the daunger of the Woordes written by the
Wiſeman, Neuer be ouer iuſte.
                  
                  
                     Firſte therefore Tertullian in the diſproufe of Matrimonie ſaithe thus:
                     Eccle. 7. Tertull. In exhorta. ad Caſtitatem. Eodem loco. Ecquid tibi videtur Stupri affine eſſe Matrimonium? Quoniā in illo deprehendo, quae
ſtupro competunt: Doeſt not thou thinke, that Matrimonie is like vnto Fornication?
Certainely I finde the ſame thiinges in the One, that I finde in the Other. Farther
he ſaithe:
                      Ergo, inquies, iam & Primas, id eſt, vnas Nuptias deſtruis. Nec immeritò:
Quoniam & ipſae ex eo conſtant, quod eſt ſtuprum: Then, thou wilte ſaie, thou
condemneſt alſo the firſte Marriage. Yea verily, and not without cauſe: For bothe Matrimonie,
and Fornication conſiſte bothe of one thinge. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
Haec ipſa Coniunctio Maritalis malum eſt ante Deum,Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homi. 1. Non dico, Peccatum, ſed
malum: The very Copulation of Matrimonie is an euil thinge before God. I ſaie
not, It is Sinne: but I ſaie, It is an euil thinge. And yet immediately after he ſaithe,
Si in Maritis, & Adulteris vna eſt libido, quomodò poteſt fieri, vt vna, eadem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      res pro
dimidia parte ſit Iuſtitia, pro dimidia autem ſit Peccatum? Aut enim tota eſt Iuſtitia, aut
rota eſt Peccatum: Quia res Vna eſt: If the Married man, and the Aduouterer haue
one kinde of pleaſme, how can it be, that one and the ſelfe ſame thinge, for the one halfe
ſhoulde be Righteouſneſſe, and for the other halfe ſhoulde be Sinne? Either it is al Sinne,
or al Righteouſneſſe: For the thinge it ſelfe is One.
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. aduer. Iouinian, Lib. 1. Ibidem. Si bonum eſt, mulierem non tangere, malum eſt ergo tangere.
Nihil enim Bono contrarium eſt, niſi Malum: If it be good for a man not to touche
his wife, then is it euil to touche his vvife. For there is nothinge contrarie to Good, but
Euil. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Quàm diu impleo Mariti officium, non impleo Chriſtiani:
As longe, as I doo the duetie of a Huſbande, I doo not the duetie of a Chriſtian
man. Againe, Non negamus Viduas, non negamus Maritatas Sanctas Mulieres inueniri.
Sed quae Vxores eſſe deſierint:Hieronym. Contra Heluidium. quae in ipſa neceſsitate Coniugij Virginum
imitentur caſtitatem: Wee denie not, but Widowes, and married wemen maie be Holy.
But ſutche as haue leafte, and foreſaken vviues dueties, and in the very neceſsitie of Matrimonie
doo countrefeite the Chaſtitie, that is in Maidens.
                  
                  The like accoumpte wée maie make of ſundrie others: Theſe fewe maye ſuffice
for this preſente.
                  Nowe, thouchinge the marriage of Widowers, and Widowes, a greate many
of the Ancient Fathers ſéeme expreſſely, and vtterly to condemne it.
                  
                     Athenagoras ſaithe,
                     Athenagoras in Apologia pro Chriſtianis. Hieronym. ad Ceron
                           •
                        iam. Hieronym. contra Iouinian. Lib. 1. In eod. Libr
                           •
                        . Secundae Nuptiae decorum quoddam ſunt Adulterium:
The Seconde Marriage (of Widowers, or Widowes
                     ) is a faire kinde of Aduouterie.
And S. Hierome calleth Widowes ſo married, Harlottes, and Naughty VVeemen,
Malas, & Proſtitutas: And ſaithe, Digamia non naſcitur in terra bona: Seconde
Marriage groweth not in good ſoile. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Tolerabilius eſt, vni
proſtitutam eſſe, quàm multis: More tolerable it is, to be Concubine vnto one,
then vnto many. Againe, Vbi numerus maritorum eſt, ibi vir, qui propriè vnus
eſt, eſſe deſijt: Where as there is a number of Huſbandes, there the huſbande, that in
proper ſpeache is but one, is no Huſbande. Likewiſe againe, Non damno Digamos.
Etiam Scortatorem recipio Poenitentem. Quicquid aequaliter licet, aequa
lance penſandum eſt: I condemne not Widowers, or Widowes, that haue married againe.

No,
                     Seconde Marriage. 
                     I refuſe not the Fornicatoure vpon his repentance.
                     Biſhops and Prieſtes married. VVhat ſo euer is equally
lavvful, muſte be vveighed in One ballance.
                  Nazianzenus ſaithe,Nazian. In dictum Euang. Cū perfeciſſet Ieſus. Origen. in Lucam. Homil. 19. Hieronym. De Scriptor. Eccle. Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 11. Hilarius. Nicephor. Li. 11. Cap. 19. Ruffinus, Lib. 2. Cap. 9. Nazianzen. In Laudem Patris: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Proſper. Euſeb. li. 6. ca. 42. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Euſeb. li. 5. ca. 25. Nouell. Conſtitu. 3. § finali: E Graeco. Ignat. ad Philadelphien. Clemens Stromat. 3 Euſeb. li 3. ca 30 Origen in Epiſt. ad Roman. Ca. 1. Lib. 1. Ambroſ. in 2. Corin. 11. Clemens Stroma. Lib. 7. Hieronym. Aduer. Iouinian. Lib. 1. Diſtin. 37. Legaxt. Diſt. 56. Oſius. Hic ſermo videtur mihi reijcere Secundas nuptias, Si enim
Duo ſunt Chriſti, Duo itē ſunt mariti, & Duae vxotes: This ſaieinge ſeemeth to condemne
Seconde Marriage. For if there be Twoo Chriſtes, then one there Twoo Huſbandes,
and Twoo Wiues. Origen ſaithe,
                      Nunc & Secundae, & Tertiae, & Quartae
nuptiae repetuntur: & non ignoramus, quòd tale coniugium eijciet nos de Regno
Dei: Nowe the Seconde, and Thirde, and Fourthe Marriage is receiued. And wee knowe,
that ſutche Marriage ſhal caſte vs out of the kingedome of God.
                  By theſe fewe examples wée maie ſée, It was harde for theſe Holy Learned
Fathers, in ſo large Amplifications of Praiſinge, or Diſpraiſinge, to holde meaſure.
Yet al thoſe vehemente woordes, and Amplifications notwithſtandinge,
partely the ſame, partely other the like Holy, and Learned Fathers, bothe vſed
Marriage them ſelues in theire owne Perſonnes, and alſo otherwiſe wrote, and
ſpake thereof with greate reuerence.
                  
                     Tertullian, as S. Hierome witneſſeth, was a Married Prieſte. Spiridion
the Biſhop of Cyprus, ſometime famouſe in the Councel of Nice, was married,
and had Children. So was S. Hilarie the Biſhop of Poit
                        •
                     rs, as appeareth
by his Epiſtle to his Daughter Abra.
                  
                  So was Gregorie S. Baſiles brother the Biſhop of Nyſſa. So was Gregorie
the Biſhop of Nazianzum, Father vnto Gregorie Nazianzene, as appeareth
by Ruffinus. Yet was he neuertheleſſe a Faithful Seruante, and a Stewarde of
the Myſteries of God: A man of Spiritual deſires: The God of Pharao: the Piller,
and Buttreſſe of the Churche: and the ſtarre of the worlde. For in ſutche wiſe
his owne Sonne Gregorie Nazianzene reporteth of him. Sutche a one was he,
his Wife, and Familie notwithſtandinge. So was Proſper of Aquitania the
Biſhop of Rhegium, as it appeareth by his Epigramme written vnto his wife:
Mearum Comes irremota rerum.
                  
                  So was the Holy Father Cheremon the Biſhop of Nilus: Who, as Euſebius
writeth, was ſente into banniſhment with his Wife. So Polycrates beinge
likewiſe a Biſhop, ſometime ſaide, that ſeuen of his Fathers, or Anceſters had
benne Biſhoppes. The Greeke woorde is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ruffinus tranſlateth it, Patres.
Iuſtinianus the Emperour séemeth the more to eſtéeme Epiphanius the
Biſhop of Conſtantinople, for that his Father, and other his Anceſters had benne
Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes.
                  Ignatius S. Iohn the Euangeliſtes Scholar ſaithe, Peter, and other the Apoſtles
of Chriſte were married menne. So writeth Clemens Alexandrinus:
So writeth Euſebius. Origen ſaithe, That S. Paule, and his VVife were called
to the Faithe, bothe at one time. S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Omnes Apoſtoli, excepto
Iohanne, & Paulo, vxores habuerunt: Al the Apoſtles had wiues, onely Iohn, and Paule
excepted. Clemens Alexandrinus ſaithe, Perfecti Chriſtiani Edunt, Bibunt, contrahunt
Matrimonium: They that be perfite Chriſtian menne, doo Eate, and Drinke,
and contracte Matrimonie. S. Hierome writinge againſte Iouinian, ſaithe thus,
                     
Quaſi non hodiè quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      plurimi Sacerdotes habeant Matrimonia: As though nowe a
daies verie many Prieſtes were not Married. And therefore he ſaithe, as he is alleged
by Gratian,
                      Legant Epiſcopi, & Preſbyteri, qui Filios ſuos ſaecularibus literis
erudiunt: Let Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes reade theſe thinges, that bringe vp their
Children in worldly learninge, (and not in the Scriptures of God.
                     )
                  
                     Pope Damaſus ſheweth vs, that a greate number of Biſhoppes of Rome
were Prieſtes Sonnes: As Pope Syluerius: Pope Deusdedit: Pope Adrianus.
2: Pope Iohn. 15: Pope Felix. 3: Pope Hoſius: Pope Agapetus: Pope Gelaſius:

                     Pope Bonifacius:Biſhops Married. 
                     Pope Iohn 10: Pope Theodorus. And concludeth thus,
Complures etiam alij inueniuntur, qui de Sacerdotibus nati Apoſtolicae Sedi
Praefuerunt: Many others biſide there are founde, that beinge Prieſtes Sonnes
ruled the Apoſtolique See of Rome.Aeneas Syluius De geſtis Concil. Baſihen. Lib. 2. 
                     Pope Pius ſaithe, A married man, hauinge
his vvife aliue maie be choſen Pope. His woordes be theſe: Cur enim diſputant
Doctòres, an Electus in Papam vxori ſuae debitū ſoluere teneatur, &c. For
wherefore doo the Canoniſtes moue this doubte, VVhether a man being choſen Pope
be bounde to yelde marriage duetie to his vvife, onleſſe a married man maie be choſen
to that roume?Polydorus in Hiſtoria Anglor. Lib. 6. Anno. Dom. 970. Polydorus De Inuentoribus rer. Lib. 5. An. Dom. 1100. Fabian, Pag. 293. Polydorus Vergilius ſaithe, that the reſtrainte of Prieſtes
Marriage was firſte attempted in Englande aboute the yéere of Our Lorde
Neenehundred three ſcore and tenne: and that the ſame was afterwarde concluded
in the Weaſte Churche aboute the yeere of Our Lorde a thouſande and a
hundred, and neuer before.
                  
                  
                     Fabian ſaithe, that Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes liued a thouſande yeeres togeather
vvith theire VViues, no lavve beinge to the contrarie.
                  Theſe twoo Principles beinge thus laide, the one of immoderate, and extraordinarie
ſpéeches of the Holy Fathers, the other of the continual, and Ordinarie
Practiſe of the Churche, wee maie nowe be the better hable to conſider the Subſtance
of M. Hardinges reaſons.
                  Firſte of al, his Obiection of Vowes nothinge toucheth the Cleregie of Englande.
For it is knowen, and Confeſſed, that the Prieſtes of Englande were
neuer Votaries.
                  Yet for further anſweare, wée graunte, it is reaſon, and conuenient, that who
ſo hath made a Vowe vnto God, ſhoulde keepe his promiſe. Cyrillus ſaithe,
Si Caſtitatem Promiſerit,
                     Cyrill. in Leuiticum Lib. 3. 
                     & ſeruare non poterit, pronuntier Peccatum ſuum: If he
haue promiſed, or Vowed Chaſtitie, and cannot keepe it, let him pronounce, and confeſſe
                     
his Sinne.
                  
                     How be it, touchinge Virginitie, or Chaſtitie, wée ſaie, It ſtandeth not in our
Choiſe,
                     Matthae. 19. Iuſtinus Apologia. 2. 
                     or Vowe, but in the ſingulare gifte of God. Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe, Al
menne take not this Woorde: but they, vnto whome it is geeuen.
                      Iuſtinus Martyr ſaithe,
Multi caſtrauerunt ſe propter Regnum Coelorum. Verùm hoc non cuius datum eſt:
Many haue ghelded themſelues for the Kingedome of Heauen. But this thinge is not geeuen
to al menne.32. q. 1. Integritas. Hieronym. in. Matthae. Ca. 19. 
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Sola Virginitas eſt, quae ſuaderi poteſt:
imperari non poteſt: Onely Virginitie is a thinge, that maie be Counſelled: but
commaunded it maie not be. So S. Hierome, Vnde infert Dominus, Qui poteſt
capere, capiat: vt vnuſquiſque conſideret vires ſuas: vtrùm poſsit Virginalia, &
pudicitiae praecepta implere. Perſe enim Caſtitas blande eſt, & quemlibea ad ſe alliciens.
Setd conſiderandae ſunt vires: vt, qui poteſt capere, capiat. Our Lorde addeth, He
that can take, let him take: That euery man maie conſider his owne ſtrengthe, whether he
be hable to accompliſhe the Lawes of Ʋirginitie, and Chaſtitie. For Chaſtitie of it ſelfe is
faire, and pleaſante, and hable to alluere any man vnto it ſelfe. But vvee muſte vveighe
our habilitie: That he maie take it, that can take it.
                  
                     Hereof the Anciente Father Origen began to complaine ſo longe agoe in his
time:
                     Origen. in Matthae. Tracta. 24. Non ſolùm, quae docent, non faciunt, ſed etiam crudeliter, & ſine miſericordia
iniungunt alijs maiora virtute ipſorum, non habentes rationem Virium vniuſcuiuſque:
vt, qui prohibent nubere, & ab eo, quod expedit, ad immoderatam
munditiem compellunt: Not onely they doo not, that they teache, but alſo
crueily, and without mercie they commaunde others, to doo, that they be not hable, not
conſideringe, or weighinge eche mannes ſtrengthe. Sutche be they, that forbidde menne to
marrie: and from that thinge, that is lavvful, driue, and force menne to an immoderate
kinde of Cleaneneſſe.

                     S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Gifte of Chaſtitie. Si quis conſideret Virginem ſuam,Hieronym. Aduerſus Iouinian. Lib. 1. id eſt, Carnem ſuam,vovves laſciuire,
& ebullire in libidinem, nec refraenare ſe poteſt, duplex illi incumbit neceſſitas,
aut capiendae coniugis, aut ruendi: If any man conſider that his owne Virgine,
that is to ſaie, his owne Fleaſhe, groweth prowde, and boileth vnto luſte, and cannot ſtaie
it, there is laide vpon him a double neceſsitie, either to take a vvife, or to falle.
                  
                     In this caſe S. Cyril ſaithe,
                     Cyrill. in Leuiticum, Lib 16. Oportet compati, & commetiri doctrinam pro virium
qualitate: & huiuſmodi, qui non poſſunt capere Sermonem de Caſtitate,
concedere nuptias: VVee muſte haue conſideration of menne, and meaſure our doctrine accordinge
to euery mannes habilitie: and vnto ſutche menne, as cannot take the vvoorde
of Chaſtitie, vvee ought to graunte Marriage.
                  If M. Hardinge wil Replie▪ that this Counſel maie take place in al others, but
not in them, that haue Vowed, or Promiſed the contrarie, lette him vnderſtande
his owne rule,22. Quae. 4. In malis. written in the Popes owne Decrees: In malis promiſsis reſcinde fidem:
In turpi Voto muta decretum. Quod incautè vouiſti, ne facias. Impia eſt
Promiſsio, quae ſc
                           •
                        lere impletur: In an euil promiſe breake thy Faithe: In an vnhoneſt
Vovve change thy pourpoſe. That thou haſte vnaduiſedly vowed, ſee thou doo
it not. It is an euil promiſſe, that is keapte with wickedneſſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Cyprian hauinge occaſion to write of certaine Maides,
                     Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epiſt. 11. 
                     that had vowed Virginitie,
and liued in diſorder, ſaithe thus: Quòd ſi perſeuerare nolunt, vel non
poſſunt, melius eſt, vt nubant, quàm vt in ignem delicijs ſuis cadant. Certè nullum
Fratribus, aut Sororibus ſcūdalum faciant: If they either cannot, or vvil not contrinevve,
better it is for them to marrie, then to falle into the fire (of Helle) with their
pleaſures. At the leaſt, let them breede no ſclaunder to their Brothers, or Siſters.
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Bono Coniugali, Diſt. 27. Quidam. Quidam nubentes poſt votum, aſſerunt Adulteros eſſe. Ego
autem dico vobis, quod grauiter peccant, qui tales diuidunt: Some menne there be,
that ſaie, They be Aduouterers, that marrie after that they haue made a Vowe. But I telle
you, that they Sinne greuouſly, that put ſutche aſunder.
                  
                     Epiphanius likewiſe ſaithe,
                     Epiphan. contra Apoſtolic. Lib 2. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Melius eſt, Vnum habere Peccatum, quàm multa.
Melius eſt cadentem à ſtadio apertè ſibi vxorem aſciſcere ſecundum Leges, &c.
Et à Virginitate longo tempore agere Poenitentiam, &c. Et non quotidiè occultis iaculis
vuluerari: Better it is, to haue one Sinne, then many Sinnes. Better it is, for a man fallinge
from his courſe, openly to take vnto him a vvife accordinge to the Lavve,
&c. And a longe time to repente him ſelfe of the breache of his Virginitie, &c. And not to be
wounded with priuie dortes euerie daie.
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. ad Virginem Demetriadem. Sanctum Virginum Propofitum, & Coeleſtis, Angelorum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
familiae Gloriam quarundam non bene ſe agentium nomen infamat. Quibus apertè dicendum
eſt, vt aut nubant, ſi ſe non poſſunt continere: aut contineant, ſi nolunt
nubere: The name of certaine Ʋirgins not wel behauinge them ſelues, defameth, and ſhameth
the Holy pourpoſe of Virgins, and the Glorie of the Heauenly, and Angelical P
                           •
                        n
                           •
                        lie.
Whome wee muſte plainely charge, that either they Marrie, if they cannot Conteine:
or that they Conteine, if they wil not Marrie.
                  
                  
                     To like purpoſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe:
                     Auguſt. De Sancta Virginitate, Cap. 34. Multas earum reuocat à nubendo, non amor
praeclati propoſiti, ſed aperti dedecotis timor, veniens & ipſe à Superbia: qua formidatur,
hominibus magis diſplicere, quàm Deo. Nubere nolunt: & ideò non
nubunt, quia impunè non poſſunt: quae meliùs nuberent, quàm vrerentur,
id eſt, quàm occulta flamma concupiſcentiae in ipſa conſcientia vaſtarentur: quas poenitet
Profeſsionis, & piget Confeſsionis: Many of them are keapte from Marriage, not for
loue of their goodly pourpoſe of Virginitie, but for feare of open ſhame, which ſhame alſo proceedeth
of Pride: for that they are more afraide to diſpleaſe Man▪ then God. They
vvil not marrie: and therefore they marrie not, bicauſe they cannot vvithout
rebuke, Yet better vvere it for them to marrie, then to burne, that is to ſaie, then
with the flame of their Concupiſcence in their owne Conſcience to be waſted. They are ſoary

of their Profeſſion: And yet it greeueth them to Confeſſe. &c.
                     Vovves.
                  
                  It is not ſufficient to ſaie,Marke 6. I haue Vowed. Herode Vowed Iohn Baptiſtes
heade:Actor. 23. The Ievves Vowed S. Paules death: Hubaldus, as it is noted by Gratian
in the Decrees,22. Quae. 4. Inter coetera. made a Vowe, that he would neuer healpe his owne Mother, or
Brethren, were their néede neuer ſo greate.
                  Alphonſus de Caſtro,Alphonſus Philippica. 19. 
                     one of M. Hardinges greateſt Doctours, ſaithe thus:
Si quis Vouerit, & continere non poſsit, & omnia expertus, nihil promouerit,
ego illi author eſſem, non vt proprio Conſilio, ſed vt authoritate Pontificis ſaluti ſuae
conſulat per Matrimonium: If any man haue Vowed, and Cannot conteine, and
hauinge aſſaied al meanes, yet be neuer the neare, I would aduiſe him, that he ſhould
prouide for the ſafetie of his Soule by Marriage: And yet not of his owne Counſel, but
by licence, and authoritie of the Pope.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe Thomas of Aquine ſaithe,
                     Thomas 22. q. 88 Arti. 10. Poteſt contingere, quòd in aliquo caſu ſit,
vel ſimpliciter malum, vel inutile, vel Maioris boni impeditiuum. Et ideo neceſſe eſt, quòd
determinetur, in tali caſu, Votum non eſſe ſeruandum: It maie happen, that in ſomme
caſe a Ʋowe maie be, either vtterly il, or vnprofitable, or an hinderance vnto ſomme other
good thinge of more weight. And therefore it muſte of neceſsitie be determined, that in
ſutche a caſe a Vovve ought not to be keapte. Therefore it was thus decreed
in the Councel of Toledo:
                     Concil. Toletan. 8. Can. 2. Non eſt ſeruandum Sacramentum, quod malè, & incautè
promittitur: A Vowe il, and vnaduiſedly promiſed, ought not to be keapte.
                  Heere, M. Hardinge, ye crie out in your inordinate heate, Fleaſhely Goſpellers:
Euangelical Vowebreakers: Impure Bigamie: Filthy railinge rabble: Lordaines:
Strumpettes: & I wote not, what: as if this were the onely waie, to winne
the Victorie. Vnto this kinde of eloquence I wil make you none other anſweare,
then that Demetrius ſometime made vnto Lyſimachus: Scortum apud nos modeſtiùs
viuit, quàm apud vos Penelope: One of theſe, whome it liketh you, to calle
Strumpettes, liueth more ſoberly emongeſt vs, then dooth emongeſt you your Chaſte Penelope.
                  
                  It appeareth by S. Auguſtine, M. Hardinge, that your errour is Ancient, and
beganne longe agoe. For he ſaithe, that euen then in his time there were ſomme,
y• maineteined the ſame. But he anſweared them then, as wée doo you nowe, They
ſpake fondly, and vnaduiſedly: and vnderſtoode not, what they ſaide. His woordes
be theſe,Auguſt. De Bono Viduitatis, Cap. 10. 
                     Qui dicunt, talium Nuptias non eſse Nuptias, ſed potiùs Adulteria, mihi
non videntur ſatis acutè, ac diligenter conſiderare, quid dicant: They that ſaie, The
Marriage of ſutche menne, or vvemen, (as haue Vowed Chaſtitie) is no Marriage,
but rather Aduouterie, ſeeme vnto me not to cōſider diſcretely, and wiſely, what they
ſaie.
                      And againe, Fit per hanc minùs conſideratam opinionem,
                     In eod. Capite. 
                     vt cùm volunt eas
ſeparatas reddere Continentiae, faciant Maritos earum Adulteros Veros, cùm ſuis Vxoribus
viuis, alteras duxerint: It commeth to paſſe by this Vnaduiſed Opinion, that whereas
they wil remooue theſe weemen, that ſo haue Vowed, from their Huſbandes, and force
them to continewe in their Single Life, they make the Huſbandes of them Aduouterers in
deede, in caſe they marrie againe, their owne Wiues beinge ſtil aliue.
                     
                  
                  Thus therefore, M. Hardinge, you maie imagine, S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto
you, as he did vnto them: Ye ſpeake fondely, and vnaduiſedly, and vnderſtande not,
what ye ſpeake.
                  
                  And yet one of your Companions there telleth vs,Dorman fol. 16. that he is vndoubtedly the
Diuelles Miniſter, that wil ſaie, as S. Auguſtine ſaithe, that the Marriage of ſutche
perſonnes is true, and verie Marriage. Thus by the Iudgemente of your late Louanian
Cleregie, S. Auguſtine is becomme the Miniſter of the Diuel.
                  But M. Hardinge hath further to ſaie, that S. Auguſtine calleth this kinde of
marriage VVoorſe then Aduouterie: An other calleth it Inceſte: & an other Sacrilege.
That the Ancient Fathers haue thus written, it is true, & not denied.

How be it,VVoorſe then Aduouterie. good Reader, as I haue partely ſhewed before, theſe, and other like
woordes haue procéeded, more of a zele, and heate of minde, then of profounde conſideration,
and Iudgemente of the cauſe. Neither maie wée alwaies ſtraine ſutche
ſaicinges to the vttermoſte. For whereas S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Sutche Marriage
is woorſe, then Aduouterie, he ſaithe neuertheleſſe immediately after in y• ſame place,
It is true, and very Marriage in deede before God, and Man, and no Aduouterie. His woordes
be theſe:Auguſt. De Bono Viduitatis, Ca. 9. 
                     Non quòd ipſae Nuptiae vel talium damnandae iudicentur. Damnatur
Propoſiti fraus: Damnatur fracta Voti Fides: &c. Damnantur tales, non quia Coniugalem
Fidem poſteriùs inierunt, ſed quia Continentiae Primam Fidem irritam fecerunt:
Not that the Marriage of ſutche perſonnes is to be blamed. The defraudinge
of theire pourpoſe, and the breache of theire Vowe is blamed. Sutche are blamed, not
for that they haue entred into the Faithe of Matrimonie: but for that they haue
broken their Firſte Faithe, or promiſſe of continente Life.
                      So likewiſe S. Auguſtine
ſaithe of a Woman,Auguſt. De Doctrina Chriſtiana, Lib. 4. Ca. 21. that vſed to painte her face: Etſi impudica circa homines non
ſis, tamen corruptis, violatiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , quae Dei ſunt, Peior Adultera detineris: Although
thou be no euil woman, as touchinge menne, yet thus colouringe, and corruptinge thy face,
whiche thou haſte of God, thou arte vvoorſe then an Aduoutreſſe. Here, by waie
of compariſon, and in heate of ſpeeche, S. Auguſtine ſaithe. That paintinge of the face
is woorſe then Aduouterie.
                     Cyprian. De ſingularitate Clericorum. In like ſenſe S. Cyprian ſaithe, Diabolo peior eſt, qui
foeminarum aſpectibus feritur: He that is ſtriken, or moued with the ſighte of Wemen, is
vvoorſe then the Diuel. Likewiſe againe he ſaithe, Multò grauior, & Peior eſt
Moechi cauſa,
                     Cyprian. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 2. 
                     quàm Libellatici: An Aduouterers caſe is vvoorſe, then is the caſe
of him, that hath betraied the Faithe.
                     
                  
                  Sutche compariſons, as I haue ſaide, maie not wel be rackte to al pourpoſes:
but muſt be taken ſo far foorthe onely, as they were meante. Otherwiſe the ſame
S. Cyprian ſaithe,Cyprian. De Singularitate Clericorum. 
                     Peius eſt, quam moechari, Continentiam ducere criminoſam:
To liue Ʋnchaſtely vnder the coloure of Chaſte life
                      (as your Cleregie dooeth) is vvoorſe
then Aduouterie. Here, M. Hardinge, S. Cyprian ſaithe, that your vnchaſte
Chaſtitie, and coloured Vaunte of Virginitie is vvoorſe then Aduouterie.
                  
                  
                     So S. Ambroſe, when he had ſaide, If ſhée haue a minde to marrie, ſhée committeth
Aduouterie, ſhée is made the Handmaide of Deathe, He addeth further, as
of a greater euil,
                     Ambroſ. Ad Virginem Lapſam, Cap 5. Si hoc ita eſt, quid de illa dicendum eſt, quae occulta, & fortiua
turpitudine conſtupratur, & fingit, ſe eſſe, quod non eſt? Bis Adultera eſt: This beinge
ſo, vvhat then ſhal vvee ſaie of her, that is defiled with ſecrete, and priuie filthineſſe:
and faineth her ſelfe to be, that in deede ſhee is not? Shee is tvviſe an Aduoutreſſe. Here
S. Ambroſe calleth your painted Virginitie Double Aduouterie. So S. Chryſoſtome,
Virginitas iſta cum Viris plùs ab omnibus arguitur,Chryſoſt. to. 5. Quòd Regulares Foeminae cum Viris cohabitent. quàm ſtuprum
ipſum: This Virginitie of Weemen emongeſt menne, is more reprooued of al menne,
then Fornication it ſelfe.
                  By theſe fewe wée maie y• better vnderſtande the place, that M. Hardinge hath
here alleaged, of S. Paule vnto Timothee.1. Timot. 5. 
                     When they waxe wanton againſt Chriſte,
they wil marrie, hauinge damnation, bicauſe they haue broken their Firſte Faithe. Notwithſtandinge
in deede S. Paule ſpake theſe woordes, neither of Vowes, nor of Vowebreakers:
but of the Widowes, that were appointed to attende vpon the Olde, and
ſicke perſonnes, and therefore were reliued, and founde by the Churche.
                  But let vs imagine, as M Hardinge would haue vs, that S. Paule ſpake al this
of the breache of Vowes. And let Prima Fides, The Firſte Faithe, be the Vowe of
Chaſtitie. How be it in deede our Firſte Faithe is the Faithe, that wée promiſe in
Baptiſme,Hierony. in Proc
                           ••
                        nto in Epiſt. ad Titum. and none other. And ſo S. Hierome ſeemeth to take it. For thus he
writeth, Non ſ
                           •
                        nt digni Fide, qui Primam Fidem irritam fecerunt: Marcionem loquor,
& Baſilidem: They be not woorthy to be beleeued, that haue foreſaken their Firſte
Faithe: I meane Marcion, and Baſilides.
                      Theſe two famouſe Heretiques Marcion,

and Baſilides,Vovv annexed &c. were not condemned for breakinge any Vowe of Chaſtitie, but for
refuſinge the Faithe of Chriſte: whiche S. Hierome calleth, The Firſte Faithe.
                  
                  S. Paule maketh no mention of any Vowe, but onely rebuketh ſutche light, &
waueringe Wemen, as beinge of longe time founde by the Charges of the Congregation,
pourpoſely to reliue the ſicke, and the feeble, afterwarde foreſooke bothe
the Congregation, and Chriſte too, and became Heathens, and folowed the Diuel.
For ſo S. Paule ſaithe, Nonnullae iam deflexerunt poſt Satanam: Many ſutche wemen
are already gonne after Sathan.
                      But if S. Paule ſpake this of the breache of Vowes,
with what eies then, M. Hardinge, doo you reade his woordes? Or what aduantage
can you hope to finde in ſutche Authorities, as doo ſo expreſſely crie againſte
your ſelfe?1. Timoth. 5. S. Paule ſaithe euen there, in the ſame place, Vidua eligatur non minor
annis ſexaginta. Iuniores Viduas reijce. Volo iuniores Viduas nubere:
liberos gignere: domum adminiſtrare: nullam occaſionem dare Aduerſario, vt habeat maledicendi
cauſam: Let no Widowe be choſen vnder threeſcore yeeres of age. Refuſe
yonge vvidovves. I vvil, that yonge vvidovves be married: bringe vp theire
Children: ouerſee theire houſe: and geue no occaſion to the aduerſarie to ſpeake il.
                     
                  
                  If theſe woordes of S. Paule muſte déedes be taken of Vowes, and none otherwiſe,
why doo you ſo violently, contrarie to S. Paules commaundemente, either
force, or ſuffer yonge Maides, and girles to receiue theſe Vowes? Why doo ye not
ſtaie them vntil they be ſtriken in age, that they maie be thréeſcore yeeres Olde,
before they Vowe? It is no reaſon, ye ſhould in one place claime by one Woorde,
and breake ſo many.
                  You ſaie,Fol. 79. b. 
                     The Vowe of Chaſtitie is annexed vnto Holy Orders by the Ancient Conſtitution
of the Churche, and by the Apoſtles of Chriſte. For trial of your truthe herein, I
beſéeche you, to conſider theſe ſewe in ſtéede of many.
                  
                     Your owne allowed,
                     26. q. 2. Sors. 
                     and principal Doctour Gratian ſaithe thus, Copula Sacerdotalis,
vel conſanguineorum, nec Legali, nec Euangelica, nec Apoſtolica authoritate
prohibetur: Prieſtes marriage is not forebidden by any Authoritie, either of the
Lavve of Moſes, or of the Goſpel, or of the Apoſtles.
                  Clemens Alexandrinus ſaithe,
                     Clemens Stromat. Lib. 3. Omnes Apoſtoli Epiſtolae, quae moderationem
docent, & continentiam, cùm & de Matrimonio, & de Liberorum procreatione, & de domus
adminiſtratione innumerabilia praecepta contineant, nunquam tamen honeſtum,
moderatum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Matrimonium prohibuerunt: Al the Epiſtles of the Apoſtle,
whiche teache ſobrietie, and continente life, whereas they conteine innumerable Preceptes
touchinge Matrimonie, bringinge vp of Children, and gouernemente of Houſe, yet they neuer
forebade Honeſte, and ſober Marriage.
                  
                     Car
                           •
                        inal Caictanus ſaithe,
                     Cardin. Caletan. in Quodlibetis Contra Lutherum. Nec ratione, nec authoritate probari poteſt,
quòd, abſolutè loquendo, Sacerdos peccet contrahendo Matrimonium. Nam nec Ordo,
in quantum Ordo, nec Ordo, in quantum Sacer, eſt impeditiuus Matrimonij.
Siquidem Sacerdotium non dirimit Matrimonium contractum, ſiue antè, ſiue pòſt: ſecluſis
omnibus Legibus Eccleſiaſticis: ſtando tantùm ijs, quae habemus à Chriſto,
& Apoſtolis: It cannot be proued, neither by reaſon, nor by Authoritie, ſpeakinge
abſolutely, that a Prieſte ſinneth in marrieinge a wife. For neither the Order of Prieſthoode,
in that it is Order, nor the ſame Order, in that it is Holy, is any hinderance
to Matrimonie. For Prieſthoode breaketh not Marriage, whether it be contracted
before Prieſthoode, or aftervvarde: ſettinge al Eccliſiaſtical Lawes aparte, and ſtandinge
onely vnto thoſe thinges, that vvee haue of Chriſte, and his Apoſtles.
                  
                     Abbate Panormitane ſaithe,
                     Panormitan. De Clericus Coniuga. Cùm Olim. Antonin. in Sū
                        ma, Par. 3. Ti 1 Ca. 21. Continentia non eſt de Subſtantia Ordinis, nec
de Iure Diuino: Single life is not of the ſubſtance of the Order of Prieſthoode,
nor of the Lavve of God.
                  
                     Likewiſe Antoninus ſaithe, Epiſcopatus ex Natura ſua non habet opponi ad
Matrimonium:
                      The office, or Degree of a Biſhop, of the Subſtance of Nature of it

ſelfe is not contrarie to Matrimonie.Letteth Praier. 
                     Hereby ye maie eaſily ſée, M. Hardinge, howe
true it is, that you ſaie, The Vowe of Chaſtitie is annexed to Holy Orders, and that by
the Apoſtles Ancient Conſtitution.
                  But this Order, you ſaie, was taken, for that, hauinge the vſe of Wedlocke
wée cannot Praie. And to that ende ye allege the Authoritie of S. Paule: Where
alſo ye might haue alleged the names and ſaieinges of ſundrie Fathers.Origen. in Numer. Homil. 7. Extra. De Probationib. In Gloſſa. Origen
ſaithe, The Holy Ghoſte in time of Copulation forſaketh a man, yea although he were the
Prophete of God. An other ſaithe, Virginitas Sola poteſt animas hominum praeſentare
Deo: Onely Virginitie is hable to preſente the Soule of man vnto God.
                      S. Hierome ſaith.
Quotieſcunque vxori debitum reddo, orare non poſſum: As often as I doo my duetie to
my wife, I cannot Praie.
                      And to this pourpoſe Pope Siricius vndiſcretely, & fondely
abuſeth the Holy Woorde of God.Hierony. Aduer. Iouinian. Lib. 1. Inter Decreta Siricij, Cap 7. Rom. 8. Thus he ſaithe, Qui in Carne ſunt, Deo placere
non poſſunt: They that be in the Pleaſhe, cannot pleaſe God.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theſe woordes ſéeme very harde, & ſounde mutche to the derogation of Goddes
Ordinance. And therefore Ignatius S. Iohns Scholare ſaithe, Si quis Legitimam
Commixtionem, & Filiorum procreationem Corruptionem, & Coinquinationem vocat,
ille habet cohabitatorem Daemonem Apoſtatam: If any man calle lawful Copulation,
and Begeattinge of Children,
                     Ignatius ad Philadelphien. 
                     Corruption, and Filthineſſe, he hath the Diuel that
felle from God dvvellinge vvithin him.
                  
                     In like manner ſaie the Learned godly Biſhoppes in the Councel of Gangra:
Si quis diſcernit Preſbyterum Coniugatum,Concil Gangren. Cap. 4. tanquam occaſione nuptiarum, quòd
offerre non debeat, & ab eius Oblatione abſtinet, Anathema ſit: If any man make difference
of a Married Prieſte, as if he maie not Miniſter the Oblation, (or Holy Communion)
bicauſe of his Marriage, and abſteineth from his Oblation, accurſed be he.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe it is written in the Councel of Conſtantinople:
                     Diſt. 31. Quoniam. Si quis praeſumpſerit
contra Apoſtolicos Canones aliquos Preſbyterorum, & Diaconorū priuare à Contactu,
& Communione legalis vxoris ſuae, Deponatur. Similiter & Preſbyter, aut Diaconus,
qui Religionis cauſa Vxorem ſuam expellit, excommunicetur: If any man,
contrarie to the Apoſtles Canons, preſume to remooue either Prieſte, or Deacon from the vſe,
and Companie of his lavvful vvife, let him be depriued. And in like manner let the prieſte,
or Deacon be excommunicate, yt putteth avvaie his vvife vnder the colour of Religion.
                  
                  As touchinge the place of S. Paule,1. Corin. 7. 
                     Defraude not your ſelues, One an Other, Onleſſe
it be of conſente for a ſeaſon, that ye maie attende vnto Faſtinge, and Praier. He ſpeaketh
not this of that kinde of Praier, that is commonly, & daiely vſed of al the Faitheful,
as wel Married, as Vnmarried, but onely of the General, & Solemne Praier
of the whole Congregation, whiche then, as in time of Perſecution, and feare of
enimies, was keapte onely in the night: and al the whole multitude of the Faitheful
was charged to be preſente at the ſame. At whiche times it was neceſſarie,
that bothe the man, and the wife ſhould leaue the one the others companie, and
reſorte to Praier.
                  
                     So it is written in the Prophete Ioel,
                     Ioel. 2. Blowe vp the Trumpe in Sion: Proclaime
a ſolemne Faſte: Cal togeather a Congregation of the People. Let the Breedegroome leaue his
bedde: Let the Spouſe comme from her Chamber. Let the Prieſtes, the Miniſters of God, weepe
bitweene the Entire, and the Aultar: And let them ſaie, O Lorde ſpare thy people, and geue
not ouer thine Enheritance vnto Confuſion. Of the like kinde of General, and Solemne
Praier:
                     Tertullian. ad Vxorem. Lib. 2. 
                     Tertullian ſaithe thus, Quis Solennibus Paſchae abnoctantem Vxorem
ſecurus ſuſtinebit?
                      What man (beinge an Heathen,) can without miſtruſte ſuffer
his Wife (beinge a Chriſtian Woman) to be awaie from him at the Solemnitie of the
Eaſter Praier?
                  Of ſutche Solemne, and Seldome méetinges S. Paule ſpeaketh: and not of
the Daiely, Vſual, and Common Praiers of al Chriſtians.
                  
                     
                     Otherwiſe,
                     Paphnutius. 
                     touchinge the Puritie, and Holineſſe of Married people, S. Auguſtine
ſaithe, Quòd Paulus ait,Auguſt. De Bono Coniugali. Li. 1. Cap. 11. Quae innupta eſt, cogitat ea, quae ſunt Dn̄i, vt ſit ſancta &
Corpore, & Spiritu, non ſic accipiendū eſt, vt putemus, non eſſe Sanctam Corpore Chriſtianam
Coniugem Caſtam. Omnibus quippe Fidelibus dictum eſt, Neſcitis, quoniam
Corpora veſtra templum ſunt Spiritus Sancti? Sancta ſunt etiam Corpora
Coniugatorum, fidem ſibi, & Domino ſeruantium: Whereas S. Paule ſaithe, Shee that
is Ʋnmarried, thinketh of the thinges, that perteine vnto the Lorde, that ſhee maie be Holy
bothe in Body, and in Sprite, it maie not ſo be taken, as though wee ſhould thinke, a Chriſtian
wife liuinge Chaſtely with her Huſbande, is not Holy in Body. For it is generally ſaide
vnto al Faitheful, Knowe ye not, that your Bodies be the Temple of the Holy Ghoſte?
Therefore if the Man, and VVife keepe their Faithe bothe bitweene them ſelues, and to
the Lorde, their Bodies are Holy.
                  But, Theſe Euangelical Vowbreakers, ſaithe M. Hardinge, pretende Paphnutius to
be their Proctoure. Whether he be Our Proctoure, or no, it forceth not greately,
Notwithſtandinge it is plaine, He was then the Onely Proctoure for the Truthe,
and that againſte the General Conſente of al the whole Councel biſides. And although
he were but One man alone, yet the whole Councel gaue place vnto him.
Sozomenus ſaithe,Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 23. 
                     Synodus laudauit ſententiam Paphnutij, & nihil ex hac parte ſanciuit:
Sed hoc in vniuſcuiuſque Voluntate, ſine vlla Neceſsitate reliquit: The Councel
commended Paphnutius iudgement, and, touchinge this mater of Marriage, made no Decree
at al: but leafte it to eche mannes owne Wil, without any force of Neceſſitie.
                     
                  
                  Of Our ſide thus mutche Paphnutius ſaithe,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Marriage is Honorable: And the
Companie of Man, and Wife is
                      (not filthineſſe, as theſe menne ſéeme to ſaie, but)
Cleaneneſſe and Chaſtitie.
                  
                  
                     But, M. Hardinge, if the ſame Holy Father Paphnutius weighe ſo mutche of
your ſide, as you pretende, wherefore then dothe One of your Companions of Louaine
ſo lightly, & ſo diſdainefully controlle that whole Storie, with the vtter diſcredite,
and condemnation of the Writers? For thus hath he not doubted to publiſhe
his iudgemente therein to al the worlde:
                     Copus Dialog
                           •
                         1. Pagi. 154. Mihi, neſcio quomodo, in dubium venit
fides huius Hiſtoriae de Paphnutio. Sunt enim, quae ſuſpicionem important, eam eſſe
Arianorum, aut Impudicorum hominum Commentum. Tota enim haec res à
Socrate pendet, & Sozomeno: quorum alter Nouatianus fuit: alter Theodorum Mopſueſtenſem
à quinta Synodo damnatum magnis laudibus extulit: I knowe not howe, this
Storie of Paphnutius ſeemeth to mee to be of doubteful credite. For there be maters, that
make mee to ſuſpecte, that it is but a vaine forged tale, either of the Arian Heretiques,
or of ſomme other filthy perſonnes. The whole mater hangeth of Socrates,
and Sozomenus: Of whiche twoo, the one was a Nouatian Heretique: The other highly commendeth
Theodorus of Mopſueſta, beinge condemned by the Fifthe Councel.
                  
                  Thus your Felowes make this whole Storie to be but a vaine Fable: and
the Authours, and Writers thereof, Socrates, and Sozomenus, to be Heretiques,
Nouatians, Arians, Vnhoneſte, and Shameleſſe perſonnes. And therefore, I
trowe, ye wil not ſaie, they are your Proctours.
                  
                     Wereas S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. in Epiſt. ad Titum Homil. 2. 
                     Marriage is ſo reuerende a thinge, that a man
maie therewith aſcende into the Holy Throne, and be made a Biſhop, notwithſtandinge
he haue a wife: and that S. Paule ſuffereth not them, that haue twiſe
married, to atteine ſutche a roume, By theſe woordes, ſaithe M. Hardinge, Chryſoſtome
condemneth the impure Bigamie of Our Holy Goſpellers. Againe he ſaithe, If
this Defender preſſe vs with Chryſoſtome, wee anſweare, that, although Chryſoſtome
graunte, that a Married man maie aſcende to the Holy ſeate, yet he ſaithe not, that a man
maie deſcende from that Holy ſeate to the Bridebedde. For wee denie vtterly, that any man
after that he hath receiued Holy Orders maie marrie. Neither can it be ſhewed, that the Marriage
of ſutche was euer accoumpted lawful in the Catholique Churche.
                  
                     
I doubte not,Huſbande of One vvife. good Reader, but it ſhal eaſily appeare, that M. Hardinge in either
of theſe twoo partes was fowly deceiued. For firſte Chryſoſtome, as it is
plaine by his woordes,Timo 1 whiche M. Hardinge in his tranſlation hath pourpoſely
falſified, expoundeth theſe Woordes of S. Paule, The Huſbande of One vvife,
not of a man, that neuer had but one wife in al his time, but of a man, that hath
but one wife at one time. If M. Hardinge ſhal thinke, this Expoſition to be
ſtrange, and vnlikely, let him remember, that Chryſoſtome him ſelfe thereof writeth
thus:Chryſoſt. in Epiſt. 1. ad Timotheum Homil. 10. 
                     Vnius Vxoris virum. Non hoc veluti ſanciens dicit, quaſi non liceat abſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
Vxore Epiſcopum fieri, ſed eius rei modum conſtituens. Iudaeis quippe licitum erat, etiam
Secundo Matrimonio iungi, & Duas itidem Simul habere Vxores: The Huſbande
of One VVife: S. Paule writeth not this, as makinge a Lawe, as if it were not lawful
for a man to be made a Biſhop without a wife: but he appointeth an order in that behalfe.
For it was lawful for the Jewes to be coupled in the Seconde Matrimonie, and to
haue Tvvoo vviues at one time.
                  
                  
                     In like ſorte ſaithe S. Hierome,
                     Hieronym. in Epiſt. ad Titum. Cap. 1. Quidam de hoc loco ita ſentiunt: Iudaicae, inquiunt,
Conſuetudinis fuit, vel binas vxores habere, vel plures. Et hoc nunc volunt
eſſe Praeceptum, ne is, qui Epiſcopus eligendus eſt, vno tempore Duas Pariter Vxores
habeat: Touchinge this place ſomme men thinke thus: By the Cuſtome of the Jewes
it was lawful for a man, to haue Tvvo vviues, or moe at once. And this they take to
be the Apoſtles Commaundement, that he, that is to be choſen a Biſhop, haue not Tvvoo
vviues,Hieronym. in Epiſt. 1. ad Timothe. Cap. 3. or moe togeather at one time. Againe he ſaithe, Diaconi ſint Vnius vxoris
viri: Non, vt ſi non habuerint, ducant: Sed ne Duas habeant: Let the Deacons be
the Huſbandes of One vvife: not that they ſhould needes marrie a wife, if they haue none:
but that they ſhoulde not haue Tvvoo vviues togeather.Catharinus contra Errores Caietani, Errore 99. 
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Cardinal
Caietane, Apoſtolus Epiſcopis permittit Vnam Vxorem, Coeteris plures: The Apoſtle
ſuffreth a Biſhop to haue One VVife: Others he ſuffreth to haue Moe.
                  
                     And to this pourpoſe Iſidorus ſéemeth to ſaie, Caſtimoniam non Violati Corporis
perpetuò obſeruare ſtudeant:Diſt. 23. His igitur. aut certè Vnius Matrimonij vinculo foederentur: Let
them ſtudie to keepe and continewe the Chaſtitie of their Body vndefiled: or els, let them be
coupled with the bande of One Marriage.
                  
                     Of ſutche a one, Pope Leo wrote ſometime vnto the Biſhops of Mauritania,
                     Leo ad Epiſcopos Mauritaniae.
Sicut ad nos relatum eſt, Duarum ſimul eſt Maritus Vxorum: As wee are enfourmed,
he is at one time the Huſbande of Tvvoo vviues. And therefore he addeth
his iudgemente of him: Priuandum honore decernimus: Wee thinke him meete to be
depriued of his promotion.
                  
                  
                     Of this kinde of Seconde Marriage Chryſoſtome ſpeaketh, I meane of hauinge
two Wiues aliue togeather: And not of marrieinge the Seconde wife after the
death of the Former.
                     31. Quae. 1. Hac ratione. 
                     And therefore he ſaithe, Secundam quidem accipere, ſecundum
Praeceptum Apoſtoli licitum eſt: Secundum autem Veritatis rationem Verè Fornicatio
eſt. Sed cùm▪ permittente Deo, Publicè, & licenter permittitur, fit Honeſta Fornicatio:
To take the Seconde vvife (while the firſte is aliue) accordinge to the Apoſtles
commaundemente, it is lawful: But by the Judgemente of the Truthe
                      in deede it is Fornication.
But while as by Goddes permiſsion it is openly, and lawfully ſuffered, the Fornication
is made Honeſte. This laſte Clauſe the Gloſe there expoundeth thus: Fornicatio
cum ea, quam permiſit Moſes poſt repudiatam aſſumi: Fornication, I meane, with
her, whome Moſes ſuffered to be taken to wife after the Diuorce of the Firſte.
                  
                  Thus therefore S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, that ſutche a man, as had Twoo wiues
togeather at one time, or was Diuorced from One wife, and had married an other, might not
be choſen to be a Biſhop.Tertullian. De Monogamia. For otherwiſe, Tertullian ſaithe vnto the Biſhoppes of
the Catholique Churche: Apud vos Epiſcopi ſunt Digami: There be Biſhoppes emonge
you
                      (he meaneth emonge the Catholiques) that haue married tvvoo vviues,
                      the one
after the deathe of the other.
                  
                     
                     If al this wil not ſuffiſe,
                     Marriage in Holy Orders. 
                     I referre mee ſelfe to Chryſoſtomes owne omes Woordes.
Thus he writeth: S. Paule reſtreineth Vnchaſte perſonnes, not permitting them,
                      that haue
married tvvoo vviues, to be Choſen to the gouernmente of the Churche. His reaſons
be theſe,
                     
                     Chryſoſ. in Epiſt. ad Tit. Homil. 2. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      Nam qui vxori, quae deceſsit (à ſe) beneuolentiam nullam ſeruaſſe deprehenditur,
quo pacto poteſt ille eſſe bonus Praeceptor Eccleſiae? Imò quibus criminibus
non ſubijcitur in dies? Noſtis enim, quòd, etſi per Leges Secundae nuptiae permittuntur,
tamen ea res accuſationibus multis patet: For he that is founde, to haue borne
no good wil vnto his wife, (not that is deade, but
                     ) that is gonne from him, howe can
he be a meete Maiſter for the Churche of God? Nai rather to what quarrelles, and accuſations
(by meane of theſe twoo Wiues) ſhal he not be ſubiect euery daie? For you know, although
by the Lawe the Marriage of the Seconde VVife (after the Diuorce of the firſte) be
ſuffered, yet the mater lieth open to many offences.
                  
                  It appeareth, ſaithe Chryſoſtome, that he bare no good wil towardes his Former
Wife, not, that nowe is deade, but that is diuorced, and ſo departed from him.
And therefore oftentimes growe many accuſations, and griefes, bitwéene the
Wiues, the Children, the Frendes, and others: for partinge of goodes: for reſtoaringe
of dowers, and other like quarrelles. For to haue ſpoken of good vvil, or
affection towardes the Former Wife, being deade, it had benne impertinent, and
to no pourpoſe.
                  Thus mutche, toouchinge Chryſoſtomes iudgement vpon theſe Woordes of S.
Paule, The Husband of One VVife. Notwithſtandinge I denie not, but certaine
other Auncient, and Learned Fathers haue taken it otherwiſe.
                  Laſte of al M. Hardinge vnwares falleth into the ſame Negatiue Diuinitie,
that he ſo often, and ſo mutche abhorreth. For thus he ſaithe, Wee denie vtterly,
that any man, after that he hath receiued Holy Orders, maye Marrie. Neither can it be
ſhewed, that the Marriage of ſutche was euer accoumpted lawful in the Catholique Churche.
It this tale be true. then be al the Greeke Prieſtes Votaries, as wel, as the Latines.
But it is noted vpon the Decrées,Diſt. 31. quoniā. In Margine. 
                     Graeci continentiam non promittunt, vel
Tacitè, vel Expreſsè: The Greekes make no Promiſſe of continente, or Single Life, neither
Secretely, nor Expreſſely.
                      And in the Councel holden at Ancyra it is concluded thus,
Diaconi,
                     Conci. Ancyran. Can. 9. 
                     quicunque ordinantur, ſi in ipſa Ordinatione proteſtati ſunt, & dixerunt,
velle ſe Cōiugio Copulari, quia ſic manere non poſſunt, Hi ſi poſtmodum Vxores
duxerint, in Miniſterio maneant: Proptereà quòd Epiſcopus illis licentiam dederit:
Deacons as many, as be ordred, if at the time of receiuinge Orders, they made Proteſtation,
and ſaide, that they vvoulde Marrie, for that they finde not them ſelues hable ſo to continewe
without Marriage, if they aftervvarde Marrie, let them continewe in the Miniſterie:
for as mutche as the Biſhop hath geuen them licence.
                      M. Hardinge, I trowe, wil
not denie, but Deaconſhip is one of the Holy Orders. Yet Deacons at the time
of theire Conſecration makinge Proteſtation ſolemnely before the Biſhop, were
licenced by this Councel to Marrie at any time afterward: and the ſame Marriage,
contrarie to M. Hardinges poſition, was euermore in the Catholique Churche accoumpted
lawful.
                  
                     So ſaithe Pope Steuin,
                     Diſt. 31. Aliter. Graecorum Sacerdotes, Diaconi aut Subdiaconi Matrimonio
Copulantur: The Greeke Prieſtes, Deacons, or Subdeacons are coupled in
Matrimonie.Gloſſ. Diſt. 31. Aliter. 
                     Vpon whiche woordes the Gloſe noteth thus, Multi ex hac litera dixerunt,
quòd Orientales poſſunt contrahere in Sacris Ordinibus: Many haue
ſaide vpon occaſion of this texte. that the Prieſtes of the Eaſte Churche (contrarie to that
M Hardinge ſo certainely here aſſureth vs
                     ) maye Marrie, beinge vvithin Holy
Orders.
                  
                     And of the Prieſtes of the Weaſte Churche Cardinal Caietane ſaithe,
                     Catharinus Cō
                        tra Error. Caietani, Errore. 103.
Papa poteſt diſpenſare cum Sacerdote Occidentalis Eccleſiae, vt Vxorem ducat,

nulla exiſtente cauſa Publicae Vtilitatis: The Pope maie diſpenſe withe a Priſte of the
VVeaſte Churche, to Marrie a VVife, although there be no manner cauſe of Common
Profite.
                  
                  
                     Athanaſius ſaithe,
                     Athanaſius ad Dracontium. Multi quoque ex Epiſcopis Matrimonia non inierunt:
Monachi contrà Parentes liberorum facti ſunt: Many of the Biſhoppes (he
ſaithe not al, but Many) haue not Married. (By whiche woordes he geueth vs
to vnderſtande, that Somme haue Married.) Contrarievviſe, Monkes haue
becomme Fathers of Children.
                  Caſsiodorus writeth thus,
                     Caſsiodo. Lib. 6. Cap. 14. In illo tempore ferunt Martyrio Vitam finiſſe Eupſychium
Caeſarienſem (Epiſcopum) ducta nuper Vxore: dum adhuc quaſi Sponſus eſſe
videretur: At that time they ſaie, Eupſychius the Biſhop of Caeſaria died in Martyrdome,
hauing Married a VVife a litle before, beinge as yet in manner a newe married man.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe M. Hardinge mighte haue founde it noted in his owne Gloſe,
Dicunt, quòd olim Sacerdotes poterant contrahere,Diſt. 84. Cum in Praeterito, in Gloſſ. ante Siricium: They ſaie, that in
Olde times, before Pope Siricius (whiche was about foure hundred yéeres after Chriſte
                     )
it vvas lavvful for Prieſtes to Marrie.
                  But wée ſhal haue occaſion to ſpeake hereof more hereafter. In the meane
ſeaſon, good Chriſtian Reader, by theſe few, as by a taſte, thou maiſte eaſily iudge,
howe true it is, that M. Hardinge telleth thée, that Marriage in them, that had
receiued Holy Orders, was neuer thought lawful in the Catholique Churche.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 2.
               And, as Sozomenus ſaithe of Spiridion, and as Nazianzene
ſaithe of his owne Father, wee ſaie, that a good and diligente Biſhop
dothe ſerue in the Miniſterie neuer the woorſe, for that he is Married,
but rather the better, and with more hablenes to doo
goode.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVere it not, that the weight of theſe maters required an vpright, and plaine dealinge, for
ciuilities ſake, I could be contente ſommetimes to ſpare you, and where ye make manifeſte lyes, to vſe a
ſofter worde, and terme them fittens. But nowe if I tel you that you vſe your accuſtomed Figure
Pſeudologia, whiche is Lyinge in plaine Engliſhe, I truſte you wil beare with my plainenes: amend
your owne faulte, and conſider the Power of Truthe, that cauſeth me to be ſo bolde with you. This I
                     M. Hardinge is aſſured, before he knovve. am ſuer of, that neither Sozomenus, nor Gregorie Nazienzene, nor Euſebius Li. 10. Cap. 5 as you haue
cauſed your bookes, both Latine and Engliſhe, to be noted in the Margent, where ye miſtake Euſebius
for Rufinus:An vnaduiſed Vntruth. Reade the Anſvveare. Nor Nazianzene either in Monodia, as you note alſo in the Margent,Sozomenꝰ, Gregorie Naziāzene, Euſebius, belied by the Authour of the Apologie. nor in the funeral
Oration that he made of his Father, hath any ſutche ſayeinge, as ye reporte of them. For howe could
thei ſay, that a Biſhop ſerueth in his miniſterie neuer the worſe, but rather the better, and with more
hableneſſe to doo good, for that he is Maried, the Scripture beinge ſo plaine to the contrary? VVhat,
were ye they were either ſo ignorante, or ſo forgetful, or ſo mutche inclined to promote your Carnal
Doctrine of Prieſtes Mariages, as to ſay ſo, notwithſtandinge that S. Paule writeth to the Corinthians?
Saithe he not of them that be Maried,S Paule vvriteth thus, not of Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes, but of al other Chriſtian menne. that ſutche ſhal haue tribulation of the fleſhe? Sayeth he not, He
that is without a VVife, careth for the thinges of our Lorde howe he may pleaſe God? Of him that
hath a VVife, ſaieth he not, that he careth forthe thinges that be the worldes, how he may pleaſe his
wife, and is diuided? Finally ſaieth he not, I tel you this thing for your profite, not to tangle you in a
ſnare, but for that, whiche is honeſt, and comely vnto you, and that whiche maye geue you readines to
praie to God without lette? VVherefore recant for ſhame that fowle erroure, that a Biſhop ſerueth
the better in his miniſterie, and is the more able to do good for that he is Maried.
                  Sutche men,M. Hardinges Modeſtie. ſutche Doctrine: fleaſhly men, fleaſhly Doctrine.
                  
                     
Nowe therefore ſee you not, how great is your impudencie, in that you lye your ſelfe, and Father
ſutche a fowle lye vpon sozomenus,Li. 1. Ca. 11. and that light of the world in his time Gregorie Nazianzene? The
wordes of Sozomenus be theſe: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
that is to ſaie, Spiridion was a Huſbandman, hauinge vvife
and Children, and yet for al that he vvas neuer the vvoorſe about Goddes ſeruice.
Of this place we graunt,Neuer the vvorſe. ye maie ſaie with Sozomenus, that Spiridion ſerued God neuer
the vvoorie, for that he was Maried. But howe, and whereof gather ye, that he ſerued God the
better, and was more able to do good bicauſe of his Mariage? Spiridion obteined that Priuiledge
throughVntruthe. For Chryſoſtome maketh the caſe General. eſpecial Grace by his excedinge vertue, whiche is graunted to fewe. And the Priuileges
of a fewe make not a Law for al in general, ye knowe, as Nazianzene ſaieth.
                  Furthermore if the woordes of Sozomenus,The place of Sozomenus alleaged by the Defenders maket vtterly againſt thē. Naziāzenes vvordes retourned vpon the Defender. that ye builde your carnal Doctrine vpon, be wel
examined, ye ſhal finde, that he maketh more againſt you, then with you. For ſignifieing that he had
VVife and Children, he addeth, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Yet for al that he was neuer
the woorſe about Goddes ſeruice. This reuocation or exception negatiué (yet for al that &c.)
implieth a confeſsion affirmatiue of the contrarie.
                  Neither maketh the place of Gregorie Nazianzene any whit for you more, then this of Sozomenus
doth whoſe woordes be theſe after the trāſlation of Raphael Volaterranus varyinge mutche
frō the Greeke:An erroure. M Hardinge taketh one place for an other. 
                     Hic Baſilij Pater Baſilius item appellatus, etſi matrimonio ſe vinxit, ita tamen
in eo vixit, vt nihil propterea ad Perfectam Virtutem, ac Philoſophiam
conſequendam impediretur. Baſiles Father, who was named alſo Baſile, although he put him
ſelfe in bondes of Matrimonie, yet he liued ſo herein, as he vvas letted no vvhit from the
atteininge of perfite Vertue and Holy knovvledge. VVere not Marriage a lette and
hinderaunce to perfection requiſite in a Biſhop,Nothinge hi
                           •••
                         dered. this Learned man coulde not rightly haue ſaide,
Ita tamen in eo vixit, &c. Yet for al that he liued ſo, &c.
                  Right ſo it is eaſi to put him from the holde he taketh of Chryſoſtome, by Chryſoſtome him ſelfe.
For leaſt any man ſhould thinke,Timoth. 1. Whereas S. Paule ſaieth, A Biſhop oughte to be the Huſbande of one
VVife, that the ſame order contineweth ſtil in the Churche, thereto he ſaithe in his ſeconde Homilie
De Patientia Iob:
                     Reade the Anſvveare. 
                     Nō ea ratione, quòd id nunc in Eccleſia obſeruetur. Oportet enim omni
prorſus caſtitate Sacerdotem ornatum eſſe. S. Paule (ſaieth he) required this, not in conſideration,
that the ſame be nowe obſerued in the Churche. For it behooueth a Biſhop to be garniſhed with
al manner a Chaſtitie.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here commeth M. Hardinge in a lofte with, Io Triumphe, as hauinge beatten
downe al the world vnder his féete: And, as beinge already in ſure poſſeſſion
of the Victorie, he crieth out, Impudencies, Levvde Lies, fovvle Faultes, and
pretie Fittens: And ful terribly chargeth vs, like a Conqueroure, to render our
ſelues, and to recante for ſhame. This newe courrage is ſuddainely blowen vpon
him, for that he thinketh, wee haue intruded vpon his office, and, as he ſaithe,
haue corrupted, and falſified and Holy Fathers. But it were a woorthy mater to
knowe, wherein. Forſooth wée ſaie, by the reporte of Sozomenus, and Gregorius
Nazianzenus, that Spiridion, and Gregorie Father vnto Nazianzene, beinge
bothe Married Biſhoppes, notwithſtanding theire Marriage, Vvere neuer
the vvoorſe hable to doo theire Eccleſiaſtical offices, but rather the better.
                  
                  Here M. Hardinge of him ſelfe, and fréely confeſſeth, theſe Holy Fathers were
neuer the vvoorſe hable to doo theire offices. For ſo mutche the woordes of Sozomenus
importe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . But that they were the better hable to
doo theire offices, bicauſe of theire Wiues, that he denieth vtterly: and herein, he
ſaithe, wée are corrupters, and Falſifiers of the Fathers. And thus the whole
difference, that is bitwéene M. Hardinge, and vs, touchinge this mater, ſtandeth
onely in theſe twoo poore woordes, Rather the better, and, Neuer the vvoorſe.
                     
Nowe,Marriage Healpeth. gentle Reader, that thou maiſte be the better hable to iudge bitwéene
vs, I beſéeche thee indifferently to weigh theſe woordes.
                  
                     Gregorie Nazianzene hereof,
                     Nazianzen in 
                           •
                        pitaphto Patris. 
                     that is, of the helpe, that his Father, beinge the
Biſhop of Nazianzum had by his Wife, writeth thus: Illa, quae dara eſt Adamo, &c.
Eua, that was geuen to Adam for a Helper, for as mutche, as it was not good for Man to be
alone, in ſteede of a Helper became his Enimie. It foloweth,
                      Meo autem Patri Mater mea
data illi à Deo,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . non tantùmm Adiutrix facta eſt, id enim minùs eſſet mirum, ſed etiam
Dux, & Princeps, Verbo, Facto
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      inducens illum ad res optimas. Et alijs quidem
in rebus quamuis optimum eſſet, ſubditam eſſe Viro, propter iura Coniugij, tamen
in Pietate non verebatur, Seipſam illi Magiſtram exhibere: My Mother beinge geeuen
to my Father of God, became not onely his Helper, for that had benne no great woonder,
but alſo was his Leader, and Captaine, bothe by VVoorde, and by deede traiinge
him vnto the beſte. And, albeit in other thinges it were beſte for her to be ſubiecte
vnto her huſbande for the Right of Marriage,
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . yet in Religion, and Godlineſſe,
ſhee doubted not to becomme his Maiſtreſſe.
                  Theſe woordes, M. Hardinge, be plaine, and cleare, and without fitton. Gregarie
Nazianzene ſaithe, that his owne Mother was vnto his Father the Biſhop
of Nazianzum, a a Helper, and a Directour, bothe by VVoorde, and deede, to
leade him to the beſte: and that in al other thinges beinge his Inferiour, yet in
Religiō and Godlineſſe ſhee vvas his Maiſtreſſe. And yet muſt al theſe woordes,
ſo open, to plaine, ſo cleare, be drowned with your ſimple diſtinction, of Rather the
better, and neuer the vvoorſe? Maie wee not now allow you with fauour, to take
al theſe, that ye cal Fittons, Lies, Corruptions, and Falſifieinges, home againe
vnto your ſelfe?
                  If yowe neuer readde theſe thinges before, it is no greate marueile. Yowe
muſte remember, Al Trueth maie not be meaſured by your Readinge.
                  
                     In déede, Marriage, as alſo al other like outwarde thinges, of it ſelfe is neither
good,
                     1 Cor. 7. 
                     nor il: but as it is vſed. S. Paule ſaithe, If the Virgine marrie, ſhee finneth not.
He that Marrieth out his Virgine, finneth not. Therefore Gregorie Nazianzene ſaith,
Neutrum horum,Nazianzen. in Epitaphio Gorgoniae: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . nec Matrimonium, nec Coelebs vita, prorſus aut Deo nos Mundóue
conciliat: aut à Deo, aut à Mundo alienat: vt alterum natura ſua omninò fugiendum ſit,
alterum abſolutè laudandum. Antmus eſt, qui & Virginitati, & Nuptijs rectè imperat:
Neither of theiſe twoo, nor Matrimonie, nor Single life, doothe either ioine vs to
God, or to the World: or withdrawe vs from God, or from the world: that the One ought
to be refuſed, and the other abſolutely, and of it ſelfe ought to be praiſed. It is the Minde,
that ruleth boothe Marriage, and Virginitie.
                  I graunte, there be moe occaſions of let, and hinderance in Matrimonie, then
in Virginitie, & ſpecially in times of Perſecution. The natural affection of Wife,
and Children often mollifieth, and melteth the harte, and cauſeth a man to looke
backewarde. S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Bona Vincula nuptiatum: Sed tamen Vincula. Etſi
vincula, tamen Vincula Charitatis: Bonum Coniugium: Sed tamē à Iugo tractum.
Good are the Bandes of Matrimonie: Yet are they Bandes. And although they be Bandes, yet
are thei Bandes of Charitie. Coniugium (VVedlocke) is good, yet it taketh his name of
the Yoke.
                  
                  This is that tribulation of the Fleaſhe,Ambroſius, De Virgini. Lib. 3. that S. Paule ſpeaketh of.
                  And, al be it theſe Cares withdrawe, and oppreſſe the Mynde, as I haue ſaide,
and oftentimes be greate lettes to Godly pourpoſes: yet, as it wel appeareth by
theſe examples of Gregorie Nazianzene, and Spiridion, in a Godly man they hinder
nothinge. Neither was this any ſutche Singulare Priuilege, as M. Hardinge
imagineth, graunted onely to theſe two Biſhoppes, Gregorie, and Spiri
                        •
                     ion, &
to none other.
                  
                     
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe generally of al menne, Quamuis Nuptiae plurimum difficultatis
in ſe habeant,Chryſo
                           •
                        tom in 1. Epiſt. ad Tim. Homil. 10. ita tamen aſſumi poſſunt, vt perfectiori Vitae impedimento
non ſint. Notwithſtandinge Marriage haue mutche trouble in it ſelfe, yet maie it ſo be taken
(and vſed,) that it ſhalbe no hinderance to perfite life. Againe he ſaithe, Ne excuſes te
propter Nuptias Dominus tuus Nuptijs interfuit, & Nuptias cohoneſtauit.Chryſoſt Contra Iudaeos & Gentales, & Haereticos: To. 3. Pag. 363. Et tu Nuptias
arguis? Et dicis Nuptias eſſe impedimentum ad Pietatem? Nullum enim ad
Pietatem eſt obſtaculum. Vis cognoſcere, quòd nihil obſit, habere Vxorem, &
Liberos? Moſes nónne Vxorem habuit, & Liberos? Vide & Petrum Columnam Eccleſiae,
quòd & ipſe Vxorem habuit. Ne accuſes Nuptias: Excuſe not thee ſelfe by thy Marriage.
Thy Lorde was at the Marriage Feaſte, and honoured Marriage with his Preſence.
And yet dooſt thou blame Marriage? And ſaiſte thou, that Marriage is an
hinderance vnto Godlineſſe? I telle thee, Marriage is no manner hinderance
vnto Godlineſſe? Wilt thou know, that it hindreth not to haue VVife, and Children?
Had not Moſes Wife, and Children? Beholde Peter, a Piller of the Churche:
He had a VVife. Therefore finde no faulte vvith Marriage.
                  
                     Againe,
                     Chryſo. in Eſaiā, In illa Verba, Vidi Dominum. Tom. 1. Homil. 4. 
                     writinge vpon theſe Wordes of the Prophete Eſai, Vidi Dominū, &c.
He ſaithe thus, Quis iſta lo
                        •
                     uitur? Eſaias ille ſpectator Coeleſtium Seraphim, qui cum
Coniugio commercium habuit: nec tamen extinxit Gratiam: Who ſpeaketh theſe
VVoordes? Eſaias the Beholder of the Coeleſtial Seraphims: who notwithſtandinge he had
companie vvith his VVife, yet he quenched not the Grace of God.
                  
                     Againe, Filium habebat, & Vxorem: vt intelligas, non eſſe malas Nuptias:
ſed malam eſſe Scortationem: Eſai had a Sonne, and a VVife: that thou maiſte vnderſtande,
that Marriage is not il, but that Pornication is il. And againe,
                      Num obſiabat
Matrimonium? Adiutrix tibi data eſt Vxor, non Inſidiatrix: VVhat? Did
Marriage hinder thee? No. Thy VVife is geeuen thee to be thy healper, and not to
deceiue thee.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe S. Auguſtine,Auguſt. in quaeſtionibus Noui, & Veter. Teſtamen. Quae. 127. Sanctiſsimus Samuel filios genuìt: non tamen

                        •
                     uſtitiae ſuae merita minuit. Zacharias Sacerdos Vir luſtus in ſenectute ſua genuit
filium. Qua ergo ratione accuſatur, quod minimè obeſſe probatur? Moſte Holy Samuel
begate Children: and yet nothinge abated the Merites of his righteouſneſſe. Zacharios
the Prieſte in his Olde age begate a Childe. VVherefore then is that thinge accuſed, that is
proued to doo no manner hurte?
                  Nicephorus writinge of Gregorie S. Baſiles Brother,
                     Nicephor. Li. 11. Cap. 19. 
                     the Biſhop of Nyſſa,
ſaithe thus, Quamuis haberet Coniugem, alijs tamen in rebus non ceſsit Fratri: Although
he had a VVife, yet in other thinges he was Nothinge Inferiour (to S. Baſile) his
Brother.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Bono Coniugali. ca. 11 
                     as he is alleged before, Sancta ſunt etiam Corpora Coniugatorum.
Fidem ſibi & Domino ſeruantium: VVhere as Married people keepe theire
Faithe bothe to them ſelues, and to God, theire Bodies be Holy.
                  
                     Likewiſe Nazianzene,Nazianzen. in 
                           〈◊〉
                         Gorgoniae. Etiam illa, quae nupſit, & de ijs, quae ſunt Mariti, & de ijs,
quae ſunt Domini, Solicita eſt: vt ſit Sancta, & Corpore, & Spiritu: Eu
                           •
                        n ſhee, that
is Married, is careful bothe for the thinges, that perteine to her Huſbande, and alſo for
the thinges, that perteine to God, that ſhee maie be Holy bothe in Body, and
Sprite.Ambroſ in. 1. Cor. 7. 
                     Likewiſe S. Ambroſe, Videmus Virgines de Saeculo cogitare: & Matrimonio
iunctos Dominicis ſtudere operibus: Wee ſee bothe Virgins careful for the world: and
Married menne Careful for the vvoorkes of the Lord.
                  
                     There be troubles in Marriage: It cannot be denied. But ſo be there alſo troubles
in Single Life: Specially to them, that feare the Iudgementes of God, and
haue not the gifte of Chaſtitie.
                     Chryſoſt in Geneſ Homil. 21. 
                     But Chryſoſtome ſaith, Matrimonium non ſolùm
nihil nobis obſtat ad Philoſophandum Deo, ſi voluerimus eſſe ſobrij, ſed & magnam
adfert Conſolationem: Comprimit enim inſanum Naturae impetum: nec turbari

ſint, quaſi mare: Sed efficit vt ſeapha foeliciter in portum appellat. Et ideo Deus
Conſolationem hanc tribuit humano generi: Marriage not onely hindreth nothing
towardes the knowledge and Seruice of God, If wee: wil be ſober, but alſo bringeth vs
greate Comforte. For it oppreſſeth the raginge furie of Nature, and ſuffreth vs not to be
daſhte, and toſte, as the waues of the Sea: but cauſeth that our ſhippe maie luckily arriue into
the hauen. And for that cauſe hath God geuen this Comforte vnto mankind. Therefore
                     
Gregorie Nazianzene ſaith,
                     Nazianzen in Funere Gorgoniae. Nuptiae ſunt laudabiles propter eam, quae in Nuptijs eſt,
animi tranquillitatem: Marriage is woorthy of Praiſe, for the quietneſſe, and contentation
of minde, that is in Marriage.
                  
                  
                     To be ſhorte,
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Clemens Alexandrinus ſaith, Habet, vt Caſtitas, ita etiam Matrimonium,
propria munera, & Miniſteria, quae ad Dominum pertinent: As wel Matrimonie,
as Chaſtitie, hath either of them theire peculiare offices perteinge vnto God.
                  
                     And Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Ne quis praetexat Vxorem, vel Liberos, &c. Haec excuſatio,
hic praetextus, Diaboli ſunt inſidiae: Let noman make his excuſe by his Wife,
or Children, &c. This Excuſe, and this pretence is the crafte, and deceitefulneſſe
of the Diuel. Thus, M. Hardinge, to conclude with Chryſoſtomes woordes,
the Grounde, and Fundation of your Doctrine in this behalfe, is the crafte, and
deceitefulneſſe of the Diuel.
                  
                     Theſe thinges conſidered, I doubte not, but of your courteſie, ye wil take
backe your Fittons vnto your ſelfe. The Concluſion and ſumme of your whole
talke is this: Spiridion ſerued God neuer the vvoorſe, not vvithſtandinge he
had a VVife: And Marriage is no let, or hinderance to perfite Godlineſſe.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 3.
               Further wee ſaie, that the ſame Lawe, whiche by conſtraint taketh
awaye this libertie from menne, and compelleth them againſte
there willes, to liue ſingle, is the Doctrine of Diuelles, as Paule
ſaith: and, that euer ſithence the time of this Lawe, a woonderful vncleaneſſe
of life, and manners in Goddes Miniſters, and ſundrie horrible
enormities haue folowed, as the Biſhop of Auguſta, as Faber,
as Abbas Panormitanus, as Latomus, as y• 
                  Tripartite VVoorke,
whiche is annexed to the Second Tome of the Councelles, and other
champions of the Popes bande, yea and as the matter it ſelfe, and al
Hiſtories doo confeſſe.
               
                  For it was rightly ſaide by Pius the Seconde, Biſhop of Rome,
that he ſavve many cauſes, vvhy VViues ſhoulde be taken avvaie
from Prieſtes: but that he ſavve many moe, and more vveightie
cauſes, vvhy they ought to be reſtoared to them againe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  There isManifeſte Vntruthe. For al Prieſtes are reſtreined from Marriage: And Prieſtes be menne. no Lawe in the Churche, that by conſtrainte taketh awaye from men libertie to Marie.
For S. Paules woordes be plaine,1. Cor. 7. Voluntarie Vovve imbarreth libertie of the contrary. If thou take a wife, thou ſinneſt not. And likewiſe, If a Virgine
marie, ſhee ſinneth not. But if any Perſons haue of theire owne wil, and deuotion Vowed to
God chaſtitie, the ſame haue imbarred them ſelues of this general libertie, and by theire Voluntarie
Promiſe, haue bounde themſelues neuer to Marie. And in ſutche, not onely Marriage it ſelfe, but alſo
a wil to Marie is damnable, as S. Paule ſaithe of VVidowes, whiche haue Vowed to liue chaſte, that
they haue theire damnation (not for that they Marie, but) for that they wil marie. If the Goſpellers
alleage againſt this Doctrine the woordes of S. Paule, If a Virgine marie, ſhee ſinneth not: VVee
anſweare with Chryſoſtome, and other Fathers, that a Virgine by a Vowe of Chaſtitie dedicated to

God, if ſhe marrie,1. Cor. 7. Ad Virginē Lapſam ca. 5. doubtleſſe ſhe ſinneth mutche, for that beſide Chriſte ſhee hathe ſurmaried an aduouterer.
If they obiecte. It is better to Marrie then to Burne: Let S. Ambroſe anſweare: VVho ſaith, that
this ſaieinge perteineth to her, that hath not promiſed, to her that is not yet vailed. And by reſtraininge
them from Marriage,The Doctrine of Deuils. the Churche vſeth no tyrannic: nor if it teache, that ſutche ought to forebeare
Marriage, is that to be accoumpted the Doctrine of Diuels, but of the Holy Ghoſte, whereby men
are kepte from wilful dammation. To forebidde Marriage wholy, Vniuerſally, and altogeather, that is
the Doctrine of Deuils. But to iudge Marriage for ſomme ſtate, and Order, of leſſe conuenience, then
the Single Life, or after Vowe of chaſtitie made, to require perpetual continencie, this is not the Doctrine
of Diuels. For S. Paule him ſelfe did bothe. If theſe Defenders wil not admitte this anſwere,
and beinge lothe to forſake theire fleaſhly pleaſure, pretende to be moued with the Auctoritie of S.
Paule, who calleth the forebiddinge of Marriage the Doctrine of Diuels: I ſende them to S. Auguſtine
for an anſwere in his thirteenthe Booke, and Six the Chapter againſte Fauſtus the Maniche. VVhere for
a ſufficient ſolutton of theire obiection, they ſhal finde theſe plaine woordes: Ille prohibet, qui
hoc malum eſſe dicit: non qui huic bono aliud melius anteponit. That is to ſate, He forebiddethe
(Marriage) whiche ſaithe it is euil: not he, whiche preferreth an other better thinge before
this good thinge.
                  Nowe, that I may ſhewe in what time, and by what perſons this Lawe of Single Life was ordeined,
for breuities ſake I wil content my ſelfe with witnes of One onely Councel. VVhiche is the Seconde
Councel of Carthage, holden in the time of Valentinian and Theodoſius the Emperours. VVhere
we finde, that this order was taken
                        Vntruthe. For theſe be the vvoordes of the Apoſtles Canōs: Epiſcopus, aut Preſbyter, aut Diaconus, Vxorē ſuam praetextu Religionis ne abijciat. Aut ſi abiecerit, à Cō
                        munione ſegregetur. Canone. 5. by the Apoſtles them ſelues, and that the Antiquitie obſerued,
and kepte the ſame. The woordes of the councel be theſe, Canone. 2.
                  
                     Aurelius Epiſcopus dixit, &c. Aurelius the Biſhop ſaide: VVhereas in the Councel before this,
it was treated of the rule of continencie and chaſtitiè, theſe three Degrees through their Conſecrations
be annexed to chaſtitte by a certaine decree written, to witte, Biſhoppes, Prieſtes, and Deacons. VVhom
it is thought good, as it becometh the Holy Prelates, and Prieſtes of God, and likewiſe Leuites, or ſuche
as attende vpon Holy Sacramentes, to be continent and chaſte in euery condition to thintente thei may
ſimply obteine, that they pray to God for, that we keepe and obſerue that, whicheVntruthe. Reade the Anſvveare. M. Hardinge fouly miſtaketh the Councel. the Apoſ
                        •
                     les haue
taught, and the antiquitie hath kepte. Lo Sir Defender.
                  VVhat if the Biſhop of Auguſta finde faulte with Prieſtes liues? (VVhiche Auguſta and whiche Biſhop
there ye meane, I knowe not, neither wel can I knowe, excepte I ſawe your notebooke) what if
the Abbot Panormitane, what if one Faber, and one Latomus, men of our time (I trow) and that zelous
man whiche wrote the litle tripartite treatiſe annexed to the Laterane Councel. What ſo euer he was:
what if al theſe (I ſaie) moued with a zeale, and beinge deſirous of the Clergies Reformation, lamentably
complaine of theire looſe life? what then?
                  Gette you fairer painted, and better filled boxes, then theſe be, or els ſhal ye al be taken for poore
Potticartes.
                  Touchinge Pius, In Platina ye ſhal finde theſe wordes, for one of that Popes ſaieinges, Sacerdo
                        
                           •
                        ibus
magna ratione ſublatas nuptias, maiori reſtituendas videri. As mutche to ſaie in Engliſh:
that Marriage was taken from Prieſtes with greate reaſon, and that it ſemed it were to be reſtoared
againe with greater. This ſaieinge reporteth not, that VViues were: taken a waie from Prieſtes, as you
reporte, neither that VViues ought to be reſtored to Prieſtes againe.A ſage expoſition. VVhat had this benne to Pius meaninge? It ſpeaketh onely of Marriage,
whiche as, before a man enter into Holy Orders, no Vowe beinge made, is lawful: ſo by orders taken a
Vowe of chaſt
                        •
                     tie beinge ſolemly made, is vtterly vnlawful. If this ſaieinge had made ſo mutche for
your pretenſed Marriage, as ye would men to beleue,Vntruthe. For if vvee had falſified the vvordes, yee vvould not ſo ſimply haue touched it. ye would neuer haue falſified it by ſutch chaūge
of woordes. VVhether is be more expedient, ſutche as come to the clergy, to be required to leade the Single
life, and to bind themſelues thereto by Vowes, or to enioie the common libertie of Mariage,Novve at laſte, the Doctour
                           •
                         ſtand i
                           •
                         doubte. 
                           •
                         
                        Mira verò Mili ti quae placeant.
                      that
we leaue to the Churche to diſcuſſe and order.
                  If Pius ſawe many weightier cauſes, for Prieſtes to haue VViues, then for theire Single Life, as
ye pretende he did: why did not he, or you in his ſteede ſhewe vs, what and how ſubſtantial they be? If
they be no better, then you and your felowes haue vttered in your Sermons, and w
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     inges hitherto,
they are not worthe
                        •
                     a Pipt nootte. This ſaieing of Pius is wel to be weighed and ſcanned.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Who ſo euer ſhal wel conſider the Fruites that haue growen of this trée,Doctrine of Diuels. maie
eaſily iudge, by whom it was planted. Certainely S. Paule, when he had géeuen
rules, touching the Cleregie, that Biſhoppes, & Deacons ſhould be the Huſbandes
of One Wife, immediately afterwarde, in the ſame tenoure, & courſe of Speache,
ſaith thus:1. Tim. 4. 
                     The Sprite ſaithe plainely, that in later times, ſomme ſhal departe from the

                           〈◊〉
                        , geeuinge eare vnto lieinge Sprites, and to the Doctrine of Diuels, vttering lies vnder
Hypocriſie, hauing theire Conſcience burnte with a hote yron (and therby made vnſenſible)
Forebiddinge Marriage, &c.
                  
                  But M. Hardinge ſaithe, there is no Lawe in the Churche, to reſtraine Marriage:
and that Marriage is not nowe condemned by him, and other of that ſide, &
thought vnlawful Vniuerſally in al menne, (for that, he ſaithe, was the Hereſie of
Valentinus, Marcion, Montanus, and others) but onely forebidden, and thought
vnlawful in a fewe. By this anſweare, M. Harding maie ſéeme to make him ſelfe
ſommewhat better, then was Valentinus, and Marcion, and other Olde Heretiques.
But further to healpe him, and thorowly to cleare his Doctrine, it wil not
ſerue. It is a Commō knowen rule in y• Scholes, Magis, & Minùs non mutant Speciē.
Verily, as he that killeth but a fewe, menne, is called a Mankiller: Euen ſo he, that
Condemneth Marriage in a fewe, muſte likewiſe be called a Condemner of Marriage.
Neither dooth S. Paule, when he propheſieth hereof, ſay, that ſomme ſhould
Condemne al kinde of Marriage Vniuerſally, in al manner of Menne: but onely
he ſaithe, There ſhalbe ſomme, that ſhal forebidde Marriage.
                  
                  Neither did al Heretiques Condemne Marriage in one ſorte. For ſomme of
them condemned it Generally, and thorowly, and altogeather: Somme others of
them Condemned it onely in a fewe, euen as M. Hardinge, and his Felowes
doo. For thus S. Auguſtine writeth of the Heretiques named the Manichées,
Auditores qui appellantur apud eos,
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 74. 
                     & Carnibus veſcuntur, & agros colunt, &, ſi
voluerint, Vxores habent: Quorum nihil faciunt illi, qui vocantur Electi: Thei, that
emonge them be called, Hearers, doo bothe eate Pleaſhe, and tille the grownde, and Marrie
Wiues too, if they liſte. But no ſutche thing maie they doo, that be called Electi. The Auditores,
or Hearers emonge the Manichées were as the laie people: The Electi,
or Choſen, were as the Cleregie. Theſe Heretiques the Manichées Condemned
Marriage, not generally in al ſortes, and degrées of menne: but onely, as M. Hardinge
doothe, in a fewe. Yet were they Heretiques notwithſtandinge, and theire
Doctrine was the Doctrine of Diuels.
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto them,
                     Auguſt. De Moribus Mantchae. Lib. 2. Cap. 13. 
                     as he woulde alſo ſaie vnto M. Hardinge:
Non Concubitum, ſed vt longè antè ab Apoſtolo dictum eſt, Verè Nuptias prohibetis:
Ye forebidde, not Copulation, (or Cocubines) But, euen as the Apoſtle Propheſied lōg
before, Verily, and in deede ye forebidde Marriage: (Albeit it were but in a few).
                  
                  
                     All this, M. Hardinge, notwithſtanding, that it maie plainely appeare, whoes
Doctrine ye teache,
                     Chryſoſt. in Opere Imperfecto, Hom
                           •
                        l. 1. 
                     it ſhalbe good, and not form the pourpoſe, briefely to diſcloſe
ſomme parte of it. And here, to paſſe ouer theſe woordes of Chryſoſtome, Haec ipſa
Coniunctio Maritalis malum eſt ante Deum:Hierony. Aduerſus Iouintan. Lib. 1. 
                     This very Copulation of Man and VVife is
euil before God: And theſe of S. Hierome, Quàm diu impleo Mariti officium, non
impleo officium Chriſtiani: As longe as I doo the de wtie of a Huſband, I doo not the
devvtie of a Chriſtian: and other like Saieinges, and Authorities before alleged,
Pope Innocentius in y• Condemnation of Marriage ſaithe thus:
                     Diſt 82. Propoſuiſti. Rom. 8. Tit. 1. Qui in Carne ſunt,
Deo placere non poſſunt: They that be in the Fleaſhe (that is to ſaie, in Marriage)
cannot pleaſe God And to this pourpoſe he allegeth theſe woordes of S.
                      Paule, To y•
Cleane al thinges are Cleane: But to the filthy, and Infidelles (wherby ye ſame Innocentius
vnderſtandeth Married people) nothinge is Cleane,Diſt 82. Pluri
                        
                           ••
                        s. But boothe theire

minde, and theire Conſcience is defiled.Copus Dialog. 1. Pag. 159. Graecos Solos in hac impudicit lae Scholà Magiſtros ſequuntur. 
                     Pope Siricius calleth Marriage, Virium,
Luxuriam, Foedas Cupiditates: Vice, Lecherie, end Filthy Luſtes. One of your late Engliſhe
Doctours of Louaine ſaith, that the whole Eaſte Churche, mainteining the
lawful Marriage of Prieſtes, euermore continewed there from the Apoſtles time
vntil this daye, mainteineth, and contineweth
                      a Schole of Filthineſſe.
                  Further you maie remember, that this rule is written in a Booke of your owne
Doctrine,Con
                           ••
                        t. Othonis. Licet ad profuga
                           ••
                        m. In Gloſſ. and is geuen in Secrete, as a Special Leſſon vnto your Cleregie, Si non
Caſtè, tamen cautè: If thou deale not Chaſtely, yet deale not Charily.
                  
                  From whence had you this Doctrine, M. Hardinge? who ſet it firſte abroche?
who taught it? who cōfirmed it? who allowed it? If ye can ſay, it is not y• 
                     Doctrine
of the Diuel: Yet verily, I beléeue, ye cannot ſaie, it is in any pointe like the Doctrine
of God.
                     Hierony. in Danielem. Cap. 11. 2. Tim. 3. 
                     S. Hierome hauinge occaſion to ſpeake of Antichriſte, ſaith thus:
Simulabit Caſtiratem, vt plurimos decipiat: He ſhal make a countrefeite ſhewe of Chaſtitie,
that he maie deceiue many.
                      Euen ſo S. Paule ſaith, Habentes Speciem Pietatis: Virtutem
autem eius abnegantes: Hauinge a colour of Godlineſſe: but ye Power therof denieing vtterly.
                     
                  
                  But, ſommewhat to reliue your ſelfe, ye allege theſe woordes of S. Auguſtine:
Ille prohibet Matrimonium,
                     Auguſt. Contra Eauſt. li. 30. ca. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                     Matrimonium, qui illud Malum eſſe dicit: non qui huic Bono aliud melius
anteponit: He forebiddeth Marriage, that ſaithe Marriage is Euil: and not he, that before
this thinge, beinge Good, ſetteth an other thinge, that is Better.
                      Here, M. Hardinge, I beſeeche
you of your indifferente iudgement: He that vſeth your woordes, and ſaithe,
as you ſaie, They that liue in Matrimonie, cannot pleaſe God: Thei be Filthy: Thei be Infidelles:
Vnto them nothing is cleane: Theire vvhole Minde, and Conſcience is
defiled:
                      He y• ſaith, Matrimonie is Vice, Lecherie, and Filthy Pleaſure,
                      Saith he not,
Matrimonie is an euil thing? Thus you ſay: Thus you write: Theſe Woordes be apparente,
and allowed in you Bookes: euen in thoſe Bookes, whereby ye woulde haue
vs to Order, and to directe our Liues, & Manners. Briefely this is the Very Subſtance
of your Doctrine in this behalfe. Therefore euen by S. Auguſtines Iudgemente,
Your Doctrine is the Doctrine of Diuels.
                  
                  And, whereas ye would ſeeme, not vtterly to condemne the ſtate of Matrimonie,
but onely to ſette Single Life before it, as a Better thinge before a Good: it maie
pleaſe you to vnderſtande, that, notwithſtandinge a thinge in it ſelfe be Beſte, yet
is it not therefore Vniuerſally Beſte for euery Man. For, notwithſtanding Scarlet
be the faireſt of al Coloures, and the Face the faireſt parte of al the Body, yet,
I reckē, M. Hardinge, to make your ſelfe faire, ye woulde not haue your Face died
in Scarlet.
                  Single Life for many cauſes is the Beſte: I graunte. Yet is it not Beſte for euery
body: but onely for him, that hath the gifte of Chaſtitie, and can with quiet
minde, & vpright Conſcience liue Single. Otherwiſe Matrimonie is mutche better.
And therefore God hath leafte vs indifferently frée to bothe: that, who ſo euer cannot
vſe the One,1. Cor. 7. may chuſe the other. S. Paule ſaith, Volo Omnes eſſe ſicut meipſum:
I woulde euery man woulde liue Single, as I doo.
                      But he addeth withal a Special Prouiſo:
Vnuſquiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Proprium donum habet à Deo: alius autem ſic: Euery man hath
his owne gifte of God: One this, an other that.
                      And therefore he ſaith further. Although
Single Life be the better ſtate, Yet, who ſo euer is not continente, let him Marrie. Better
it is to Marrie. then to Burne. Although otherwiſe he weigh Single Life before Marriage,
yet in this caſe, he ſaith, it is better to Marrie, then to liue Single.
                  M. Hardinge hereto replieth: They, that haue Vowed, haue loſte this libertie:
and by S. Ambroſe, and S. Auguſtines Iudgemente maye not Marrie. Hereof I
haue partely ſpoken before: & partely ſhal haue occaſion offered to ſaie more hereafter.
In the meane ſeaſon wée are taught here by M. Hardinge, to take S. Paules
Woordes by the toppe, and to turne them quite backwardes: and thus to frame a

Newe Rule of Life,The Apoſtles Doctrine. and to ſaie contrarie to S. Paule, Melius eſt Vri, quàm Nubere:
It is better, to burne in Concupiſcence, then to Marrie.
                  
                  
                     Yet S. Auguſtine ſaithe euen of them, that haue Vowed, as it is before alleged,
Quae Nubere volunt,Augu. De Sācta Virginit. Ca. 34. & ideò non Nubunt, quia impunè non poſſant, Meliùs Nuberēt.
quàm vrerentur, id eſt, quàm occulta flamma Concupiſcentiae in ipſa Conſcientia vaſtarentur:
They that haue a minde to Marrie, and yet Marrie not, bicauſe they cannot
Marrie without reproche, Better vvere it for them to Marrie, then to Burne,
that is to ſaye, then with the priuie flame of theire Coucupiſcence to be waſted in theire Conſcience.
                  
                  Further M. Hardinge ſaithe, This Order of Single Life was taken by the Apoſtles
them ſelues: And therefore, ſaithe he, it is not the Diuels, but the Apoſtles
Doctrine. If this be true in déede, then is this mater thorowly concluded. But
where was this Order taken by the Apoſtles? By what Writinge, by what Recorde,
by what Tradition maie it appeare? Or how is it likely, that the Apoſtles,
beinge Married Menne them ſelues, would force other menne to liue Single?
                  I haue already ſhewed by Ignatius,
                     Ambro. 2 Cor. 11. by Clemens, by Euſebius, and by S. Ambroſe,
that the Apoſtles, S. Iohn Onely excepted, were al Married. Clemens ſaith.
that Peter ſaw his owne Wife carried by y• Officers to ſuffer deathe for Chriſtes
ſake:Euſeb. Li. 3. Ca. 30 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Ignatius ad Philadelphien. and cried vnto her comfortably by her Name, O Wooman, Remember the Lord.
Ignatius
                      S. Iohns Diſciple ſaithè, Opto Deo dignus inueniri, ſicut Petrus, & Paulus,
& reliqui Apoſtoli, qui Nuptijs fuerunt ſociati, qui non libidinis cauſa, ſed
poſteritatis ſurrogandae gratia Coniuges habuerunt: I wiſhe to be founde meete for God,
as was Peter, and Paule, and the other Apoſtles that vvere Married: and not for
pleaſure, but for Poſterities ſake had VViues.
                     
                  
                  Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſo. In Priorem ad Timoth. Homil. 10. Cur non ait, Oportet Epiſcopum Angelum eſſe,
nulli humanae perturbationi vitióue ſubiectum? Ne Eccleſiae negotia fructuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      perirent.
Idcircò moderatam Virtutem propoſuit: non ſupremam illam, atque Coeleſtem:
VVhy ſaithe not S. Paule, A Biſhop ought to be an Angel, ſubiecte neither to any
worldly affection, nor to any Vice? Leſte the affaires, and fruites of the Churche ſhould periſhe,
(beinge without a Gouernoure). Therefore he required of Biſhoppes a moderate, and
a reaſonable kinde of Vertue (willinge them to be Huſbandes of One Wife)
and not that other Vertue, ſo High, and ſo Heauenly: (that is to ſaye, vtterly to liue vnmaried.)
Againe he ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. in eadem Homil. Idcircò ait, Vnius Vxoris Virum: Ne nimis in
anguſtum rem eam concluderet, ſi exactiſsimam Virtutem experiſſet: idcireò
moderatiori admonitione maluit vti: ne ex deſperatione perfectae illius inueniendae
Virtutis, Eccleſiae ſine Epiſcopis eſſent: Therefore S. Paule ſaith, Let a Biſhop
be the Huſbande of One VVife: Leſte he ſhoulde ſhut vp the mater into too greate a
ſtraite, if he had required that moſte perfite puritie: therefore he woulde rather vſe a reaſonable
moderation, or meane (that a Biſhop ſhoulde be the Huſbande of One Wife): Leſte
of deſpaire of findinge that excellencie of Vertue (to liue Vnmarried) the Churches ſhoulde
be leafte without Biſhoppes.
                  
                  S. Paule
                     1. Cor. 7. 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. Leo Epiſt. 87. ſaithe, Touchinge Virgins, I haue no commaundemente of the
Lorde: Better it is to Marrie, then to burne: Let a Biſhop be the Huſbande
of One VVife. Whiche laſte woordes Pope Leo expoundeth thus: Is Epiſcopus
ordinetur, quem Vnius Vxoris Virum fuiſſe, aut eſſe Conſtiterit: Let him be
Conſecrate a Biſhop, of whom it may wel appeare, that either he is, or hath benne the
Huſbande of One VVife.
                  
                  
                     S. Ambroſe expoundinge theſe woordes of S. Paule,
                     Ambroſ. in 1. Cor. 7. Touchinge Virgins, I
haue no commaundemente of the Lord, ſaith thus, Si Doctor Gentium non habuit, habere
quis potuit?
                      If the Doctour of the Gentiles had no Commaundement of the Lorde, touching
Virgins, what man els then coulde euer haue it?
                  
                     
                     Emonge the Rules, whiche commonly are called the Apoſtles Canons, it is
written thus: Epiſcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus Vxorem ſuā praetextu Religionis
ne abijciat. Aut ſi abiecerit, à Communione ſegregetur: &, ſi perſeueret, deponatur:
Let not either Biſhop, or Prieſte, or Deacon put awaie his Wife vnder coloure of Religion. Or
if he ſo doo, let him be put from the Communion (of the Faithful): And. if he ſo continew, let
him be vtterly depoſed from his office.
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome expounding theſe Woordes of S. Paule, Let euery man remaine
in the vocation,Hierony. Contra Iouinian. Lib. 1. vvherein he vvas called, ſaithe thus, Ex hoc, habentibus Vxores

                        •
                     ollit licentiam dimittendi eas: Hereby S. Paule forebiddeth Married menne to put awaye
theire Wiues.
                  
                  
                     In the Sixth Councel holden at Conſtantinople it is written thus: Antiquum
ſequentes Canonem Apoſtolicae diligentiae,Diſt. 31. Quoniā. & Conſtitutiones Sanctorum Virorum,
Legales Nuptias Poſthac valere volumus, nullo modo cum Vxoribus ſuis eorum
connubia diſſoluentes: Folowing the olde Order of the Apoſtles diligence, and the Conſtitutions,
and Lawes of the Holy Fathers, frōhence foorth wee wil, that the lavvful Marriage
(of Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes) ſhal ſtande in force,
                      not in any vviſe diſſoluinge
the VVedlocke, that they haue vvith theire VViues. And herein, they ſay, they
folowe the Olde Canon, or Order of the Apoſtles.
                  
                  
                     Gratian ſaithe,
                     
                     26. Quae. 2. Sor
                           •
                        . 
                     as he is before alleged, Copula Sacerdotalis, nec Legali, nec Euangelica,
nec Apoſtolica Authoritate prohibetur:
                      The Marriage of Prieſtes is not forebidden
by any Authoritie, either of the Lawe, or of the Goſpel, or of the Apoſtles.
                  
                     Cardinal Caietane ſaith,
                     Catharinus cō
                        tra error. Caietani, Errore 112. Clemens ſtroma Lib. 3. Dominus Diſcipulis ſuis nullum indixit Votum: Our
Lord appointed vnto his Diſciples no manner of Vovve.
                  Clemens Alexandrinus ſaithe, as it is ſaide before, Epiſtolae Apoſtoli nuſquam
honeſtum, Moderatum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Matrimonium prohibuerunt: The Epiſtles of Paule the Apoſtle
neuer forebade honeſte, and ſobre Marriage.
                  
                  Al theſe thinges wel conſidered, I beſeche thée, gentle Reader, indifferently to
weigh M. Hardinges woordes: and to demaunde of him, with what countenance
he coulde thus tel thee, that the Order of Single Life was taken by the Apoſtles
them ſelues, and therefore muſte be holden as the Apoſtles Doctrine.
                  
                  If he happen to tel thée, it is ſo written in the Councel of Carthage, tel him
againe, he is deceiued. I ſaie, tel him, that the Apoſtles of Chriſte neuer, neither
made any Law, nor gaue any order for y• Single Life of the Miniſters. And therefore
tel him hardly, he is deceiued. He wil ſay, The woordes of y• 
                     Councel be plaine.
Quod Apoſtoli docuerunt,
                     Concil. Carthag. 2 Cap. 2. & ipſa ſeruauit Antiquitas: Whiche thinge the Apoſtles haue
taught, and y• Antiquitie it ſelfe hath obſerued.
                      Theſe woordes be plaine in déede, if they
were not peruerſly gloſed. Therfore tel him againe, he ſhould better haue learned,
bothe the māner of the Apoſtles teaching, & alſo the ſcope, and reache of this Antiquitie.
Certainely thus mutche his owne Gloſe could haue told him: Apoſtoli nihil
inſtituerunt,
                     Diſt. 84. Cùm in Praeterito, in Gloſſa. 
                     de non vtendo Matrimonio iam contracto: The Apoſtle tooke no order,
touchinge the not vſinge of Matrimonie already contracted.
                     
                  
                  
                     And whereas the Councel ſaithe, Apoſtoli docuerunt, The Apoſtles taught,
The ſame
                      Gloſe ſaithe, Apoſtoli docuerunt exemplo: non Inſtitutione, vel Conſtitutione:
The Apoſtles taught it by theire Example: but not by appointemene, nor
by commaundemente. Perhaps M. Hardinge wil ſaie, The Apoſtles Example
is ſufficiente.
                     Clemens ſtroma. Lib. 7. 
                     Thereto I wil anſweare, as Clemens Alexandrinus ſommetime
anſweared certaine of the Olde Heretiques in like caſe: Dicunt glorioſi iſti iactactores,
ſe imitari Dominum, qui Vxorem nō duxit. Illis dicit Scriptura, Deus Superbis reſiſtit:
Humilibus autē dat Gratiam: Theſe glorious Braggers ſaie, they wil folow the
Example of our Lord, y• Married no VVife. Vnto them the Scripture ſaith, God withſtandeth
the Prowd: and geueth Grace vnto the humble. And to like pourpoſe S.
                      Ambroſe ſaith,
                     
Praeceptum quidem Apoſtolus non habuit: at habuit Exemplum. In deede the Apoſtle
S. Paule had no Commaundemente to geeue of Virginitie: but Example he
had.
                  
                     Againe whereas the Councel allegeth Antiquitie, Quod ipſa Seruault Antiquitas,
the ſame Gloſe expoundeth it thus: A tempore Siricij Papae hic vocat Antiquitatē:
By this woorde, Antiquitie, the Councel meaneth the time after Pope Siricius (Whiche
was foure hundred yeeres after Chriſte). And againe, as it is alleged before,
                      Ante tempora
Siricij Papae Sacerdotes poterant contrahere Matrimonium: Before the
time of Pope siricius it vvas lavvful for Prieſtes to contracte Matrimonie.
                  Sutche good lucke M. Hardinge hath to his Doctours, and Councelles. By his
owne Gloſe he hath loſte foure hundred yéeeres of his Antiquitie.
                  Panormitane after he had ſaide, The Commaundemente of Single life is not
of the Law of God, he added further,
                     Extra, De Clericis Coniugatis. Cùm olim. Quia aliâs Graeci peccarent: Non enim excuſaret
eos Conſuetudo. Quia illa non valet cōtra Legem Dei: Otherwiſe the Graecians were offenders.
For no Cuſtome coulde excuſe them. For as mutche as Cuſtome preuaileth not againſt the
Lawe of God.
                  
                  Now touchinge this Councel of Carthage, notwithſtandinge it had benne
truely Conſtrued, yet the Authoritie therof muſte néedes ſéeme ſo mutche the leſſe,
for that it decréeth of ſet pourpoſe quite contrarie to the Councel of Nice. For the
Fathers in the Nicene Councel durſte nor to remoue Prieſtes, andSozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 23. and Biſhoppes
from theire Wiues: for that it was written, Whom God hath ioīned, let noman ſunder.
But theſe other Fathers in the Councel of Carthage without any ſtickinge, or
doubtinge at the mater, onely with one woorde, vtterly remoued them: and ſo by
force, and violence, and contrarie to the Commaundemente of Chriſte, ſundred, &
diuided them, whom God had ioined. Whiche thing, Holy Paphnutius ſaith, was
not Lawful for man to doo.
                  Touchinge Biſhop Hulderichus, Panormitanus, La
                           •
                        omus, and Iacobus Faber,
and ſutche others, as haue ſpoken, or written in the behalfe of Prieſtes Marriage,
M. Hardinge thinketh it ſufficiente for him to anſweare, What if they complaine
of the looſe life of the Cleregie? What then? That is to ſaie, What if the Cleregie
liue in profeſſed ſhame, and open filthineſſe? What then? As if ſutche Simple
Authorities were woorthy of none other anſweare.
                  Yet was Hulderichus ſommetime Biſhop of Auguſta in Germanie, welneare
ſixe hundred yeeres agoe, & for his vertue, and Holineſſe was coumpted a Saincte.
Abbas Vrſpergenſis in his ſtorie writeth of him in this ſorte:Abbas Vrſperg. Anno 925. Pagina 214. 
                     Hiltinus Auguſtanus
Epiſcopus obijt: Cui Sanctus Vdalrichus (qui idem eſt Hulderichus) ſucceſsit: Hiſtine
the Biſhop of Auguſta died: To whom ſucceded Saincte Hulderichus. Abbas Panormitanus
was a famouſe Canoniſte, in Iudgement Equal with any other.
                  
                     Faber, and Latomus bothe in our time were accoumpted Learned: and either
of them a Special Champion of M. Hardinges ſide. Verily the woorſte, and vileſte
of al theſe is a greate deale bothe ſounder in Iudgement, and déeper in Learning,
then either Amphilochius, whom M. Hardinge ſo highly eſtéemeth: or Abdias, or
Hippolytus, or Leontius: whom they haue lately rakte out of the duſte: Or Clement
of Rome, whom he ſo often calleth the Apoſtles Felowe.
                  Neither did theſe writers onely complaine of the looſeneſſe of Prieſtes liues, as
M. Hardinge telleth vs: But alſo for remouinge of Publique ſhame, and ſclaunder
out of the Churche of God, wiſhed, that the Libertie of Marriage might be reſtoared:
whiche thinge M. Hardinge ſo cloſely diſſembleth.
                  
                     Touchinge that Pope Pius was commonly woonte to ſay, As Marriage vvas
taken avvaie from Prieſtes vpon greate Conſiderations, euen ſo novve vpon
other greater conſiderations it vvere to be reſtoared to them againe, M. Hardinge,

after mutche other néedeleſſe talke,
                     The fruites of Single Life. 
                     ſaithe thus: Why did not he, or you in
his ſtéede ſhewe vs, what, and how Subſtantial conſiderations they be?
                  
                  Good Chriſtian Reader, lothe I am to diſcloſe, and publiſhe any thinge, that
maie ſounde to the ſhame of any one man: mutche leſſe, to the open ſhame of ſo
greate a number. But M. Hardinge ouer heauily preſſeth vs with his importunitie,
and requireth vs vpon our credite to ſhewe theſe cauſes. Therefore if the
reporte hereof ſhal ſéeme vnpleaſant, the faulte is M. Hardinges: It is not mine.
I wil onely ſhew foorthe ſimply, & truely, that I finde written in ſundrie, bothe of
the Ancient learned Fathers, and alſo in others of his owne ſide: Whiche neuertheleſſe,
had not M. Hardinge benne, mighte mutche better haue benne concealed.
                  
                     Firſte of al, the Ancient Father Origen for his time, whiche was welneare
foureteene hundred yéeres agoe, hereof complaineth thus: Non ſolùm, quae docent,Origen. in Marthae. Tracta. 24.
non faciunt, ſed etiam crudeliter, & ſine miſericordia, non ſecundum aeſtimationem
vitium vniuſcuiuſque, iniungunt: Vt, qui prohibent nubere, & ab eo, quod expedit, ad
immoderatam munditiem compellunt. Alligant onera grauia, & faciunt homines
cadere ſub eis. Et frequenter videmus, eos qui talia docent, contraria facere ſermonibus
ſuis. Caſtitatem docent: & Caſtitatem non ſeruant: &c. Omnia faciunt propter perſonas
hominum, & glorias vanas, vt videantur ab hominibus. Et plaerunque ſunt tales,
qui diligunt primos accubitus in conuiuijs, & ſalutationes in foro, & vocari ab hominibus
Rabbi: Qui volunt vocari Epiſcopi, Preſbyteri, Diaconi: Not onely they doo
not, that they teache, but alſo cruelly, and without mercie they laie theire Iniunctions vpon
others, not conſideringe eche mannes habilitie. Sutche be they, that forbidde menne to
marrie: and from that thinge, that is lawful to be donne, driue, and force menne to an vnreaſonable
Puritie. They binde, and laie on heauy burthens, and cauſe menne to fal vnder
them. And oftentimes wee ſee them, that teache ſutche thinges, to doo contrarie to theire
owne ſaieinges. They teache Chaſtitie: and yet keepe not Chaſtitie: &c. They doo al
thinges for the commendation of menne, and vaine glorie, that they maye be ſeene, and noted
of the people. And commonly they be ſutche, as loue the higheſt places at Feaſtes, and Banquettes,
and to be Saluted,
                     Euſeb li. 4 ca. 23. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     and Honoured in the Market places, and of the people to be called
Rabbi: That wil be called Biſhoppes, Prieſtes, and Deacons.
                  
                  
                     At the verie firſte attempte hereof, Dionyſius the Biſhop of Corinthe wrote
thus vnto Pinytus the Biſhop of Gnoſus, Noli graue illud onus neceſsariae Caſtitatis
imponere Fratribus: Laie not that heauy burthen of the neceſsitie of
Chaſte life vpon the Brethren.
                  
                  
                     Neither was it for nothinge, that S. Cyprian in his time wrote thus, Vt quid
ſibi adhibuit mulierem,Cypria. De Singularitate Clericorum. qui ducere contempſit Vxorem? Peius eſt, quàm Moechari,
continentiam ducere criminoſam: Wherefore tooke he a woman vnto him, that diſdeined
to marrie a wife? To liue a continente life with reproche, is vvoorſe then Aduouterie.
                  
                     It is not for nothinge,
                     Epiphan. Contra Origenian. Haereſi. 42. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Chryſoſtom. to 5. Quòd Regulares Foeminae cum vi
                           •
                        is cohabitent. 
                     that Epiphanius writeth, Repudiant Nuptias: at non
Libidinem. In honore enim eſt apud illos, non Caſtitas, ſed Hypocriſis: quam tamen
appellari volunt Caſtitie? They refuſe Marriage, but not luſte, or pleaſure.
For they eſteeme, not Chaſtitie, but Hypocri
                           •
                        ie: And yet the ſame Hypocriſe they wil
haue called Chaſtitie.
                  
                     It is not for nothinge, that Chryſoſtome writeth of the Vowed, or Chaſte
wemen in his time: Nuptias magis dicere beatas licet, &c. Poſthac melius eſset,
ne Virgines quidem eſſe, &c. Perſeuerat adhuc nomen, & appellatio rei: at nego
                        •
                     ium
totum in corpore ſublatum eſt, &c. In delicijs magis viuunt, quàm mulieres in fornice,
&c. Frequens, & quotidianus eſt concurſus obſtetricum ad Virginum domos:
&c. Virginitas iſta cum viris plùs ab omnibus arguitur, quàm ſtuprum ipſum:
Wee maie ſaie, that Marriage is a greate deale better (then ſutche Ʋirginitie).
Herea
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        r it vvere better, there were no Ʋirgins at al. The na
                        •
                     e (of Virginitie) continueth
ſtil: But Virginitie it ſelfe in their body is quite gonne. They liue more in pleaſure,

then Harlottes in the Stevves. There is often, and daiely renninge of Midvviues to
virgins houſes. This manner of Virginitie of vvemen emongeſt menne, is
more reproued of al menne then Fornication it ſelfe.
                  
                     It is not for nothinge,
                     Sulpitius Seuerus Dialog. 3. 
                     that Sulpitius Seuerus ſaithe of S. Hierome, Hieronymus
de familiaritatibus virginum, & Monachorum, & Clericorum, quàm vera,
quàm fottia diſputauit? Vnde a quibuſdam, quos nominare nolo, dicitur non amari:
Howe truely, and how ſtoutely hath S. Hierome written of the Familiaritie, that theſe
virgins haue vvith Monkes, and Prieſtes? And therefore it is ſaide, that of ſomme
menne, whome I wil not name, he is the leſſe beloued.
                  
                  
                     Neither is it for nothinge,
                     Saluianus De Prouidentia, Lib. 5. Ibidem. 
                     that Saluianus ſaithe of his time, which was aboute
a thouſande yéeres agoe, Sub ſpecie Religionis vitijs Saecularibus mancipantur:
Vnder the coloure of Religion, and Holineſſe, they are made ſlones to worldly vices.
And againe,
                      Nouum prorſus Conuerſionis genus: Licita non faciunt: Illicita committunt:
A very ſtrange kinde of Conuerſion: That they maie doo, they doo not: And
doo, that they maie not doo.
                  Al theſe, and other like thinges were written longe agoe, in the olde times,
before the fruites of Single life were thorowly knowen.
                  
                     But after that Pope Hildebrande by Crueltie, and Tyrannie had fully eſtabliſhed
the mater, and brought it to perfection, Auentinus ſaithe, Many godly learned
menne vtterly foreſooke the Miniſterie,
                     Auentinus in Hildebrando. Et Falſi Prophetae, Falſi Apoſtoli, Falſi
Sacerdotes emerſerunt, qui ſimulata Religione populum deceperunt. Maxima pars
ſub honeſto nomine Caſtimoniae Stupra, Inceſtus, Adulteria, paſsim, & impunè committunt:
Falſe Prophetes, Falſe Apoſtles, and Falſe Prieſtes ſprange vp: which vnder a coū
                     trefeite
Religion deceiued the people. The moſte parte of them, vnder the honeſte name
of Chaſtitie, commit whoredome, Aduouterie, Inceſte, commonly, and without puniſhment.
                  
                  S. Bernarde ſaithe,
                     Bernardus in Concilio Remenſi. Epiſcopi, & Sacerdotes huius temporis Caſtitatis Sanctimoniam,
ſine qua nemo videbit Deum, tam in Corde, quàm in Corpore, quomodo'
ſtudent obſeruare? Traditi in reprobum ſenſum, faciunt, quae non conueniunt. Quae enim
in occulto fiunt ab Epiſcopis, turpe eſt dicere: The Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes of this
time, how doo they endeuoure to keepe either in harte, or in body the Holineſſe of Chaſtitie,
without whiche noman ſhal ſee God? They are geuen ouer into a reprobate minde, and
doo thoſe thinges, that are not conuenient. For it were ſhame to vtter, vvhat theſe Biſhoppes
doo in Secrete.
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Bernard. De Conuerſione, ad Clericos, Ca. 29. In Opere Triparti. Li. 3. ca. 7. Abſtinentes à Remedio Coniugali, poſteà in omne flagitium
effluunt: Abſteininge from the remedie of Marriage, afterwarde they flowe ouer into
al kinde of wickedneſſe.
                  
                  
                     He that wrote the litle Booke, called Opus Tripartitum, ioined with the Councel
of Laterane, ſaithe thus, Tanta immunditia luxuriae notoria eſt in multis partibus
mundi, non ſolùm in Clericis, ſed etiam in Sacerdotibus: imo, quod horribile eſt
audire, in Praelatis Maioribus: &c. Sutche Notorious filthineſſe of Lecherie there is in
many partes of the Worlde, not onely in the inferiour Clerkes, but alſo in Prieſtes: yea in
the greatter Prelates: whiche thinge is horrible to be hearde: &c.
                  
                  
                     And in the Gloſe vpon the Conſtitutions Legantine of Englande it is written
thus:
                     De Concubinis Cleri. remouendis. Licet ad profligandum. Paralipomena Vrſpergen. Pag. 403. Clerici huiuſmodi Concubinas tenent Cōmuniter, apparatu honeſto, nomine
appellationis Sororiae: Clerkes commonly holde, and haue ſutche Concubines, in
honeſte haueour, vnder the name of their Siſters.
                  Nicolaus de Clauengijs, complaininge hereof, ſaithe thus: Capellani, & Canonici
ſimiles Epiſcopis, Indocti, Ebrij, Scortatores: The Chaplaines, and Canons are
like to the Biſhoppes, Vnlearned, Dronken, and Fornicatours.
                  Robert Holcote ſaithe,
                     Rob. Holcot In Librum Sapientiae, Lectione. 182 Sacerdotes moderni ſunt Daemones Incubi per luxuriam,
& Sacerdotes Priapi, vel Beelphegor, & Angeli Abyſsi: The Prieſtes of our time by

their Lecherie, are like the Sprites called Incubi, the Prieſtes of Priap
                           ••
                        , or Beelphegor, and
the Angels of the pitte of Helle.
                  
                  Hulderichus in Olde times the Biſhop of Auguſta in Germanie,
                     Hulderichus Epiſcopus Auguſtan. 
                     wrote
ſharpely hereof againſt Pope Nicolas in this wiſe: Decreta tua ſuper Clericorum
continentia à diſcretione inueni aliena: Multos confilij tui aſſentatores hominibus,
non Deo, ſub falſa ſpecie continentiae placere volentes, grauiora vides committere:
I haue founde, thy Decrees, touchinge the Single life of Prieſtes, to be voide of diſcretion.
Thou ſeeſt, that many folowers of thy counſel, willinge vnder 
                           •
                         fained colour of Continente
life, rather to pleaſe Man, then God, commit hainous actes. In the ende be concludeth
thus,
                      Qua noſti diſcretionis diſciplina, Phariſaicam ab Ouili Dei extirpa Doctrinam:
By ſutche diſcipline of diſcretion, as you knowe beſte, roote this Phariſaical
Doctrine out of Goddes Folde.
                  
                  But for as mutche,VVo
                           •
                        phgangus VViſſenburgius in praefatione in Antiologiam Papae. as M. Hardinge hath no ſkil in this Epiſtle of Hulderichus,
he maie vnderſtande, that his owne Pope Pius, otherwiſe called Aeneas
Syluius, maketh euident mention of the ſame.
                  Further Mantuanus the Poete ſaithe,
                  
                     Petriue domus polluta fluenti
                     Marceſcit luxu: Nulla hîc arcana reuelo.
                     Sanctus ager Scurris, venerabilis Ara Cynaedis
                     
                     Seruit: Honorandae Diuûm Ganymedibus Aedes.
                  
                  The matter hereof is ſutche, as is not woorthy to be Engliſhed.
                  But what pleaſure can it be, to ſtande ſo longe in ſo vnſauery a place? They
themſelues ſaie thus,2. Quae. 7. Lator. In Gloſſa. 
                     Fornicatio Simplex non eſt digna depoſitione: S
                           ••
                        ple Fornication
(in a Prieſte) is no iuſte cauſe of Depriuation. The cauſe thereof in an other
Gloſe is alleged thus, Quia pauci ſine illo vitio inueniuntur:
                     Diſt. 81. Maximianus. In Gloſſa. 
                     Bicauſe there be
fevve Prieſtes founde vvithout that faulte.
                     
                  
                  
                     To be ſhorte, Polydorus Vergilius ſaithe, Nullius delicti crimen maius Ordini
dede
                        •
                     us,Polyd. Vergil. De Inuentorib. rer. Lib. 5. Ca. 4. plùs mali Religioni, plus doloris bonis attulit: No kinde of crime euer
brought either more ſhame to the Order of Prieſthoode: or more hinderance to Religion: or
more griefe to the Godly, then the life of Single Prieſtes.
                  
                  Theſe, theſe, M. Hardinge, vvere the cauſes, that moued Pope Pius commonly
to ſaie, as it is before alleged: As Marriage vpon good, and greate conſiderations
vvas taken from Prieſtes, ſo novve vpon better, and greatter conſiderations
it vvere to be reſtoared to them againe. And therefore he ſaithe
in his diſcourſe of the Councel of Baſile,Aeneas Syluiu
                           •
                         De Con. Baſil
                           •
                         Lib. 2. Fortaſſe non eſſet peius, Sacerdotes complures
vxorari. Quoniam multi ſaluarentur in Sacerdotio Coniugato, qui nunc in
ſterili Preſbyterio damnantur: Perhaps it were not woorſte, that many Prieſtes
vvere Married. For many might be ſaued in Married Prieſthoode, whiche nowe in
barren Prieſthoode are condemned. If the former of theſe twoo Saieinges be
ſo doubteful, yet this later is plaine, and cleare, and voide of doubte. In like ſenſe,
and ſorte he writeth vpon good aduiſe,
                     Aeneas Syluius Epiſt. 321. ad Iohan. Fontem. 
                     and deliberation to his frende: Quoniam huc
ventum eſt, vt Legi Carnis reſiſtere nequeas, meliùs eſt Nubere, quàm Vri: For as
mutche as the mater is growen ſo far, that ye cannot withſtande the Lawe of the Fleaſhe,
Better it is to Marrie, then to burne.
                  
                     So ſaithe Panormitane,Extra, De Clericis Coniugatis, Cùm olim. Credo pro bono, & ſalute animarum, quòd eſſet ſalubre
ſtatutum, vt non valentes continere, poſsint contrahere. Quia experientia
docente contrarius prorſus effectus ſequitur ex illa Lege Continentiae: cùm hodiè
non viuant ſpiritualiter, nec ſint mundi: Sed maculentur illicito coitu, cum ipſorum grauiſsimo
peccato: Vbi cum propria vxore eſſet Caſtitas. Vnde deberet Eccleſia facere

ſicut bonus medicus: vt, ſi medicina, experientia docente, potitis officiat, quàm profit,
eam tollat. Et vtinam idem eſſet in omnibus Conſtitutionibus poſitiuis: I beleeue,
it vvere a good Lavve, and for the wealthe; and ſafetie of Soules, that ſutche, as
cannot liue Chaſte, maie contracte Matrimonie. For wee learne by experience,
that of the Lawe of Continente, or Single Life the contrarie effecte hath folovved.
For as mutche as nowe a daies they liue not ſpiritually, nor be cleane, and chaſte: but with their
greate Sinne are defiled with vnlawful Copulation: vvhereas vvith theire ovvne
vviues they ſhould liue Chaſtely. Therefore the Churche ought to doo, as the ſkilful
Phyſician vſeth to doo: Who, if he ſee by experience, that his Medicine hurteth rather, then
doothe good, taketh it cleane awaie. And woulde God the ſame waie were taken with al
poſitiue Conſtitutions.
                  
                     So ſaithe Durandus,Durandus, De modo Celebrandi Concilium, Titul. 46. Vtile eſſet, vt in Concilio Matrimonium Sacerdotibus romittatur.
Fruſtrà enim hactenus coacti ſunt ad Caſtitatem: It vvere good, that
in a Councel Prieſtes Marriage were ſet at libertie: For hitherto it hath benne in vaine,
to force them to Chaſtitie.
                  
                     So ſaithe Martinus Pereſius,Martinus Pereſius. 
                     Multis pijs viſum eſt, vt Leges de Coelibatu tollerentur
propter ſcandala: Many godly menne haue thought it good, that the Lavves
of Single Life ſhould be aboliſhed, for auoidinge the offence of the people.
                  
                  M. Hardinge wil ſaie, The Prieſte hathe Vowed, and muſte kéepe his Vowe.
But Pope Pius, as it is ſaide before, gaue counſel of Marriage vnto a Prieſte,
that had made a Vowe.
                  It appeareth right wel, bothe by that hath benne already alleged, & alſo by the
common experience, & practiſe of the world, that a Vowe importeth not alwaies a
Chaſte life.Optatus Contra Parmenianum Donatiſt. Lib. 6. Hierony in Hieremi. lib. 2. Ca. 7. Ambro. De Virginib. Lib. 1. 
                     Optatus Mileuitanus ſaithe, In Mirella ſignum eſt voluntatis: non Caſtitatis
auxilium: In the apparel there is a token of the Wil: not a healpe towardes Chaſtitie.
                     
                  
                  S. Hierome ſaithe, Quid prodeſt Corporis pudicitia, animo conſtuprato?
VVhen the Minde, or Harte is defloured, what auaileth the Chaſtitie of the Body?
                  
                  S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Non imperari poteſt Virginitas, ſed optari. Nam, quae ſupra
nos ſunt, in Voto magis ſunt, quàm in Magiſterio: Wee maie vviſhe for 
                        Ʋirginitie:
but commaunde it wee cannot. For the thinges, that be aboue vs, and out of our
power, are rather of deſire, then of Commaundement.
                  
                  
                     Hereof Epiphanius maketh this Concluſion:
                     Epiphani. Lib. 2. Haereſi. 41. Vt ne confundantur apud homines,
occultè ſcortantur: & ſub Solitudinis, aut continentiae ſpecie libidinem exercent.
Melius eſt itaque lapſum à curſu, palàm ſibi vxorem accipere ſecundum Leges:
Leſte they ſhould be ſhamed before menne, they keepe Harlottes priuily: and vnder the
colour of Solitarie, or Continent Life, they practiſe theire filthy pleaſure. Better is it
therefore for a man, beinge fallen from his courſe, openly to take vnto him ſelfe a vvife
accordinge to the Lavve. So ſaithe S. Hierome, as I haue before alleged:
Huiuſmodi Virginibus apertè dicendum eſt,Hieronym. Ad Demetriadem. vt aut nubant, ſi ſe non poſſunt continere:
aut contineant, ſi nolunt nubere: To ſutche virgins wee muſte ſaie plainely, that either
they Marrie, if they cannot Conteine: Or els that they Conteine, if they wil not
Marrie.
                     Bernardus ad Sororem. De modo bene viuendi. Sermo 62. 
                     So ſaithe S. Bernard vnto his Siſter: Quod incautè vouiſti, ne impleas:
Impia eſt promiſsio, quae ſcelere adimpletur: That thou haſte vnaduiſedly
Vowed, ſee thou keepe it not. It is a vvicked promiſſe, that is perfourmed
vvith vvickedneſſe.
                  
                     To be ſhorte,
                     4. Senten diſt. 36. Quaeſt. 1. Iohannes Scotus ſaithe, Si votum Continentiae eſt annexum Ordini
Sacro ſolùm ex praecepto Eccleſiae, ſequitur, quòd non ſimpliciter illegitimat ad
contrahendum: If the Vowe, or promiſſe of Chaſtitie be annexed vnto Holy Orders Onely
by force of the Conſtitution, or Commaundement of the Churche, then dooth it not of neceſſitie,
and fine force, vnhable a man to contracte Matrimonie.
                  How be it, hereof wée haue ſaide already ſo mutche, as to a reaſonable man
maie ſeeme ſufficient.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wee receiue, and embrace al the Canonical Scriptures, bothe of
the Olde, and Newe Teſtament, geuinge thankes to our God, who
hath raiſed vp vnto vs that Light, whiche wee might euer haue before
our eies: leaſte either by the ſuttletie of man, or by the ſnares of
the Diuel, wee ſhould be carried awaie to errours and lies. Alſo that
theſe be the Heauenly Voices, whereby God hath opened vnto vs
his wil: and that onely in them mannes harte can haue ſettled reſte:
that in them be aboundantly, and fully comprehended al thinges,
what ſo euer be needeful for our Healthe, as Origene, Auguſtine,
Chryſoſtome, and Cyrillus haue taught: That they be the very
mighte and ſtrength of God to attaine to Saluation: That they be
the Fundations of the Prophetes, & Apoſtles, whereupon is builte
the Churche of God: That they be the very ſure, and infallible Rule,
whereby maie be tried whether the Churche doo ſwarue, or erre,
and whereunto al Eccleſiaſtical Doctrine ought to be called to accoumpte:
and that againſt theſe Scriptures neither Lawe, nor Ordinaunce,
nor any cuſtome ought to be hearde: no though Paule him
ſelfe, or an Angel from Heauen ſhould comme, & teache the contrarie.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  But why doo yee not here plainely declare, whiche be the Bookes of the Scriptures, that ye allowe,
and whiche be theyVntruthe. For vvee reiecte no parte of al the Scriptures. that ye reiecte? In general, ye ſaie, that ye embrace al the Canonical
Scriptures.
                        
                           •
                         Macha. 12 Iacob. 2. Yet if a man preſſe you with the place of the Machabees, for Praier to be made for
the Deade, and with the woordes of S. Iames Epiſtle againſte your Iuſtification of Faithe onely, and
likewiſe with certaine other places of the Scriptures, whiche be accompted in the Canon of the
Churche, againſte certaine other your falſe doctrines: in this caſeVntruthe: For vvee denie no more, then S. Auguſtine, S. Hierome, and other Holy Fathers haue denied. your wonte is to denie thoſe
Scriptures to be Canonical. Yet here ye beare the worlde in hande ye allowe al. VVould God there
were in you either more truthe. or leſſe crafte. VVel, ye geue thankes to God for the Scriptures, for
that hauinge them before your eies, ye are ſtaied in Truthe, aſſured, that by the ſuttelty of man, or
ſnares of the Diuel, ye be not caried awaie into Errours, and Lies. And is it ſo in deede? I praie
you ſyrs of what ſecte be ye? or of whiche ſecte is eche one of you? For I dare boldely ſaye, and
ſo the worlde ſeethe, that yee agree not al in one. If yee ſaie, yee be Lutherans, then muſte I
further demaunde of you, of whiche ſorte of Lutherans? For that puddle runneth out by many
ſinckes. Be yee Zuinglians, Arians, Oſiandrines, Libertines, Adiaphoriſtes, Anabaptiſtes, Caluiniſtes,
or Sathaniſ
                        •
                     es? VVhat Priuiledge haue ye before your felowes? a matche beinge made betwene
you (I meane that newe Cleregie of Englande) and the other sectes of our time, &c. If yee
haue this lighte of the Scriptures before your eies, how is it, that ye agree not within your ſelues?
yea how is it, that eche one of you oftentimes diſagreeth with him ſelfe? howe is it thatChildiſhe, and fonde vntruthe: For the Communion Booke vvas neuer but once changed. But ſee the often changes of the Maſſe. ſo many
times ye haue chaunged your Comm
                        •
                     nion Booke, the order of your Seruice, your doctrine of the bleſſed
Sacrament, your Homilies, &c. VVho knoweth not how in the matter of the Sacrament your
chiefe Capitaines haue ſhewed them ſelues inconſtant and mutable, and contrary to them ſelues. I
meane Cranmere, Ridley, Latimer, and that greate Rabbin Peter Martyr him ſelfe? As for the
reſ
                        •
                     , they be not woorthy to be named.
                  But what ſaie ye? be theſe the Heauenly Voices, whereby God hath opened vnto vs his wil? Then
howe dare yee to tranſgreſſe his wil declared in theſe Voices, where ye reade expreſſely, that he,

                        S. Cyprian ſaithe, Non iungitur Eccleſiae, qui ab Euangelio ſeparatur: De Lapſis Sermo. 5. whiche heareth not the Churche, is to be taken for no better, then a Heathen, and a Publicane? As
yee procede, ye ſaye, that onely in the Scriptures mans harte can haue ſetled reſte, and that in them be
abundātly and fully comprehended al thinges, what ſo euer be needeful for our Saluation, as Origen,

Auguſtine, Chryſoſtome, and Cyrillus haue taught. Either you knowe not, what you ſaie, ſir Defender,
nor the thinges of whiche you make affirmation,1. Timo. 6. as S. Paule ſaile of ſuche, as ye are, writinge
to Timothe, or you are fowly ouerſeene. If the harte of man haue ſetled reſt in the Scriptures
onely,Mans harte hath not ſetled reſte in Scriptures onely. as you ſaye, then in nothinge els but in the Scriptures. By this you ſeeme to trouble and diſqutet
many hartes. For if this be true,Vntruthe. For Ab
                           •
                        l 
                           •
                        earde the VVoorde of God. Reade the An
                           ••
                        veare. then had good Abel no better reſte in his harte, then wicked
reſtleſſe Cain.
                  VVhen the Holy Booke of Scripture was loſte, whiche God reſtored by Eſdras, were there none in
al that time, whoſe hartes had ſetled reſte? VVhat fooliſhe, and abſurde doctrine is this?A vvoorthy doubte. VVhat if it
had pleaſed God, there had neuer benne letter written of the Olde, or Newe Teſtament? ſhoulde not
Gods frendes haue founde his peace that paſſeth al ſenſe,Philip. 4. as S. Paule ſaieth? Had Paule, Antony, Hilarion,
Pambus, and many other Holy men liuinge in VVilderneſſeVntruthe. For S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Antonius Scripturas Diuinas memoriter audiendo tenuit, &c.
                      without letters, no reſte, ne quiet at
their hartes? Nay, who had the like? And whereas you ſaie, that al thinges needeful for our Saluation
be abundantly, and fully cōprehended in the Scriptures, this is alſo as falſe, as ſundry other partes
of your Doctrine. For if al thinges neceſſary to Saluation be conteined in the Scriptures, then
what ſo euer is not in them conteined, the ſame is not neceſſarie: If not neceſſarie, why ſhoulde we be
laden with vnneceſſarie burdens? Then awaie with al Traditions at a clappe, be they neuer ſo
Apoſtolike, neuer ſo Auncient, neuer ſo Healthful, neuer ſo longe time in the Churche continued.
Remember you not, what the moſte renoumed Fathers haue written of the neceſsitie of Traditions?
Or if you remember them, what thought you when you wrote thus? Let Learned and Holy Baſil
be hearde in ſteede of many, if not to reuoke you from your errour, yet to diſcredite you, and ſtaye
others in the truthe.Lib. de Spiritu Sancto. ca. 27. His woordes be theſe: Of the doctrines, whiche be preached in the Churche,
certaine we haue out of the Scripture written, certaine we haue receiued in ſecrete Miſtery by tradition
of the Apoſtles,Yet novve the very ſame neceſſarie Traditions be quite forgotten, and aboliſhed, yea euen in the Churche of Rome. whiche bothe be of equal force to Godlines. Neither concerninge theſe any
man gaineſaieth, be he of neuer ſo ſmal knowledge. For if we goe about to reiect the cuſtomes that
be not ſet foorth in writinge, as beinge of litle regarde, then ſhal we condemne thoſe thinges alſo,
whiche we haue in the Goſpel neceſſarie to Saluation. Yea rather we ſhal bringe the preachinge of
the Faithe but to a bare name. For ſo they were taken for Heretikes, whiche regarded not the ſolemne
faſte of LenteVntruthe. Reade the Anſvveare. receiued at the Apoſtles,Faſte of Lente. as we reade in S. Auguſtine, De Haer. ad Quoduultdeum,
cap. 53. and in the Councel of Gangra in an Epiſtle to the Biſhops of Armenia. Euen ſo
they whiche denied theVntruthe. For hereby bothe S. P
                           •
                        ule, and S. Hierome, and other good men are condemned of Hereſie. diſtinction of a Biſhop and a Prieſte, were condemned of Hereſie, as we
finde in S. Auguſtine in the Booke and Chapter aforeſaide, and in Epiphanius Lib. 3. Cap. 75. In the
Councel of Conſtance the ſame is to be founde.
                  Againe if al thinges neceſſarie to Saluation beVntruthe. For vvee ſaie not, Al things are there expreſſed. expreſſed in the Scriptures, to what purpoſe
ſaide S. Paule concerninge order, and maner, to be vſed at the celebration of the holy Sacramente:
Coetera cùm venero diſponam,
                     1. Corin. 11. Epiſt. 2. As for other thinges I wil take Order for them, when I come?
VVhat meaneth S. Iohn to ſaye, Hauinge other thinges to write to you of, I woulde not (write them)
in Paper and inke: for I truſte to be with you, and ſpeake to you mouthe to mouthe. To conclude
muche, that might be obiected, in fewe woordes for breuities ſake, what ſaie you, ſir Defender, ſhal
we finde al thinges neceſſarie to Saluation in the Scripture?Stale, and fonde queſtiōs. Howe thinke you of the Scripture it
ſelfe? How knowe you this to be the Scripture? How knowe ye the Goſpel of Mathewe, Marke, Luke,
and Iohn, to be theirs, whoſe names they beare? This can you not finde in al the Scripture,Vntruthe. For it is not neceſſarie to Saluation. and
yet is the ſame neceſſary to be beleeued. VVhat Scripture have you to admitte theſe, and to refuſe the
Booke bearinge the name ofThey vvere vvritten by Heretiques in de
                        
                           •
                        ogation of the Truthe. Peter, the Goſpel of Thomas, of Bartholome we, of Nicodeme? VVhy
admitte you not the Prophetes that Baſilides would to be allowed, but onely the foure greate, and the
twelue leſſer? what auctoritie haue you to ſtaie your ſelfe by, concerninge theſe: but onely that of
the Churche? for Scripture haue you none for proufe hereof. Then hath not Scripture al thinges in
it neceſſarie for a Chriſten man.Homouſion. Is it not neceſſarie to beleeue the Sonne of God to be Homouſion,
that is to ſaie, of the ſame Subſtance with the Father? whiche if you denie, you reſtore the olde condemned
Hereſie of the Arians.Vntruthe. For Epipham
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , Senſus eius notain
                           •
                        s vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         eſt. The ſame can you not finde in the Scripture. VVhere in al the Bible
finde you that God the Father is Ingenitus? VVhere finde you, that the Holy Ghoſte proceedeth frō
the Father and the Sonne? that the bleſſed Virgin Marie continued in her Virginitie? that ſuche as be

Baptized of Heretikes oughte to be Baptized againe?S. Imaes. That in fantes ought to be Baptized? That
the Foure Bookes of the Goſpels were written by Mathewe, Marke, Luke, and Iohn, by what Scripture
can you prooue it? To ende, where finde you expreſſely in al the Scriptures three Perſons to
be one God?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here to weighe downe the Authoritie of Goddes Holy Woorde, M. Hardinge
hath brought in a heape of ordinarie ſtale quarrelles, Of the difference bitwéene
Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes: of Lente: of the Communion Booke: of the Homilies: of
the Order of Seruice: and of the Perpetual Virginitie of Our Lady. His whole
drifte herein is, to beare vs in hande, that there is very litle, or none Authoritie
in the Scriptures: and that the whole Credite, and certainetie of our Faithe reſteth
onely in the Churche of Rome.
                  He ſeemeth to take it in ſcorne, that the Woorde of God ſhoulde be called the
Light.Pſalm. 118. Pſalm. 18. Theophylact. in Lucam, Ca. 16. Yet notwithſtandinge the Prophete Dauid ſaithe, Thy Woorde is a Lanterne
to my feete. And againe, The Commaundement of the Lorde is Lightſome, geeuing Light
vnto the eies. And Theophylacte ſaith, Verbum Dei eſt Lucerna, qua Fur deprehenditur:
The Woorde of God is the Candel, whereby ther Theefe (or falſe Teacher) is eſpied.
                     
                  
                  Whereas M. Hardinge demaundeth of vs ſo pleaſauntly, what Scriptures we
allowe, and what wée reiecte, he troubleth him ſelfe with an idle, and a néedeleſſe
queſtion. For we embrace, and reuerence euery parcel, and title of the Scriptures
without exception, not refuſinge any parte thereof, that hath benne allowed by
the Ancient, Learned, Catholique Fathers of the Churche of God.
                  Neither doo wee ſo ſcornefully calle Goddes Holy Woorde,Albert. Pigghius, Lib. 3. Cap. 3. Hierar. a Noſe of vvaxe,
a Shipmannes Hoſe, or a Dead letter: as ſundrie of that ſide haue delited to cal it.
                  Touchinge the Booke of the Machabees, wee ſaie nothinge, but that we finde
written by S. Hierome,Iohan. Sleidan. Lib. 23. S. Auguſtine, & other Holy Fathers. S. Hierome ſaithe.
Machabaeorum Libros legit quidem Eccleſia: Sed eos inter Canonicas Scripturas
non recipit: In deede the Churche readeth the Bookes of the Machabees:
                     
                     Hieronym. in Prooemio in Prouerb Salomonis. In the firſt parte Chap. 10. Diuiſ. 2. 
                     but ſhee receiueth
them not emonge the Canonical allovved Scriptures.
                  
                  Or Praier for y• Dead, wee ſhal haue place more conuenient to ſpeake hereafter.
                  The place of S. Iames, touchinge the Iuſtification of Faithe, & Woorkes, is
anſweared before. Neither doo wee diſcredite any parte either of the Authoritie,
or of the Doctrine of that whole Epiſtle: notwithſtandinge Euſebius ſaithe, It
was written by ſomme other,Euſeb. li. 2. ca. 23. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and not by S. Iames. His woordes be theſe: Iſtius
Iacobi, qui luſtus, & Oblias vocabatur, dicitur eſſe Epiſtola, quae prima ſcribitur inter Canonicas.
Sciendum autem eſt, illam Epiſtolam eſſe Spuriam: The Opinion is, that
the Epiſtle, whiche is reckened the firſte emonge the Canonicalles, is of this Iames, whiche
was called Iuſtus, and Oblias. But wee muſte vnderſtande, that it is a Baſtarde Epiſtle, and
not written by S. Iames.
                     
                  
                  Likewiſe S. Hierome ſaithe,Hieronym. in Catalogo Eccleſiaſticor. Scriptorum. 
                     Epiſtola Iacobi ab alio quopiam ſub eius nomine
edita aſſeritur: It is ſaide, that the Epiſtle of S. Iames, was ſet foorthe by ſomme other
man vnder his name. This therefore is no Newe fantaſie: but the Iudgemente
of the Ancient Learned Fathers. Neuertheleſſe wee doo bothe receiue the ſame
Epiſtle, and alſo reade it in Oure Churches: and allowe euery Clauſe, and Sentence,
that therein is written.
                  M. Hardinge ſaithe, If yee haue this Lighte of the Scriptures before your eies, howe
is it, that yee agree no better emongeſt your ſelues? And here he reckeneth vp by rote
a many of names of his owne makinge, Lutherans, Zuinglians, Arians,
Oſiandrians, Libertines, Adiaphoriſtes, Anabaptiſtes, Caluiniſtes, and Sathaniſtes.
In whiche his ſo pleaſante fanſie, he maie haue leaue to ſporte him ſelfe,

while he liſteth.VVoorde vvritten. God be thanked, wée agrée thorowly togeather in the whole Subſtance
of the Religion of Chriſte: and altogeather with one harte, and one Sprite
doo glorifie God the Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte. Certainely S. Auguſtine,
S. Hierome, S. Chryſoſtome, Epiphanius, and Theophilus, as it appeareth
by theire writinges, agreed no better togeather in theire time, then wee
doo nowe. Yet had they, and euery of them the Woorde of God: and the ſame
Woorde of God was a Light vnto their feete.
                  
                  It was not for any greate ſtoare of better mater, I trowe, that M. Hardinge
thus chargeth vs with ſo often changinge the Communion Booke. For of more,
then of one Onely Change, he cannot tel vs. And if there had benne leſſe then
that, there had benne no change at al. And yet, for that One change, he him ſelfe
in the meane ſeaſon hath changed thriſe. But the Holy Communion Booke,
and the Order of the Holy Miniſtration ſtandeth, and by Goddes Mercie ſhal ſtand
ſtil, without any further Change.
                  How be it,Platin. in Sixto. 1 Polydor. Vergil. De Inuentorib. rer. Li. 5. Cap. 10. Gentle Reader, if thou wilt knowe the often Alterations, and
Changes of the Maſſe, reade, I beſeche thée, Platyna, and Polydore Vergil, touchinge
the ſame: There ſhalte thou finde, howe, and by whome, and vpon what
occaſion, and in what proceſſe of time, al the partes of the Maſſe were peeced,
and ſette togeather: and that in the ſpace of ſeuen hundred whole yéeres ſcarcely,
and with mutche adoo it was made vp at laſte, and brought to ſomme perfection.
                  
                     Chriſtes Commaundement of Hearinge the Churche is anſweared before.
S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. De Fide. & Simbol. Eſai. 8. Credimus Sanctam Eccleſiam: non Credimus in Sanctam Eccleſiam:
VVee beleeue, that there is a Holy Churche: But wee Beleue not in the Holy
Churche. For the Churche is not God, nor is hable of her ſelfe to make, or alter
any one Article of the Faithe. The Prophete Eſay ſaithe,
                      Ad Legem potiùs, &
ad Teſtimonium. Si non reſponderint ſecundum Verbum hoc, non erit illis Lux Matutina:
To the Lawe rather, and to the Teſtimonie. If they anſweare not accordinge to this
VVoorde, they ſhal haue no Morninge Light.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge ſaithe further, If quietneſſe of Conſcience comme of the VVoorde of
God onely, then had Abel no more quietneſſe of Conſcience then wicked reſtleſſe Cain. Then
ſhould Paule the Eremite, and Antonie, and Hilarion, and Pambus, and other Holy
menne, liuinge in Wilderneſſe without Letters, haue had no reſte, ne quiet at theire hartes.
And why ſo? Bicauſe they had no Woorde written.
                  
                  Who woulde thinke, that M. Hardinge, bearinge ſutche a countenance of Diuinitie,
woulde thus goe aboute to deceiue him ſelfe with a pointe of Sophiſtrie?
Chryſoſtome ſaithe,Chryſoſtom. In Geneſ. Homil. 2. Hebrae. 3. 
                     Deus Conditor Humani Generis ab initio per ſeipſum homibus
loquebatur: God the Creatour of Mankinde, frō the beginninge ſpake vnto menne
by him ſelfe, in his owne perſonne.
                      And S. Paule ſaithe, Deus olim multifariàm,
multiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        modis Patribꝰ locutus eſt: In Old times God ſpake many vvaies, and in ſundrie
ſortes vnto the Fathers.
                      And doothe M. Hardinge thinke, when God him ſelfe in
his owne perſonne, and preſently ſpake vnto Abel, that Abel bearde not then the
Woorde of God? Wée ſpeake not ſo preciſely, and nicely of Goddes Woorde written
in Paper. For ſo it is a Creature Corruptible, and ſhal conſume, and periſhe,
as other Corruptible Creatures doo. But the VVoorde of God, whiche wée ſpeake
of, endureth for euer.
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. in Iobum. Ca. 27. Quomodò Aeternae erunt Scripturae Diuinae, ſi Mundus certo
fine eſt terminandus? Verum eſt quidem, quòd Librorum pelliculae cum ipſis Literis
abolendae ſunt. Sed, quia ſubiungit Dn̄s, Verba verò mea non praeteribunt, proculdubio,
quod illis apicibus pollicetur, erit Aeternum: Howe ſhal the Holy Scriptures
he Euerlaſtinge, ſeeinge the Worlde ſhal haue on ende? True it is, that the parchement,

or leaues of the Bookes with the letters and al,
                     Traditions. 
                     ſhal be aboliſhed. But for as
mutche as our Lorde addeth, My Woordes ſhal neuer paſſe, doubteleſſe (though the Papers,
and Letters periſhe, yet)
                      the thinge, that is promiſed by the ſame letters,
ſhal laſte for euer.Chryſoſtom. 2. Corin. Homil. 18. 
                     So Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Paulus Praedicationem non Scrip
                     
                        •
                     am
appellat, Euangelium: Preachinge not vvritten Paule calleth the Goſpel.
                  
                  That M. Hardinge addeth of Antonius, and Paulus, & Hilarion, & other Eremites,
that they liued in Wilderneſſe vvithout Letters, and therefore preſumeth,
they liued vvithout the VVoorde of God, it is very vnaduiſedly ſpoken, and vtterly
vntrue. For proufe whereof, to name onely One in ſtéede of the reſte, S.
Auguſtine ſaithe, that Antonius the Eremite was notably Learned, and perfite
in the Scriptures.Auguſt. De Doctrina Chriſtiana Lib. 1. In Prologo. His woordes be theſe, Antonius ſine vlla ſcientia Literarum,
Scripturas Diuinas & memoriter audiendo tenuiſſe, & prudenter cogitando
intellexiſſe, praedicatur: It is reported, that Antonius, without knowledge of Letter,
bothe Learned the Holy Scriptures, and bare them vvel in minde, by hearinge:
and alſo by Wiſedome and ſtudie, vnderſtoode them.
                     
                  
                  And whereas M. Hardinge woulde ſéeme to make ſutche an accoumpte of
Praier,Auguſ
                           •
                        in. De Scalic Paradiſi, Cap. 11. and Holineſſe without knowledge, S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Lectio ſine Meditatione
arida eſt: Meditatio ſine Lectione erronea eſt: Oratio ſine Meditatione tepida
eſt: Readinge without Meditation, or ſtudie is drie, and barren: Meditation, or ſtudie
vvithout Readinge is erroneous: And Praier without Cogitation, or ſtudie is halfe
colde, and vnfruiteful.
                      Thus wée ſée by S. Auguſtines Iudgement, that the Force,
and Subſtance bothe of Praier, and of Meditation dependeth of Readinge.
                  How be it, what Comforte, and peace of Conſcience wée haue by Hearinge the
Woorde of God, S. Paule can tel vs ſomewhat better, then M. Hardinge. Thus he
ſaithe,Rom. 15. 
                     Quaecunque Scripta ſunt, &c. What ſo euer thinges are written, they are written
for our learninge, that by Patience, and Comforte of the Scriptures we maye haue hope.
                     
Euen ſo ſaithe Chriſte him ſelfe,Iohan. 17. 
                     O Father, this is the Euerlaſtinge Life, that they maye
know thee, the onely, and very God: and Ieſus Chriſte, whome thou haſte ſente.
                  
                  But S. Paule ſaithe.2. Theſſalon. 2. Baſili. De Spiritu Sancto. Ca. 27. 
                     Keepe the Traditions, whiche ye haue receiued, either by Epiſtle,
or by VVoorde. And S. Baſile reckeneth Traditions to be One, and Equal with
the Woorde of God. Firſte, that S. Baſile worte thoſe woordes rather of zele, then
of Iudgement, it maie eaſily appeare, by that the ſelfe ſame Traditions, that he
there ſpecially nameth, and ſo highely commendeth, are for the greatteſt parte already
aboliſhed, and quite foregotten, yea and that euen in the Churche of Rome.
Yet the Woorde of God endureth ſtil, and ſhal endure for euer. For example, by
one of S. Baſiles neceſſarie Traditions, It is not lawful for any man, to kneele in
the Churche vpon the Sonnedaie:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . But euery man is bounde by the ſame Tradition,
at Sermon, at Praier, & at the Communion, to ſtande vpright. And this, he
ſaithe, was geuen vnto vs in Secrete Charge by the Apoſtles of Chriſte. This ſo
neceſſarie, and ſo Apoſtolique Tradition is now diſſolued, and broken, and vtterly
foregotten, not onely in Louaine, but alſo in Rome.
                  S. Auguſtine ſaithe,Auguſtinus ad Caſulanum. By Tradition of the Apoſtles, bitwéene Eaſter, and Witſondaie
it was not lavvful for any man to Faſte. Yet now wée Faſte within the
ſame daies ſo forebidden, and the ſame kinde of Faſte is thought lawful, the Apoſtles
Tradition to the contrarie notwithſtandinge.
                  The reſte of S. Baſiles Traditions ſtande in halowinge of VVater: in Bleſſinge
of Oile:
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . in Praieinge towardes the Eaſte: in vtteringe certaine woordes of
Inuocation at the ſhewinge foorthe of the Breade of Thankeſgeuinge vnto the
people. Theſe thinges, I beléeue, M. Hardinge him ſelfe neuer thought to be Equiualente
with the Woorde of God.
                  But if theſe, and other like Traditions be ſo weighty, and ſo neceſſarie, as he

ſéemeth to make them,Traditions. then let him tel vs in good ſoothe, and without fable: what
were theſe Myſtical Solemne VVoordes of Inuocation, that S. Baſ
                        •
                     le ſaithe
were ſpoken by the Prieſte, at the Openinge, or ſhewinge foorthe of y• Sacrament?
If they be ſo neceſſarie to be vſed, and continued in the Churche of God, why hath
he, & his whole Romaine Cleregie quite foregotten them? If he, and his Cleregie
haue foregotten them, and vſe them not, and care not for them, how can he ſaie,
or maie wée thinke, they are ſo neceſſarie to Saluation?
                  This is the Simplicitie, and plaineneſſe of M. Hardinges dealinge. He telleth
vs many tales of the Apoſtles Traditions, being him ſelfe the manifeſte deſpiſer,
and breaker of the ſame Traditions. Touchinge the woordes of S. Paule, I marueile,
that M. Hardinge could ſo eaſily be deceiued. For S. Paule him ſelfe, euen in
the ſame woordes, & in the ſelfe ſame line would haue tolde him, that by the name
of Traditions, he meante, not vnvvritten Verities, and Liueleſſe Ceremonies, as
he ſuppoſeth, but the ſelfe ſame Subſtance of Religion, & Doctrine, that he had vttered
vnto the Theſſaloniens before, either by Epiſtle, or by Preachinge.
                  
                     Theſe be his Woordes,
                     2. Theſſalon. 2. 
                     Holde the Traditions, whiche ye haue receiued either by Epiſtle,
or by Woorde. He calleth them Traditions, although they were conteined in
his Epiſtles, and deliuered to them by Writinge. For the Apoſtles preachinge, &
writinge,
                     
                     Nicephor. Lib. 2. Cap. 34. 
                     in grounde and ſubſtance were al one. Nicephorus ſaithe, Paulus, quae
praeſens oratione ſua dilucidè docuerat, eadem abſens per compendium in memoriam,
ſcripta Epiſtola, reuocare voluit: Paule, what thinges, beinge preſente, he had
plainely taught by Mouthe, the ſame thinges afterwarde, beinge abſente, he ſhortely called
to their remembrance, by writinge of an Epiſtle. The like he writeth alſo of S.
Mathewe,
                     
                     Nicephor. Lib. 2. Cap. 45. Matthaeus diſcedens (aliò praedicatum) abſentiam ſuam ſcripto praeſenti
compenſauit: S. Mathewe departinge (to preache in other places)
                      recompenſed
his abſence by preſente vvritinge.
                  
                     S. Paule vnto the Philippians ſaithe thus,
                     Philippen 3. Eadem ſcribere mihi quidem non
pigrum: vobis au
                        •
                     em neceſſarium: To write vnto you the ſelfe ſame thinges, vnto me
it is not paineful: but in your behalfe, it is neceſſarie. Theſe woordes S. Hierome expoundeth
thus:
                     
                     Hieronym. in Epiſtol. ad Philippen. Cap. 3. Theophylact. in Lucam, Cap. 1. Eadem ſcribere, hoc eſt, eadem repetere, quae praeſens dixeram:
To write the ſame thinges, that is to ſaie, to make rehearſal of the ſame
thinges, that I tolde you by Mouthe, whe
                           •
                         I was preſente.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe Theophylacte, ſpeakinge in the perſonne of S. Luke: Priùs te ſine
Scripto inſtitui: nunc scriptum tibi trado Euangelium: Atque ita mentem tuam
munio, vt ne obliuiſcatur eorum, quae priùs ſine scriptis Tradita ſunt: Before this
time I haue inſtructed thee vvithout vvritinge. Nowe I deliuer vnto thee a vvritten
Goſpel. And ſo I furniſhe thy minde, that it forgeate not the thinges, that vvere deliuered
thee before vvithout vvritinge.
                  
                     So ſaithe Irenaeus,Irenae. lib. 3. ca. 1. Apoſtoli tunc Euangelium praeconiauerunt. Poſteà verò per
Dei voluntatem, illud in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt, Fundamentum, & Columnam
Fidei noſtrae futurum: Then the Apoſtles preached the Goſpel. And afterwarde by Goddes
wil, they deliuered the ſame to vs in vvritinge, to be a Fundation, and a Piller vnto
our Faithe.
                  
                  
                     And therefore Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. in. 2. Corin. Homil. 18. Paulus etiam non Scriptam Praedicationem,
vocat Euangelium: S. Paule calleth his Preachinge not vvritten, by the name
of the Goſpel.
                  
                  But me thinketh, M. Hardinge, ſo ſtoutely ſtriuinge for the bare name of Traditions,
ſhould better haue Learned S. Hieromes leſſon touchinge the ſame.Hieronym. in 2. Theſſalon. 2. Thus
he writeth vpon theſe woordes of S. Paule, Holde the Traditions, whiche ye haue learned,
either by Our Epiſtle, or by Our VVoorde: Quando ſua vult teneri, non vult
extranea ſuperaddi: Whereas S. Paule wil haue his ovvne thinges to be keapte, he

wil haue no ſtrange thinges thereto to be added.
                     Traditions.
                  
                  And, that S. Paule by this Woorde, Traditions, meante not Ceremonies, or
certaine Secrete vnknowen Verities, but the very Subſtance of the Goſpel of
Chriſte, as it is ſaide before: if M. Hardinge wil not beleue vs, yet let him beléeue
S. Paule him ſelfe.1. Corinth. 15. Thus he writeth, Tradidi vobis in primis, quod etiam accepi,
quòd Chriſtus mortuus eſt pro peccatis noſtris ſecundum Scripturas: Firſte I
haue deliuered to you,
                      (or geuen to you by Tradition) the ſame thinge, that I receiued:
that is, that Chriſte died for our ſinnes, accordinge to the Scriptures. Here
by S. Paules Woordes, the Deathe of Chriſte is called a Tradition.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Baſile,Baſilius De Spiritu Sancto. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Hoc palàm impugnat Salutaris Baptiſmatis Traditionem:
Baptiſmus noſter iuxta ipſam Domini Traditionem eſt in Nomine Patris, & Filij, &
Spiritus Sancti: Per ipſam Baptiſmi Traditionem habemus Confeſsionem Fidei: This
thinge is plainely againſte the Tradition of Healtheful Baptiſme: Our Baptiſme, accordinge
to the Tradition of our Lorde, is in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the
Holy Ghoſte: By the very Tradition of Baptiſme wee haue the Confeſſion of Faithe.
                  
                  S. Cyprian ſaithe,
                     Cyprian. ad Pompeium. contra Epiſ
                           ••
                        lam Stephani. Vnde eſt iſta Traditio? Vtrum ne de Dominica, & Euangeliea
Authoritate deſcendens, an de Apoſtolorum Mandatis, atque Epiſtolis veniens? &c.
Si igitur aut in Euangelio praecipitur, aut in Apoſtolorum Epiſtolis & Actis continetur,
obſeruetur etiam haec Sancta Traditio: From whence haue wee this Tradition? Whether
commeth it from the Authoritie of Our Lorde, and of the Goſpel: or els from the Commaundementes,
and Epiſtles of the Apoſtles? &c. Therefore if it be either commaunded in the
Goſpel, or conteined in the Epiſtles, or Actes of the Apoſtles, let vs keepe the ſame Tradition.
Likewiſe Euſebius ſaithe, Polycarpus,Euſeb. li. 5. ca. 20. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . c
                        •
                     m recepiſſet ea ab illis, qui
ipſi viderant vitam Verbi, nuntiauit eadem, omnia Scripturis conſona: Polycarpus,
when he had receiued theſe thinges of them, that had ſeene the Life of the Woorde, vtteted,
and ſhewed the ſame, beinge al agreeable vnto the Scriptures.
                  Of ſutche Traditions, it is plaine, S. Paule ſpeaketh. Nowe therefore Iudge
thou, Gentle Reader, howe truely, and handſomely M. Hardinge allegeth theſe
Woordes of S. Paule, to ſerue his purpoſe.
                  As for Lenten Faſte, the Superſtition onely excepted, wee condemne it not,
but vſe it ſtil. But how can M. Hardinge ſaie, either that Lente is ſo neceſſarie,
as he maketh it: or els, that it is the Tradition of the Apoſtles? Verily S. Auguſtine
ſaithe,Auguſtin. Epiſt. 86. 
                     Quibus diebus non oporteat ieiunare, & quibus oporteat, Praecepto Domini,
vel Apoſtolorum non inuenio definitum: Vpon what daies wee ought not to Faſte,
and vpon what daies we ought to Faſte, I finde it not appointed, or limited by any
commaundement, either of Our Lorde, or of the Apoſtles.
                     
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe Socrates,Socrates, Lib. 
                           •
                        . Cap. 22. Euangelia non impoſuerunt iugum ſeruitutis: Sed homines
ipſi ſuis quiſque locis propter remiſsionem, & memoriam Paſsionis, Paſcha, & alios
Dies Feſtos, ſicut voluerunt, ex Conſuetudine quadam celebrarunt. Non enim
hoc vel Seruator, vel Apoſtoli Lege aliqua obſeruandum eſſe mandauerunt:
The Goſpel hath laide vpon vs no Yoke of bondage: But menne them ſelues in the Countries
vvhere they dvvelte, for releaſe of laboure, and Remembrance of the Paſsion of
Chriſte, of a certaine Cuſtome, keapte the Eaſter, and other Holy daies, eche man, as he
vvoulde. For neither Our saueour, nor the Apoſtles by any Lavve commaunded
theſe thinges.
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Caſsiodorus,Caſsidor. Lib. 5. Ca. 38. Alij Piſces ſolummodò comedunt: Alij vnà
cum Piſcibus vtuntur etiā Volatilibus: Alij vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad No
                        •
                     am 
                        •
                     einnantes, ſine diſcretione
Ciborum reficiuntur. Puto, Apoſtolos ſingulorum hoc reliquiſſe ſententiae, vt vnuſquiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
Operetur, non timore, aut neceſsitate, quod bonum eſt: Somme menne (in the
time of the Lenten Faſte)
                      eate onely Fiſhe: Others vſe bothe Fiſh
                           •
                        , and Foule too:
Somme others, when they haue Faſted vntil three of the Clocke in the afternoone, afterward

they refreaſhe theire bodies vvithout difference or Choiſe of meates.
                     
                     Lenten Faſte. I thinke, the Apoſtles
leafte this mater to euery mannes diſcretion, that euery man maye doo good without
feare, or Superſtition, or neceſſitie.
                  Tertullian likewiſe ſaithe,
                     Tertull. De Ieiunio, contra Phyſichos. De coetero indifferenter ieiunandum, ex arbitrio,
non ex imperio Nouae Diſciplinae, pro temporibus, & cauſis vniuſcuiuſque. Sic & Apoſtolos
obſeruaſſe, nullum aliud imponentes iugum certorum, & in Commune
omnibus obeundorum ieiuniorum: Hencefoorth wee muſte Foſte vvithout
compulſion, of free vvil, not by commaundemente of this Newe Diſcipline, accordingly
as euery man ſhal ſee time, and cauſe. For ſo, it appeareth, the Apoſtles keapte
it, laieinge on none other yoke of certaine appointed Faſtes, to be obſerued in
Common of al menne altogeather.
                  
                     Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaith,
                     Auguſti. contra Fauſtum, Li. 30. Cap. 5. Per Quadrageſimam ferè omnes abſtinent, non ſolùm
à Carnibus, verùm etiam à quibuſdam fructibus, quantò magis quiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vel minùs,
ſeu voluerit, ſeu potuerit: In the Lente ſeaſon al menne for the moſte parte abſteine,
not onely from fleaſhe, but alſo from certaine fruites, as euery man either vvil, or is hable
to doo, more or leſſe.
                  Al theſe thinges beinge true, and certaine, and out of queſtion, howe can M.
Hardinge thus aſſure vs, that the Lenten Faſte is y• 
                     Vndoubted Tradition, and
Commaundemente of the Apoſtles?
                  Certainely, whereas they ſo often tel vs, wée ought to Faſte Fourtie Daies,
for that Chriſte him ſelfe did the like, and gaue vs example ſo to doo, Chryſoſtome
ſaithe,Chryſoſtom in Matthae. Homil. 47. 
                     Chriſtus non iubet, vt leiunium ſuum imitemur: Chriſte commaundeth vs not to
folow his Faſtinge, Or, to Faſte, as he Faſted.
                     
                  
                  
                     And touchinge the number of the Daies, Euſebius ſaithe, Quidam putant ieiunare
oportere vnum tantùm Diem:Euſebius. Li. 5. Cap 26. alij Duos: alij Plures: alij quadraginta Horas
diurnas, noctumaſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     : Somme thinke, they ought to Faſte onely one daie? Others, tvvo
daies: Others. Moe: Some others, Fourtie vvhole Houres both night, and daie togeather.
                  
                  But what meante M. Hardinge here to comme in with the difference bitwéene
Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes? Thinketh he, that Prieſtes, & Biſhoppes holde onely by
Tradition? Or is it ſo horrible an Hereſie, as he maketh it, to ſaie, that by y• Scriptures
of God, a Biſhop, and a Prieſte are at One? Or knoweth he, howe far, and
vnto whom he reacheth the name of an Heretique?
                  
                     Verily Chryſoſtome ſaith,
                     Chryſoſt in 1. Timoth. Hom. 11. Hieronym. ad Euagrium. Inter Epiſcopum, & Presbyterum intereſt fermè nihil:
Bitweene a Biſhop, and a Prieſte in a manner there is no difference. S. Hierome
ſaith, ſommewhat in rougher ſorte, Audio, quendam in tantam erupiſſe vecordiam,
vt Diaconos Preſbyteris, id eſt, Epiſcopis anteferret: Cùm Apoſtolus perſpicué doceat,
eoſdem eſſe Preſbyteros, quos Epiſcopos. I heare ſaie, there is One becomme ſo
peeuiſhe, that he ſetteth Deacons before Prieſtes, that is to ſaie, before Biſ hoppes:
where as the Apoſtle plainely teacheth vs, that Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes be al One.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaith,
                     Auguſtin. In quaeſtiontb. No. ui & Veter. Teſtamen. Qu
                           •
                        ol. Ambroſ. De Dignitate Sacerdot ali. 1. Cor in 7. Iohan. 2. Quid eſt Epiſcopus, niſi Primus Preſbyter, hoc eſt, Summus Sacerdos?
What is a Biſhop, but the Firſte Prieſte, that is to ſoie, the Higheſt Prieſte? So ſaithe
S. Ambroſe,
                      Epiſcopi, & Preſbyteri vna Ordinatio eſt: Vter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim Sacerdos eſt.
Sed Epiſcopus Primus eſt: There is but one Conſecration of Prieſte, and Biſhop. For
bothe of them are Prieſtes. But the Biſhop is the Firſte.
                  
                  Al theſe, and Other moe Holy Fathers togeather with S. Paule the Apoſtle,
for thus ſateinge, by M. Hardinges aduiſe, muſte be holden for Heretiques.
                  But S. Paule ſaithe to the Corinthians, Coetera, cùm venero, diſponam: For
the reſte, I wil take order, when I comme.
                      And S. Iohn ſaithe, I wil not write by paper,
and inke: but I truſte to be with you mee ſelfe, and to ſpeake vnto you. Vpon theſe
ſewe woordes. M. Hardinge is hable to builde by his Dimi Communion, his

Priuate Maſſe,
                     Traditions. and, what ſo euer he liſteth biſides.
                  S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tract. 57. Omnes inſipientiſsimi Haeretici, qui ſe Chriſtianos vocari
volunt, audacias figmentorum ſuorum, quas maximè exhorret ſenſus humanus,
hac occaſione Euangelicae ſententiae colorare conantur, vbi Dominus ait, Adhuc
multa vobis habeo dicere: Sed ea non poteſtis portare modò: Al the moſte peeuiſhe
Heretiques, that faine would be called Chriſtians, goe aboute to coloure the bolde Vanities of
theire Inucntions, whiche the very ſenſe and reaſon of Man doothe moſte abhorre, vvith
the pretenſe of this ſaieinge in the Goſpel, where as our Lorde ſaithe thus: I haue
many thinges to ſaie vnto you: but as nowe ye are not hable to beare them.
                  
                     Euen ſo ſaithe Tertullian, Eadem dementia confitentur, Apoſtolos quidem nihil
ignoraſſe,Tertul. De Praeſcription. Cōtra Haereticos. nec diuerſa inter ſe praedicaſſe. Sed non omnia volunt illos omnibus reuelaſſe:
Sed quaedam Palàm. & Vniuerſis: quaedam ſecretò, & Paucis demandaſſe: By a like
kinde of Madneſſe they Confeſſe, that the Apoſtles in deede were ignorante of no thinge: nor
taught any contrarie Doctrine emonge themſelues. But they ſaie, The Apoſtles reucied not
al thinges to al menne: but ſhewed certaine thinges openly, and to al: and other certaine
thinges ſecretely, and vnto a fevve.
                  By ſutche right helde ſommetime the greate Heretique Arius. For euen ſo
ſaide he then,Athanaſius Cō
                        tra Arian. Oratione 2. as M. Hardinge ſaithe nowe, Ex Electis Dei ſecundum Fidem, Peritis
Dei, Rectigradis, oui Sanctum Dei Spiritum acceperunt, ego ita didici: Theſe thinges
haue I learned
                      (not of y• Scriptures, but) of the Choſen of God, according to Faithe: of the
ſkilful in Godly vnderſtandinge: of them, that walkte vprightly, and had receiued the Sprite
of God: that is to ſale, by Tradition.
                  
                  So Epiphanius ſaithe,Epiphani. Lib. 2. Haereſ. 38. The Heretiques called Caiani, auouched al theire ſolies,
and Hereſies, not by the Scriptures, but by Tradition, as they ſaide, from S.
Paule: and tooke vpon them to knowe al thoſe Secrete woordes, that S. Paule had
hearde in the Thirde Heauen.
                  If M. Hardinge maie haue leaue, to handle the ſame weapons, I doubte not,
but he wil ſoone be hable to proue, that bothe his Holy Breade, & his Holy VVater,
and, what ſo euer ſhal pleaſe him els, came by Tradition directly from the Apoſtles,
and from Chriſte him ſelfe.
                  But S. Paule,
                     1. Cor. 11. when he ſaide, I vvil comme, and take order, he meante not to
diuiſe any other Scripture, or Newe Verities, that they had not knowen before:
but onely to appointe them, in what place, at what time, in what order, and with
what other Circumſtances, the Holy Miniſtration, and other like Eccleſiaſtical
Offices ſhould be vſed.
                  
                     As for theſe fantaſies, that M. Hardinge, and his felowes haue imagined, S.
Auguſtine ſaithe,Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 96. cùm Chriſtus ipſe tacuerit, quis noſtrum dicat, Iſta, vel illa ſunt?
Aut, ſi dicere audeat, vnde probat? Quis enim eſt tam vanus, aut tam temeratius, qui,
cùm dixerit etiam vera, quibas voluerit, quae voluerit, fine vllo Teſtimonio Diuino,
affirmet ea eſſe, quae tunc Dominus dicere noluit? For as mutche as Chriſte him ſelfe
hath not reueſed theſe thinges, whiche of vs wil ſaie, they be theſe, or theſe? Or if he ſo ſaie,
hovve can he proue it? For who is there, either ſo vaine, or ſo raſhe, who, notwithſtanding
he ſpeake the Truthe, to whom he liſteth, and what he liſteth, wil affirme vvithout
any Teſtimonie of the Scriptures, that theſe be the thinges, that the Lorde then
vvould not Open?
                  Sutche thinges they be,Hieronym In Aggaeum. cap. 1. S. Hierome ſaithe, are cutte of with the Swerde
(that is to ſaie, with the Woorde) of God.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge ſaithe, theſe expreſſe Woordes, Perſona, Ingenitus, Homouſios,
are not found in the Scriptures. So ſaide the Arian Heretiques too, as wel, as he.
But what foreeth that?
                     Epiphan. Lib 3. Hareſ. 73. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Epiphanius ſaith, Nomen Subſtantiae non ponitur nudè, nec
in Veteri, nec in Nouo Teſtamento: Senſus autem eius Nominis vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſt: This very

                     woorde,
                     Forged Scriptures Subſtantia, is not plainely expreſſed, neither in the Newe, nor in the Olde Temente:
But the ſenſe and meaninge of that VVoorde is eueryvvhere.
                  
                     So ſaith Anthanaſius,Athanaſ. Tom. 2. Quòd Decreta Ni
                           •
                        enae Synodi commodis, & piys verbis ſint expoſita. Tametfi haec voces in Scriptura non reperiuntur, tamen habent
earn Sententiam, quam Scripturae volunt: Notwithſtanding theſe woordes be not founde
expreſſed in the Scripture, yet haue they the ſame ſenſe and meaninge, that the scripture
willeth.
                  
                  
                     Touchinge the Perpetual Virginitie of that Bleſſed Virgine, the Mother of
Chriſte, whiche M. Hardinge ſaithe, cannot be proued by any Scriptures, Gennadius
writeth thus,
                     Gennadius in Catalogo Illuſtri. Virorum. Heluidij prauitatem arguens Hieronymus, Libellum Documentis
Scripturarum Sufficienter factum aduerſus cum edidu: S. Hierome repreuinge the
wilful lewdneſſe of the Heretique Heluidius (denieinge the Perpetual Virginitie of
Chriſtes Mother) ſette foorth a Booke againſt him, furniſhed
                      vvith ſufficiēte Teſtimomonies
of the Scriptures. Gennadius ſaithe, the Perpetual Virginitie of Our
Lady is proued ſufficiently by the Scriptures: M. Hardinge, onely to mainteine
his quarrel, ſaith, It cannot be proued by any Scriptures: but ſtandeth onely by
Tradition.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome him ſelfe in ſo vaine a contention, moued by an Heretique, thought
it ſufficient to anſweare thus:Hieronym. Contra Heluidium. 
                     Mariam nupſiſſe poſt partum non credimus: quia non
legimus: Wee beleeue not, that Marie was Married againe after her Childebearinge:
bicauſe vvee reade it not.
                  
                  Here M. Hardinge thinketh to oppreſſe vs with the Olde Heretiques Ordinarie
queſtion: Hovve knovve you, ſaith he, that the Scriptures be the Scriptures?
Hovv knovve you,
                      that the Goſpel of Thomas, Bartholomewe, and Nicodeme
are no Scriptures? Thus they laboure to pulle al credite from the Woorde of God,
and ſende vs onely to theire Traditions. Of God, and his Woorde, they would
euermore haue vs to ſtande in doubte: but of the Pope, and his Woorde, they ſay, in
any wiſe wée male not doubte.Hoſius, De expreſſo Verbo Dei. 
                     Hoſius a ſpecial Proctoure of that ſide ſaithe,
Quod Eccleſia docet, id eſt Expreſſum Verbum Dei: What ſo euer the Churche
teacheth,
                      (he meaneth the Churche of Rome) that is the very Expreſſe VVoorde
of God.
                     
                  
                  A man might wel demaunde the like queſtion of M. Hardinge: Hovv knovv
you, that the Sonne is the Sonne? Or that the Moene is the Moene? Or hovve
knovve you, that the Churche is the Churche? Or that the Congregation of the
Wicked is not the Churche?
                  
                     Sutche idle queſtions the Olde Heretiques the Manichées demaunded of S.
auguſtine.Auguſt. Contra Pauſtum, Lib. 32. Cap. 21. 
                     But S. Auguſtine anſweared them, Si quaeratis à nob is, vnde nos ſciamus,
Apoſtolorum eſſe iſtas literas, breuiter vobis reſpondemus, Inde nos ſcire, vnde &
vos ſcitis, illas literas eſſe Manichaei: If you demaunde of vs, hovve vvee knovve that
theſe be the Apoſtles writinges, wee make you this ſhorte anſweare, Euen ſo wee knowe, that
Oure writinges are of the Apoſtles, as you knowe, that your writinges are of the Heretique
Manichee.
                  
                  But for further anſweare, I recken, M. Hardinge cannot be ignorant, that the
Goſpel of Thomas, Bartholomevve, Nicodeme, and ſutche others, were neuer
written by them, whoes names they beare: but were wickedly, and falſely countrefeited
vnder their names, by ſundrie Heretiques.
                  S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Euſeb. Li. 3. ca. 25 Ambro. in Lucā, in Prooemio. Erant Pſeudopropherae, &c. Erat autem populi gratia diſcernere
Spiritus: vt cogno ſcerer, quos referre deberet in numerum Propherarum: quos
autem, quaſi bonus Nummularius, reprobare. Sic & nunc in Nouo Teſtamento
multi Euāgelia ſcribere conati ſunt: quae boni Nummularij non probauerunt: There
were Falſe Prophetes, &c. But the people had a Grace geeuen them, to diſcerne
Sprites, and to iudge, whom thei ſhould receiue into the number of the Prophetes: and whom,

as ſkilful exchangers,
                     Forged Scriptures 
                     they ſhoulde refuſe. Euen ſo nowe in the time of the Newe Teſtamente,
Many haue taken in hande to VVrite Goſpels: But the ſkilful exchangers, and triers
of Coines haue not allowed them.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Auguſtine:Auguſti. contra Fauſtum, Lib. 22. Cap. 80. Manichaei legunt Scripturas Apocryphas, neſcio à
quibus Sutoribus Fabularum, ſub nomine Apoſtolorum ſcriptas: The Manichees
reade Secrete Hidden Scriptures, written, I knowe not by what Cobblers of Fables,
vnder the name of the Apoſtles.
                  
                     So ſaithe Euſebius of the Goſpel countrefeited vnder the name of S. Peter:
Nos Petrum,Euſeb. li. 6 ca. 12. & reliquos Apoſtolos, ſicut Chriſtum recipimus. Sed Pſeudepigrapha
reijcimus: Veluti gnari eorum ſenſus, & ſententiae: Scientes, quòd talia non recipimus
tradita ab Apoſtolis: Wee receiue Peter, and the reſte of the Apoſtles, as wee woulde receiue
Chriſte him ſelfe. But Countrefeite VVritinges (vnder theire names) wee refuſe vtterſy:
as hauinge vnderſtandinge of their ſenſe,
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     and meaninge: knowinge wel, that wee haue receiued
no ſutche thinges deliuered by the Apoſtles.
                  
                  Thus had the Churche of God the Sprite of Wiſedome, whereby to diſcerne
the True Scriptures from the Falſe.
                  
                     Yet male wée not geather hereof, that the Authoritie of the Churche is ouer,
and aboue the Scriptures.
                     Diſt. 4. In iſtis. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaith, In iſtis temporalibus Legibus, quamuis
de illis homines iudicent, cùm eas inſtituunt, tamen cùm fuerint inſtitutae, & firmatae,
non licebit ludici, de illis iudicare, ſed ſecundum eas: In theſe temporal, or Worldly
Iawes, although menne be Iudges ouer thē, while they be a making, yet after the ſame Lawes
be once made, and eſtabliſhed, it is no ſenger lawful for the Iudge to Iudge of them: Onely
it is lawful, to Iudge by them.
                  
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. Confeſſ. Lib. 13. Cap. 23. Spirituales, ſiue qui praeſunt, ſiue qui obtemperant, Spiritualiter
iudicant: non de cognitionibus Spiritualibus, quae lucent in Firmamento (id eſt,
de Scripturis): Non enim oportet de tam ſublimi Authoritate iudicare, &c.
Homo enim, licet Spiritualis, factor ramen Legis eſſe debet, non Iudex. De illis dicitur
Iudicare, in quibus poteſtatem habet corrigendi: Menne Spiritual, whether thei ruſe,
or be ruled, Iudge accordinge to the Sprite. But they Iudge not of the Spiritual knowledge,
that ſhineth in the Firmamente (that is to ſaie, of the Scriptures): For it is not lawful for
any man to be Iudge ouer ſo high Authoritie. For be the man never ſo mutche Spiritual,
yet muſte he be a Dooer, and not a Iudge of the Lavve. There a Man is ſaide
to be a Iudge, where he hath Power, and Authoritie to correcte.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 10. Diuiſion. 1.
               Moreouer wee allowe the Sacramentes of the Churche, that is
to ſaie, certaine Holy Signes, & Ceremonies, whiche Chriſte woulde
wee ſhoulde vſe, that by them he might ſette before our eies the Myſteries
of our Saluation, and might more ſtrongely confirme the
Faithe, whiche wee haue in his Bloude, and might ſeale his Grace in
our hartes. And theſe Sacramentes, togeather with Tertullian, Origen,
Ambroſe, Auguſtine, Hierome, Chryſoſtome, Baſile, Dionyſius,
& other Catholique Fathers. wee doe calle Figures, Signes,
Markes, Badges, Printes, Copies, Fourmes, Seales, Signettes, Similitudes,
Paternes, Repreſentations, Remembraunces, and Memories.
And wee make no doubt, togeather with the ſame Doctours
to ſaie, that theſe bee certaine Viſible vvoordes, Seales of Righteouſnes,
and Tokens of Grace.
               
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVith what face, ſaie ye, that ye allowe the Sacramentes of the Churche?Vntruthe. For the thinges, that vveehaue leafte, vvere not the Sacram. of the Churche. Haue ye not abandot
ned almoſte al the Sacramentes of the Churche? Retaine ye any mo by name of the Sacramentes then
two, Baptiſme, and your Supper of the Lorde? Of whiche the one, after that Doctrine, as it is by you
taught, and miniſtred, auaileth nothinge but to your further condemnation.
                  The ſounde, and true Doctrine, whiche the Catholike Churche holdeth, and beleueth touching this
point, is this:The ſounde and true Doctrine of the Sacramentes. There be ſeuen Sacramentes, in which, vnder coouer of viſible thinges, theVntruthe. As ſhal appeare. Power of God
worketh mans helth. They be theſe: Baptiſme, Confirmation, the Sacrament of the aulter, Penaunce, extreme
Vnction, Order, VVedlocke. And theſe ſo we cal Sacramentes, as neuertheles we acknowledge the
name of Sacrament may be extended to many other thinges. That it be knowen what a Sacrament is,
this woorde Sacrament ſignifieth ſommetime a holy thinge,Seuen Samentes. ſometime the ſigne of a holy thinge inſtituted
by God.Sacramente vvhat it ſignifieth. As it is taken for a ſigne only, ſo is it found generally, not only in the Newe Lawe, but alſo
in the Olde Lawe. But in the Newe Lawe theſe ſignes after a Peculiar, and Special manner be called
Sacramentes, whiche do not only ſignifie a holy thinge, but alſo do ſanctifie and make holy thoſe to whō
thei be adhibited, being ſuch as by inſtitution of Chriſte conteine grace in them, and Power to ſanctifie.
                        
                           •
                         Vntruthe. For they are onely certaine late Scholaſtical Sophiſters.
VVhereof a Sacrament is by the beſt learned diuines defined to be a viſible ſigne of inuiſible grace,Definition of a Sacrament.
ſo as it beare the image of it,* and be cauſe of the ſame. For the plaine vnderſtāding of this Definition,
how a Sacrament beareth the forme, ſigne, or image of inuiſible grace, it appeareth euidently in Baptiſme,
where waſhinge of the body ſheweth the clenſinge of the ſowle. Alſo in the Sacramente of the
Aulter,Vntruthe, Vaine, and childiſhe. For no Learned Father euer ſaide ſo. where the formes of Breade and VVine out wardly repreſent the ſpiritual nouriſhing of the
ſoule. The like appeareth in other Sacramentes.
                  Neither is it a New, and ſtraung Doctrine to ſay, that the Sacramētes of the Goſpel conteine grace in
them, for the Fathers teache the ſame not ſeldom. Chryſoſtome expounding the Myſterie of the Poole called
Betheſda in Hebrewe, that was in Ieruſalem, ſaith, that ſicke folke were healed at the mouing of
the water, to the intent men might be brought to vnderſtande the vertue of Baptiſme. For then was it
comming to paſſe (ſaith he) that Baptiſme ſhoulde be ful of power and grace.Cap. 5. S. Ambroſe in his booke
de Sacramentis ſpeaking of Baptiſme, ſaith it is not euery water that healeth, but that water healeth,
whiche hath the Grace of Chriſte. Cyrillus vpon the foreſaide Chapter of S. Iohn ſaith, that in Baptiſme
it is not VVater ſimply, that worketh, but when as it hathe receiued the grace of the Holy
Ghoſte.Sermoné Dominicae intra octauas Epiphaeniae. S. Auguſtine in a Sermon ſaith, the VVater in Baptiſme is enriched with a more gifte in maner,
then was the Virgine Mary. For the (ſaith he) deſerued Chaſtitie to her ſelfe, this hath geuen to vs
ſanctifications: She deſerued that ſhe ſinned not, this that it might purge ſinnes. It is ſaide vniuerſally
by S. Cyprian of al the Sacramentes, that the fatte of Gods anointinge powereth fulnes of grace into
the miniſterial ſanctifications,In ſermone de Baptiſmo Chriſti. whereby he meaneth the Sacramentes. Yet we meane, that they conteine
grace, and power to ſanctifie, after ſuche maner of ſpeakinge, as we ſaie of Potions and drinkes prepared
for ſicke Perſons, that thei conteine health, to the workinge whereof they be effectual.
                  And as it is ſaide of the Sacramentes, that thei conteine grace, ſo is it likewiſe ſaide, that through
theire vertue, whiche thei haue by Gods inſtitution, thei do not only ſignifie (as by theſe Defenders Doctrine
that ſemeth to be theire ſpecial office) but alſo with ſignificationVntruthe. See the Anſvveare. worke and cauſe, as an inſtrumental
cauſe, the effecte of that, whiche they ſignifie.
                  After whiche maner,Povver gede to Sacramentes to vvorke that thei ſignifie by Gods ordinance. God hath geuen to the Sacramentes of the Newe Teſtamente, that thei worke
the thinge ſignified, through vertue geuen them by Gods ordinance, to ſpecial effectes of grace.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Of the number of the Sacramentes, wée ſhal haue more conueniente time to
ſpeake hereafter. There, gentle Reader, I truſt, thou ſhalt ſée M. Hardinges great
queſtion eaſily anſweared, with what face wée ſaye, wée allowe the Sacramentes
of the Churche. In the meane ſeaſon it maie pleaſe thée, to weigh theſe woordes of
Cardinal Beſſarion, the Biſhop of Tuſculum, one of M. Hardinges eſpecial Catholique
Doctours:Beſſarion, De Sacramen. Euchariſtiae. 
                     Haec Duo Sola Sacramenta in Euangelijs manifeſtè tradita legimus:
Theſe onely tvvo Sacramentes wee reade to be deliuered vs plainely in ye Goſpel.
                     
                     
Here Beſſarion nameth,Baptiſme. 
                     not Seuen Sacramentes, as M. Harding dooth, but onely
Tvvo. Certainely wée refuſe no Sacramente, that euer was either ordeined by
Chriſte, or vſed and practiſed by the Apoſtles.
                  
                     Your Lordes Supper, ſaithe M. Hardinge, auaileth you nothing, but to your
further Condēnation. So muſt it néedes be, bicauſe M. Harding ſaith, it ſhal ſo be.
Theſe Tragical terrours are fit onely to frale children: In the Date of the Lorde
eche mannes woorke ſhal appeare. The ſimpleſte of our people vnderſtandeth the
Nature, & Meaning of ye Holy Myſterie of Our Lordes Supper: & therfore they receiue
y• ſame togeather to theire greate conſolation. But in Your Lady Maſſe the
ſimple people vnderſtandeth nothing, heareth nothing, &, ſauing a fewe vnſeemely
Ceremonies, ſeeth nothing. And therfore they ſo ſeldome Communicate, & that onely
of cuſtome, without any zele, or comforte of conſcience, as hauinge no ſenſe, or feeling
in al theſe dooinges.Origen. in Luc
                           •
                         Homil. 5. 
                     Origē
                      ſaith, Niſi Circunciſionis reddatur ratio, nutus eſt, &
Opus mutum. Paſcha, & aliae Solenuitates nutus magis ſunt, quàm Veritas, vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hodiè
Populus Iſrael ſurdus, & mutus eſt: Onleſſe the reaſons, or cauſes of Circumciſiō be opened,
Circumciſion is but a geſture, and a doumbe kinde of vvoorke. The Eaſter Feaſte,
and other like Solemnities, are rather Ceremonies, then the Truthe it ſelfe. Euen ſtil vntil
this daie,
                     
                     Ambroſ. in 1. Cor. 11. 
                     the people of Iſrael is deafe, and doumbe. S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Indignus eſt Domino,
qui aliter Myſterium celebrat, quàm à Chriſto traditum eſt. Non enim poteſt
deuotus eſſe qui aliter praeſumit, quàm datum eſt ab Authore: He is vnwoorthy of the
Lorde, that Miniſtreth this Sacramente othervviſe, then Chriſte deliuered it. For he cannot
be deuoute, that preſumeth to vſe it othervviſe, then it was firſte deliuered from
Chriſte the Authoure.
                      Theſe wordes ſéeme ſommewhat to touche M. Hardinge,
and his Companie. But here he is contented, to allowe vs the very
Sacramente, and true vſe of Baptiſme, and that vailable, and of force for the Remiſſion
of Sinnes. Whereby vnaduiſedly, and vnwares he confeſſeth, that wee
haue the very True Catholique Churche of God. For S. Auguſtine ſaithe truely,
Baptiſmus Eccleſiae poteſt eſſe extra Eccleſiam:
                     De Con. Diſt. 4 Eccleſia. 
                     munus autem Beatae vitae non niſi intra
Eccleſiam inuenitur: The Baptiſme of the Churche maie be without the Churche: but the
gifte of Bleſſed life is not founde, but vvithin the Churche. But why he alloweth vs
this Sacramente, rather then the other, it were a harde mater to diſcuſſe. Neither
may we iuſtly require reaſon of him that ſpeaketh ſo mutche without reaſon.
                  Perhaps he wil ſate, Baptiſme is but a light Sacramente, & maie be miniſtred
by any Laie Perſonne, euen by an olde Woman, or by a gyrle, ſo that ſhée ſpeake
Latine, and vnderſtande not, what ſhée ſaie. For otherwiſe, I trowe, her dooinge
maie not ſtande for good. Certainely, whereas M. Hardinge ſpeaketh of the dewe
Fourme of Woordes, according to Chriſtes Inſtitution, his owne Doctours telle
vs,De Conſe. Diſt. 4. Si non. and auouche it for greate Truthe, that if the Prieſte ſaie thus, Ego te Baptizo
in nomine Patris, & Filij, & Spiritus Sancti, & Diaboli: That is, I. Baptize thee in the
name of the Father,
                     De Conſe. Diſt. 4. Retulerunt. 
                     and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghoſte, and of the Diuel:
                      Or if he
ſaie thus, as one ignorante Prieſte ſommetime ſaide, Ego te Baptizo in nomine
Patria, & Filia, & Spirita Sancta, yet the Fourme of Baptiſme is very good.
                  But one greate faulte M. Hardinge findeth in our dooinges, for that wée haue
leafte out a greate many Holie rites, his Chriſme, his Oile, his Salte, his Spittle,
and ſutche other like thinges: and for that wée miniſter this Sacramente plainely,
& ſimply, as Chriſte commaunded. This obiection beinge of no greater weight,
may eaſily diſcharge it ſelfe, & therefore maie paſſe wel without farther anſweare.
                  M. Hardinge ſaithe, there be Seuen Sacramentes, whiche,
                      as he ſaithe, doo not onely
ſignifie a Holy thinge, but alſo doo Sanctifie, and make holy thoſe, to whō they be adhibited, being
ſutche as by Inſtitution of Chriſte conteine Grace in them, and power to ſanctifie. Here, to leaus
the reſte, it might be demaunded, howe can Matrimonie Sanctifie a Man, & make

him Holy:To Conteine Grace. or by what Inſtitution of Chriſte conteineth it Grace in it ſelfe, and
Power to Sanctific? Or if it cannot Sanctifie, nor haue ſutche Grace, howe then
can it be called a Sacramente?
                  
                     I graunt, the Ancient Learned Fathers, entreating of the Sacramentes, haue
often vſed vehement,
                     Concil Nicen. 
                     and greate woordes. It is written in the Councel of Nice,
Vides Aquam? Conſidera Vim Diuinam, quae in Aquis Latet. Puta, Aquam eſſe plenā
Ignis Diuini. Seeſt thou the Water? Conſider ye diuine Povver that lieth Hidde
in the Water, Imagin, that the Water is ful of Heauenly Fiere. So S. Ambroſe,
Spiritus Sanctus deſcendit,Ambroſ. De Samen. Li. 1. Cap. 5. Tertul. De Batiſmo. & Aquam conſecrat. Adeſt Praeſentia Trinitatis: The Holy
Ghoſte commeth downe, and haloweth the Water. There is the Preſence of the Trinitie.
So ſaith Tertullian, In Baptiſmo tingimur Paſsione Chriſti: In Baptiſme wee
are vvaſſhed vvith the Paſsion of Chriſte. So ſaith Chryſoſtome, as M. Hardinge
hath here alleged him, Baptiſme is ful of Povver, and Grace: So ſaith S. Cyprian:
ſo ſaie others.
                  
                  
                     Al theſe, and other like vehemente ſpeaches M. Harding mitigateth, and qualifieth
in this wiſe: VVee meane, ſaith he, that Sacramentes conteine Grace, after ſutche manner
of ſpeakinge, as wee ſaie, Potions, and drinkes conteine healthe. That is to ſaie, Sacramentes
verily, and in déede
                      conteine not the Grace of God. For drinkes, and Potions
verily,
                     4. Reg. 4. 
                     and in déede conteine not the health of ye Patiente. In this manner of
ſpeache ye Children of the Prophetes ſaide to Elizaeus the Prophete, Mors in olla,
Vir Dei:Prou. 18. Iohan. 5. 
                     O thou man of God, Death is in the Potte. So Salomon ſaithe, Death, and Life
are in the handes of the tongue. So Chriſte ſaithe vnto the Phariſeis, Searche the Scritures:
for in them you thinke to haue euerlaſtinge Life. Therefore one M. Hardinges
Schoole Doctous ſaithe,
                     
                     Iohan. De Pariſijs, De Poteſtate Regia, Cap. 26. In Sacramentis Eccleſiae, ſpecialis Virtus Paſsionis Chriſti
continetur, ſicut Virtus agentis in inſtrumento: The ſpecial Grace of the Paſsion of
Chriſte is conteined in the Sacramentes of the Churche, as the Power of the woorkes
is conteined in the inſtrumente, wherewith he woorketh.
                  
                  But in déede, it is the Soule of man, and not the Creature of Breade, or Water,
that receiueth the Grace of God. Wee haue néede of Goddes Grace: Theſe corruptible
elementes néede it not. Without Faith of our Parte Sacramentes be not onely
vnprofitable to vs,Chryſo. in Matthae. Operis Imperfe. Homil. 43. but alſo hurtful. S. Chryſoſtame ſaith, Vbi eſt Virtus Euangelij?
In Figuris literarum, an in intellectu ſenſuū? VVhere is the Povver of the
Goſpel? In the Fourmes of the letters, or els in the vnderſtandinge of the meaninge?
                     
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe Bonauentura ſaithe,
                     Bonauen in 4. Sen. diſt. 1. Qu. 3. Nullo modo dicendum eſt, quòd Gratia continetur
in ipſis Sacramentis eſſentialiter, tanquam Aqua in Vaſe, vel Medicina in Pyxide.
Imò hoc intelligere eſt erroneum. Sed dicuntur continere Gratiam, quia eam ſignicant:
VVee maye not in any wiſe ſaié, that the Grace of God is conteined ſubſtantially,
and verily in the Sacramentes, as VVater is conteined in the Veſſel, or a Medicine in
the Boxe. For ſo to ſaie, it were enoneous. But wee ſaie, the Sacramentes conteine the
Grace of God:Eodem loco. bicauſe thei ſignifie the Grace of God. Againe he ſaith, Gratia eſt
in anima, non in Signis viſibilibus: The Grace of God is, not in the viſible Signes, but
in the Soule. And againe he ſaithe, Ad illud, quod obijcitur, quòd remiſsio Peceatorum
Latet in Baptiſmo, dicendum eſt, quòd hoc intelligiturede latentia Signati in Signo:
quod quidem habet vlteriorem rationem, quàm rationem Significandi: non tamen eſſentialiter
continendi in ſe: ſed quia ipſum, quod Signat, continetur in anima: To the Obiection,
that is made, that the Romiſsion of Sinnes is Hidde in Baptiſme, wee muſte anſweare
thus, that it muſt be taken of the thinge Signified hidde in the Signe. VVhiche
thinge neuertheleſſe hath a farther meaninge, then to Signifie: yet not to conteine (the Remiſſion
of Sinnes) verily, and Subſtantially in it ſelfe: but that the Grace, that is Signified
thereby, is conteined in the Soule.
                  
                     
The Myſtical ſignification,Fourmes, and Accidentes. that M. Harding hath imagined, of his Shevves,
and Accidentes, that the Fourmes of Breade, and Wine outwardely repreſente
the Spiritual nouriſhinge of the Soule, is vaine, and fantaſtical, without the witneſſe
of any Anciente Doctour, or Father, confirmed onely by the Authoritie of
him ſelfe. For what manner of féedinge is there is theſe Accidentes, and Holy
Fourmes? Or how can that thinge, that féedeth not the Body, repreſente vnto
vs the Spiritual féedinge of the Soule?
                  The mater is plaine yenough of it ſelfe, and néedeth no cauil. The Signification,
and Subſtance of the Sacrament is to ſhewe vs, how wee are fedde with
the Body of Chriſte: that is, that like as Material Breade feedeth our Body, ſo
the Body of Chriſte nailed on the Croſſe, embraced, and eaten by Faithe, feedeth
the Soule. The like Repreſentation is alſo made in the Sacramente of Baptiſme:
that as our Body is waſſhed cleane withe Water, ſo our Soule is waſſhed cleane
with Chriſtes Bloude.Auguſtin. Epiſt. 23. Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Niſi Sacramenta ſimilitudinem
quandam earum rerum, quarum sacramenta ſunt, haberent, omninò Sacramenta
non eſſent: Yf Sacramentes had not a certaine likeneſſe, and repreſentation
of the thinges, wherof they be Sacramentes, then in deede they were no Sacramentes.
This Repreſentation Rabanus Maurus expoundeth thus,Rabanus Li. 2. Cap. 31. 
                     Quia Panis Corpora
confirmat, ideò ille congruenter Corpus Chriſti nuncupatur: Et quia vinum Sanguinem
operatur in Carne, ideò refertur ad Sanguinem: Bicauſe
                      (not the Accidentes,
or Fourmes of Breade, but) Breade it ſelfe confirmeth the Body, therefore it is
conueniently called the Body of Chriſte: And bicauſe Wine woorketh bloude in the fleaſhe,
therefore it hath relation vnto the Bloude.
                     
                  
                  
                     So likewiſe ſaithe Druthmarus,Druthmarus in Matthae. ca. 26. Vinum laetificat, & Sanguinem auget:
& ideò non inconuenienter Sanguis Chriſti per hoc figuratur: (not the Accidentes
or Fourmes of Wine, but) VVine it ſelfe reioiceth the harte, and increaſeth
bloude: And therefore the Bloude of Chriſte conueniently is thereby ſignified.
                  
                  
                     M. Hardinge, for that he cannot vtterly denie it, the mater beinge ſo plaine,
is therefore contented to graunte, that the Sacrament is the Figure of Chriſtes
Body. But to helpe out, and to ſhifte the mater, he hath diuiſed ſutche a ſtrange
kinde of Figure, as ſeldome hathe benne hearde before. Notwithſtandinge the
Holy Learned Fathers ſpeake plainely, and ſimply, and vſe no kinde of ſutche
Gloſes.
                     Hierony. aduerſus Ruffinum. 
                     S. Hierome ſaithe, Ad Tropicam intelligentiam ſermo referatur. Quando
dico, Tropicam, docco verum non eſſe, quod dicitur, ſed allegoriae nubilo figuratum:
Let that ſateinge be expounded by a Figure. When I ſaie, a Figure, I ſaie, the
thing that is ſpoken, is not true in deede, but Figured vnder the clowde of an Allegorie.
Likewiſe
                      Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Geneſin, Homi. 35. Audiſti, fuiſſe Figuram. Ne ergo mirare, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      omnia
require in typo. Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim typus eſset, ſi omnia, quae Veritati accidunt, haberentur:
Ye haue hearde, that it was a Figure. Therefore maiueiſe not: and beinge a Figure,
require not al thinges to agree.Auguſtin. De Doctrinae Chriſtiana, li. 3. ca. 5. 
                     For otherwiſe it were no Figure. So likewiſe
S. Auguſtine ſaithe, in Principio cauendum eſt, ne Figuratam locutionem ad
literam accipias. Ad hoc enim pertinet, quod ait Apoſtolus, Litera occidit. Cùm enim
Figuratè dictum ſic accipitur, tanquam proriè dictum ſit, Carnaliter ſapitur: ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
ulla mors animae congruentiùs appellatur: Firſte of al thou muſte take heede,
that thou take not a Figuratiue Speache accordinge to the Letter. For that is
it, whereof S. Paule ſaithe, The Letter Killeth. For, when the thinge, that
is ſpoken vnder a Figure, is ſo taken, as if it vvere plainely ſpoken, there is a
Fleaſhly vnderſtandinge. Neither is there any thinge, that maie better be
called the deathe of the Soule.Articulo. 12. 
                     Al this, and mutche more to like purpoſe, thou
maiſte finde in my Former Replie to M. Hardinge.
                  
                  
                     An other fantaſie M. Hardinge hathe, that the Sacramentes of the Nevve

Lavve woorke the thinge it ſelfe,
                     Sàcram. Olde. Nevve. 
                     that they ſignifie, through Vertue, as he ſaith,
geuen vnto them by Goddes ordinance, to ſpecial effectes of Grace. This, as I
ſaide, is but a fantaſie. For the Sacramentes of the Olde Lavve,1. Corin. 10. and of the
Nevve, in Truthe, and Subſtance are al one. S. Paule ſaithe, Omnes eundem
cibum Comederunt:Hilari. in Pſalnum 67. 
                     The Fathers in the Olde Lawe, did al eate the ſame meare, that is to
ſaie, the ſame Chriſte, that wée eate. S. Hilarie ſaithe, Sub nube fuerunt, & Chriſto,
aquam Petra praebente,Leo De Natiuita Domini, Sermone. 3. potati ſunt: They were vnder the Clowde, and were drenched
vvith Chriſte, the Rocke geeuinge them water. Likewiſe ſaithe Leo:
                      Myſteria
pro temporum ratione variata ſunt: quum Fides, qua viuimus, nulla fuerit aetate
diuerſa: The Sacramentes are aſtered accordinge to the diuerſitie of the times. But the
Faithe,Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 26. vvhereby vvee liue, in al ages vvas euer one. Likewiſe S. Auguſtine,
Sacramenta illa fuerunt, in Signis diuerſa: in rebus, quae ſignificabantur, paria: Theſe
thinges were Sacramentes, in the outvvarde tokens, diuerſe: but in the thinges tokened,
al one vvith ours.
                  
                     M. Hardinge wil replie:
                     Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 73. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Sacramenta Noui Teſtamenti
dant Salutem: The Sacramentes of the New Teſtament geeue Saluation. But who
can better expounde S. Auguſtines meaninge, then S. Auguſtine him ſelfe? He addeth
immediately:
                      Cùm ergo iam teneas promiſsa, quid quaeris promittentia Saluatorem?
Hoc dico, teneas promiſſa: non quòd iam acceperimus Viram aeternam, Sed
quòdiam Chriſtus Venerit, qui per Prophetas praenuntiabatur: Wherefore, ſeeinge
thou haſte the Promiſſes (of the comminge of Chriſte) already perfourmed, what ſeekeſt
thou the thinges,
                      that Promiſed the Saueoure? I ſaie, Thou haſte the Promiſſes already
perfourmed: not for that wee haue alreadie receiued euerlaſtinge life, but for that
Chriſte is alreadie comme, that was promiſed by the Prophetes. Therefore, when S.
Auguſtine ſaithe, Our Sacramentes
                      geue Saluation, his meaninge is this, Our
Sacramentes teache vs,
                     Auguſtin contra Fauſtum, Li. 19. Ca. 14. 
                     that Saluation is already comme into the World. Thus
S. Auguſtine ſaithe in an other place: Illa fuerunt Promiſsiones rerum complendarum:
haec ſunt indicia completarum: The Sacramentes of the Olde Lawe were Promiſſes
of ſutche thinges, as ſhould afterv vard be accompliſſhed: Our Sacramentes of
the Newe Lawe are takens, that the ſame Promiſſes be already accompliſſhed. Thus
the Holy Fathers ſaie, The Sacramentes of the Newe Lawe vvorke Saluation:
bicauſe they teache vs, that our Saluation is already wrought. So Bonauentura
ſaithe of the Sacramentes of the Olde Teſtamente,
                     Bonauentura. in 4. Senten. dis. 1. In Procemio. Mundare dicebantur: id eſt,
mundatum oſtendebant: They were ſaide to make a man cleane, bicauſe they ſhevved,
or ſignified, that a man vvas made cleane.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 1.
               And wee doo expreſſely pronounce, that in the Lordes Supper
there is Truely geuen vnto the Beleuinge the Body and Bloud of
our Lorde, the Fleaſhe of the Sonne of God, whiche quickeneth our
Soules, the Meate that commeth from aboue, y• foode of Immortalitie,
or Grace, Truth, & Life: And the ſame Supper to be the communton
of the Body, and Bloud of Chriſte: by the partaking whereof
wee be reuiued, ſtreghtened, and fedde vnto Immortalitie: and
whereby wee are Ioined, Vnited, & Incorporate vnto Chriſte, that
wee maie abide in him, and he in vs.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat ye proncunce of this high Sacrament, the wiſe and careful tenderers of their ſoules wil
be right ware thereof. Of you and ſuche as ye be, becauſe your Doctrine isIn reſpect of this Corner, the Churche of Rome vvere a ſimple corner. but of a corner of
the worlde in reſpect of the Vniuerſal Churche,Matt. 24. hathe geuen vs a watche woorde, Nolite

credere,The Sacramentaries Lordes ſupper. beleeue them not. In your the Lordes ſupper, celebrated by the Miniſters of your owne creation,
Vntruthes, ioined vvith Heatheniſhe blaſphemies. there is not geeuen the Body and Bloud of our Lorde, neither to the beleuing, nor to the vnbeleuinge.
For at the celebration of your ſchiſmatical ſupper, no * conſecration being done, * nor
Faithe of the Churche, * not right intention had, * nor Chriſtes inſtitution obſerued, what deliuer
ye to your communicantes, but * a peece of Breade, and a * ſippe of VVine? Neither is it * your wil
it be more or better. At the ſupper of Our Lorde miniſtred in the Catholike Churche by Prieſtes rightly
conſecrated,Iudas receiued the true body of Chriſte, noleſſe then thapoſtles. Math. 26. Chryſoſt. Homil. de Proditione Iudae. Auguſtin. in Pſal. 10. and as it hath ben accuſtomed in Chriſtes Churche, there is the true and whole Body of
our Lorde and ſaueour geeuen and receiued, be the receiuers beleuinge, orVnttuthe, Reade tile Anſvveare. not beleuinge. For when
Chriſte gaue this Sacrament to his Diſciples at his laſt ſupper, after that he had conſecrated the ſame,
ſaieing, take ye, eate ye, this is my Body: Iudas the traitour, as the * Fathers teache, receiued his true
Body noleſſe then Peter, Andrewe, Iohn, or Iames did: though they to their ſaluation, he to his damnation.
                  Now it is to be noted, how this Defender in this long ſentence affecteth a certaine holy (as it
were) and ſolemne eloquence, and vſeth a religious amplification of Woordes, to ſet foorth the ſacrament,
as though he had a reuerent and a godly opinion of it: whereas in dede he taketh itVntruthe. For vve cal the Signe the Signe: and the Truthe, the Truthe. but for
a poore ſigne or token, as their Doctoure Zuinglius dothe. But ſuche is their crafte, to purchaſe them
credite among the people. Thus offer they to the vnlearned their faire cuppes ful of venym, anointinge
the brimmes with Honye of ſweete and Holy woordes, the rather to poiſon them. Suche complainte
maketh the graue Father S. Hilary againſte the Arians of his time, Ingerunt nobis primū
nomina Veritaùs,
                     De trinit. Li. 6. 
                     vt virus falſitatis introeat. Bonum in Ore eſt, vt de corde malum ſubeat:
Firſte (ſaithe he) they thruſt me foorthe woordes of truthe, that the venym of falſehed mate enter in.
Good is in their mouthe, that out from the harte maie euil proceede. And among al theſe woordes (hee
meaneth the Arians confeſſion of their faithe) I heare no where by them ſaide, Deum dei filium:
God the ſonne of God. Right ſo among al theſe faire woordes concerning the Sacramente,O merueilous horrible Hereſi: vvhat Doctour, or Father euer named your Real Preſence
                           •
                        
                      we heare
neuer a whit ſaide of the real preſence of Chriſtes Body.Contra Ariomanitas, Haereſi. 69. De gratia Chriſti, contra Pelagiū & Coeleſt. li. 1. Cap. 32. Matth. 13. Epiphanius noteth the like crafte in Arius,
and ſo doth S. Auguſtine in the Pelagians. Neſtorius likewiſe ſpake honorably in many places of Chriſte
and his Mother. But now here would he cal her 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, the Mother of God. The Iewes alſo,
as we finde in the Goſpell, called our ſauiour Ieſus the Carpenters ſonne, confeſſed Mary to be his
Mother, Iames, Ioſeph, Simon, and Iude, his brothers, and that his ſiſters were among them (by whom
his Kinneſ folke are to be vnderſtanded) but the ſonne of God they would not acknowledge him, nor in
that degree honour him. Better then to thoſe Iewes can I not compare theſe Defenders, who ſpeake honorably
of our Lordes Body and Bloud in their ſupper:Neither did any Doctour or Father Euer ſaie, that Christs Body is Really, and Verily in the Sacraments. but that his Body is really, that it is verely in
the Sacrament of the aulter, that wil not the Deuill who raigneth in their hartes, ſuffer theire
mouthes to vtter.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  M. Hardinge telleth vs, wée deliuer vnto the Faitheful nothing els, but a
péece of Breade, and a ſlppe of Wine: that wée haue neither Intention, nor Conſecration:
that our faire Cuppes be ful of Venime: That our Supper is Schiſmatical:
that our Eloquence is Hypocritical: that our Doctrine is Heretical: that
wée are like to the Pelagians, to the Neſtorians, to the Arians, and to the levves:
and that the Diuel raigneth in our hartes. If the Truthe of God were euermore
ioined with vaine ſpeache, then might M. Hardinge be hable eaſily to winne the
price. He ſaithe, Our Doctrine is but in a Corner of the worlde, and that therefore
Chriſte hathe geuen this watche woorde of vs, Beleeue them not. How be
it, if he would aduiſedly conſider the mater, and looke wel about him, he ſhoulde
finde, that ſo many Kingdomes, and Countries, and Commonweales, as this day
profeſſe the Goſpel of Chriſte, would make a good large Corner in the Churche of
God. Certainely in reſpecte thereof, Rome it ſelfe were a very poore Corner.
                  Vnto whom Chriſte ſpecially pointed,2. Theſſalon. 
                           •
                        
                      when he ſaide theſe woordes, Beleeue
them not, bicauſe it is a Propheſie, it is harde to iudge. But it is very likely,
he meante Antichriſte, that Man of Sinne, the Childe of deſtruction, that auanceth him ſelfe

aboue al that is called God.
                     Conſecration. 
                     Verily Chryſoſtome thereof ſaithe thus: Non dico,Chryſoſt. in Mat. Homil. 49. ſi
dixerint vobis, Ecce in Haereticis Eccleſijs illis, vel in illis apparuit Chriſtus: ſed etiam ſi
in ipſis veris Eccleſijs, quae Dei ſunt, id eſt, domus veſtrae, dixerint vobis, Chriſtum
apparuiſſe, nolite eis credere dicentibus iſta de me: quia non eſt digna Diuinitatis meae
notitla haec: Oſtendens per haec, quomodò ex ipſis Eccleſijs veris frequenter exeunt
Seductores. Proptereà nec ipſis omninò credendū eſt, niſi ea dicant, vel faciant, quae conuenientia
ſint Scripturis: I ſaie not, if they tel you, Behold Chriſte hathe appeared in
theſe, or theſe Churches of Heretiques: But if they ſhal ſaie vnto you, that Chriſte bathe appeared
in the very true Churches, that are of God, that is to ſaie, that are your houſes,
Beleeue them not, if they ſaie thus of me: for this is no woorthy knowledge of my Diuinitie:
By theſe he ſheweth, hovv that out of the very true Churches oftentimes come
foorthe deceiuers. Therefore wee maie not beleue no not them, onleſſe they ſpeake, or doo
thoſe thinges, that are agreeable to the Scriptures.
                  Verily, how ſo euer M. Hardinge wil ſhifte this mater, the plaine woordes
ſéeme rather to touche him, and his companie, then either Luther, or Zuinglius,
or any other. For they can pointe with theire fingers, and ſaie, Here is Chriſte,
and There is Chriſte. Behold, In this Pyre are three Chriſtes: in that fiue: in
that ſeuen: in that moe. Therefore it is likely, that Chriſte géeueth vs this ſpecial
watche woorde of them, and ſutche others, Beleeue them not.
                  
                  
                     Here M. Hardinge maketh mutche adoo about Conſecration: and yet are not
his Felowes wel agreed, what to make of theire owne Conſecration. Gabriel
ſaithe,
                     Gabriel Biel. Lectio. 36. Chritus potuit ſine verbo tanquam verus Deus, Subſtantiam Panis, & Vini
Conſecrare: Vel, potuit verba quaedam ſecretò proferre, & per illa Conſecrare: Vel,
per haec Verba, Hoc eſt Corpus meum, Conſecrare potuit: Vel, potuit priùs Conſecrare,
& poſteà diſtribuere: Vel, primùm diſtribuere, & poſteà Conſecrare. Quid
autem horum fecerit, ex Sacris Scripturis non conſtat: Chriſte, as beinge very
God, might Conſecrate the Subſtance of Breade and VVine vvithout vvoorde: Or els, he
might ſpeake certaine wordes in ſecrete, and by them Conſecrate: Or els, he might Conſecrate
by theſe woordes, This is my Body: Or els, he might firſte Conſecrate, and
after deliuer: Or els, firſte deliuer, and after Conſecrate. But vvhiche of al theſe he
did in deede,Beſſarion de Sacramen. Euchariſtia. Catharinus De Conſecratione. Durandus Li. 4. De Sexta parte Canonis. Petrus de Alliaco, in. 4. Senten. quae. 5. Antididagma. Bonauentura in 4 Senten. diſt. 8. quae. 2. by the Holy Scriptures it appeareth not. Cardinal Beſſarion
ſaithe, that in the Latine Churche Conſecration is wrought by the vvoordes of
Chriſte: in the Gréeke Churche by other Praiers, that folowe afterwarde. Catharinus
intreatinge pourpoſely hereof, ſaithe, Chriſte
                      Conſecrated not vvith the
ſame vvordes, that are nowe vſed in the Maſſe, This is my Body. Durandus ſaithe,
Chriſte Conſecrated by his
                      Diuine povver, and after Conſecration ſaide, This is my Body.
Petrus Alliacenſis yeldeth this reaſon hereof, Quia, niſi antè fuiſſet Corpus
Chriſti, Chriſtus non verè dixiſſet, Hoc eſt Corpus meum: If it had not benne
Chriſtes Body before, Chriſte coulde not haue ſaid truely, This is my Body. It is concluded
in a Booke called
                      Antididagma. lately ſet foorth by the Chapter of Colaine.
that the bare woordes of Chriſtes Inſtitution, without the woordes of the Canon
of the Maſſe, are not ſufficient to woorke Conſecration. Bonauentura ſaithe,
To haue the true Fourme of Conſecration, wée muſte ſéeke, not to the Goſpel of
Chriſte, but to the Canon. Howe be it, thereof groweth a greate inconuenience,
that Chriſte, and his Apoſtles, for that they had not the woordes of the Canon,
had therefore no Conſecration. Againe Bonauentura ſaithe, that theſe woordes,
Noui, & Aeterni Teſtamenti, are not of the ſubſtance of Conſecration: but are
vſed onely as a fourniture.
                     Scotus in. 4. Senten. diſ. 8. quae. 2. Iohannes Scotus ſaithe, Quod ergo eſt conſilium? Dico,
quòd Sacerdos intendens facere, quod facit Eccleſia, legens diſtinctè verba Canonis, à
Principio vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad finem, verè conſicit: nec eſt tutum alicui, reputare ſe valde peritum in ſcienua
ſua, & dicere, volo uti praeciſè iſtis verbis pro Conſecratione: The mater beinge

ſo doubteful, what then is your Counſel? I ſaie, that the Prieſte intendinge to doo, what
ſo euer the Churche doothe, and readinge the woordes of the Canon diſtinctly, and plainely,
from the beginninge to the ende, doothe verily Conſecrate. Neither is it good for a
man to recken him ſelfe very ſkilful in his knowledge, and to ſaie, I vvil vſe preciſely
theſe, or theſe vvoordes to vvoorke Conſecration. Where alſo theſe woordes
are ſpecially noted in the Margine, Nota, quòd de hae materia, Doctor nihil hîc
aſſerit, ſed probabiliter aliquid dicens, ſub dubio relinquit: Here marke, that touching
this mater (of Conſecration) the Doctour auoucheth nothing: but ſpeakinge ſommewhat
by the waie of likelyhoode, he leaueth the vvhole mater vnder doubte. In
the ende Scotus vncertainely, and doubtefully concludeth thus: Vnde dicunt aliqui,
quòd Forma Graecorum,Scotus in. 4. Senten diſ. 8. quae. 2. & Forma noſtra, & quaecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſcripta in Euangelijs,
ſufficiens eſt ad Conſecrationem: Whereof ſomme ſaie thus, that the Fourme of
vvoordes, that the Greekes vſe, and the Fourme that vvee vſe, and any Fourme
els vvritten in the Goſpels is ſufficient to Conſecration. The like certainetie Bonauentura
teacheth vs: For thus he endeth:
                     Bonauentura in 4. Senten. diſt. 8. De hoc eſt vtilius dubitare: Quis enim
poteſt ſcire, vtrùm Euangeliſtae, aut Apoſtolus ipſe intenderint deſcribete Formam?
Igitur melius eſt, hîc piè dubitare, quàm praeſumptuoſé definire: Hereof it is beſt to
ſtande in doubte. For who can tel, whether the Euangeliſtes, or the Apoſtle Paule him ſelfe,
meante to write vs the Fourme of Conſecration? Therefore in this pointe it is better, Soberly
to doubte, then preſumptuouſly to determine.
                  
                  By theſe fewe, good Chriſtian Reader, thou maiſte ſée the grounde, and certainetie
of M. Hardinges Doctrine. He ſaithe, Wée haue no Conſecration, for that
wée lacke a Thing: but what Thinge it ſhould be, he, and his Felowes cannot tel.
                  How be it, in deede wée vſe the ſame woordes that Chriſte vſed. If Chriſte,
and his Apoſtles Conſecrated, then doo wée vndoubtedly likewiſe Conſecrate.
The wante, that he findeth in vs, he maie alſo finde in them. S. Auguſtine
ſaithe,Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta 80. Origen in Matt. Cap. 15. Ambroſ. De ijs qui intiantur, Cap. 9. 
                     Accedat Verbum ad Elementum, & fit Sacramentum: Ioine the Woorde of God
vnto the Elemente
                      (or outwarde Creature) and thereby is made a Sacrament. Origen
                     
ſaithe, Parus ſanctificatur per Verbum Dei, & Obſecrationem: The Breade is Conſecrate
by the Woorde of God, and by Praier.
                      S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Ante Benedictionem
Verborum Coeleſtium, alia ſpecies nominatur: poſt Conſecrationem, Corpus Chriſti
Significatur: Before the Bleſſinge of the Heauenly woordes, it is called an other kinde:
After Conſecration, the Body of Chriſte is Signified.
                  
                  An other quarrel, that M. Hardinge piketh to vs, is, that wee haue no Intention,
or minde to Conſecrate. But how longe hathe M. Hardinge benne a
Wiſarde?1. Corinth. 2. Articulo. 1. Diuiſione. 12. Summa Angel. Euchariſita. 26. Gerſon in Floretum, Lib. 4. Panormtian. de Celebratione Miſſ. Quidam. Or who made him ſo priuie to our Intention? S. Paule ſaithe, Noman
can tel, what is in Man, but the Sprite of Man, that is within him. Theſe folies are anſweared
at large in my Former Replie to M. Hardinge. Verily by the late Doctours
of that ſide, the Prieſte maie haue Intention, to Conſecrate the one halfe of
the Hoſte, and not the other: Or, hauing thirtéene Hoſtes, he maie haue Intention,
to Conſecrate but twelue. And thereof groweth a greate queſtion, when he commeth
to the reckeninge, and ſeeth his errour, whiche of al that whole Companie
of Hoſtes ſhal goe vnconſecrate. Yea Abbate Panormitane ſaithe, Etiamſi Sacerdos
celebret, vt Deus perdat aliquem, tamen bene Conſecrat: Notwithſtandinge the
Prieſte ſaie Maſſe, with Intention, that God would deſtroie ſomme man, yet dooth he Conſecrate
neuertheleſſe.
                      Into ſutche toies theſe menne throwe them ſelues, with theire
fonde Intentions.
                  
                  Our Intention is,Matthae. 26. 1. Corin. 11. to doo, that Chriſte hathe taught vs to doo, that is, to Miniſter
the Holy Sacramente in Remembrance of him: and, as S. Paule ſaithe,
to ſhewe foorthe, and to publiſhe the Lordes Deathe, vntil he comme. And to this
pourpoſe one of M. Hardinges owne Doctours ſaithe, Non ſufficit Intentio Conſecrandi

abſolutè:
                     The vvicked Receiueth. 
                     Sed Oportet, vt ſit conformis Intentioni Sacramentum Inſtituentis:
Abſolutely the Intention, to Conſecrate, is not ſufficient: but it muſte be anſvvearable
vnto the Intention of Chriſte,
                     Pupilla Oculi, De Euchariſtia, ca. 5. 
                     that ordeined the Sacramente.
                  
                  At the Supper of our Lorde, ſaithe M. Hardinge, miniſtred in the Catholique
Churche, by Prieſtes rightly Conſecrate, there is the true, and whole Body of
Our Lorde and Saueour geuen, and receiued: be the receiuers beléeuinge, or not
beléeuinge.De Conſecra. Diſ. 2. Qui bene. In Gloſſa. Alexand. Halen. Par. 4. quae. 45. memb. 1. This is no greate marueile in M. Hardinges Doctrine. For they of
his ſide ſaie, Si dicatur, quòd Mus ſumat Corpus Chriſti, non eſt magnum inconuenines:
If it be ſaide, that a Mouſe receiueth the Body of Chriſte, it is no greate incōuenience.
                     
And Alexander of Hales a notable Schole Doctour ſaith, though in more
vnſéeingly, & groſſer wiſe, Si Canis, vel Porcus deglutiret Hoſtiam Conſecratam integram,
non video quare Corpus Domini non ſimul traijcertur in ventrē Canis, vel Porci:
If a Dogge, or a Sovve ſhoulde happen to ſwallow downe the whole Hoſte being Conſecrate,
I ſee no reaſon, but the body of our Lorde maie paſſe withal into the belly of the Dogge,
or of the Sowe.
                     
                  
                  
                     But S. Auguſtine ſaithe farre otherwiſe,
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta 26. Origen in Matt. Cap. 15. Hoc eſt manducare illam eſcam,
& illum potum bibere, in Chriſto manere, & Chriſtum manentem in ſe habere: This is
the Eatinge of that meate, and the Drinkinge of that Drinke, that a man dwel in Chriſte,
and haue Chriſte dwellinge in him. Likewiſe
                      Origen ſaithe, Eſt verus Cibus, quem
nemo malus poteſt edere. Etenim ſi malus poſſet edere Corpus Domini, non ſcriberetur,
Qui edit hunc panem, viuer in aeternum: The Body of chriſte is the True Foode,
which no euil man can Eate, Fore if the euil man could Eate the Body of Our Lord, it ſhould
not be written,
                     Articulo. 23. 
                     He that Eateth this Breade, ſhal liue for euer. But hereof wée haue
ſpoken more at large in the Former Replie to M. Hardinge.
                     
                  
                  The Heretical Doctrine, that M. Hardinge talketh of, with al the whole
forniture of Hypocritical Eloquence, wee maie ſafely ſende home, from whence it
came. And I doubte nothinge, but he can wel tel, howe to vſe it.
                  As for Pelagius, Arius, and Neſtorius, wee deſie them vtterly, and deteſt
them, as wée doo alſo al other ſortes, and ſectes of Hereſies.
                  Of the Sacramentes of Chriſte, wee doo bothe ſpeake, and thinke reuerently,
and as it becommeth vs, and accordinge to the Holy Scriptures. Wée ſaie, that
a Creature is a Creature: that a Sacramente is a Sacramente,
                     Auguſtin in Iohan. tracta 59. Contra Maximin. Cap. 22. and not God, Wée
ſaie with S. Auguſtine, The Sacramente is not our Lorde, but the Breade of our Lorde
                     
Againe S. Auguſtine ſaithe, In Sacramentis videndum eſt, non quid ſint, ſed quid
Significent: In Sacramentes we muſte conſider, not vvhat they be in deede, but what
they Signifie.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 2.
               Biſides this, wee acknowledge, there be twoo Sacramentes,
whiche wee iudge properly ought to be called by this name: that is
to ſaie, Baptiſme, and the Sacramente of thankeſgeuing. For thus
many wee ſee were deliuered and ſanctified by Chriſte, and wel allowed
of the Olde Fathers, Ambroſe, and Auguſtine, & ſutche others.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhy ſpeake ye not plainely?The Defenders acknovvledge but tvvoo Sacraments. Be there no moe but twoo Sacramentes? Though ye ſaie not ſo
expreſſely, yet wee iudge, that ſo ye meane. For ſo your ſcholefelowe of Geneua Theodore Beza pronounceth
in plaine termes in the Confeſſion of your Geneuian Faithe. And ſo your ſelues, Defenders,
do affirme in the Articles, which ye agreed vpon in your Conuocation holden at London in the yere of
our Lorde. 1562. VVhiche Articles ye haue put forthe 
                        〈◊〉
                      printe by the Queenes Auctoritie, as ye

pretende. Nowe whereas ye acknowledge there be but twoo Sacramentes, why ſhould any man beleeue
you,Diuerſitie of Iudgemente in the Goſpellers about the number of the Sacramentes. rather then the Germaines your firſte Scholemaiſters, whoVntruthe fond and vaine. in their Confeſſion exhibited
to Charles the fifthe then Emperour at Augſpurge in the name of al the Proteſtantes, Anno. 1530.
appointe three Sacramentes, Baptiſme, the Euchariſte, and Penance? The nexte yere after,Vntruthe, proceedinge of vnaduiſed malice, Reade the anſvveare. Philip
Melanchthon in his Apologie auouched thoſe three Sacramentes: but afterwarde in the yere. 1552.
he founde out an other, and made vp the number of foure, by addinge the Sacramente of Order
to the foreſaide three. In Lipſia they receiue three: In VVittenberg, whiche Citie is not thence far
of, they haue foure. At Magdeburg thereby alſo Flacius Illyricus, and ſo many as folowe him, will
haue but two: and the Zwenckfeldians, that ſpring out of the ſame ſtocke, care for none at al.
                  Foraſmuche as ye alleage the names of the Olde Fathers for you, ſpecially S. Ambroſe,That there be moe Sacramentes then tvvoo by the Doctrine of the Fathers Cap. 104. The Sacramente of Confirmation. and S.
Auguſtine, that there be but twoo Sacramentes, let vs ſee howe muche they make for maintenance of
yo
                        ••
                      Doctrine, and wheather they teache vs not, that there be moe S. Auguſtine in his ſeconde Bookes

                        ••
                     ira literas Petiliani, ſpeakinge of the place of the Pſalme, Sicut vnguentum in capite, whiche
the Heretike had alleaged, ſaithe thus: In hoc vnguento, &c. In this oinctement his will is to
interpret the Sacramente of Chriſme (he meaneth the Sacramente of Confirmation) whiche in the
kinde of viſible ſignes is Holy, as Baptiſme is. Lo, S. Auguſtine calleth cofirmation a Sacramente.
S. Euſebius Pope namethe it a Sacramente in his third epiſtle written to al the Biſ
                        •
                     hoppes of Tuſcia
and Campania: Manus impoſitionis Sacramentum, &c. The Sacramente of impoſition of
Handes (ſaithe he) is to be kepte with greate reuerence, whiche cannot be performed but by the
high Prieſtes, (he vnderſtandeth Biſhoppes). Melchiades nexte to Sylueſter before the Nicene Councel
ſpeakinge muche of Confirmation, amonge other thinges ſaithe thus. Duo haec Sacramenta,
Baptiſmi,
                     This forged Melciades auanceth his Oile aboue the Sacramente of Baptiſme. 
                     & confirmationis, ſeparanda non ſunt: Theſe twoo Sacramentes of Baptiſme, and
Confirmation, maye not be ſundered. Though theſe twoo Biſhoppes were Popes, yet they deſerue credit,
foraſmuche as they liued before that corruption crept into the Churche, after your accoumpte, and
died Holy Martyrs.
                  That Penaunce is a Sacramente,The Sacramente of Penance. Cap. 66. Homil. 20. in epiſt. ad Heb. and ſo accoumpted amonge the Fathers, it is ſo euident, that
who doubteth of it, maie ſeeme not to haue peruſed their writinges. S. Auguſtine in enchiridio ad
Laurentium ſpeakinge of Baptiſme and Penaunce, calleth bothe, Salutaria Sacramenta, healthful
Sacramentes. S. Ambroſe ſignifieth him ſelfe to be of the ſame minde, in his firſte Booke de Poentientia,
Cap. 6. &. 7. and in the ſecond Booke, Cap. 2. though without puttinge thexpreſſe name of Sacramente.
But in the third Chapter of that Booke he putteth the name of Sacramente expreſſely.
                  Touchinge Order,The Sacramente of Order. that is a Sacramente, alſo by verdite of S. Auguſtine, whom ye alleage for
you. Let vs heare what he ſaithe. In his ſeconde Booke contra epiſt. Parmentani Cap. 13. theſe be his
wordes, where he ſpeaketh of Baptiſme, and of the Power to Baptize, whiche is geuen in the Sacramente
of Order: Vtrunque euim Sacramentum eſt, & quadam conſecratione vtiunque homini
datur, illud cum Baptizatur, iſtud cum ordinatur. Ideo in Catholica non licet vtrunque
iterari: Either of them is a Sacramente, and with a certaine Conſecration either is geuen
to man: the one when he is Baptized, the other when he taketh Orders. Therefore in the Catholike
Churche it is not lawful either of them to be taken twiſe.
                  For the Sacramente of wedlocke, beſides other good and ſufficient proufes, that it is a Sacramente,
wee haue ſundrie teſtimonies out of S. Auguſtine,The Sacramente of vvedlocke. Lib. de Fide & Operib. c. 7. and other Doctours. In the Churche (ſaithe
S. Auguſtine) not onely the bande of mariage, but alſo the Sacramente is ſo commended, that it is
not lauful for the huſbande to deliuer his VVife to another. He calleth wedlocke a Sacramente in
many places of his workes. De bono coniugali. Cap. 7. 18. and in the. 24. Chapter of that Booke hee
ſaithe: Haec omnia bona ſunt, propter quae nuptiae bonae ſunt, Proles, Fides, Sacramentū:
All theſe thinges be good, for whiche mariage is good, iſſue, Faithe, the Sacramente.
                  Of extreme Vnction,The Sacramente of extreme Vnction. Iacob. 5. Lib. 3. de ſacerdo. who doubteth whether it be a Sacramente, let him reade the Epiſtle of
Innocentrus the Firſte ad Decentium Eugubinum Epiſcopum, Cap. 8. where moſte planely treatinge
of it, he nameth it a Sacramente. Chryſoſtome interpreteth the place of S. Iames epiſtle for this
Sacramente. And ſo dothe Bede, alleaging the place of S. Iames, the ſixth of Marke, the Auctoritie of
Innocentius, and the cuſtome of the Churche. Seinge then we haue founde theVntruthe. For the Ancient Faneure recken preciſely Seuen onely Sacramentes, ſeuen ſacramentes

expreſſely mentioned in the Fathers,Number of Sacramentes. accordinge to the teaching of the Catholique Churche: whereas
ye teache men to beleeue there be but two, and pretend that the Fathers ſpake of nomo:As this is true, ſo vve deſire further credite. I truſte
from henceforthe they wil take better aduiſe, how they beleue your bare VVoorde without al prouſe,
and with certaine danger of their ſoules, forſake the Doctrine of the Churche, whiche is the ſure
Pillour,1. Timot. 3. and ground of truthe, as S. Paule ſaithe. In this greate pointe, Beza, and ye of that ſide bee
manifeſtly founde lyers.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  To ſpende woordes without cauſe, is affliction of the Sprite, and loſſe of
time. M. Hardinge here beſtoweth mutche laboure, and allegeth many Doctours,
to winne that thinge, that he might eaſily haue obteined without any ſutche adoo.
For, gentle Reader, lefte that thou be deceiued, and thinke, there is ſomme weight
in this heape of feathers, wee wil graunt without force, and freely, that the Holy
Catholique Fathers haue made mention, not onely of Seuen, as M. Hardinge
here accoumpteth them, but alſo of Seuenteene ſundrie Sacramentes.
                     Tertul. Aduerſus Iud. cos. 
                     Tertullian
calleth the Helue, wherewith Elizaeus recouered the Axe out of the water, Sacramentum
Ligni, ye 
                     Sacramente of VVoode: And the whole ſtate of ye Chriſtian
Faithe, he callethTertull. contra. Marcionem, li. 4. 
                     Religionis Chriſtianae Sacramentum, The Sacramente of
Chriſtian Religion.
                     Auguſtin. in Epiſt. 112.
                     Auguſtin. in Sermone De Sanctis. 19. S. Auguſtine in many places hathe Sacramentum Crucis,
The Sacrament of the Croſſe.
                      Thus he ſaithe, In hac Crucis Figura continetur
Sacramentum: In this Figure, or Fourme of the Croſſe there is conteined a Sacrament.
                     
So ſaith Leo,
                     Leo de Reſurrectione Domini, Sermo. 2. 
                     Crux Chriſti, quae ſaluandis eſt impenſa Fidelibus, & Sacramentum
eſt, & exemplum: The Croſſe of Chriſte, whiche was geuen to ſaue the Faitheful, is
bothe a Sacramente, and alſo a Samplar.
                      S. Hierome ſaithe,Hieronym. ad Oceanum. 
                     E latere Chriſti Baptiſmi,
atque Martyrij pariter Sacramente funduntur: Out of Chriſtes ſide the Sacramentes
of Baptiſme, and Martyrdome are powred foorthe bothe togeather.
                     
                     Inter Decreta Leonis, Cap. 14. 
                     Leo calleth
the promiſſe of Virginitie, Sacramentum: Quid eos manebit, qui corruperine
foedera Diuini Sacramenti? VVhat ſhal becomme of them, that haue broken the Couenante
of the Heauenly Sacramente?
                     Auguſtin. De Peccator merit. & remiſſ. Li 2. The Breade, that was geuen vnto the Nouices,
or Beginners in the Faithe, called Catechumeni, before they were Baptized,
of S. Auguſtine is called a Sacramente,
                     Hilar. in Matt. Canon 11. &. 12. & Canon. 23. S. Hilarie in ſundrie places ſaith,
Sacramentum Orationis: Sacramentum Eſuritionis: Sacramentum Scripturarum:
Sacramentum Fletus: Sacramentum Sitis: The Sacramente of Praier:
The Sacramente of Faſtinge: The Sacramente of the Scriptures: The Sacramente of VVeepinge:
The Sacramente of Thirſte.
                     
                     Bernard. in Sermo. De Coena Domini. S. Bernarde calleth the waſſhinge of the Apoſtles
foete, a Sacramente: Ablutio Pedum Sacramentum eſt quotidianorum peccatorum:
The VVaſſhinge of feet is the Sacramente of daily Sinnes.
                     
                  
                  Thus many, and many moe Sacramentes, it had benne eaſy for M. Hardinge
to haue founde in the Catholique Learned Fathers. Yet, I trowe, he wil
not ſaie, that either the Helue of an Axe, or the whole Religion of Chriſte, or a
Croſſe printed in the foreheade, or Martyrdome, or the Scriptures, or a Vowe
of Virginitie, or the Breade geuen to the Catechumeni, or Praier, or Faſtinge,
of Wéepinge, or Thirſte, or Waſſhinge of féete, are the neceſſarie seuen Sacramentes
of the Churche.
                  How be it, wée wil not greately ſtriue for the name. It appeareth hereby,
that many thinges, that in deede, and by ſpecial propertie be no Sacramentes,
maie neuertheleſſe paſſe vnder the general name of a Sacramente. But thus
wee ſaie, It cannot be proued, neither by the Scriptures, nor by the Ancient
Learned Fathers, that this Number is ſo ſpecially appointed, and Conſecrate to
this pourpoſe, or that there be neither moe, nor leſſe Sacramentes in the Churche,
but onely Seuen.
                  
                  
                     
As for the Reaſones, that they of M. Hardinges ſide haue brought vs for
proufe hereof,, they are too Childiſhe to be remembred. For thus they ſaie,
                  
                     The Booke in the Apocalyps hathe Seuen Seales:Apocalyp. 5.
                     
                     The Seuen Angels there haue Seuen trumpettes:Apocalyp. 8.
                     
                     Chriſte hath in his right hande Seuen ſtarres:Apocalyp. 7.
                     
                     Chriſt vvalketh in the middes of Seuen golden Candleſticks:Apocalyp. 1.
                     
                     Zacharie ſavve Seuen eies vpon a ſtone:Zachar. 3.
                     
                     There vvere Seuen Candleſtickes in the Tabernacle:Exod 37.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ergo,
                     In Compendi
                           •
                         Theologiae. ſaie they, there muſte needes be iuſte Seuen Sacramentes in the
Churche of God.
                  But vnto euery neceſſarie Sacramente of the Churche, twoo thinges ſpecially
are required: that is, a Senſible outwarde Elemente, and the Woorde of Inſtitution.
And without either of theſe there is no Sacramente. Therefore S.
Auguſtine ſaithe,Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 80. 
                     Accedat Verbum ad Elementum, & fit Sacramentum: Ioine the
Woorde of Chriſtes Inſtitution vnto the ſenſible Creature, or outwarde Elemente: and
thereof is made a Sacramente. The Element, or Creature in Baptiſme is Water:
the Elementes, or Creatures in Our Lordes Supper, are Breade, & Wine:
The woordes of Inſtitution are common, and knowen.
                  The other fiue Sacramentes want, either the Woorde, or the Elemente, or
bothe togeather: As for example, Matrimonie, Order, and Penance haue the
Woorde of God, but they haue no outwarde Creature, or Elemente. Extreme
Vnction, and Confirmation haue neither VVoorde, nor Elemente. Therefore
theſe fiue later, in proper vſe of ſpeache, are not taken for Sacramentes of the
Churche.
                  
                     For thus Alexander of Hales ſaithe,
                     Alexander. Halen. par. 4. qu
                           •
                        . 24. mem. 1. Sacramentum Confirmationis, vt eſt
Sacramentum, neque Dominus inſtituit, neque Apoſtoli: Sed poſtea inſtitutum eſt in
Concilio Meldenſi: The Sacramente of Confirmation, as it is a Sacramente, was not
ordeined, either by Chriſte, or by the Apoſtles: but afterwarde in the Councel of Melda.
                  
                  
                     So likewiſe Durandus ſaithe, Matrimonium ſtrictè, & proprié loquendo,
non eſt Sacramentum:Durandus. Matrimonie in dewe, and proper kinde of ſpeache is no
Sacramente.
                  
                     Nowe to that, wée make accoumpte onely of Tvvo Sacramentes, as inſtituted
by Chriſte,
                     Irenaeus. Iuſtin. Apol. 2. Tertul. 1. & 4. Con. Marcion. Ambroſ. De Sacramen. Cyril. in Myſtagogicis. Cyprian. Li. 2. Epiſt. 1. ad Steph. Auguſtin. De Doctrina Chriſtian. Li. 3. ca. 9. Auguſt. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. Paſchaſius De Coena Domini. 
                     wherewith M. Hardinge findeth him ſelfe ſo mutche offended, it
maie pleaſe him to vnderſtande, that the Anciente Learned Fathers, Irenaeus,
Iuſtinus Martyr, Tertullian, S. Ambroſe, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, and others,
hauinge occaſion to intreate of pourpoſe, and ſpecially hereof, ſpeake onely of
Tvvo Sacramentes, Baptiſme, and Our Lordes Supper, and name none other.
S. Cyprian ſaithe, Tunc demùm planè ſanctificari, & eſſe Filij Dei poſſunt, ſi vtro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
Sacramento naſcantur: Then maie they be throughly Sanctified, and become the Children
of God, if they be newe borne by both the Sacramentes. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Quaedam
Pauca pro multis, eadem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      factu facillima, & intellectu auguſtiſsima, & obſeruatione
caſtiſsima, ipſe Dominus, & Apoſtolica tradidit diſciplina: ſicuti eſt Baptiſmi Sacramentum,
& Celebratio Corporis, & Sanguinis Domini: Our Lorde, and his Apoſtles
haue deliuered vnto vs a fevve Sacramentes in ſteede of many, and the ſame in dooing
moſte eaſy, in ſignification moſte excellent, in obſeruation moſt reuerende: as is the Sacrament
of Baptiſme, and the Celebration of the Body, and Bloude of Our Lorde.
Againe, ſpeakinge of Baptiſme, and the Supper, he ſaithe thus: Haec ſunt
Eccleſiae Gemina Sacramenta: Theſe be the Tvvoo Sacramentes of the Churche.
Paſchaſius ſaithe, Sunt Sacramenta Chriſti in Eccleſia Catholica, Baptiſmus, &

Corpus,Tvvo Sacramentes & Sanguis Domini: Theſe be the Sacramentes of Chriſte in the Catholique
Churche: Baptiſme, and the Body, and Bloud of our Lorde. To be ſhort, Cardinal
Beſſarion ſaithe,
                     Beſſarion De Sacramento Euchariſtiae. Haec Duo Sola Sacramenta in Euangelijs manifeſtè tradita
legimus: Wee reade, that theſe Onely tvvoo Sacramentes were deliuered to vs plainly
in the Scriptures.
                  
                  Here hath M. Hardinge in expreſſe woordes, Bothe the Sacramentes, and
the tvvo sacramentes, and the Onely tvvo Sacramentes of the Churche. Iudge
thou nowe therefore, good Chriſtian Reader, what truthe thou maiſte recken to be
in him, that ſaithe, Beza, and they of this ſide are manifeſtly founde liers.
                  
                     Al theſe thinges notwithſtanding, the late pretenſed Councel of Tridente
with moſte horrible threates, and great Curſes, concludeth the contrarie: Si quis
dixerit,Concil. Triden. Seſſion. 7. Sacramenta Nouae Legis non fuiſſe omnia à Ieſu Chriſto Domino noſtro inſtituta,
aut eſſe Plura, vel pauciora, quàm septem, aut etiam aliquod horum non eſſe veré,
& propriè Sacramentum, Anathema ſit: If any man ſhal ſaie, that the Sacramentes of
the Newe Lawe were not al ordeined of Our Lorde Jeſus Chriſte: or that there be fevver,
or moe then seuen: or that any one of the ſame, verily, and in proper vſe of ſpeache is not a
Sacramente, accurſed be he.
                  
                  
                     But ye ſaie, Luther, and the Germaines admitte three Sacramentes, Baptiſme,
the Lordes Supper, and Penance: And Philip Melancthon afterwarde
founde out the fourthe. O, M. Hardinge, what is it, that thus enflameth your
tongue to ſpeake Vntruthe? Yf it had pleaſed you, to haue ſéene it, Luther, & Melancthon
plainely expreſſed theire owne meaninge, and vtterly remoued al manner
occaſion of ſutche cauilles.
                     In Captiuitate Babylonica. Luther writeth thus, Propriè ea viſum eſt vocare
Sacramenta, quae annexis Signis promiſſa ſunt: Coetera, quia Signis alligata non ſunt,
nuda promiſſa ſum. Quò fit, ut ſi rigidè loqui velimus, tantùm duo ſint in Eccleſia
Dei Sacramenta, Baptiſmus, & Panis: cùm in his Solis, & inſtitutum diuinitùs signum,
& promiſsionem Remiſsionis Peccatorum videamus: In Proper ſpeache
thoſe wee cal Sacramentes, whiche are promiſſed with signes annexed. The reſte, that haue
no Signes, are bare promiſſes. Wherefore ſpeakinge hereof preciſely, and ſtrictely, there
are Onely tvvo Sacramentes in the Churche of God, Baptiſme, and the Breade: for
as mutche as in theſe Onely we finde bothe the Signe ordeined by God, and alſo the Promiſſe
of Remiſsion of Sinnes.In Apologia Confeſsionis Auguſtinae. 
                     Likewiſe Melancthon ſaithe, He can wel cal
Order, a Sacrament, ſo that it be knowen from Baptiſme, and the Supper, whiche
in Proper ſpeache, and verily be called Sacramentes.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 3.
               Wee ſaie, that Baptiſme is a Sacramente of the Remiſſion of
Sinnes, & of that waſſhing, which we haue in the Bloud of Chriſte:
and that no perſon, whiche wil profeſſe Chriſtes name, ought to be
reſtreined, or keapte backe therfrom: no not the very Babes of Chriſtians:
forſomutche as they be borne in ſinne, and doo perteine vnto
the people of God.Baptiſme very ſclenderly ſpokē of by the Defenders. Baptiſme taught by our Nevve cleregie to be but a Signe and ſeale of our nevve birth.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As ye acknowldege fewe Sacramentes, ſo ye ſpeake of them very ſlenderly. Baptiſme (ye ſaie)
is a Sacramente of the remiſſion of ſinnes, and of that waſſhinge whiche wee haue in the Bloude of
Chriſte. Now whereas ye meane, as within fewe lines ye declare, by the name of a Sacramente,
Vntruthe. For vve ſaie no
                           •
                         ſo. no more but a Token or Signe, ſpecially ſith ye teache in your articles that Baptiſme at the beſt, is
but a Signe, and Seale of our newe birthe: ye ſeme not to attribute to Baptiſme ſo mutche, as the Scripture
dothe. Neither is Baptiſme onely a Signe or Tokē, that ſinnes be remitted, but, wee beleeue, as the
Catholique Churche, according to the Scriptures teacheth, that in, and by Baptiſme ſinnes be fully, and

truely remitted,That in Baptiſme ſinnes be fully and truly forgeuen. Cap. 36. Timot. 3. and put awaie: and that not through the FaitheThis talke is needeleſſe, and out of ſeaſon. onely of the geuer, or receiuer,
or of any other, though hereunto it be neceſſarie in th
                        •
                     ſe, that be come to age of diſcretion: but
through the power, and vertue of the Sacrament, and Gods promiſe. And therefore to whom it is
geuen, of them it is rightly ſaide, that, they be Baptized for remiſſion of their ſinnes. The ſcriptures
be plaine. Firſte Ezechiel ſpeakinge of this Holy Sacrament, ſaithe in the perſon of God: I wilſhed
vpon you cleane water, and ye ſhal be made cleane from al your defilinges, and from your Idols wil I
clenſe you. Nexte S. Paule ſaithe, That God hath ſaued vs by the waſſhinge of Regeneration, and of
the renewing of the Holy Ghoſte, whom he hath powred vpon vs aboundantly by Ieſus Chriſte our
Sauiour. That I maie adde to theſe manifeſt Scriptures the Auctoritie of a Learned Father, not
whereby to ſtrengthen the truthe of them, but to witneſſe our right vnderſtandinge of them: S. Auguſtine,
Lib. 3. contra duas epiſt. Pelagian. Cap. 3. ſhewinge the ſclaunder of the Pelagians againſte
the Catholikes, ſaithe thus in theire Perſone: Againe they (that is, after theire meaninge, the
Catholikes) auouche, that Baptiſme maketh not in deede newe menne againe, that is to witte, that
it geueth not ful remiſſion of ſinnes, &c. Thereto eftſones anſwearinge S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Theſe vvoordes maie vvel perteine to M. Har. him ſelfe. For vve ſai not thus. 
                     Mentiuntur,
                     Pelagians belied the Catholikes as the Sacramentaries do alſo novve. 
                     iuſidiantur, tergiuerſantur. They lye, they ſtudye howe to deceiue, they ſeeke
ſhiftes: wee ſaie not this. And after certaine ſentences retourninge to Baptiſme, he concludeth
thus: VVherefore Baptiſme waſſheth awaie al ſinnes, vtterly al, of dedes, wordes, thoughtes, be
they Original, or Actual: be they done ignorantly, or wittingly. But it taketh not awaie the infirmitie,
whiche the regenerate reſiſteth, &c. VVhiche place doth not onely ſet foorthe the vertue of
Baptiſme, but alſoVntruthe, ioined vvith groſſe ignorance. M. Har. fouly miſtaketh S. Auguſtines minde. deſtroieth the Doctrine of our New Goſpellers, that affirme concupiſcence,
whiche remaineth after Baptiſme, to be verily ſinne▪
                     Vntruthe fond and vaine. Reade the Anſvveare. VVherein they erre manifeſtly againſte the
Scripture, and ſenſe of the Fathers.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Il wil is euer plenetiful of ili wordes. M. Hardinge here maketh him ſelfe
mutche mater without cauſe. He teacheth our Newe Cleregie, that Baptiſme
is not onely a Signe, or a Token of Remiſſion of ſinnes: He telleth vs of the
Faithe of the Geeuer: of the Faithe of the Receiuer: Of the Povver of the Sacramente:
Of Concupiſcence, that it is no ſinne. And more, I trowe, he would haue
ſaide, if more had preſently comme to minde. Verily the poore Newe Cleregie
ſpeaketh not one woorde in al this whole place, neither of Signe, nor of Token,
nor of the Receiuer, nor of the Geeuer, nor of the Povver of the Sacrament, nor
of Concupiſcence, whether it be Sinne, or not Sinne, nor of any other like thinge.
Yet in y• ende he taketh S. Auguſtines vvoordes, vvithout his meaninge, and
crieth againſte vs, They lie, they ſtudie to deceiue, they ſeke ſhiftes. And why
ſo? Certainely bicauſe wée ſaie, Baptiſme is a Sacrament of Remiſſion of Sinnes: And
that the Children of the Faitheful, for that they be borne in Sinne, and perteine
to the people of God, ought therefore to be Baptized. Other cauſes then theſe in
any Our Woordes he can finde none.
                  True it is, that the Sacramente dependeth not, neither of the Miniſter,
nor of the Receiuer,
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 5. De Conſe. diſt. 4. Baptiſmus talis. Iohan. 1. nor of any other. For though they be al the Children of ſinne,
yet is Baptiſme the Sacramente of Remiſſion of Sinne. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Securum me fecit Magiſter meus, de quo ſpiritus eius dicit, Hic eſt, qui Baptizat: Chriſte
my Maiſter hath aſſured me, of whom his owne Sprite ſaithe, this is he, that Baptizeth.
                     
                  
                  
                     Neuertheleſſe concerninge the Faithe of the Parentes,Auguſtin. De Libero Arbitrio Li. 3. Ca. 22. Auguſtin. De Verbis Apoſtol
                           •
                         Sermo▪ 10. 
                     and others, the Holy
Doctours haue ſommetimes written otherwiſe. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Satis piè,
recte
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      creditur, Prodeſſe paruulo eorum Fidem, à quibus Conſecrandus offertur:
It is good and Godly to beleue, that the Child is holpen by the Faithe of them, by whom
he is offered, or brought vnto Baptiſme. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Accommodat illis Mater
Eccleſia aliorum pedes, vt veniant: aliorum Cor, vt credant: Our Mother the
Churche lendeth them other mennes fecte, that they maie comme▪
                      and other mennes

hartes,The Faith of the Infantes. that they maie beleeue. The like ſaieings might be alleged out of Iuſtinus
Martyr, S. Cyprian, S. Hierome, and others. For thus they write. Howe
truely, I wil not ſaie. But theire woordes be plaine. The Prophets Abacuc ſaithe,
Iuſtus ex Fide ſua viuet: The Juſte man ſhal liue, (not by the Faithe of his Parentes,
but) by his ovvne Faithe.
                  
                     Of this Faith S. Hierome ſaith,
                     Hieronym. in Ezechiel. ca. 16. De Conſecra. Diſt. 4. Verus. Actor. 15. 1 petri. 3. Qui plena Fide non ſuſcipiunt Salutare Baptiſma,
accipiunt quidem Aquam, ſed non accipiunt Spiritum: They that receiue not Baptiſme
with perfite Faithe, receiue the VVater: But the Holy Ghoſte they receiue not. S.
                      Auguſtine
ſaithe, Verus Baptiſmus conſtat, non tam ablutione Corporis, quàm Fide Cordis:
Sicut Apoſtolica Doctrina tradidit, dicens, Fide mundans Corda eorum: Et alibi,
Saluos facit Baptiſma, non Carnis depoſitio ſordiū, ſed conſcientiae bonae interrogatio
in Deum, per Reſurrectionem Ieſu Chriſti: True Baptiſme ſtandeth, not ſo mutche in waſſhinge
of the Body, as in the Faithe of the harte: As the Doctrine of the Apoſtles hathe
tought vs, ſaieinge, By Faithe purifieinge theire hartes. And in an other place, Baptiſme
maketh vs ſafe: not y• putting awaie of the filth of the Fleaſh, but the examining of a good
conſcience before God, by the Reſurrection of Jeſus Chriſte. Likewiſe againe he ſaith,
                     
Vnde iſta tanta Virtus Aquae,Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 
                           •
                        0. vt corpus tangat, & Cor abluat, niſi faciente Verbo? Non
quia dicitur, ſed quia creditur: VVhence is al this ſo greate Vertue, or Power of the
VVater, that it toucheth the Body, and waſſheth the Harte, but by the woorkinge of the
VVoord? Not for that it is ſpoken (by the Miniſter) but for that it is beleeued (of the
Faitheful).
                  
                     Somme man wil ſaie, Children, or Infantes beléeue nothinge, but are vtterly
voide of Faithe. S. Auguſtine anſweareth,
                     Auguſtin. Epiſt. 205. Qui non crediderit, condemnabitur.
Sicut eos renaſci per Miniſterium Baptizantium, ita etiam eos credere per corda, &
ora confitentium confitemur: He that beleeueth not, ſhalbe damned. VVee confeſſe, that
as they be borne againe by the Miniſterie of the Baptizers, ſo they beleue by the hartes, and
mouthes of the Confeſſours.
                     Auguſtin. Epiſt. 23. In eadem Epiſto. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Habent Fidem, propter Fidei Sacramentum:
Theie haue Faithe, bicauſe they haue (Baptiſme, whiche is) the Sacrament of
Faithe. For he ſaithe,
                      Quemadmodum Sacramentum Corporis Chriſti ſecundum
quendam modum Corpus Chriſti eſt, ita Sacramentum Fidei Fides eſt: As the Sacramente
of Chriſtes Body, (not verily, and in deede, but) after a certaine manner of
ſpeeche is Chriſtes Body: So Baptiſme is Faithe, bicauſe it is the Sacrament of Faithe.
Therfore Cardinal
                      Caietane is woorthily blamed by Catharinus,Catharinus contra Caietanum, errore. 87. &, 88. 
                     in that he ſaith,
An Infante for that he wanteth inſtruction in Faithe, therefore hathe not perfite Baptiſme.
                     
                  
                  
                     Touchinge the Vertue, or Power of this Sacramente, if M. Hardinge mean
                           •
                        
thereby the outwarde Elemente of the Water, he knoweth, or maye eaſily know,
It is a common reſolution emongeſt al his owne Schole Doctours, Gratia Dei
non eſt alligata Sacramentis: The Grace of God is not tied to any Sacramentes. The
meaning thereof is, that God is hable to woorke Saluation, bothe with them, and
without them.
                     
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 80. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, as it is before alleged: Iam vos mundi eſtis
propter ſermonem, quem locutus ſum vobis. Quare non ait, Mundi eſtis propter Baptiſmum,
quo loti eſtis: Niſi, quia etiam in Aqua Verbum mundat? Detrahe Verbum: &
quid eſt Aqua,De Con. dis. 4. Aliud eſt. niſi, Aqua? Nowe are ye cleane bicauſe of the VVoorde, that I haue
ſpoken to you. But why ſaithe he not, Nowe Ye are cleane bicauſe of the Baptiſme,
wherwith ye are waſſhed: ſauing y•, bicauſe in the VVater it is the VVoord, that maketh cleane▪
Take awaie the VVoorde, and vvhat is the VVater, more then VVater? Therefore
he ſaithe,
                     Auguſti epiſt. 23. Aqua exhibet forinſecùs Sacramentum Gratiae: The VVater geueeth vs
outvvardly the Sacramente of Grace.
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge wee muſte conſider, that the Learned, Fathers in theire
treaties of the Sacramentes, ſommetime vſe the outwarde Signe in ſtéede of the
thinge it ſelfe, that is ſignified: ſommetime they vſe the thinge Signified, in ſtéede

of the Signe. As for example,The Povver of Baptiſme. Sommetimes they name Chriſtes Bloude in ſtéede
of the VVater: Sommetime they name the VVater in ſteede of Chriſtes Bloude.
This Figure is called Metonymia, that is to ſaie, an exchange of names: and is
mutche vſed emongſt the Learned, ſpecially ſpeakinge of the Sacramentes.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine vſinge the VVater in place of the Bloude of Chriſte, that
is Signified by the Water, ſaithe thus:
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 23. Soluit vinculum culpae: reconciliat bonum
naturae: regenerat hominem in Vno Chriſto: It breaketh the bande of Sinne: It reconcileth
the goodneſſe of Nature: It dooth renewe a man in One Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     Notwithſtanding, in déede, and in preciſe manner of ſpeache. Saluation muſte
be ſought in Chriſte alone, and not in any outwarde Signes. Chriſte is that
Lambe of God,Iohan. 1. 1. Iohan. 1. Cyprian. De Baptiſmo Chriſti. 
                     that taketh awaie the Sinnes of the Worlde: The Bloude of
Chriſte maketh vs cleane from al our Sinnes. S. Cyprian ſaithe, Remi
                        •
                     io peccatorum,

                        •
                     iue per Baptiſmum, ſiue per alia Sacramenta donetur, Propriè Spiritus
Sancti eſt: & ipſi soli huius efficientiae Priuilegium mane
                        •
                     . Verborum ſolennitas,
& Sacri inuocatio Nominis, & Signa Apoſtolicis Inſtitutionibus attribura, Viſibile celebrāt
Sacramentum. Rem verò ipſam Spiritius Sanctus format, & efficit: The Remiſsion of
Sinne, whether it be geeuen by Baptiſme, or by any other Sacramente, is in deede of the
Holy Ghoſte: and to the ſame Holy Ghoſte onely the Priuilege of this woorke dooth
appertaine. The ſolemnitie of the Woordes, and the inuocation of Goddes Holy Name,
and the outwarde Signes appointed to the Miniſterie of the Prieſtes, by the Inſtitution of the
Apoſtles, wooorke the Viſible outwarde Sacramente: But touchinge the subſtance thereof
(whiche is the Remiſſion of Sinnes) it is the Holy Ghoſte, that woorketh it. Likewiſe
ſaithe S. Hierome,
                     
                     Hieronym. in Eſa
                           •
                        am, Cap. 4. Homo Aquam tantùm tribuit: Deus autem dat
Spiritum Sanctum, quo ſordes abluuntur: The Miniſter, being a man, geeueth onely
the VVater: but God geeueth the Holy Ghoſte, whereby the Sinnes be waſhte awaie.
And againe,
                     
                     Hierony. ad Galat. Cap. 3. Si quis Corporeum, &, quod oculis Carnis aſpicitur. Aquae tantùm
accipit lauacrum, non eſt indutus Dominum Ieſum Chriſtum: If any man haue receiued
onely the Bodily vvaſſhinge of VVater, that is outwardly ſeene with the eie,
he hath not put on our Lorde Jeſus Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     Concerninge Concupiſcence, remaininge in the faitheful after Baptiſme,
whether it be Sinne, or no Sinne, there was no greate cauſe, why M. Hardinge
ſhoulde in this place moue queſtion: ſauinge that, as he hath hitherto denied, that
Falſhedde is Falſhedde, ſo he woulde nowe denie, that Sinne is Sinne. Vndoubtedly
S. Paule féelinge the ſame Concupiſcence in him ſelfe, is forced to
moorne,
                     Roman. 7. 
                     and to crie out, I ſee an other Lawe in my members, fightinge againſte the
Lawe of my minde, and leadinge me Priſoner to the
                      Lavve of sinne. And againe,
O Wretched man, that I am: who ſhal deliuer me from
                      this Body of Deathe?
Therefore S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſ. Lib. 10. Epiſt. 84. Non iuuenitur in vllo hominum tanta concordia, vt Legi
Mentis Lex, quae Membris eſt inſita, non repugnet. Propter quod ex omnium Sanctorum
Perſona accipitur, quod Iohannes Apoſtolus ait, Si dixerimus, quòd pecca
                        •
                     um non
habemus, nos ipſos ſeducimus, & Veritas in nobis non eſt: There is not found in any man
ſutche concorde (bitweene the Fleaſhe, and the Sprite) but that the Lawe (of Concupiſcence)
whiche is planted in the Members. fighteth againſt the Lawe of the Minde.
And for that cauſe the woordes of S. John the Apoſtle are taken, as ſpoken in the Perſone of
al Sainctes,1. Iohan. 1. 
                     If wee ſaie, wee haue no Sinne, wee deceiue our ſelues, and there is no Truthe
in vs. And to leaue al others, S. Auguſtine ſaithe in moſte plaine wiſe,
                      Concupiſcentia
Carnis,Auguſt. contra Iulian. li. 5. ca. 3. aduerſus quam bonus Concupiſcit Spiritus, & Peccatum eſt, &
Poena Peccati, & Cauſa Peccati: The Concupiſcence of the Fleaſhe, againſt whiche
the good Sprite luſteth, is bothe Sinne, and the Paine of sinne, and the Cauſe of
sinne.Augu in Iohan. Tracta. 41. 
                     And againe he ſaithe, Quàmdiu viuis, neceſſe eſt Peccatum eſſe in membris

ruis:Concupiſcence is Sinne. As longe, as thou liueſt, there muſte needes be Sinne in thy members.
                  
                     If M. Hardinge ſaie, wee wreaſte, and racke S. Auguſtine, and take his
woordes otherwiſe, then he meante, Albertus Pighius his owne Principal Doctour
wil control him.
                     Albertus Pighiin Controuer. de Peccato Originis. 
                     Thus he writeth: Auguſtinus tradit, hanc ipſam Concupiſcentiam
Corpori noſtro inſperſam, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      innatam in nondum renatis verè, & propriè
Peccatum eſſe: quae ignoſcatur quidem, ſed non tollatur in Baptiſmo: S. Auguſtine
teacheth vs, that this ſame Concupiſcence planted in our Body, in them, that be not
regenerate by Baptiſme, Verily, and in plaine manner of ſpeache is Sinne: and
that the ſame Concupiſcence is foregeeuen in Baptiſme, but is not vtterly taken
avvaie.
                  
                     Yet the late bleſſed Chapter of Tridente, in ſpite of S. Auguſtine, hathe publiſhed
the Contrarie:
                     Concil. Trident. Seſsion. 5. Hanc Concupiſcentiam, quam Apoſtolus aliquando appellat
Peccatum, Sancta Synodus declarat, Eccleſiam Catholicam nunquam intellexiſſe,
quòd verè, & propriè in renatis Peccatum ſit: ſed quia ex Peccato eſt, & ad Peccatum
inclinat. Si quis autem contrarium ſenſerit, Anathema ſit: The Concupiſcence, whiche
the Apoſtle S. Paule ſommetime calleth Sinne, this Holy Councel declareth, that the Cathoſique
Churche neuer vnderſtoode it to be called sinne, for that it is ſo in deede, and in
Proper manner of Speache, in them that be Baptized: but bicauſe it is of Sinne, and enclineth
vs vnto Sinne. And if any man thinke the Contrarie, accuſed be he. Thus wée
ſee, that by the Decrée of this woorthy Couente,
                      S. Ambroſe, and S. Auguſtine, &


other Holy Fathers, that haue written the ſame, are al accurſed.
                  
                  As for that M. Hardinge here toucheth, as an errour defended by certaine, I
knowe not, by whom, that Baptiſme géeueth not ful Remiſſion of Sinne, he mai
                        •
                     
commaunde it home againe to L
                        •
                     uaine emongeſt his felowes, and ieine it with
other of his, and their
                        •
                      Vanities. For it is no parte, nor portion of our Doctrine.
Wée Confeſſe, and haue euermore taught, that in the Sacramente of
Baptiſme by the Deathe, and Bloude of Chriſte, is géeuen Remiſſion of al manner
Sinnes: and that not in halfe, or in parte, or by waie of Imagination, or by
fanſie: but ful, whole, and Perfite, of al togeather: ſo that nowe, as S. Paule
ſaithe,Roman. 8. 
                     There is no damnation vnto them, that be in Chriſte Jeſu.
                  
                  Nowe iudge thou indifferently, gentle Reader, what Sprite forced M. Hardinge
thus terribly to crie oute, They Lie: they ſtudie to deceiue: they ſeeke
ſhiftes, &c.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wee ſaie, that Euchariſtia, that is to ſaie, the Supper of the
Lorde, is a Sacramente, that is, an euident Repreſentation of the
Body, and Bloude of Chriſte: wherein is ſette, as it were, before
our eies, the Deathe of Chriſte, and his Reſurrection, and
what ſo euer he did, whileſt he was in his Mortal Body: to thende
wee maie geene him thankes for his Deathe, and for our deliueraunce.
And that by the often receiuinge of this Sacramente,
wee maie daily renewe the remembraunce thereof, to thintente
wee beinge fedde with the Body, and Bloude of Chriſte, maie
be brought into the hope of the Reſurrection, and of Euerlaſtinge
Life: and maie moſte aſſuredly beleeue, that, as our bodies be
fedde with Breade, and Wine, ſo our Soules be fedde with the Body,
and Bloude of Chriſte.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Amonge al theſe gay woordesVVee vtter as many Syllables of Real Preſēce, as Chriſte euer vttered. we heare not ſo mutche as one Syllable vttered, whereby we
may vnderſtande, that ye beleue, the Very Body of Chriſte to be in deede Preſente in the bleſſed Sacrament
of the Aulter. Ye confeſſe the Euchariſtia, whiche commonly ye cal, the Supper of the Lorde, to
be a Sacramente,The Lordes ſupper vvith the Defenders is an euident token of the Body and Bloude of Chriſte. and al that to be none other then an euident token of the Body and Bloud of Chriſte.
As for that ye adde to make the matter ſeme ſommewhat, of the Deathe of Chriſte, and his Reſurrection,
and his actes done in fleſhe: VVhat reaſon or ſcripture haue ye, that a peece of Bread and a Cuppe
of VVine (forVntruthe, ioined vvith ſclaū
                        der, and malice. in your belefe more make ye not of this Sacramente) can ſet them as it were before
our eies? Dothe not rather a faire Painted table ſet foorth the actes of our Sauiour before our eies
more liuely and more expreſſely? And be we not moued therewith to geue God thankes for his greate
benefites, as wel as if we haue Breade and VVine on a table? But I praie you, ſithens al isVntruthe, ſclaunderous, as the Former. but Breade
and VVine after your teachinge, howe ſhal we by eatinge and drinkinge thereof be fedde with the
Body and Bloude of Chriſte? Againe can we byEuen as vvel, as by the VVater in Baptiſme. Breade and VVine be brought into hope of the Reſurrection,
and Euer laſtinge life, as ye ſaie? And howe ſhal we by Eatinge of Breade and Drinking
of VVine be aſſured, that Chriſtes Body and Bloude doth in like manner feede our ſoules, as Breade and
VVine feedeth our bodies? Though your imagination be neuer ſo ſtronge, yet by eatinge of that,
whiche is Breade onely, and Drinkinge of that, whiche is VVine onely, we ſee not how your ſoules
can be fedde with the True Body and Bloude of Chriſte, no more then ye be at your common meales.
                  Verily, when al your tale is tolde, ye ſeme to ſaie nothinge els touchinge the eatinge of our Lordes
Body, but that the Body of Chriſte remaineth in Heauen, and that we muſte ſende vp our ſoules thither,
to eate it there by a certaine Imagination, whiche ye cal faithe. For this is your Maiſter Caluines
Doctrine.Faithe doth al. By this Doctrine al ſtandeth vppon your faithe: your faithe doth al alone. And he
that beleueth in Chriſte, ſo as ye teache, eateth his Body, and Drinketh his Bloude. For by your Goſpel,
to eate the Body, is nothinge els, but to beleue in Chriſte. If this be true, then is your Supper ſuperfluous.
                  For declaration of the Truthe herein,The Catholike Doctrine touchinge the Sacramente of thaulter. it is to be conſidered that, when we ſpeake of this bleſſed
Sacramente, we meane ſpecially, the thinge receiued to be the very Real Body of Chriſte, not onely a
Signe or Token of his Body. Yet we thinke it neceſſarie.Vntruthe, cō
                        trarie to the Ancient Fathers: Reade the Anſvveare. the Doctrine of the Fathers be clerely
taught: whiche is, that here is a Sacramente, and the thinge of the Sacramente. TheVntruthe, vvithout ſenſe or ſauoure. No Catholique Father euer taught this peeuiſhe Doctrine. Forme
of Breade and VVine, whiche is ſene, is the Sacramente, that is to ſaie, a Signe of the Holy thinge.
For a Sacramente beſides the outwarde ſhape, whiche it repreſenteth to the ſenſes, cauſeth an other
thinge to come into knowledge. The thinge of this Sacramente is of two ſortes, the oneVntruthe, and one of M Harmyſtical dreames. in tho
ſame conteined and ſignified, the other ſignified, but not conteined. The firſte is the Body of Chriſte
borne of the Virgine Mary, and his Bloude ſhed for our Redemption: the Seconde is the Vnitie of the
Churche in theſe that be predeſtinate,A threefold diſtinction to be conſidered in the Doctrine of this Sacramente. called, iuſtified, and glorified. VVhiche Churche is Chriſtes
Body myſtical. So that here are three diſtincte thinges vnderſtanded. The one is a Sacramente onely:
the other a Sacramente and the thinge: the thirde the thinge, and not a Sacramente. The firſte is
the viſible ſhape or Forme of Breade and VVine: the ſeconde is the proper and very Fleaſhe and Bloude
of Chriſte: the thirde, his Myſtical Body.
                  And as there be two thinges of this Sacrament, ſo be there alſo two meanes or waies of eating.
The one Sacramental, after whiche bothe good andVntruth horrible, and Heatheniſhe. euil eate the true Body of Chriſte: they to ſaluation,
theſe to damnation. The other ſpiritual, after whiche the good only do eate. Theſe Defenders,
as al other the Sacrament aries,Indiſtinct ſpeakinge of diſtinct thinges. ſpeakinge of theſe diſtinct thinges indiſtinctly, cauſe confuſion,
and deceiue the vnlearned readers. In ſutche a ſenſe and meaninge the place commonly alleged out of
S. Auguſtine, as alſo many other the like, maye wel be vnderſtanded, without preiudice of the Truthe
of Chriſtes Body in the Sacrament: Vt quid paras dentem & Venttem? Crede, & manducaſti.
To what pourpoſe makeſt thou ready teeth and bely? Beleue, and thou haſt eaten. Nowe theſe Defenders
harping
                        •••
                     n
                        •
                     ly vpon this one ſtringe of ſpiritual eatinge, and ſhunninge the Faithe of the Catholike
Churche touching the true preſence of the Body, and Violently wreſting the Holy Scripture, and

Auncient Fathers to a contrary ſenſe,Faithe Eateth. admittinge Figures for Truthe, tropes for the letter, ſhadowes
for thinges: plaie vs many a falſe leſſon,Al this is onely M. Hardinges diſcante. VVee admit Figures for Figures, and Truthe for Truthe. and teache horrible lies, to the vtter ſubuerſion of thoſe, that
be lead by them.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here is no mention, ſaithe M. Hardinge, of Real Preſence: and thereupon he
plaieth vs many a proper Leſſon. Notwithſtandinge here is as mutche mention
made of Real Preſence, as either Chriſte, or his Apoſtles euer made: or in y• Primutiue
Catholique Churche of God was euer beléeued.
                  
                     Farther he ſaithe, VVhat reaſon, or Scripture haue ye, that a Peece of Breade, and a Cuppe of
VVine can ſette the Death, and Reſurrection of Chriſte, as it were, before your eies? Verily, when
al your tale is tolde, ye ſeeme to ſaie nothinge els, but that the Body of Chriſte remaineth in Heauen,
and that wee muſte ſende vp our ſoules thither, to eate it there by a certaine imagination,
whiche ye cal Faithe.
                  Here ye doo greate wronge, M. Hardinge, to cal the Faithe of Chriſte, an Imagination,
or, as I trowe: ye meane, a fanſie. S. Paule ſaithe, Fides eſt Subſtantia
rerum ſperandarum: Faithe is
                      (not an Imagination, but) the Subſtance and
grounde of the thinges, that wee hope for. If ye trauaile once againe to Rome, being
thus far inſtructed already, ye wil eaſily learne the Leſſon, that one of your late
Popes there, as it is reported, taught his Cardinalles: O, quantum nobis profuit illa
Fabula de Chriſto?
                  
                  
                     That wée ought to ſende vp our Faithe into Heauen, and there to embrace
the Body of Chriſte, it is S. Auguſtines Doctrine, it is not ours. Theſe be his
woordes: Dices,Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 52 Quomodò tenebo Chriſtum Abſentem? Quomodò in Coelum manum
mittam, vt ibi ſedentem teneam? Fidem mitte: & tenuiſti. Parentes tui tenuerunt
Carne: tu tene Corde: Thou wilt ſaie, howe ſhal I holde Chriſte beeinge Abſente?
Howe we ſhal I reache my hande into Heauen, that I maye holde him ſittinge there? Sende
vp thy Faithe: and thou holdeſt him. Thy Fathers (the Iewes) helde him in the fleaſhe:
Holde him thou in thy harte.
                  But for as mutche as H. hardinge thought it ſufficient, ſo pleaſantly to paſſe ouer
this mater with his Imaginations, and fanſies, I thinke it therefore ſo mutche
the more néedeful, to ſhewe the iudgemente of the Auncient Learned Fathers in
that behalfe.
                  
                     Firſt therefore S Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Augu. De Trinitate, Li. 13. Ca. 1. Rerum Abſentium Praeſens eſt Fides: &
rerum, quae foris ſunt, intus eſt Fides: & rerum, quae non videntur, videtur Fides:
Of thinges that be Abſente, Faithe is Preſente: of thinges, that be without, Faithe is
within: and of thinges that be not ſeene,
                     Auguſtin in. Pſalm. 75. 
                     Faithe is ſeene. Againe be ſaithe,
                      Cùm
non obliuiſcimur munus Saluatoris, nonne nobis quotidiè Chriſtus immolatur? Ex ipſis
reliquijs cogitationis noſtrae, id eſt, ex ipſa memoria Chriſtus quotidiè nobis ſic immolatur,
quaſi quotidiè nos innouet: When wee foregeate not ye gifte of our Saueoure, is not
Chriſte offered vnto vs euery daye? Of the very remanentes of our thoughtes, that
is to ſay, of our very memorie, Chriſte is ſo daily offered vnto vs, as though he renewed vs
euery daie.
                  
                  
                     And,
                     Hieronym. De 7. Ordinib. Eccle. De gradu 7. 
                     the more liuely to expreſſe this mater, S. Hierome ſaith, Tibi Conuiuium
Chriſtus eſt: Cogitatio Chriſtus eſt: Gaudium Chriſtus eſt: Deſiderium Chriſtus eſt:
Lectio Chriſtus eſt: quies Chriſtus eſt: Chriſte is thy banket: Chriſte is thy thought:
Chriſte is thy ioie: Chriſte is thy deſire: Chriſte is thy readinge: Chriſte is thy reate. Likewiſe
S. Ambroſe,
                     
                     Ambroſ. De Virginib. Lib. 2. In animis veſtris quotidiè pro Redemptione Corporis Chriſtus
offertur: In your mindes Chriſte is daily offered for the Redemption of the
Body.
                  
                  
                     
And to paſſe ouer others,Faithe Eateth. for that it pleaſeth M. Hardinge, to make himſelfe
ſutche mirthe with Imaginations, Euthymius a Gréeke Authour writing pourpoſely
of this mater, ſaith thus,Euthymi. in Iohan. Cap 9. 
                     Non oportet ſimpliciter ea intueri, ſed aliud quiddam
imaginari, & interioribus oculis ea perſpicere, tanouam Myſteria: Wee maie not
ſooke barely vpon theſe thinges,
                      (that is, vpon the Breade and Wine) but muſte thereof
imagine ſomme other mater, and behold the ſame with our in vvarde Spiritual eies, as it
is meete to beholde Myſteries.
                  
                  And leaſte M. Hardinge ſhoulde ſaie, This Imagination is vaine, and fantaſtical,
as is the greatteſte parte of his Religion,Augu. Epiſt. 117. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Magis ſunt illa,
quae intelligimus, quàm iſta, quae cernimus: The thinges, that wee vnderſtande,
(or imagine by Faithe) are more certaine, then the thinges, that wee ſee vvith our
eies.
                     
                  
                  Neither maie you thinke, M. Hardinge, that theſe thinges beinge graunted,
the Miniſtration of the Holy Supper woulde be ſuperfluous. For theſe twoo
Kindes of Eatinge muſte euermore neceſſarily be ioined togeather. And who ſo
euer commeth to the Holy Table, & auaunceth not his Minde vnto Heauen, there
to feede vpon Chriſtes Body at the Right hande of God, he knoweth not the meaninge
of theſe Myſteries, but is voide of vnderſtandinge, as the Horſe, or the Mule,
and receiueth onely the bare Sacramentes to his Condemnation. Therefore the
Myſtical Supper of Chriſte, notwithſtandinge this Doctrine, is not ſuperfluous:
But your Tranſubſtantiation, your Real Preſence, and a greate parte of this
your idle talke is moſte vaine, and moſte ſuperfluous.
                  But ye ſaie, Howe can Breade, and VVine bringe vs to the hope of Reſurrection,
or of Euerlaſting Life? and why maie not a man in like manner demaunde
of you, Haw can a fewe Droppes of colde VVater bringe vs to the hope of Reſurrection?
If VVater maie doo it, why maie not Breade, and VVine likewiſe doo it?
                  
                     Touchinge the VVater,Baſilius, De Sā
                        cto Baptiſmo. 
                     S. Baſile ſaith, Baptiſmus eſt Potentia Dei ad Reſurrectionem:
Baptiſme is the Povver of God to Reſurrection. Againe he ſaith,
                      Reſurrectionis
Gratiam in Die Reſurrectionis recipiamus: Vpon the Daie of Reſurrection
let vs receiue (Baptiſme,
                     
                     Hieronym. in 1. Cor. 15. 
                     whiche is) the Grace of Reſurrection. S. Hierome ſaith,
Non ſolùm propter Remiſsionem Peccatorum Baptizamur, ſed etiam propter Reſurrectionem
Carnis noſtrae: Wee are Baptized, not onely for Remiſsion of Sinnes, but alſo
for the Reſurrection of our Fleaſhe. And therefore the Greekes calle Baptiſme
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,Dionyſius. Ca. 2. 
                     That is, the VVeede of immortalitie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, it were ſomme pointe of ſkil to ſhewe vs, howe ſo greate
Power maie be in ſo litle VVater. Howe be it, it is not the VVater in déede, that
woorketh the force of Reſurrection, but the Bloude of Chriſte, that is Signified by
the VVater.
                     Ambro. in Epiſt. ad Rom. Cap. 6. Ignatius ad Trallianos. And therefore S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Baptiſmus Reſurrectionis Pignus,
& Imago eſt: Baptiſme is the Pleadge, and Image of Reſurrection.
                      Likewiſe Ignarius,
Credentes in Mortem eius, per Baptiſma Participes Reſurrectionis eius efficimur:
Beleeuinge in the Death of Chriſte, by Baptiſme wee are made Partakers of his Reſurrection.
                     
The like wée ſaie of the Holy Supper. Neither is M. Hardinge hable to
ſhewe vs any ſufficient cauſe to the contrarie, but VVine or Breade maie haue
this Power, as wel as VVater. Of this whole mater wée ſhal ſpeake hereafter
more at large.
                  But if Breade, and VVine, as M. Hardinge ſaithe, haue no Power to woorke
Reſurrection, what Power then can his Accidentes, and emptie Fourmes haue
to woorke the ſame? For, touching the Body of Chriſte it ſelfe, his own Doctours
could haue tolde him, that it enteth not into our Bodies. For thus it is noted, &
publiſhed for ſounde, and certaine Doctrine, vpon the Decrees:De Conſe. Diſt. 
                           •
                        . Tribus gradib. in Gloſſa. 
                     Certum eſt, quòd
quàm citò Species teruntur dentibus, tam citò in Coelum rapitur Corpus Chriſti:

                        It is certaine,
                     
                     Differēce bitvvene, &c. 
                     and out of doubte, that as ſoone as the Accidentes, or Fourmes are touched with
the teethe, ſtraight waie the Body of Chriſte is taken vp into Heauen.
                     
                  
                  Hereof wee maie reaſon thus: Chriſtes Body is ſuddainely taken vp into Heauen,
and is not receiued into our Bodies: and that, as it is noted here, is true, and
certaine: The Breade, and Wine, by M. Hardinges Doctrine, are vtterly conſumed,
no parte of the Subſtance thereof remaining: There is nothing leafte there,
but Fourmes, and Accidentes. Hereof it muſt needes folow, by this Doctrine, that
the ſame bare Fourmes, & Accidentes haue Power to woorke our Reſurrectiō. But
it is wel knowen, and confeſſed in al Schooles, that the Subſtance is better, and
woorthier, then is the Accidente. Therfore wée maie conclude, The Accidente may
doo it: Ergo. the Subſtance maie mutche more doo it.
                  For the reſte, M. Hardinge ſaithe, The Subſtance of the Breade is quite remoued:
The roundeneſſe, and whiteneſſe are the Sacrament: The thinge thereof
is of twoo ſortes: The one conteined, and ſignified: the other ſignified, and not conteined.
Theſe Myſtical fanſies maie lie ſtil, vntil M. Hardinge by ſomme Authoriritie,
other then his owne, haue proued them better. True it is, that M. Hardinge
ſaithe, Bitwéene the Sacramente, and the thinge it ſelfe, that is to ſaie, bitwéene
the Sacramente, and the Body of Chriſte repreſented by the Sacramente, there is
great difference. For in déede, and verily, and in preciſe manner of ſpeache, neither
is Chriſtes Body the Sacramente: nor is the Sacramente Chriſtes Body.
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaith,
                     Auguſt. Epiſt 23. ad Bonifacium. 
                     as it is alleged before, Niſi Sacramenta ſimilitudinem quandam
earum rerum, quatum Sacramenta ſunt, haberent, omninò Sacramenta nō eſſent.
Ex hac autem ſimilitudine plaerun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      rerum ipſarum nomina accipiunt. Ité
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſecundum
quendam modum Sacramentum Corporis Chriſti, Corpus Chriſti eſt: Onleſſe
Sacramentes had a certaine likeneſſe of the thinges, wherof thei be sacramentes, without
queſtion thei were no Sacramentes. And in conſideration of this likeneſſe, oftentimes they
beare the names of the thinges them ſelues. Therefore after a certaine manner of ſpeache
(and not otherwiſe) the Sacramente of the Body of Chriſte, is Chriſtes Body.
                  
                     Hereof I haue written more at large,
                     Articulo 21. 
                     as occaſion was offered, in my Former
Replie to M. Harding. S. Ambroſe noting this differēce, ſaith thus, Non iſte Panis,
qui vadit in ventrem:De Conſe. diſt. 2. Non iſte. Sed Panis Vitae Aeternae, qui animae noſtrae Subſtantiam fulci
                        •
                     :
Not this Breade (of the Sacrament) that paſſeth into y• belly: but (the Body of Chriſte
it ſelfe, whiche is) the Breade of euerlaſtinge Life: whiche reliueth the Subſtance of
our Soule,
                     Rabanus, Lib. 1. Cap. 31. 
                     and is ſignified by the Sacramente. Rabanus Maurus ſaithe, Aliud
eſt Sacramentum, aliud vis Sacramenti. Sacramentum in Corporis alimentum
redigitur: Virtute Sacramenti aeternae Vitae dignitas adipiſcitur: The Sacramente
is one thinge: The Povver of the Sacramente is an other thinge. The Sacramente is
changed into the foode, or noriſhemente of the Body: by the vertue of the Sacramente
is gotten the dignitie of euerlaſtinge Life.
                     Chryſo. in Matthae. Homil. 11. 
                     Likewiſe S. Chryſoſtome, In Sacris Vaſis,
non ipſum Corpus Chriſti, ſed Myſterium Corporis eius continetur: In the Holy
Veſſels is conteined, not the Very Body of Chriſte it ſelfe, but a Myſterie, or Sacramente
of his Body.
                  
                  So greate difference there is bitwéene the Sacramente & the Body of Chriſte.
The Sacramente paſſeth into the Belly: Chriſtes Body paſſeth into the Soule.
The Sacramente is vpon Earthe: Chriſtes Body is in Heauen. The Sacramente
is corruptible: Chriſtes Body is glorious. The Sacramente is the Signe:
Chriſtes Body is the thinge Signified. For wante of this diſtinction M. Hardinge
wandreth blindely in the darke, he knoweth not whither. Therefore S. Auguſtine
ſaith,Auguſt. De Doctrina Chriſtiana, Lib. 3. Cap. 5. ſpeaking purpoſely hereof, Ea demum eſt miſerabilis animae ſeruitus, Signa
pro rebus accipere: This is a miſerable bondage of the ſ
                              •
                           ule, to take the Signes in ſteede of the
thinges, that he ſignified.
                     
                  
                  
                     
Whether, and in what ſenſe the wicked maie be ſaide to eate the Body of
Chriſte, it ſhalbe diſcuſſed hereafter more at large.
                  As for M. Hardinges ordinarie Concluſion of Wreaſting the Scriptures, and
Holy Fathers: Of plaieinge falſe Leſſons: of teachinge, as be ſaithe, horrible lies:
and of ſubuertinge the people, with al other the like furniture, wee wil leaue it
freely, and wholy vnto the Authour.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 2.
               To this Banket wee thinke the People of God ought to be earneſtly
bidden, that they maie al Communicate emonge them ſelues,
and openly declare, and teſtifie bothe the godly Societie, whiche is emonge
them, and alſo the hope, whiche they haue in Chriſte Ieſu. For
this cauſe, if there had benne any, whiche woulde be but a looker on,
and abſtaine from the holy Communion, him did the Olde Fathers,
and Biſhoppes of Rome in the Primitiue Churche, before Priuate
Maſie came vp, excommunicate, as a wicked perſon, & as a Pagans.
Neither was there any Chriſtian at that time, whiche did Communicate
alone, whiles other looked on. For ſo did Calixtus in times
paſte decree, that after the Conſecration was finiſhed, al ſhould Communicate,
excepte they had rather ſtande without the Churche
doores. For thus (ſaithe he) did the Apoſtles appointe, and the ſame
the Holy Churche of Rome keepeth ſtil.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Let this Banket be dight as it ought to bee: let the beſt diſhe be made readie in due ſorte, whiche
is the very Bodie of our Sauiour Chriſte: let the gheſtes be tolde what is ſet before them at that Holy
Table: let them be taught to beleue rightly, to proue, and prepare themſelues, as behoueth: then we
thinke it moſte conuenient the people of God be bidden thereto, not thereby to Communicate amonge
themſelues onely, but alſo, and rather to Communicate with God, to be incorporate in Chriſte, and to
be made Partakers of al the benefites of God procured to man by the Deathe of his Sonne ſuffered in
that Body, whiche at this highe Feaſte they Eate. This Banket beinge thus ſet foorthe, if ſome deuoute
perſons thinke them ſelues for good cauſes vnwoorthy to aſſaie thereof,Deuoute lookers on, doo Spiritually Cō
                        municate. and to receiue that
heauenly foode Sacramētally, findinge thē ſelues not ſo wel prepared, as S. Paule requireth in that behalfe,
yet for loue of it deſire to be preſente, and beholde that Table, and ſpiritually to taſte of that
healthful Diſhe by Faithe, Charitte, Praier, and feruent Deuotiō, wherein they doo not wholy abſteine
from the Holy Communion: ſutcheVntruthe. For the Catholique Fathers Cōdemned them. are not to be condemned as idle lookers on for ſo yee make them,
nor to be driuen out of the Church. Neither did euer the Olde Fathers, and Biſhops of Rome in the Primitiue
Churche (ſaye what ye wil Defenders) excōmunicate them: mutche leſſe did they repute them
forVntruthe. For S. Chryſoſtome calleth them impudentes, & improbos: Ad [
                           
                              •
                           pheſ. Homil 3. wicked Perſons and Paganes. AndVntruthe, coldely auouched. Reade the Anſvveare. not ſeldome the Prieſteat the Maſſe (whiche for this reſpecte
with vnreaſonable noueltie ye terme Priuate) when none other were diſpoſed to receiue with
him Sacramētally,Calixtus alleaged for Anacletus. The Defenders require more of the Catholikes then they performe them ſelues. The place of Anaclet
                           •
                         diſcuſſed. but Spiritually onely, hath receiued alone the Holy thinges, which he hath offered.
                  Neither the Decree of Anacletus, whiche ye beinge deceaued by GratianVntruthes three togeather: As ſhal appeare. vntruely father vpon
Calixtus, requireth that al the people preſent ſhoulde Communicate with the Prieſte at the Maſſe.
VVhiche thinge ye ſhoulde not haue obiected to the Churche, ſeeinge that it is not obſerued by your
owne Newe order in your Congregations. Reade the Epiſtle of Anacletus, from whence this Decree
is taken, and your ſelues wil confeſſe the ſame. That Holy Father and Martyr preſcribeth the Order
whiche he would to be kepte, when Biſhoppes, or Prieſtes ſaye Maſſe: VVhiche was, that it be done in
places conſecrated to God, that a Biſhop at his Maſſe haue witneſſes with him moe then an other
Prieſte. In theVntruthe three togeather: As ſhal appeare. solemne Feaſtes he requireth Seuen, Fiue, or three Deacons, likewiſe Subdeacons, and
other Miniſters, al cloathed in hallowed Veſtimentes to attende vppon him, to ſtande of euery ſide of

him with a contrite harte,The beſte Diſſhe. and humble Spirite lookinge downewarde, kepinge him from malicious
menne,This Commaūdemēs of receiuing the Cōmunion geuen by Anacket
                           •
                         perteineth only to the Miniſters of the Church in ſolemne Feaſtes. geuinge conſente to his Sacrifice. Thus muche beinge declared in that Epiſtle, it foloweth
immediatly, Peracta autem Conſecratione, &c. And when the Conſecration is ended, let them
al Communicate, that wil not be kepte without the Churche doores. For ſo the Apoſtles haue ordeined,
and the Holy Churche of Rome obſerueth. VVho ſeeth not this requeſt of receiuinge the Communion
to be referredVntruthe. plaine and manifeſt. Reade the Anſvveare. to the Prieſtes, Deacons, Subdeacons, and other Miniſters in ſolemne feaſtes, ſeruinge
the Biſhop at Maſſe? For in that place Anacletus ſpeaketh neuer a woorde expreſſely of the Lay
people. Therefore ye deceiue the vnlearned reader with a lie.
                  For the better vnderſtandinge of this Decree, ſpecially whereas Anacletus alleageth the Apoſtles
ordinaunce for the ſame, ninthe Canon of the Apoſtles is to be conſidered: In whiche they require
Vntruthe, For in the Apoſtles Canons it is vvritten thus, Quicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            Fideles ingrediūtur in Eccleſiā, &c. Canone. 10. euery Eccleſiaſtical perſon to be partaker of the Sacrifice, that is offered, or to be excluded
from the Communion:See the 9. Canon of the Apoſtles onelſſe he ſhewe iuſte cauſe for the contrary. The reaſon whereof in that Canon
expreſſed is this: Leaſte Clearkes abſteininge from the Communion ſhould be occaſion of offence
to the people, and thereby raiſe an euil ſuſpicion againſt him. that ſacrificed, as though he had not
made the Oblation as it ought to be.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Let this Banket be deight, ſaithe M. Hardinge, as it ought to be: Let the beſte
Diſſhe be made ready. Good Chriſtian Reader, the beſt, the wholeſomeſt, the moſte
pleaſant, and moſt Comfortable diſſhe at this Table, is the Death of Chriſte, that
Lambe of God, that hath taken awaie the Sinnes of the worlde. Thus Chriſte him
ſelfe, the Maiſter of this Feaſte, hath willed vs to dreſſe this Dinner: Doo this, ſaith
he, in Remembraunce of me. Likewiſe S. Paule, As often as ye ſhal eate of this Breade,
and Drinke of this Cuppe,
                     1. Corinth. 11. 
                     ye ſhal ſhewe foorthe, and publiſhe the Lordes Deathe, vntil
be comme.
                  
                  
                     This Banket therefore is not the outwarde, or bare Sacramente, but Chriſtes
very Body, and Bloude, which are repreſented vnto vs by the Sacramente: And,
as it is before alleged out of S. Ambroſe,
                     De Con. Diſt. 2. Non iſte. Hieronym. ad Hedibiam. 
                     It is not the Breade (of the Sacramente)
that paſſeth into the belly, but the Breade of Euerlaſtinge Life, whiche reliueth
the Subſtance of the Soule. Therefore S. Hierome ſaithe,
                      Iudaicas fabulas repellamus,
& Aſcendamus cum Domino in Coenaculum magnum ſtratum, atque mundatum,
& accipiamus ab eo ſurſum Calicem Noui Teſtamenti: Lette vs abandonne
from vs Iewiſhe Fables, and ſet vs Aſcende vp with our Lorde into Heauen, into that great
parlar dreſte, and made cleane: and there aboue let vs receiue of him the Cuppe of the
Newe Teſtamente.
                     Cyprian. De Coena Domini. 
                     In this ſenſe S. Cyprian ſaithe, Vident haec Sacramenta Pauperes
Spiritu, & hoc Vno contenti Ferculo, omnes huius mundi delicias aſpernantur:
& poſsidentes Chriſtum, aliquam huius mundi poſsidere ſupellectilem dedignantur:
The poore in Sprite ſee theſe Sacramētes, and beinge contented with this Onely Diſſhe,
they deſpiſe al other the deinty fares of the worlde: and hauinge poſſeſſion of Chriſte, they
diſdeigne to poſſeſſe any worldly Subſtance. In like ſorte ſpeakinge of the Birthe of
Chriſte, he ſaithe thus:
                     
                     Cyprian De Natiuitate Chriſti. Ea quae licita ſunt, & conceſſa, tangamus: & circa incunabula
Saluatoris Prima Infantiae eius Fercula deguſtemus: Let vs touche thoſe thinges,
that be lawful for vs to touche: and ſtandinge aboute the Cradle of our Saueoure, ſet vs taſte
of the Firſte Diſſhe of his Childehoode.Auguſt. in Pſalmum. 57. 
                     Likewiſe ſaithe S. Auguſtine, Coecus
interiùs Panem Chriſtum non videt. Et beatus eſt? Hoc non dicit, niſi Pariter Coecus:
He that is blinde in his harte within, ſeethe not Chriſte, that is our Breade. And is
he bleſſed? Noman wil ſo ſaie, onleſſe it be one as blinde, as he.
                  
                  But what manner of Feaſte is it, that M. Hardinge prepareth for the people?
How is it ſeaſoned? how is it dreſte? Firſte, by very vncourteous, and vnciuile
dealinge, he withdraweth the one halfe, that is, the Cuppe of the Nevve Teſtament,
and reſerueth it ſeuerally to him ſelfe: & yet woulde make the people beléeue,

they haue the whole.Priuate Maſſe. And thus doothe he, when he hath greatteſt companie to
Suppe with him, and when his feaſte is beſte furniſhed. Otherwiſe he ſuffereth
his gheaſtes to ſtande aluffe, and he conſumeth al his prouiſion him ſelfe alone.
Neither in déede hath he any thinge to ſet before them, ſauinge onely a colde ſurcharge
of dead Shevves, and doumbe Ceremonies. The poore people heareth nothinge,
Underſtandeth nothinge, Eateth nothinge, Drinketh nothinge, Taſteth
nothinge: They publiſhe not the Lordes Deathe: They knowe not the Lordes
Supper.
                  To ſutche a Banket Paſetes the Iuggler vſed ſometimes to calle his frendes.Suidas.
There was a greate ſhewe of varietie, and plenetie of al manner of Meates, and
Drinkes, the table fulle. But when any of the gheaſtes would haue touched any
thinge, it vaniſhed ſuddainely awaie, and was turned to nothinge. And ſo, when
their eies were ful, they put vp theire kniues, and roſe ahungred. Euen thus M.
Hardinge féedeth, and feaſteth the people of God, with Shewes and Ceremonies,
and ſuffereth them in the meane while to ſterue for hungre. Euen as the Prophete
ſaithe, It ſhalbe like the dreame of a hungrie man. Beholde he eateth, and maketh mery: But
when he is awakte,
                     Eſai. 29. 
                     his ſoule is emptie.
                  
                  Good menne, ſaithe M. Hardinge, withdrawe them ſelues, and are contented
to be preſente onely, & to ſtande by: but receiue not the Sacramente. But Chryſoſtome
ſaithe to ſutche a good deuoute man.Chryſoſt. ad Epheſ. Homil. 3. 
                     If thou ſtande by, and doo not Communicate,
thou arte vvicked, thou arte ſhameleſſe, thou arte impudente. Thou wilte ſaie, I am
vnvvoorthy to be partaker of the Holy Myſteries.
                     Impudens. Improbus. 
                     Then arte thou vnvoorthy to be
partaker of the Praiers. Thou maiſte no more ſtande here, then an Heathen, that neuer
was Chriſtened.
                  
                  Here, gentle Reader, maiſte thou ſée, a marueilous change in the Churche of
God. The thinge, that in olde times was coumpted Heatheniſhe, Impudencie,
and VVickedneſſe, is nowe by M. Hardinges Newe Diuinitie becomme Godlineſſe,
and greate Deuotion.
                  
                  But,Not Seldome. God wote, here foloweth a very colde Aſſeueration. Not Seldome, ye
ſaie, the Prieſte at the Maſſe, whan none other were diſpoſed, receiued alone. O M. Hardinge,
the worlde wel ſeethe, your woorde is no Goſpel. It appeareth by your ſo
many Vntruthes, ye care not greately, what you ſaie. Thus yée tel vs, Not Seldome
the Prieſte receiued alone. Not Seldome? what is that? why ſpeake you ſo
nicely? what meaneth this colde, and doubteful eloquence, ſpecially in him, that
otherwiſe hath acquainted his voice to ſpeake ſo bigge? why ſaie you not, The
Prieſte vſed daiely, and commonly ſo to doo? Or if yée coulde not auouche ſo great
Vntruthe for very ſhame, why ſaide you not, The Prieſte oftentimes, or at ſome
certaine times receiued alone: at the leaſte at foure, or three, or tvvoo ſundrie
times, within the ſpace of ſixe hundred yéeres? At the woorſte, if yee had ſaide, but
Once, it had benne ſomwhat. As for, Not ſeldomme, it is too baſe: it is too ſimple:
it diſgraceth the whole courſe of your pleadinge, and in plaine ſpeache ſoundeth,
as mutche, as Neuer. It had rather benne your parte, takinge vpon you this
countenance of credite, and grauitie, to haue tolde vs Subſtantially, and plainely,
what manner of man this Prieſte was: where he dwelte: what was his name:
when, and where, and in what Companie he ſaide this Maſſe: who ſawe it: who
hearde it: who bare witneſſe to it: by what Recorde, or Authoritie it maie be proued.
The matter beinge ſo great, and of ſutche Antiquitie, is there noman leafte
behinde, to witneſſe the ſame, but M. Hardinge? In your Former Anſweare ye
bringe vs in Boies, Girles, Sicke folke, Laie people, and VVemen: and vpon
ſutche groundes ye ſticke not to founde your Priuate Maſſe. And doubteleſſe theſe
examples might haue ſeemed to ſtande you in ſomme prety ſtéede, yf in thoſe daies

                     Boies,
                     Anacletus Calixtus. and VVemen had benne Prieſtes. For Prieſte, or Biſhop, that euer receiued
the Sacrament alone, in the Churche, before the people, ye are not yet hable
to ſhewe vs one. As for your Leontius, and Amphilochius, & S. Baſiles Maſſe
at Midnight, and other like folies, and fables, it ſeemeth by the ſilence, ye vſe in
your late Reioinder, ye are contented wiſely, and quietly to geue them ouer.
                  Yee ſaie, wee are deceiued by Gratian, and haue placed Calixtus in ſteede of
Anacletus. Here firſte of al, ye confeſſe, that Gratian your greate Rabbin, the
Father, and Fountaine of your Decrees might be deceiued. And verily ſutche
plaineneſſe in dealinge, if ye would voucheſaue to vſe it oftener, were woorthy of
ſome commendation. For in déede your Gratian, as he was a man of great readinge,
and ſmal iudgement, ſo he allegeth oftetimes, he knoweth not what: Hierome
for Origen: Cyprian for Auguſtine: Beda for Ambroſe: Iuuencus for
Vincentius: Greeke for Latine: Newe for Olde. As for this authoritie, wherein
you ſaie,De Con. Diſt. 1. Epiſcopus. De Con. Diſt. 2. Peracta. wee are deceiued, he allegeth it in twoo ſundrie places: firſte vnder the
name of Anacletus: nexte vnder the name of Calixtus: meaninge, I trowe, yf
there were errour in the one, at leaſte to redreſſe it by the other. Therefore, M.
Hardinge, yf ye had looked better vpon your Booke, what ſo euer opinion ye haue
of your Gratian, ye ſhould haue founde, that wée were nothinge deceiued. Haw be
it, your Gratian, in ſteede of one errour, hath made twoo. For in deede, as it is true,
y• theſe woordes were neuer written by Calixtus: ſo of the other ſide it is likewiſe
true, they were neuer written by Anacletus: but were manifeſtly forged, and falſified
by others, that folowed afterwarde:Artic. 4. Diui. 3. as in my Former Replie I haue declared
more at large.
                  But it is a world to ſee, what wiles, & ſhiftes theſe menne can finde, to beare
out erroure. Firſte, ye ſaie, theſe woordes were ſpoken of the Prieſtes, Deacons, &
Subdeacons, ſeruinge the Prieſte at Maſſe vpon Solemne Feaſtes. Pardonne
me, M. Hardinge, to ſaie the Truthe. For verily, notwithſtandinge this ſolemne
tale, it ſeemeth, ye knowe not, what ye ſaie. For it maie pleaſe you to remember,
that your Anacletus, whoſe forged Authoritie ye haue alleged, was Biſhop
in Rome in the time of S. Peter, ſhortely vpon the Deathe of Chriſte, when
the Churche was euerywhere vnder perſecution, & ful of Bloude. Nowe, I praie
you, who euer tolde you, either of any office, that your Subdeacons had in the Holy
Miniſterie, or of any greate highe Holy Daies, of Duplex, or magis Duplex,
or principal Solemne Feaſtes in the Churche of God in al that time? Maye wee
thinke, that the Bleſſed Virgins, and the Apoſtles daies were keapte Highe and
Holy, while the ſame Bleſſed Virgin, and Apoſtles were yet aliue? Though ye had
none other regarde, either to God, or to your ſelfe, yet ſhame ſhoulde force you, to
foreſee more aduiſedly, what yée ſaie.
                  But your greatteſt folie appeareth in y• ſhiftinge, & gloſtnge of theſe woordes.
For you ſaie, this Calixtus, or Anacletus ſpeaketh onely of the Prieſtes, the Deacons,
and the Subdeacons: and neuer a woorde expreſſely of the Laie people: and
therefore ye ſaie, w
                           •
                        e deceiue the vnlearned Reader with a lie. Touchinge your vncourteous
ſpeache, I weigh it none otherwiſe, but as it is. The Truthe wilbe hable
euermore to beare it ſelfe. But that theſe woordes of Anacletus, or Calixtus,
touche not the Laie people, but onely the Prieſtes, and the Miniſters, the very
Gloſer him ſelfe was neuer, either ſo vnſkilful, or ſo impudent, ſo to ſaie. For,
whereas the woordes be theſe, Let them al Communicate, onleſſe they wilbe remoued
out of the Churche, he ſetteth there to this Expoſition, Hoc antiquum eſt: Nam
hoc hodiè relictum videtur arbitrio cuiuſlibet:
                     De Con. Diſt. 2. Peracta. In Gloſſa. 
                     This vvas the olde manner:
For novve adaies it is free for euery man to doo therein, vvhat he vvil.
                  
                  
                     The like Decree is founde vnder the name of the Apoſtles Canons: Quicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                     
fideles ingrediuntur in Eccleſiam,Anacletus Calixtus. & Scripturas audiunt, non autem perſuerant
in Oratione,Canon. Apoſtol. Canon. 10. nec Sanctam Communionem percipiunt, velut qui ordinis perturbationem
commouent, ab Eccleſiae Cōmunione arceri conuenit: As many (not onely of the Prieſtes,
and Miniſters, but
                     ) of the Faitheful, as comme into the Churche, and heare the
Scriptures, but continewe not out the Praiers, nor receiue the Holy Communion, let them be
put from the Communion of the Churche, as menne that woorke the breache of Order. Likewiſe
it is noted in the Margin vpon the ſame Canons,
                     
                     Canon. Apoſt. Can. 9. In Margine. Omnes olim, qui intererant.
Communicabant: In olde times al, that vvere preſente, did Communicate.
In the Councel of Antioche it was decreed thus: Omnes, qui ingrediuntur in
Eccleſiam Dei,Concil. Antiochen. Can. 2. & Sacras Scripturas audiunt, auerſantur autem perceptionem Dominici
Sacramenti, &c. ab Eccleſia abijci oportet, &c. Al, that comme into the Churche of
God,
                     Concil. Aquiſgran. Cap. 70. 
                     and heare the Holy Scriptures, and refuſe the receiuinge of the Lordes Sacramente, let
them be put from the Churche. Theſe Decrees reache not onely to the Miniſters of
the Churche, but alſo to the whole people.
                     
                  
                  
                     Clemens that was Biſhop in Rome,Clemens Epiſt. 2. as it is thought, nexte after this Anacletus,
ſaithe thus, Tanta in Altario Holocauſta offerantur, quanta populo ſufficere
debeant: Let ſo many loues be offered at the Aultar, as maie ſuffiſe to ſerue,
                      (not onely the
Miniſters, but alſo) the People.
                  
                  
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Munus oblatum totius populi fit: quia in vno Pane omnes
ſignificantur.Ambroſ. in 1. Corinth. 1
                           •
                        . Per idem enim, quòd vnum ſumus, de vno Pane omnes ſumere
oportet: The oblation offered is made the vvhole peoples: for that in one Breade al
are ſignified. For in that wee are al one, vvee muſt al receiue of one Breade.
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe vnto the people, Neque nos abundantiùs, vos autem minùs, de
Sacra Menſa participamus:Chryſoſtom. in 2. Theſſal. Homi. 4. Sed pariter, & ex aequo illam vtrique deguſtamus: 
                        
                           ••
                         either
doo wee receiue more, and you leſſe of the Holy Table: but wee taſte thereof equally
bothe togeather. The like might be alleged out of S. Hierome, S. Auguſtine,
Dionyſius, and others.
                  
                  But for as mutche as ye ſo bitterly tel vs, that wée miſconſtrue theſe woordes
of Anacletus, and deceiue the vnlearned Reader with a lie, maie it therefore pleaſe
you farther to heare, what your owne late Scholaſtical Doctours haue written,
and iudged in this behalfe.
                  
                     Thomas of Aquine ſaithe, In Primitiua Eccleſia, quando magna vigebat deuotio
Fidei Chriſtianae, ſtatutum fuit, vt Fideles quotidiè Communicarent: In the Primitiue
Churche, when greate Deuotion of the Chriſtian Faithe was in ſtrength, it was ordeined,
that the Faitheful ſhould receiue the Communion euery daie. Durandus
ſaithe, In Primitiua Eccleſia omnes Fideles quotidiè Communicabant:Durandus in Rational. Li. 4. Cap. 55. 
                     In the
Primitiue Churche al the Faitheful daiely receiued the Communion.
                     Hugo Cardina in Luc. Cap. 24. Hugo Cardinalis
ſaithe, In Primitiua Eccleſia omnes, quotquot intererant Canoni Miſſae, ſingulis
diebus Communicabant. Et, ſi nollent communicare, egrediebantur poſt Offertorium:
In the Primitiue Churche, as many as vvere preſente at the Canon of the Maſſe, did
daiely Communicate: and if they woulde not, they departed foorthe after the Offertorie.
                  
                  
                     If ye thinke, theſe authorities are not ſufficient,
                     Iohan. Cochlae. Contra Muſcul. De Sacrificio. Iohannes Cochlaeus ſaithe,
Omnes olim, tum Sacerdotes, tum Laici, cum Sacrificante Communicabant, ſicut ex
Canonibus Apoſtolorum, & ex Libris antiquiſsimorum Eccleſiae Doctorum perſpicuè
cognoſcitur. Hic vnicum hac de re Canonem recitabo, qui Calixto adſcribitur: Peracta,
&c. In olde times bothe al the Prieſtes, and al the Laie people receiued the Communion
with the Miniſter, that had made the Oblation: as it is plainely perceiued by the
Canons of the Apoſtles, and by the Bookes of the Ancient Doctours of the Churche. One Canon
hereof I wil allege written by Calixtus: &c. Likewiſe ſaithe Iudocus Clichthoueus,
In Primitiua Eccleſia Fideles quotidiè ſumebant Communionem,In. Clichthoueut in Canon. Miſſae. ſecundum
illam Calixit ſanctionem, Peracta, &c. In the Primitiue Churche the Faitheful receiued
the Communion euery daie, accordinge to this Decree of Calixtus: &c.
                  
                     
Here you maie ſée, not onely, that theſe woordes are alleged by your owne
Doctours, vnder the name of Calixtus, wherein you haue noted ſo greate an errour,
but alſo that the ſame woordes, by the iudgement of the ſame Doctours, are
thought to perteine no leſſe to the Laie people, then to the Prieſte.
                  Nowe, M. Hardinge, theſe thinges conſidered, I referre the indifferent iudgement
hereof to your owne knowledge, and Conſcience, whether of vs twoo hath
deceiued the Reader with a lie.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 3.
               More ouer, when the People commeth to the holy Communion,
the Sacrament ought to be geuē them in Bothe Kindes: for ſo bothe
Chriſte hath commaunded, and the Apoſtles in euery place haue ordeined,
and al the Ancient Fathers and Catholique Biſhoppes haue
folowed the ſame. And who ſo doothe contrarie to this, he (as Gelaſius
ſaithe)D
                        •
                      Conſec. Diſt. & Comperio
                        ••
                     s. committeth Sacrilege. And therefore wee ſaie, that
our Aduerſaries at this daie, who hauinge violently thruſte out, and
quite forebidden the Holy Communion, doo without the woorde of
God, without the Authoritie of any Ancient Councel, without any
Catholique Father, without any Exāple of the Primitiue Churche,
yea and without reaſon alſo, defende, and maineteine their Priuate
Maſſes, and the manglinge of the Sacramentes, and doo this not
onely againſt the plaine expreſſe Commaundemente of Chriſte, but alſo
againſte al Antiquitie, doo wickedly therein, & are very Churcherobbers.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Softe, and fayre, Maiſters. Ye ſhewe more heate then witte, more ſtomake then learninge, more
anger then reaſon. Ye ſaie muche, and prooue little. But ſaie ye, and ſaie againe, what ye wil: we
tel you boldely,Cōmunion vnder both kindes not cōmaunded expreſſely by Chriſte, nor ordeined by the Apoſtles. thatVntruthes three togeather boldely preſumed. neither Chriſte euer commaunded, * nor the Apoſtles ordeined, * nor al the Ancient
Fathers obſerued, that the Sacrament be geuen to the people none otherwiſe, but vnder bothe
Kindes onely. If Chriſte had expreſſely commaunded it, the Churche (of Rome) had not ſo longe
time receiued, and kepte the vſe of one Kinde. The Apoſtles, and ſundry Holy Fathers Miniſtred bothe
Kindes: we confeſſe. That the one Kinde was not alſo by them Miniſtred, and that it is vtterly vnlawful,
we denie,To prooue a Negatiue, it is a folie. But you ſhal neuer proue the Affirmatiue. and the ſame ſhal ye neuer be able to proue. Touchinge this whole pointe, and
how litle, that ye alleage out of Celaſius, maketh for you, and concerninge Maſſe not to be omitted
for lacke of Companie, to communicate Sacramentally with the Prieſte:Certainely yenough. For in the ſame tvvoo Articles ye haue vttered threeſcore and foure greate Vntruthes. I haue ſaide yuongh in my
anſweare to your fellowe M. Iuel his chalenge. Bringe ye other ſtuffe, and better then this, or els
al the worlde wil ſee your haltinge, and the febleneſſe of your ſide.An vnſhamefaſte and ſclaunderouſe lie▪
                      That we haue violently thruſte
out, and quite forbidden the Holy Communion, onleſſe ye meane your owne Schiſmaticall, mutable,
and polluted Communion, if there were any ſparke of ſhame, or harted of liynge in you, ye woulde
neuer impute it vnto vs. God dothe knowe, and the Worlde is not vnwittinge,Vntruthe, ſo ſenſible, and ſo groſſe, that a man maie feele it vvith his fingers. how muche, howe
often, and how earneſtly the Catholike Churche exhorteth her Children to prepare themſelues, to receiue
theirVntruthe. No Learned Father euer called the Sacramente his God, or Maker. Maker. And though the people of Englande of late yeeres reſorted not commonly thereto,
yet the deuotion of Chriſten folke in this Countrie of baſe Almaigne, in Fraunce, in Italy, in
Spaine, and in ſundrie other Chriſten Prouinces, is ſo feruent in frequentinge the Holy Communion, as
if ye ſawe it, ye would be aſhamed of your ſclaunderous reporte. Let wiſe men, and good men
iudge, whether we be Churcherobbers, or ye vnſhamefaſte liers.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Where nothinge is anſweared, it were not amiſſe, to replie nothinge. If M.
Hardinge can onely voucheſaue, to calle vs ſclaund
                        •
                     rous Reporters, 
                        •
                      vnſhamefaſt

Liers:Inſtitution in Bothe Kindes. and the Lordes Supper a Schiſmatical, Mutable, pollutted Communion,
it is ſufficient: the mater needeth no farther proufe. To this whole matter,
M. Hardinge ſaithe, He hath ſufficiently anſweared M. Iewel. He hath anſweared,
I graunte: but how ſufficiently, the mater it ſelfe wil declare. How be it, he maie
not in any wiſe forgeate, that in the ſame twoo ſhorte Treaties to M. Jewel, conteininge
onely twoo and fourtie litle leaues of Paper, he hath ſente vs ouer, and
publiſhed threeſcore and foure notable, and greate Vntruthes: whereof, I thinke,
he hath no greate cauſe ſo mutche to glorie.
                  
                     He ſaithe, That the Sacramente ſhoulde be deliuered to the peple in bothe kindes, neither
Chriſte euer commaunded it, nor the Apoſtles euer ordeined it. Thus M. Hardinge ſaithe,
onely bicauſe it liketh him thus to ſaie. Yet this owne Catholique Doctours, & the
Chiefe Champions of that ſide ſaie far otherwiſe.
                     De Miſſ. Publica Proroganda. Gerardius Lorichius ſaithe,
Ipſius Sacramenti Inſtitutio vult, vt Omnes vnà manducemus, & bibamus: The
very Inſtitution of the Sacramente it ſelfe willeth, that vvee Eate, and Drinke al togeather.
And Ruardus Tapper the Deane of Louaine ſaithe thus:
                     Caſſander 
                           〈◊〉
                         Vira
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Specie, Pa. 29. Habito reſpectu
ad Sacramentum, eius
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      perfectionem, magis conueniret, ſub Vtra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſpecie fieri
Communionem, quàm ſub Altera tantùm. Hoc enim magis conſonum eſt eius Inſtitutioni,
& integritati, & refectioni Corporali: imò & Exemplo Chriſti, & Patrum Primitiuae
Eccleſiae: Conſideration had vnto the Sacramente, and to the perfection of the ſame,
it were more conuenient, that the Communion were Miniſtred vnder Bothe Kindes, then
vnder One alone. For this were more agreable to the Inſtitution, and fulneſſe thereof,
and to the outwarde refection of the Body: Yea and to the Example bothe of Chriſte, and alſo
of the Fathers of the Primitiue Churche.
                  
                  
                     Certainely theſe woordes of Chriſte, Drinke ye al of this: Doo this in my
Remembrance, are very plaine woordes of commaundemente, and
                      Inſtitution.
Therefore Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Et in Pane,Chryſoſt. in. 1. Corin. Homi. 27. & in Calice Chriſtus dixit, Hoc
facite in meam Commemorationem: Chriſte bothe in the Breade, and alſo in the
Cuppe ſaide, Doo this in Remembrance of mee. Likewiſe
                      Theophylactus,
Tremendus Calix pari cunctis conditione traditus eſt:Theophylact. 1. Corinth. 11. Paſchaſius. 
                     The Reuerende Cuppe is in equal
manner deliuered to al. And, whereas Chriſte ſaithe, Drinke ye al of this,
Paſchaſius, to make the mater the plainer, putteth thereto theſe woordes: Tam Miniſtri,
quàm reliqui Credentes: As wel the Miniſters, as the reſte of the Faitheful.
In like manner S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     De Con. Diſt. 2. Quia Paſſus. Simul hoc ſumimus: ſimul bibimus: quia ſimul
viuimus: VVee receiue togeather: VVee drinke togeather: bicauſe we liue togeather.
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge any Promiſſe of Conſtancie, made to the contrarie, yet,
I truſte, M. Hardinge of his courteſie wil beleeue, either S. Chryſoſtome, or S.
Auguſtine, or Theophylacte, or Paſchaſius, or Lorichius, or Tapper, or his
Nevve Doctours, or the Olde, or his owne, or others. Otherwiſe, if he be
fully determined to beleeue noman, it is reaſon, that noman beleeue him.
                  
                     Perhaps he wil ſaie, Notwithſtandinge Chriſtes woordes be plaine, yet they
are not of force ſufficient, to binde vs for euer. For ſo writeth Cardinal Cuſanus,
Scripturae ad tempus adaptantur,Nicola. Cuſanus Epiſt. 2. ad Bohaemos. & variè intelliguntur: ita vt vno tempore ſecundum
currentem Eccleſiae ritum exponantur: mutato verà ritu, iterum ſententia mutetur:
The Scriptures are applied to the ſtates of diuers times, and ſo are taken
in diuers ſenſes: So that at one time they are expounded accordinge to the currente order
of the Churche: But the order of the Churche beinge changed, the ſenſe of the Scripture is
like wiſe changed. So S.
                      Auguſtine ſaithe of the Heretiques the Manichees: Expendunt
iſta,Auguſt. contra Epiſt. Parmeniani. Lib. 3 Cap. 2 Hilar. De Trinitaae, Lib. 9. non in ſtatera aequa Diuinarum Scripturarum, ſed in ſtatera doloſa Conſuetudinum
ſuarum: They weighe theſe maters, not in the equal balance of the Diuine
Scriptures, but in ye deceiteful Balance of their ovvne Cuſtomes. Of ye like ſorte of Her
                           •
                        tiques
S. Hilarie ſaith, Qui ea, quae Scripta ſunt, negas, quid teſtat, niſi vt ea, quae non

ſcripta ſunt, credas? Seeinge thou denieſt the thinges, that be written in the Scriptures, what
remaineth there, but that thou muſt beleeue ſutche thinges, as be not written in the Scriptures?
                  
                  But where haue theſe menne the Inſtitution of theire Halfe Communion?
Who ordeined it? Who commaunded it? What Apoſtle, what Ancient Doctour,
what Holy Father euer vſed it?M. Hardinge. Pag. 48. b. Leo, Sermon. 4. De Quadrageſima. M. Hardinge him ſelfe is forced to confeſſe, by the
reporte of Leo, that the Firſte knowen Diuiſers, & Authours of it, were the olde
Heretiques called the Manichees. Sutche is the Inſtitution, and Antiquitie of
their Doctrine. It ſprange firſte of Hereſie, and was founded by Heretiques.
                  Touchinge Gelaſius, I haue already in my Former Replie ſaide ſo mutche, as
then vnto me ſeemed ſufficient. The woordes be plaine yenough of them ſelfe, and
neede no Commentarie:De Co
                           •
                        s. Diſt. 2. Comperimus. 
                     Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris a
                           •
                        ceantur.
Quia diuiſio vnius eiuſdem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Myſterij ſine grandi ſacrilegio non poteſt peruenire:
Either let them receiue the vvhole Sacramentes (in Bothe Kindes:) or els let them be
driuen from the vvhole.
                     
                  
                  Farther M. Hardinge ſaithe, God doothe knowe, how mutche, howe often, and how earneſtly
the Catholique Churche exhorteth her Children, to prepare them ſelues to receiue their Maker.
O M. Hardinge, why ſhould you ſo fondely mocke ye world with ſo manifeſt folies?
By what woordes, by what examples exhorte you them? When euer ſaide you, as
Chryſoſtome ſaith vnto the people?Chryſoſtom. ad Popul. Antioch. Homil. 61. In Epiſt ad Epheſ. Homul. 3. Departe yée hence: yée haue nomore right to
ſtāde here, then Heathens, & Infidelles: yée are VVicked: ye are shameleſſe: ye are
Impudente, that ſtande by, & wil not Communicate. And if ye Catholique Churche
doo ſo often, & ſo earneſtly exhorte her Children, how is it then, that y• Pope, & his
Cardinalles doo ſo ſeldome Communicate, ſcarcely once through the yéere? Maie
wée thinke, that the Pope, & his Cardinalles be not the Children of the Churche?
                  Laſte of al, ye ſaie, ye exhorte the people to receiue their Maker I beſeche you,
M. Hardinge, what Scripture, what Father, what Doctour euer taught you thus
to ſaie? The Sacramente is a Sacramente: it is not God. It is the Breade of our
Lorde,
                     Auguſt. in Iohānem, tract. 59. Chryſoſt. in Iohan. Homil. 3. as S. Auguſtine ſaithe: it is not our Lorde. It is a Creature corruptible:
it is not the Maker of Heauen, and Earthe. Accurſed is he, that geueth the name,
and glorie of God vnto a Creature, that is no God. S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Nolimus
quaeſo Creatorem cum Creatura confundere: Ne illud audiamus, Seruierunt Creaturae
potiùs, quàm Creatori: Let vs not confounde the Creature, and the Creatour bothe togeather:
Leſte it be ſaide of vs, They haue honoured a Creature more then their Maker.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 13. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wee affirme that Breade and Wine are holy and heauenly Myſteries
of the Body and Bloude of Chriſte, and that by them Chriſte
him ſelfe, beinge the true Breade of Eternal Life, is ſo preſently geuen
vnto vs, as that by Faithe wee verily receiue his Body and his
Bloude. Yet ſaie wee not this ſo, as though wee thought, that the
Nature and Subſtance of the Breade and VVine is clerely chāged,
and goeth to nothinge: as many haue dreamed in theſe later times,
& yet could neuer agree emōge them ſelues vpon their owne dreames.
For that was not Chriſtes meaninge, that the vvheaten Breade
ſhould laie aparte his owne Nature, and receiue a certaine newe Diuinitie:
but that he might rather chaunge vs, and (to vſe Theophylactes
woordes)In Iohan. Ca. 6. De Sacr. Lib. 4. Cap. 4. might tranſfourme vs into his Body. For what can
be ſaide more plainely, then that, whiche Ambroſe ſaithe, Breade and
VVine remaine ſtil the ſame, thei vvere before: and yet are
changed into an other thinge: Or that whiche Gelaſius ſaithe,

                  The Subſtance of the Breade,
                  Subſtance. Accidentes. 
                  or the Nature of the VVine ceaſeth
not to be: Or that, whiche Theodoretus ſaithe, After the
Conſecration,
                  In Dialogis 1. &. 2. 
                  the Myſtical Signes doo not caſte of their ovvne
propre Nature: for thei remaine ſtil in their Former Subſtance,
Forme, & Kinde: Or that, whiche Auguſtine ſaith,In Sermon. ad Infantes. 
                  That, vvhiche
ye ſee, is the Breade, & cuppe, & ſo our eies tel vs: but that, vvhiche
your Faithe requireth to be taught, is this: The Bread is the Body
of Chriſte, and the Cuppe is his Bloude: Or that, whiche Origen
ſaithe:In Matth. Homil. 15. 
                  The Breade, vvhiche is ſanctified by the vvoorde of God, as
touchinge the material Subſtāce thereof, goeth into the belly, and
is caſte out into the priuie: Or y•, whiche Chriſte him ſelfe ſaide, not
onely after the bleſſinge of the Cuppe, but alſo after he had Miniſtred
the Communion: I vvil drinke nomore of this fruite of the Vine.
It is wel knowen, that the fruite of the Vine is Wine, & not Bloude.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  In this Sacramente,VVhat is that vve cal holy and heauenly Myſteries. after Conſecration, the Subſtance of Breade and VVine beinge tourned into
the Subſtance of the Body and Bloude of Chriſte, theVntruthe. No Doctour, or Father euer taught ſutche vaine fo
                           •
                         lies. out warde Formes of Breade and VVine, whiche
remaine, are the Sacramentes of Holy thinges, the Body and Bloude of Chriſte.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  In euery natural thinge, twoo thinges are ſpecially to be conſidered: the Subſtance,
& the Accidente, or, as M. Hardinge calleth it, the outvvarde Fourme. For
example, In Breade, the Material thinge, that ſéedeth vs, and is changed into the
Bloude, and nourriſhement of our bodies, is called the Subſtance of the Breade:
The whiteneſſe, the Roundeneſſe, y• Thickneſſe, the Swéeteneſſe, & other the like,
that are perceiued outwardly by our ſenſes, are called Accidentes. Now ſaithe M.
Hardinge, for as mutche as the Subſtance of the Breade, & Wine is remooued by
Conſecration, & for that cauſe cannot be the Sacrament: therefore the Accidentes,
and Fourmes, whiche remaine, muſte needes be thought to be the Sacramentes.
And ſo vpon a falſe Poſition, as ſhal appeare, he laieth the fundation of al his Doctrine:
by the olde Rule, I trowe, that he learned ſometimes in his Sophiſtrie, Ex
Impoſsibili ſequitur quodlibet: Of an Impoſsibilitie ye maie conclude, what ye liſte: euen
as aptely, and as truely, as ſomme haue ſaide, If Chriſte were not Chriſte, then
Saincte Patrike ſhoulde be Chriſte.
                  
                  If M. Hardinge had alleged, either Scripture, or Doctour, or Father, or Councel,
or any other Authoritie biſide his owne, he might happily haue benne beléeued.
                  
                     To this whole fanſie, gentle Reader, in my Former Replie, I haue made a ſeueral
anſweare. Verily Chriſe ſaithe,
                     Matthae. 26. Luc. 22. 1. Corinth. 10. 1. Corinth. 11. Cyprian in Oratio. Dominicam. Non bibam ex hoc fructu vitis: I wil nomore
drinke, (not of theſe Accidentes, but) of this, generation, and fruite, (and Subſtance)
of the Vine. S. Paule ſaithe, Panis, quem frangimus: (Not the Fourmes,
or Accidentes, but) the
                      Breade, that wee breake. And againe,
                      Quoties manducabitis
Panem hunc: As often as ye ſhal eate (not theſe Accidentes, but
                     ) this Breade. S. Cyprian
ſaithe of the ſame, I anis ex multorum granorum adunatione congeſtus:
Breade moulded, and made of many cornes. I doubte not, but M. Hardinge wil confeſſe,
that cornes yéelde Flower, and
                     Auguſtin. De Fide ad Petrum Ca. 19. Cyrill. in Iohan. Lib. 4. Cap. 24. Subſtance: and not onely Fourmes, and Accidentes.
S. Auguſtine calleth the Holy Myſterie, Sacramentum Panis, & Vini:
The Sacramente (not of
                      Fourmes, and Accidentes, as M. Hardinge ſaithe, but) of
                     
Breade, and VVine, Cyrillus ſaith, Credentibus Diſcipulis fragmenta Panis dedit:

                     Chriſte gaue vnto his Diſciples beleeuinge in him,
                     In, and By. peeces of Breade, (not peeces of Accidentes).
                  But M. Hardinge, hauinge in his fantaſie remoued the whole Subſtance of the
Breade, in ſtéede thereof hath brought vs in Holy Fourmes, Holy Shevves, & Holy
Accidentes. His Accidentes be the Myſteries of Heauenly thinges: His Accidentes
be the Inſtrumentes of Goddes Grace: His Accidentes be the cauſes of
Remiſſion of Sinne. Wée breake Accidentes: Wée eate Accidentes: Wée drinke
Accidentes. wée are fedde with Accidentes: The Subſtance of our Bodies is increaſed
with Accidentes, And, to be ſhorte, he woorketh al his Miracles by the
Power of his Accidentes.
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhy be ye ſo lothe to ſpeake,The Defenders refuſe to ſpeake as the Church ſpeaketh. as the Church ſpeaketh, that in this bleſſed Sacramēt we receiue the
Body of Chriſte? VVhy had ye rather ſaie after aVntruthe. For this phraſe is vſed commonly of the Ancient Fathers: as ſhal appeare. ſtraunge manaer, that by Breade and VVine Chriſt
him ſelfe is ſo preſently geuen vnto vs, as that by Faithe we verely receiue his Body and his Bloud?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     I neuer thought, it had benne ſo great an Hereſie, to ſpeake, as the Apoſtles of
Chriſte, & the Learned Doctours of the Churche haue ſpoken before vs. S. Paule
ſaithe,
                     Roman. 6. Coloſſ. 2. Hieronym. De Corp. & Sanguine Chriſti. Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 50. Cyrill. in Iohan. Lib. 11. Cap. 27. Hilarius De Trinit. Lib. 8. Conſepulti ſumus cum Chriſto Per Baptiſmum in mortem: Wee are buried togeather
with Chriſte By Baptiſme vnto death. S.
                      Hierome ſaith. Per Aquam Baptiſmi,
vel per Ignem Spiritus Sancti Aeterni illius Panis Corpus efficitur: By the Water of
Baptiſme, or By the Fier of the Holy Ghoſte, he is made the Body of y• Euerlaſtinge Breade.
S.
                      Auguſtine ſaithe, Habes Chriſtum in praeſenti Per Fidem: In praeſenti Per Baptiſmatis
Sacramentum: In praeſenti Per Altaris Cibum, & Potum: Thou haſte Chriſte in
Preſence By Faithe: In Preſence By the Sacrament of Baptiſme: In Preſence By the Meate,
and Drinke of the Aultar. S.
                      Cyril ſaithe, Corporaliter Filius Per Benedictionem
Myſticam nobis vnitur, vt Homo: The Sonne of God By the Myſtical Bleſſinge is vnited
vnto vs, as Man. S.
                      Hilarie ſaithe, Chriſtus eſt in nobis Per Sacramentorum Myſterium:
Chriſte is in vs By the Myſterie of the Sacramentes.
                  
                  
                     And, leſte M. Hardinge ſhoulde thinke, to take any greate aduantage by theſe
woordes thus vttered, as he, & others of his ſide haue often donne, S. Auguſtine in
moſte plaine wiſe expoundeth the ſame: Si ad ipſas res Viſibiles, quibus Sacramenta
tractantur,Auguſt. De Baptiſmo contra Donatiſt. Lib. 3. Cap. 10. animum conferamus, quis neſciat, eas eſſe corruptibiles? Si autem ad id, quod
Per illas res agitur, quis non videat, non poſſe corrumpi? If wee beholde the Viſible
Creatures, (as the Breade, the Wine, the Water) wherein the Sacramentes are miniſtred,
who ſeeth not, that they be
                        
                      corruptible? But if wee conſider the thinges, that are
wrought thereby, who ſeeth not, that they cannot be corrupted?
                  Now iudge thou, good Chriſtian Reader, how Childiſhely theſe quarrelles be
ſought againſte vs, without cauſe: & what Myſtical Catholique eares M. Hardinge
hath, that cannot abide the phraſes, and ſpeaches of the Anciente Fathers.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If a man ſhould preſſe you with your owne woordes,VVhat Preſence of Chriſte in the Sacrament doo the Defenders acknovvledge. and demaunde, what maner of Preſence ye
teache, affirminge Chriſte him ſelfe preſently to be geuen: I weene, ye would be founde haltinge. For
how ſaie ye? If Chriſte be preſently geuen vnto vs by Breade and VVine in the Sacramente, then is
Chriſte preſent. If he be preſent, whiche ye muſte needes graunt, tell vs further, howe is he preſent:
accordinge to the Subſtance of his Body, or by Grace, or accordinge to the Maieſtie of his Godhed? The
firſt, what ſhiftes ſo euer ye ſeeke, ye wil not graunt. And therefore is your owne Apoſtle Martin
Luther at fowle defiance with your maiſters, Zuinglius, Occolampadius, Caluine, and you,
and ſo be his Diſciples, Ioachimus VVeſtphalus, Epinus, Pomeran, He ſhuſius, Brentius, Illyricus, and many
others, as ye knowe. If ye wil ſaie, he is Preſent by his Grace, ſo is he Preſente with al good men:

and that not onely when the Sacrament is miniſtred, but alſo at al other times.Abſente in Body. Againe, how can ye
make good, that by Faithe we receiue his Body, and Bloud? By Faith we receiue Grace, and the Merites
of his Death ſuffered in his Body with ſheddinge of his Bloud. But the Body and Bloude it ſelfe, that
is, the veryVntruthes, tvvo togeather. For properly, and in Subſtāce, vvee receiue it not. Reade the Anſvveare. Subſtance of his Body and Bloude: tel vs, how by Faithe (Vntruthes, tvvo togeather. For properly, and in Subſtāce, vvee receiue it not. Reade the Anſvveare. properly and truely to ſpeake)
as who ſhould ſate by Faithe made Preſent,The Body of Chriſte not receiued by Faithe onely. we receiue it? FurthermoreVVe anſvveare, It is a peeuiſhe queſtion. what haue ye to anſweare
to this queſtion? If wee receiue the Body and Bloud of Chriſte verely by Faithe (for ſo ye ſaie) we demaūde
whether we receiue the ſame by Faithe onely without the Body, or with the office of our Body.
If thoffice of our Body be required to the receiuinge of Chriſtes Body in the Sacrament, as Chriſte him
ſelfeVntruthe. For Chriſte meante no ſuche thing, as appeareth by the Fathers. certainely meante (for els how obeyed the Diſciples his commaundement, to whome he ſaide at
his Supper, Take and eate, this is my Body, likewiſe of the Cuppe, Take and drinke, whiche cannot
be donne but by the ſeruice of the Body) hereof then it foloweth, that his Body is verely preſent. Now
that it is not receiued by Faithe onely, thus we proue it by your owne Doctrine:A Sophiſtical, and a childiſhe cauil. Reade the Anſvveare. It is ſo receiued▪ as
it is Preſent: but it is Preſent by Bread and VVine (as ye ſaie,) Ergo it is receiued by Bread and
VVine. To conclude, if by Breade and VVine, then not by Faithe onely. VVil ye geue me leaue to ſaie,
what I thinke of you? Verely it ſeemeth by your vaine ianglinge, that as S. Paule ſaieth of ſuche
other like you, ye vnderſtande not, what ye ſpeake, nor whereof ye affirme.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     In what ſenſe wée maie truely ſaie, Chriſte is either Preſente with vs, or Abſente
from vs, the mater is not ſo doubteful, or dangerous to be anſweared: onleſſe
M. Hardinge haue foregotten the Articles of his Créede. For thus wée are taught
to beéeue, Chriſte is Aſcended into Heauē, and fitte that the Right Hande of God. Whiche
Article S.
                        
                      Auguſtine expoundeth thus:
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 57. ad Dardan. Noli dubitare ibi nunc eſſe hominem Chriſtum
Ieſum, vnde venturus eſt: memoriter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      recole, & fideliter tene Chriſtianam
Confeſsionem, Quoniam Reſurrexit à mortuis: Aſcendit ad Coelum: Sedet ad Dextram
Patris: nec aliunde, quàm inde venturus eſt ad viuos mortuo
                        •
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iudicandos: Doubte
thou not, but Chriſte Jeſus, as Man, is there nowe, from whence he ſhal comme: And heare
thou wel in minde, and faithefully beleeue the Chriſtian Confeſsion, That Chriſte is Riſen
againe from the Deade: And Aſcended into Heauen: And Sitteth at the Right Hande of
the Father: And that he ſhal comme againe from thence, and from no vvhere els,
to Judge the quicke, and the Deade. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Homo, ſecundum Corpus,
in Coelo eſt:Auguſt. in Iohan tracta. 31. & de loco migrat: &, cùm ad alium locum venerit, in eo loco,
vnde venit, non eſt: Chriſte, as Man, accordinge to his Body, is in Heauen: and
paſſeth from place to place: and, vvhen he commeth to an other place, he is not
in the other place, from vvhence he came. Likewiſe againe, Secundum Praeſentiam
Maieſtatis,Auguſt. in Iohan. tractat. 50. ſemper habemus Chriſtum nobiſcum: Secundum Praeſentiam Carnis,
rectè dictum eſt Diſcipulis, Me autem non ſemper habebitis: Accordinge to the
Preſence of his Maieſtie, wee haue Chriſte euermore with vs: But accordinge to the Preſence
of the Fleaſhe, it is true, that Chriſte ſaide to his Diſciples, Me you ſhal not haue
alvvaies vvith you.
                  
                     So ſaithe the Holy Father, and Martyr Vigilius,Vigilius contra Eutychen, Lib. 1. Del Filius, ſecundum Humanitatem
ſuam, receſsit à nobis: Secundum Diuinitatem, ait, Ecce ego vobiſcum
ſum vſque ad Conſummationem ſaeculi: The Sonne of God, accordinge to his Manhoode,
is gonne from vs: But accordinge to his Godhed, he ſaithe, Beholde, I am with
you vntil the ende of the worlde. And againe,
                      Et nobiſcum eſt, & non eſt nobiſcum:
quia quos reliquit Humanitate, non Deſeruit Diuinitate: Chriſte is with vs: and yet
he is not vvith vs: For vvhome he leafte, touchinge his Humaine Nature, or
his Body, touchinge his Godhead, he leafte them not. And againe,
                      Verbum vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
eſt: Caro autem eius vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      non eſt: The Woorde, (or Godhed of Chriſte) is euerywhere,
but his Fleaſhe, or Body is not eueryvvhere. So ſaithe S. Cyril. Etſi
Corpore abfuero,Cyrill. in Iohannem. Li. 10. Ca. 7. Praeſens tamen ero, vt Deus: Although I be Abſente as touchinge
my Body: yet, as God, I wil be Preſente.
                  
                  
                     
                     And to leaue an infinite number of other Learned, and Catholique Fathers,
                     Faithe Eateth.
                     that haue written the like,
                     Origen. in Matthae. Homi. 33. Origen ſaithe thus: Secundum Diuinitatis Naturam
non peregrinatur à nobis: Peregrinatur ſecundum diſpenſationem Corporis,
quod ſuſcepit: Chriſte, accordinge to his Godhed, is not a ſtranger to vs: But he is a ſtranger,
accordinge to the diſpenſation of the Body, that he receiued.
                  
                  
                     Thus is Chriſte bothe Abſente, and Preſente: Preſente in Maieſtie, Abſente
in Body. And in this ſenſe Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. 1. Corinth. Homil. 6. Semper nobiſcum eſt Chriſtus:
Neque enim, niſi nobiſcum eſſet Chriſtus, ſupereſſet Eccleſia: Chriſte is euermore Preſente
with vs. For onleſſe he were preſente, the Churche of God coulde not continewe.
                  
                  
                     But M. Hardinge ſaithe, Howe can yee make good, that by Faithe wee receiue his
Body, and Bloude? By Faithe wee receiue Grace, &c. This queſtion ſhoulde rather haue
benne demaunded of S. Auguſtine, and of other Learned Doctours, and Ancient
Fathers of the Churche.
                     Auguſtin. in Iohānem, tract. 25. Tertull. De Reſurrectione Carnis. 
                     How coulde S. Auguſtine ſaie, Quid paras dentem, &
ventrem? Crede, & Manducaſti: What prepareſt thou thy toothe, and thy Belly? Beleeue:
and thou haſte eaten. How coulde Tertullian ſaie, Chriſtus auditu deuorandus
eſt: intellectu ruminandus eſt: & Fide digerendus eſt? Chriſte muſte
be deuoured by Hearinge: chevved by vnderſtandinge: digeſted by Faithe.
                  
                     How coulde Origen ſaie,
                     Origen. in Matthae. Tracta. 26. Cyprian. De Coena Domini. sanguis Teſamenti infuſus eſt in Corda noſtra?
The Bloude of the Teſtamente is povvred into our hartes. Howe coulde S. Cyprian
ſaie, Eſus huius Carnis eſt quaedam auiditas, & quoddam defiderium manendi in
Chriſto? Quod eſt eſca Carni, hoc eſt Animae Fides. Non dentes ad mordendum acuimus:
ſed Fide ſincera Panem Sanctum frangimus: The Eatinge of this Fleaſhe
is a certaine greedineſſe, and a certaine deſire to tarrie in Chriſte. That meate is vnto our
Fleaſhe, the ſame is Faithe vnto our Soules. Wee ſharpen not out teeth to bite withal:
But vvith pure Faithe vvee breake this Holy Breade. To be ſhorte, howe
could S. Auguſtine ſaie,
                     Auguſt. in Iohan. tracta. 26. Credere in Chriſtum, hoc eſt manducare Panem Viuum?
To Beleeue in Chriſte, that is the Eatinge of the Breade of Life. And againe,
Nolite parare fauces, ſed Cor: Prepare not your mouthes (to Eate of this
Breade, but) prepare your
                      Hartes. To theſe & other like Ancient Catholique Fathers
M. Hardinge ſhould haue ſaide, How can ye make good, that by Faithe we receiue
Chriſtes Body, and Bloude? Thus they witneſſe: thus they write: thus they ſaie: and
therefore, onleſſe M. Hardinge can finde vntruthe in theire woordes, they make
it good.
                  
                  
                     But to force onwarde his mater, he ſaithe: Properly, and truely to ſpeake,
howe can wee Eate Chriſtes Body by Faithe? Here it might haue pleaſed M.
Hardinge to remember, that theſe phraſes, To Eate Chriſte: To Drinke Chriſte:
To Digeſte Chriſte: To be Fedde vvith Chriſte: To dvvelle in Chriſte: To be
cladde vvith Chriſte: To be grafte in Chriſte: and other the like, are not plaine,
ordinarie, vſual, and Common Speaches: but Myſtically, and Couertly vttered
vnder a Figure: thereby to géeue vs to vnderſtande, that Chriſte is our Spiritual
Meate: our Spiritual Drinke: our Spiritual Suſtenance: our Spiritual houſe:
our Spiritual robe: and our Spiritual ſtocke. Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Niſi manducaueritis Carnem Filij Hominis, & Sanguinem biberitis, non habebitis Vitam
in vobis.Auguſt. De Doctrina Chriſtiana, Lib. 3. ca. 16. Facinus, vel Flagitium videtur iubere. Figura ergo eſt, Praecipiens Paſſioni
Domini eſſe communicandum, & ſuauiter, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vtiliter recondendum in memoria,
quòd pro nobis Caro eius Crucifixa, & vulnerata ſit: Onleſſe ye eate the Fleaſhe of the
Sonne of Man, and Drinke his Bloude, ye ſhal haue no life in you. He ſeemeth by theſe
woordes to commaunde vs to doo an horrible wickedneſſe. (For it is an horrible mater to
eate Mannes Fleaſhe, or to drinke Mannes Bloude.
                     ) Therefore this is a Figure,
(or manner of ſpeache) commaundinge vs to be partakers of Chriſtes Paſsion, and comfortably
to laie vp in our
                      minde, that his Fleaſhe was Crucified, and wounded for our ſakes.
                  
                  
                     
                     So ſaith Gratian▪
                     De Conſe. Diſt. 2. Species. 
                     touching the ſame, Quidam nō improbabiliter exponunt Carnis, &
Sanguinis Veritatem, ipſam earundem rerum efficientiam, id eſt, Remiſsionem Peccatorum:
Touchinge theſe woordes, The Truthe of Chriſtes Fleaſhe, and Bloude, ſomme
menne not vnaptely vnderſtande thereby, the effecte, and force of Chriſtes Fleaſhe, and
Bloude, that is to ſaie, The Remiſsion of our Sinnes. And ſo S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     
Lauerunt Stolas ſuas in Sanguine Agni,Augu. in Apoc. Homil. 6. hoc eſt, in Gratia Dei per Chriſtum: They
waſhte theire cotes in the Bloude of the Lambe, that is to ſaie, in the Grace of God
through Chriſte. This Grace flowinge from Chriſtes Body vpon the Croſſe, and
geuen to the Faithful in the Miniſtration of the Holy Myſteries, oftentimes beareth
the name of Chriſtes Body, and is the grounde, and Subſtance of the Sacrament:
And who ſo euer is Partetaker of this Grace, is alſo Partetaker of Chriſtes
Body. Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaith,
                      Cùm eſſent omnibus Communia Sacramenta,Aug. in Pſal. 77.
non Communis erat omnibus Gratia, quae eſt Virtus Sacramentorum:
Whereas the Sacramentes were common to al, yet the Grace thereof was not common to al.
And that is the Povver, and ſtrength of the Sacramentes. Likewiſe S. Ambroſe,
In ſimilitudinem quidem accipis Sacramentum: Sed Verae Naturae Gratiam, Virtutem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
conſequeris:Ambroſ. De Sacramen. li. 6. ca. 1 
                     Yee take the Sacramente in Repreſentation, or Remembrance: But ye
obteine thereby the Grace and Povver of Chriſtes Very Nature.
                  
                     Here M. Harding once againe moueth a very néedeleſſe queſtion. VVee demaunde,
ſaithe he, whether wee receiue the ſame Body of Chriſte by Faithe onely, without our Body, or with
the office of our Body. Any childe might ſoone be hable to aſſoile this reddle. Rabanus
Maurus ſaithe,
                     Rabanus Maurus Lib. 1. Ca. 31. 
                     as it is alleged before, Sacramentum ore percipitur: Virtute
verò Sacramenti interior homo ſatiatur: The Sacramente is receiued with the bodily
mouth: but vvithe the vertue of the Sacramente, (whiche is the Body of
Chriſte) the Inner man (that is, not the Body, but the Soule) is filled. So ſaithe
Auguſtine, Cùm videbitis Filium Hominis alcendentem, vbi erat priùs, certè vel tunc
videbitis,Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 27. quia non eo modo, quo putatis, erogat Corpus ſuum: certè vel tunc intelligetis,
quia Gratia eius non conſumitur morſibus: When ye ſhal ſee the Sonne of
Man Aſcendinge thither, where he was before, then at the leaſte, ye ſhal ſee, that he geeueth
not his Body in ſutche ſorte, as you imagine: Then ſhal you vnderſtande, that his
Grace is not conſumed vvith bitte of mouthe.Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 26. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Qui manducat
intus, non foris: qui manducat in corde, non qui premit dente: He that eateth the Chriſtes
Body in vvardly, not that eateth (the Sacramente
                     ) outvvardly: He that eateth the
Body of Chriſte it ſelfe in his harte, not that preſſeth (the Sacramente
                     ) vvith his
toothe.
                  M. Hardinge argueth farther, Chriſtes Body is ſo receiued, as it is Preſente: But it is preſente
by Bread and VVine (ye ſaie) Ergo it is receiued by Bread, and VVine: To conclude, if by Bread,
and VVine, then not by Faithe onely. If M. Hardinge had better conſidered the Rules
of his Olde Sophiſtrie, he might ſoone haue ſéene the wantes, and deformities of
theis reaſon. Emongeſt children it is called Ignoratio Elenchi: Whiche is the
Simpleſt Fallax of al the reſte.
                  It is true, that of our parte, it is not either our hande,, or our mouthe, but
Faith onely, that receiueth the Body of Chriſte: but the ſame Body of Chriſte is
offered, and repreſented vnto our Faithe by meane of the Sacramentes. Wée
ſpeake of ſutche Inſtrumentes of Receiuinge, as are of our ſelfe, and be within vs:
M. Hardinge anſweareth of the Sacramentes, that be external Inſtrumentes,
and are wholy without vs. So in Baptiſme, notwithſtandinge wée haue Chriſte
Preſente of our parte Onely by Faithe▪
                      yet S. Auguſtine ſaithe, as it is ſaide before,
Habemus Chriſtum in Preſenti per Baptiſmatis Sacramentum: Wee haue Chriſte
Preſently by the Sacramente of Baptiſme.
                      Thus is Chriſte Preſente vnto vs: Of his
parte, Onely by his Grace: Of our parte, Onely by our Faithe: By the Sacramentes,

                     Onely,
                     Certainetie of Doctrine. as by meane of outwarde Inſtrumentes, to moue our ſenſes.
This light, and childiſhe errour, as I haue ſaide before, is called Ignoratio Elenchi,
and therefore ſéemeth to procede of Ignorance. M. Hardinge ſhould haue better
examined the force of his Argumentes, before he thus ſuddainely ſente them
abroade.
                  Touchinge the mater it ſelfe, it is not the Bodily mouthe, but Faithe alone,
that receiueth, and embraceth Chriſtes Body. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Panis iſte Interioris
Hominis quaerit eſuriem.
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 26. 
                     Qui credit in eum, manducat: This Breade requireth
the hunger of the Inner Man. He that beleeuth in him, eateth his Body.
                     
                  
                  This is no tangling, as you ſaie, M. Hardinge: It is the Auncient Catholique
Doctrine of y• Churche of God. Wée be wel aſſured of it, & knowe certainely, what
wée ſaie. But touching y• certainetie of your Doctrine in this point, I haue briefely
touched it in my Former Replie, ſo mutche, as I then thought might ſéeme ſufficiēte.
Somme of you hold, y• Chriſtes Body paſſeth down into y• ſtomake: Somme,
y• it entreth onely into the Mouthe, & goeth no further: Somme others ſaie, Quàm
citò Species terūtur dentibus,
                     De Conſe. Diſt. 2. Tribus gradib. In Gloſſa. 
                     tam citò in Coelum rapitur Corpus Chriſti: As ſoone as
the Fourmes of the Breade be grated with the teeth, ſtreight waie the Body of Chriſte is
caught vp into Heauen.
                      An other of you ſaithe, A Mouſe eateth the Body of Chriſte:
                     
An other ſaithe, Nay; a Mouſe cannot eate it: Peter Lombarde,
                      the Grande Maiſter
of al your Schoole, is piteouſly confounded in the caſe, and cannot imagine,
what to ſaie.4. Senten. diſt. 13. For after he had him ſelfe moued the queſtion, Quid igitur ſumit Mus,
vel quid manducat? What is it then, that the Mouſe receiueth, or what eateth it?
                      He anſweareth,
Deus nouit: Novve God knovveth: (As for my parte, I cannot tel
                     ).
Sutche be your Doctours, M. Hardinge: ſutche is your Doctrine. Therefore, to
conclude with your owne woordes, it appeareth by your agréemente, and your anſweares,
ye vnderſtande not the thinges ye ſpeake of: but both
                        •
                      affirme, and denie,
ye knowe not what.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As ye procede foorth, ye geue warninge to your Readers, not to take you ſo, as though ye held with
tranſubſtantiation. And here ye ſpeake thereof as beſt becommeth your ſcoffinge ſprite, callinge it a
dreame of men of later times, whereof they coulde neuer yet agree within them ſelues. By whiche
woordes your eloquence hath ſet foorth your ſpite and lieing at once. For albeit the terme of tranſubſtantiation
beMarke this Antiquitie. This Councel vvas holden tvvelue-hundred and fifteene yeeres after Chriſte. of no greater antiquitie,Tranſubſtā
                        tiatio
                           •
                        . then the Councel Laterane vnder Innocentius the thirde,
where it was by the Holy Ghoſte, and the Fathers there deuiſed, as very fitte for opening of the Truthe
impugned by the Berengarians: yet is the Doctrine thereof no leſſe Auncient, then the Goſpel it ſelfe.
For maugre the malice of the Deuil, and of al the Sacramentaries, the Olde Truthe ſhal preuaile, by
whiche we are taught, that, whiche was Breade, by the Myſtical bleſsinge to beAs in a Myſterie, or Sacramente: but not in Subſtance: Othervviſe it is a greate Vntruthe. made Chriſtes Body:
and that whiche was wine, to be made his Bloude, as I haue other wheres ſufficiently declared. And
the Churche hathVntruthe manifeſte, As ſhal appeare. alwaies hereupon perfitely accorded, touchinge the Subſtance: though certaine
schoolemen in their Scholaſtical Diſputations, where oftentimes victorie is ſought, and Faith not impugned,
about diſcuſsion of ſomme ſchoole point, haue without preiudice of our belefe diſagreede.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  As for the ſcoffes, and ſpites, and lies, ye ſpeake of, M. Hardinge, let him haue
them, that hath beſte deſerued them. Then verily, without greate wronge, you
cannot loſe them.
                  Touching your New Fātaſie of Tranſubſtantiation, whether it be a dreame, or
no, & whether the dreamers of it them ſelues were euer yet hable, rightly to expoūd
theire owne dreame, it appeareth partely by your owne Confeſſion. Ye graunte,
the name and terme thereof was neuer knowen, or hearde of in al the Worlde,

vntil your late Councel of Laterane, holdē in Rome vnder Pope Innòcentius the
thirde,Tranſubſtantiation Nevve, & doubteful. in the yeere of our Lorde a thouſande two hundred and fiftéene,Anno. 1215. in the time
of Kinge Iohn the Kinge of England, and neuer before. So longe the Churche
of God was hable wel to ſtande without your Tranſubſtantiation.
                  
                  And al be it ye tel vs, notwithſtandinge the newneſſe of the name, yet neuertheleſſe
the Doctrine thereof hath ſtil continewed in the Churche, and hathe benne
euermore receiued, and confeſſed of al the Faitheful: and that maugre the malice
of the Diuel, and of al the Sacramentaries, it is as Ancient, as the Goſpel, or as
Chriſte him ſelfe: Yet of y• other ſide ye cōfeſſe plainely, that for the ſpace of twelue
hundred yéeres, and more, Roman wiſte, by what name to calle it.
                  But for as mutche, as you thinke it lawful for you to auouthe, and affirme,
what you liſte, true, or falſe, without controlmente: whereas ye ſaie, this late
Faithe of yours is as Auncient, as the Goſpel, knowe you, that ſomme of the beſte
learned of your owne ſide, haue ſaide, It is a nevve Pointe in Religion: and therefore
not ſo Auncient, as you ſeeme to make it: It is a doubteful Concluſion: and
therefore no Faithe at al.Cutberbertue Tonſtallus▪ De Euchariſtia, Lib. 1. Pag. 46, D. Tonſtal thereof ſaithe thus, De modo, quo id fieret,
fortaſſe ſatius erat▪ Curioſum quen
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſuae relinquere Coniecturae: ſicut liberū fuit ante
Concilium Lateranum: Of the manner, and meane, howe this might be
                      (whether by
Tranſubſtantiation, or otherwiſe) perhaps it had benne better to leaue euery man, that
woulde be Curious, to his owne Coniecture: as before the Councel of Laterane it
vvas leafte at libertie.
                      You ſaie, it is as Auncient as the Goſpel: D. Tonſtal ſaith,
It is but new, and came in twelue hundred yéeres, and more, after the Goſpel: You
ſaie it is the Catholique Faith: D. Tonſtal ſaithe, It is a Coniecture, or a Gheaſſe
(whiche differeth not mutch from a dreame) and that before the ſaide late Councel
of Laterane, noman vvas bounde to beleeue it. And here it maie pleaſe you to
conſider indifferently with your ſelfe: It it were leafte at Libertie, as D. Tonſtal
ſaithe, for any man either to receiue it, or to refuſe it, as he thought good, how could
it then be the Catholique Faithe? If it were the Catholique Faithe, as you ſaie,
& that maugre the malice of the Diuel, howe then could it ſo many hundred yeeres
be leafte at libertie?
                  
                  Hereof ye ſaie, ye haue written ſufficiently otherwheres. Al this I graunt: your
Bookes are knowen. How be it, if you woulde haue written nomore but Truethe▪
ye might haue ſaued mutche time, and ſpared ſomme paper. But if it ſhal not
miſlike you, once againe more aduiſedly to viewe the ſame, ye ſhal finde in the very
Firſte Diuiſion thereof thrée greate Vntruthes togeather, al within the ſpace of
Foureteene lines.
                  Nowe whether your fantaſie of Tranſubſtantiation be a Dreame, or no, by
the Conſtancie, and Certainetie thereof, and by the agréemente of your Doctours,
y• founded it firſte▪ it maie appeare. Petrus Lombardus, y• onely General of al this
Camp,Senten 4. diſt. 11. Si autem, &c. herof vſeth theſe ſpeaches: Quibuſdam ita Videtur: Quidā dicunt: Quidā tradunt:
Quidam concedunt: Alij putauerunt, Subſtantiam ibi Panis & Vini remanere:
Somme menne Iudge thus: Somme ſaie thus: Somme haue vvritten thus: Somme graunte
this: Somme others haue thought thus, that y• very Subſtance of the Breade, and Wine
remaineth ſtil. Here is a ſtrange agréemente of Learned menne, ſpecially in a
caſe of the Catholique Faith. But hereto what ſaithe Peter Lombarde him ſelfe,
that taketh vpon him as a Iudge to determine theſe doubtes? How is he reſolued?
Or howe agréethe he in Iudgemente with him ſelfe? His anſweare is this,
Si autem quaeritur, qualis ſit illa Conuerſio, An Formalis, An Subſtantialis, An alterius
generis, definire non ſufficio: If a queſtion were moued, what manner of Conuerſion, or
change this is: Whether it be in Fourme, or in Subſtance, or of ſomme other ſorte, I am
not hable to diſcuſſe it. Here wée maie ſée, the blinde leadeth the blinde. He that

ſetteth him ſelfe before al the reſte,
                     
                     Tranſubſtantiation Nevve, & douteful. 
                     and woulde be taken for a guide, knoweth not
where to ſette his owne foots. Gabriel Biel ſaithe, Quomodo ſit ibi Corpus
Chriſti, Vtrùm per Conuerſionem alicuius in ipſum, an ſine Conuerſine incipiat eſſe
Corpus Chriſti cum Pane, manentibus Subſtātia, & Accidentibus Panis, non inuenitur
expreſſum in Canone Bibliae: Howe the Body of Chriſte is there, whether it be by
changinge of ſomme thinge into it,
                     Gabriel. in Canonem, Lect. 40. 
                     Or Chriſtes Body beginne to be there togeather with the
Breade, both the Subſtance, and the Accidentes of the Breade remaininge ſtil
vvithout changinge, it is not founde expreſte in the Canon of the Bible. I leaue
                      Innocentius,
Scotus, and ſundrie others of your Scholaſtical Doctours, with theire
doubteful dreames, and gheaſſes to like pourpoſe.
                  
                  
                     Whether theſe be dreames, or no, I leue to you, M. Hardinge, to conſider. Verily
Innocentius. 3. ſaithe, Fuetunt, qui dicerent, quòd, ſicut poſt Conſecrationem vera
Panis remanent Accidentia, ita Panis remanet vera Subſtantia: There were ſomme,
that ſaide, that as after Conſecration there remaine the very Accidentes, or Fourmes of Bread,
ſo likewiſe the very Subſtance of the ſame Breade remaineth ſtil. And this ſame
Iudgemente Durandus, although he him ſelfe holde it not, yet he wil not haue it
in any wiſe to be condemned.
                  
                  Nowe, M. Hardinge, if you diſſemble not, but beléeue conſtantly, as you ſaye,
then cannot theſe thinges ſtande, without Preiudice of your beléeue.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  But Lorde what meant ye to allege Theophylacte, and S. Ambroſe, whoſe Doctrine is ſo contrary
to yours,Theophylacte contrary to theſe Defenders. as light is to darkenes? Theophylacte expoundinge theſe woordes of Chriſte in S. Iohn. As
the Liuinge Father hath ſent me, euen ſo liue I by the Father, and he that eateth me, ſhal liue by me,
ſaithe thus: Doeſt thou not heare a dreadful ſaieinge? VVee eate not pure God, for he is vntoucheable,
and vnbodily. Neither can he be comprehended with eies, nor teethe. Neither eate we the fleſhe
of a pure man: for that can profite nothing at al. But now that God hath vnited vnto him ſelfe fleaſhe
after a vnſpeakeable contemperament, the fleaſhe is alſo become lifemakinge. Not for that it is paſſed
away into the Nature of God,This ſimilitude of f
                           •
                        y yrō quite ouerthrovveth the vvhole fantaſie of Tranſubſtantiation. beware of that, but after the likenes of fyryyron, whiche abideth
yron, and ſheweth the operation of fire: euen ſo (quoth he) the fleaſhe of our Lorde abidinge fleaſhe, is
lifemakinge, as beinge the fleaſhe of God the worde. then as (ſaithe he) I liue by the Father, who is
life, ſo he that eateth me, ſhal liue by me, being tempered with me, as alſo being tranſelemented into
me, who haue Power to viuificate or giue life. VVhiche laſte woordes your owne Doctour Oecolampadius
hathe thus turned, Dum quodammodò miſcetur, & tranſelementatur in me, qui viuificare
poteſt, corruptinge the ſounde Doctrine of the writer with his forgedVntruthe, preſumed onely of ignorance For, Quodammodò, is in the texte: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     quodammodò,
whiche he founde not in the Greke there placed, and breakinge the congruitie of the Latine ſpeache,
by puttinge that in the thirde Perſon, that ought to be in the firſte. If faithe wrought al this matter,
then after your meaning, might we eate God, whiche Theophylacte denyeth. He ſaithe, he that eateth
Chriſtes fleaſh, is tēpered togeather with him, and tranſelemented into him, ſo as he is made one Body
with him,Cap. 3. Ephe. 5. as Cyrillus expoundeth the place of S. Paule to the Epheſians: where he ſaithe, that we be
Concorporales, that is to ſay, of one Body with Chriſte. And an other where, fleaſh of his fleaſhe, and
bone of his bones.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Of Theophylactes Authoritie, wée neuer made any greate accoumpte. He is
but a very late writer, in compariſon of the Auncient Fathers. For the moſt parte
of that he writeth, he is but an Abbridger of Chryſoſtome. He writeth againſte
the Churche of Rome, ſtoutly mainteininge a knowen Hereſie, concerninge the
Procedinge of the Holy Ghoſte. Notwithſtandinge, in this place wée alleged his
woordes to good purpoſe. For, as he ſaith, wee are Trāſelemented, or tranſnatured.
and changed into Chriſte, euen ſo, and none otherwiſe, wee ſaie, The Breade is
Tranſelemented or chāgedinto Chriſtes Body. But not withſtanding this chāge.

wée remaine ſtil in Subſtance,
                     Theophylacte. To eate God. as wee were before: Therefore wée ſaie, Notwithſtandinge
the like change, The Subſtance of the Breade in like manner remaineth
ſtil.
                  But what fanſie came in your heade, M. Hardinge, thus to allege, and ſo vehemently
to force this place of Theophylacte? What one woorde ſpeaketh he, either
of your Tranſubſtantiation, or of your Real preſence, or of your Corporal, and
Fleaſhely Eating? Verily, as, by any his expreſſe woordes, he nothing aideth you,
ſo by his example of Firie yron, he ſéemeth quite to ouerthrowe you. For if ye compare
the Sacramente with a péece of Burninge yron, (whiche neuertheleſſe was
not Theophylactes meaninge: and therefore ye are therein mutche deceiued) then,
as the yron, although it be fiery, yet notwithſtandinge in Nature, and Subſtance
is yron ſtil: Euen ſo the Breade, although it be made the Sacramente of Chriſtes
Body, and ſo the Inſtruments of the Grace of God, yet, that notwithſtandinge, in
Nature, and Subſtance in Breade ſtil.
                  Here, leſte you, geuinge ouer your Tranſubſtantiation, as knowinge it to be
onely a late founde fantaſie, ſhould hope neuertheleſſe by this Example of Fiery
yron to eſtabliſhe your Real Preſence, and to ſaie, that as the fiere is Really, and
in deede in the yron, ſo the Body of Chriſte is in déede, and Really in the Sacramente:
it maie pleaſe you to cal to minde, that in the Holy Learned Fathers, the
ſame example, and like Fourme of ſpeache, is vſed alſo of the Sacramente of Baptiſme.
In the Councel of Nice it is written thus:Concil Nicen. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Vides Aquam: Cogita de virtute
Dei, quae latet in Aqua. Cogita, A quam eſſe plenam Ignis Diuini: Thou ſeeſte the
Water: Thinke thou of the Power of God, that lieth in the VVater: Thinke thou, that
the Water is ful of Heauenly Fier. Yet, I trowe, ye wil not haue vs beléeue, as
an Article of our Faithe, that this fire, whereby is ment the Bloude of Chriſte, is
in déede, and Really in the Water.
                  Theſe, and ſutche other the like, maie not alwaies be taken, as phraſes of Preciſe
Truthe: but rather as Amplifications, or heates of ſpeache, the better to ſturre
vp, and to enflame the mindes of the Hearers. And in this ſorte, and ſenſe, to
leaue other Authorities,Hoſius in Conf. Petruouien. Cap. 48. 
                     Hoſius, your owne Doctour ſaithe, Opera noſtra reſperſa
ſunt Sanguine Chriſti: Our Woorkes be ſprinkled vvith the Eloude of Chriſte.
So ſaith Pope Innocentius. 3. Virtutes noſtiae Crucis Chriſti Sanguine Purpurantur:
Our Vertues are died,
                     Innocen. De Myſterijs Miſſ. Li. 2. 
                     as redde as Purple, in the Bloude of the Croſſe of Chriſte.
                     
Thus the Holy Fathers ſaie, The Breade of the Holy Myſteries, and the Water
of Baptiſme are ful of fiere.
                  Further Theophylacte ſaithe, The Body of Chriſte is Eaten: But the Godheade
is not Eaten: bicauſe it is vntoucheable, and vncomprehenſible vnto our ſenſes. Hereof
you woulde ſéeme to reaſon thus: If Faith wrought al this mater, then might wee
Eate God. For by Faithe wée beléeue in God.
                  
                     Firſte,
                     Pſalm 33. 
                     touchinge the Eatinge of God,1. Pet. 2. 
                     God him ſelfe ſaith,
                     Augu. De Verb. Domini Secund. Lucam, Serm 29 Auguſt. Confeſſ. Guſtate, & videre,
quòd ſuauis eſt Dominus: Taſte, and ſee that the Lord is delectable. S.
                      Auguſtine ſaith,
Panis eſt, & Panis eſt, & Panis eſt: Deus Pater, Deus Filius, & Deus Spiritus Sanctus:
It is Breade, It is Breade, and it is Breade: God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the Holy
Ghoſte. Againe he ſaith,
                      Deus Panis intus eſt animae meae: God is the Invvarde
Breade of my Soule. Therefore it is not ſo thorowly, and vndoubtedly true, that
you ſaie, the Nature of God cannot be Eaten.
                     
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge, for ſparinge of woordes, and time,Lib 1. Articulo. 8. Diuiſi. 16. herein I wil refer you
to my Former Replie. There ſhal you finde this whole Obiection fully anſweared.
                  You ſaie, Theophylactes reaſon ſtandeth thus, God cannot be Eaten: bicauſe
be cannot be comprehended, either vvith eies, or vvith teethe. But Chriſtes Body maie

be eaten:
                     
                     To eate God. 
                     Therefore it muſte folowe in the Concluſion, that with our eies vvee maie ſee it:
and with our teethe receiue it. Here woulde I faine learne of you, M. Hardinge,
when ye ſawe Chriſtes Body viſibly in the Sacramēte with your eies, or when ye
preſſed it with your téeth?Augu. in Iohan. Tracta 25. If your téeth can receiue it, why ſaithe S. Auguſtine,
Quid paras Dentem, & Ventrem? Why prepareſt thou thy Toothe, and they Belly?
                      If
your Bodily eie can ſée it, why ſaye you, It is Inuiſible? If it be Inuiſible, howe is
it ſéene? If it be ſéene, how is it Inuiſible? It appeareth, that either Theophylacte
the Maiſter, or you the Scholare, are deceiued: or one of you vnderſtandeth not the
others meaninge. Certainely, as Chriſtes Body is ſeene in the Sacramente, ſo
is it eaten in the Sacramente. But it is not Really, or Fleaſhely ſéene: Therefore
it is not Really, or Fleaſhely Eaten.
                  
                     To auoide errour herein, it behooueth vs to vnderſtande, that, To eate God,
is to haue the fruition of the Diuine Nature, and to be Incorporate into God. But
the Maieſtie of God ſo far ſurmounteth the capacitie of man, that as he is in him
ſelfe in Nature, and Godhedde, no mortal creature is hable to conceiue him, but onely
in the Face,
                     Hebr. 1. 
                     and ſight of Ieſus Chriſte the Sonne of God. Therefore S.
Paule ſaithe, Chriſtus eſt Splendor Gloriae, & Character Subſtantiae Dei: Chriſte is the
Brightneſſe of the Glorie, and the expreſſe Image of the Subſtance of God. S.
                      Auguſtine
ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. in Pſal. 134. Tu quomodò contingis Deum? Quia Verbum Caro factum eſt, & habitauit in
nobis: Howe doeſt thou touche God? (He anſweareth) Bicauſe the Woorde became
Fleaſhe,
                     
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tracta 2. 
                     and dwelte in vs. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Si Chriſtus ſic veniret, vt Deus, non agnoſceretur:
If Chriſte came ſo, as he is God, noman coulde knovve him. S. Gregorie
ſaithe,
                     Grego. in Ezech. Lib. 1. Homil. 14. Dominus murus nobis non eſſet, ſi forinſecùs non fuiſſet: Intus nos non
protegeret, ſi exteriùs non appareret: Our Lorde were no wal vnto vs, if he had not benne
in the Fourme of Man: He coulde not inwardely defende vs, if he had not outvvardely
appeared.
                     Eccleſ. Hierar. Cap. 3. 
                     So ſaithe Dionyſius, Si cupimus Communionem habere cum Deo, oportet
nos in Diuiniſsimam illius vitam, quam egit in Carne, intueri: If wee deſire to
haue Communion with God, wee muſte beholde that heauenly life, that he leadde in the
Fleaſhe. Thus, as God is God, in Maieſtie, and in him ſelfe, wée vnderſtande him
not, wee conceiue him not, wee knovve him not: That is to ſaie, wee haue no
fruition of him,
                     Auguſtin in Pſalm. 119. vvee eate him not. Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Ieſum Chriſtum
ſecundum id, quod erat Verbum apud Deum, Paruuli non capiunt. Quomodò ergo
capiunt, qui Lac capiunt? Ieſum Chriſtum, inquit, & hunc Crucifixum. Suge quod
pro te factus eſt: & creſces ad id, quod eſt: Litle ones vnderſtande not Ieſus Chriſte, accordinge
to that he was the Woorde with the Father. How then doo they receiue him, y• receiue
milke? S. Paule ſaithe, they receiue Ieſus Chriſte Crucified. Sucke that thinge, that
he vvas made for thee: and thou ſhalt growe to that he is.
                  
                  Thus in the Holy Myſteries there is repreſented vnto vs, not the Diuine Nature
of Chriſte, whereby he is Equal to the Father: But his Death, and Humilitie,
whereby he abaſed him ſelfe, and was made Equal vnto vs. This is the Spiritual
Meate, and Drinke, and the onely feedinge of the Soule. 
                        •
                      Thereof S. Paule
ſaithe,1. Cor. 11. 
                     As often as ye ſhal eate of this Breade, and drinke of this Cuppe, ye ſhal publiſhe (not
the Diuine Nature, or Godhedde, but) the Lordes Deathe vntil he comme. So ſaithe
Heſychius,
                     Heſych. in Leut. Lib. 1. Cap. 2. Ambroſi. in 1. Cor. 11. 
                     Comedimus hunc Cibum, ſumentes eius memoriam Paſsionis: Wee
Eate this Foode, receiuinge the memorie (not of his glorie, but) of his Paſsion. So
ſaith S. Ambroſe, Quia Morte Domini liberati ſumus, huius rei memores, in Edēdo, &
Potando, Carnem, & Sanguinem, quae pro nobis oblata ſunt, ſignificamus: Bicauſe
wee are deliuered by our Lordes Deathe, beinge mindeful thereof, in Eatinge, and Drinkinge,
VVe Signifie, or Repreſente the Fleaſhe, and Bloude, that vvere offered vp
for vs. Thus in the Holy Myſteries wee Eate, and Drinke the Sacramente of
Chriſte Crucified in the Humilitie of his Fleaſhe. But his Diuine Nature in

Godhed,
                     Chriſtes Body geeueth Life. and Maieſtie cannot be Repreſented, or expreſſed by any Sacramentes.
                  It was al vaine, and loſte laboure for you, M. Hardinge, ſo earneſtly to
proue, that Chriſtes Body quickeneth, and geuéeth life. Wee knowe it: Wée
Confeſſe it:Iohan. 6. Wée féele it: Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe it: I am the Breade of Life: He
that eateth of this Breade, ſhal liue for euer.
                  
                  This talke empeacheth noman, but your ſelfe. For you tel vs, and woulde
haue it holden, as an Article of your Faithe, not onely, that the wicked man without
Faith, but alſo that the doumbe creature voide of Reaſon, maie receiue the very
Body of Chriſte, and that Subſtantially, Verily, & in déede. Thus you diuide
and ſunder Chriſtes Body, from his Sprite: and, contrarie to Theophylacte,
and to al the Ancient Fathers, and to Chriſte him ſelfe, ye ſaie, It maie be Really
receiued vvithout Life.
                  
                  
                     But wée ſaie,
                     Ambroſ. De Benedictionib Patriarch. Cap. 6. 
                     with S. Ambroſe, Qui accipit hunc Panem, non moritur morte
Peccatoris: Quia hic Panis eſt Remiſsio Peccatorum: VVho ſo eateth this Breade
(not the Sacramente of Chriſtes Body, but Chriſtes Body it ſelfe
                     ) diethe not
the death of a Sinner: For this Breade is the Remiſsion of Sinnes. Wée ſaye with S.
                     
Auguſtine, Qui Carnem Domini non ſumit, non habet vitam: &, qui eam ſumit,
habet vitam,Augu in Iohan. Tracta. 26. & hanc vtique aeternam: He that receiueth not the Fleaſhe of Our Lorde,
hath no Life: and, he that receiueth it, hath Life, and the ſame Euerlaſting. Againe
wée ſaie with S.
                      Auguſtine,Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. eodem. Huius rei Sacramentum de Menſa Dominica ſumitur, quibuſdam
ad vitam, quibuſdam ad Mortem: Res verò ipſa, cuius Sacramentum eſt, Omni
homini ad vitam, Nulli ad exitium: quicunque eius Particeps fuerit: The Sacramente
(of Chriſtes Body) is receiued from the Lordes Table, to ſomme vnto Life, to
ſomme vnto Death: But the thinge it ſelfe, (that is, the Body of Chriſte, whereof
this is a Sacramente) is to al menne vnto Life, and to Noman vnto Deathe:
Who ſoeuer ſhalbe Partetaker of it.
                  For ſomme further declaration hereof, it appeareth by the witneſſe of the Anciente
Learned Doctours, and Fathers, that wée are Really, and Corporally ioined,
and vnited vnto Chriſte, not onely by the Myſteries of the Holy Supper, but
alſo by Faithe, by Baptiſme, by the Sprite of God, by Loue, and other waies. Of
Faithe S. Auguſtine ſaith thus:Auguſt. Epiſt. 31. 
                     Per Fidem Adcorporamur in Ieſu Chriſto Domino
noſtro: By Faithe vvee are incorporate in Chriſte Ieſu our Lorde.
                      And againe,
Qui venit ad me,
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 25. 
                     Incorporatur mihi: He that commeth vnto me, is Incorporate
into me.
                     
                     Chryſo. in Epiſt. ad Rom. Hom. 25 Chryſo. in Epiſt. ad Coloſ. Hom. 6. S. Chryſoſtome ſaith, Quid nobis eſſe non vult, omnibus modis nos ſibi
conglutinans, & coniungens? What wil not Chriſte be vnto vs? For by al manner meanes
he cleaueth, and faſteneth him ſelfe vnto vs.
                      Againe in plainer ſorte he ſaithe,
Dominum ipſum amplecteris, & Commiſceris, & ſubuectus coniungeris Corpori illi,
quod ſurſum ſedet in Coelis: Thou embraceſte the Lorde him ſelfe, and arte mingled
vvith him, and beinge here benea the, arte ioiued to that Body, that ſitteth in Heauen
aboue.
                     
                  
                  
                     In like manner he writteth of the Sacramente of Baptiſme:
                     Chryſo. in Epiſt. ad Ephe. Hom. 20. Quomodò ex
Carne eius ſumus, & ex Oſsibus eius? Quemadmodum ille fine Virili Congreſſu natus
eſt ex Spiritu Sancto, ita nos illud efficimur in Lauacro: How are wee of his Fleaſh,
and of his Bones? He anſweareth, As Chriſte was borne by the Holy Ghoſte without the
knowledge of Man, euen ſo in the Fonte (of Baptiſme
                     ) vvee are made the ſame (that
is, his Fleaſhe, and his Bones).
                  
                     So ſaithe Leo,Leo, De Natiuitate Domi. Sermo. 3. Sicut Dominus Factus eſt Caro noſtra naſcendo, ita nos facti ſumus
ipſius (Caro) Renaſcendo: As our Lorde was made our Fleaſh, by that he was Borne:
ſo are vvee made his Fleaſhe, by that wee are newe borne.
                  
                  
                     So ſaith S. Hierome,Hieronym. 
                           〈◊〉
                         Viro Perfecta. De Carne eius ſumus, & de Oſsibus eius: Ipſe enim eſt
Caput Corporis Eccleſiae: Wee are of his Fleaſhe, and of his Bones: For that he is

the Heade of His Body,
                     Quodammodò. 
                     whiche is the Churche.
                  
                  Thus, M. Harding, wée are ioined togeather, and temp
                        •
                     ared with Chriſte, not
onely by the Holy Myſteries, but alſo by the Sacramente of Baptiſme, & by Faith.
And Chryſoſtome ſaithe,Chryſoſtom. in. 1. Cor. Hom. 8. 
                     Ne ſimpliciter teneamus Chriſtum, ſed etiam illi conglutinemur.
Nam ſi quicquam ſeceſſerimus ab eo, Perimus: Let vs not onely holde Chriſte,
but alſo let vs be faſte glevved vnto him. For if wee falle any thinge from him, wee
are vtterly loſte.
                      Muſte wée therefore conclude, M. Hardinge, that the VVater
of Baptiſme is Tranſubſtantiate, no parte of the Subſtaunce thereof remaininge
ſtil: or that Chriſtes Body is Really, and groſſely Preſente in that Sacramente, as
you haue imagined of the other?
                  Ye finde greate fanlte with Oecolampadius, for corruptinge, as ye ſaie, the
ſounde Doctrine of Theophylacte with his forged, Quodammodò, and for
breakinge the Congruitie of the Latine ſpeache, by puttinge the thirde Perſonne,
in place of the firſte. Of the Latine Congruitie, I wil ſaie nothinge. The Learned
thinke, that Oecolampadius was as ſkilful bothe in the Latine tongue, and
in the Gréeke, as M. Hardinge. But for the forginge of, Quodammodò, why
doo you not as wel finde faulte with Theophylacte him ſelfe? For if it be a forgerie,
he him ſelfe hath likewiſe forged the ſame, Quodammodò: and if that maie
be called Corruption, he hath alſo corrupted his owne Doctrine. Theſe be his
woordes:Theophylact. in Iohan. Cap. 6.
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Qui manducat me, hic viuet propter me, dum Quodammodò miſcetur
mihi, & tranſelementatur in me: He that cateth me, ſhal liue by me: for as mutche as,
after a ſorte, he is mingled with me, and tranſelemented, or changed into me.
                      If
yee doubte, whether, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in Gréeke, maie be expounded by, Quodammodò,
then is not your ſkil herein ſo greate, as ye haue thought.
                  
                     Why finde ye not faulte with S. Auguſtine, for ſaieinge the like? Omnes
in illo, & Chriſti, & Chriſtus ſumus: quia Quodammodò totus Chriſtus, & Caput,
& Corpus eſt: In him wee are al Chriſtes, and Chriſte him ſelfe: For after a ſorte
whole Chriſte is bothe the Heade (of the Churche) and alſo the Body. And againe,
                     
Qui in Chriſtum credit,Augu. in Pſal. 26 Auguſt. in Iohan. Sermon. 61. Auguſt. Epiſt. 120. Cap. 18. credendo in Chriſtum veniet, & in cum Chriſtus, & quoquo
modo vnitur in eum, & Membrum in Corpore eius efficitur: He that beleeueth in
Chriſte, by beleeuinge commeth into Chriſte, and Chriſte into him, and after a ſorte is vnited
into him, and is made a Member in his Body. And againe,
                      Paulum Chriſtus voce
mactauit, & in ſuum Corpus traijciens, Quodammodò manducauit: Chriſte killed
Paule with his voice,
                     Cyrill ad Caloſyrium. 
                     and after a ſorte, did eate him, ſwalowinge him down into his Body.
Why finde ye not the ſame faulte with
                      Cyrillus writing thus, Decebat ergo eum
Quodammodò Vniri Corporibus noſtris? It was meete, that after a ſorte Chriſte
ſhoulde be Ʋnited vnto our Bodies:
                     Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 84. 
                     Or with S. Chryſoſtome, writinge the like:
Chriſtus nos ſecum in vnam, vt ita dicam, Maſſam reducit? Chriſte mouldeth vs.
if I maie ſo ſaie, into one lumpe with him ſelfe.
                  
                  Why ſaie ye not, theſe, and other like Holy Fathers were Sacramentaries,
and Heretiques? Why ſaie ye not, that S. Auguſtine, S. Cyril, S. Chryſoſtome,
with theire Forged Quodammodò, corrupted the ſounde, and Catholique
Doctrine of the Churche?
                  Woulde ye rather, for the better facinge, and colouringe of your Doctrine,
wée ſhoulde ſtrike oute this, Forged Quodammodò, and amende it thus,
Qui manducat me, Reipſa Miſcetur mihi, & tranſelementatur in me? Woulde ye
haue vs to beléeue, that wee are wholy, and thorowly changed into Chriſtes Body,
and that wée are made very Chriſte, God, and Man, the ſame, that was borne of
the Virgine, and nailed to the Croſſe: and that not, Quodammodò, after a ſorte.
or by ſomme peculiare phraſe of ſpeache: but Subſtantially, Really, Verily, and in

déede?Quodammodò. I recken, your Doctrine is not fully ſo fonde.
                  S. Paule ſaithe,Roma. 12. Cyrill. in Iohan. Lib. 11. Cap. 26. Chryſoſtom. in 1. Cor. Homil. 
                           •
                        
                      
                     Sumus alter alterius Membra: VVee are Members one
of an other: Cyrillus ſaithe, Nos inter nos vnimur Corporaliter: Wee are
Corporally vnited togeather emonge our ſelues:
                      S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Si quis
exuat impudicarum mulierum animas, videbit malum Daemonem illis admixtum:
If a man wil open the Soules of Vnchaſte, or Filthy Wemen, he ſhal ſee the Diuel
tempered togeather, and mingled with them.
                      And thinke you, M. Hardinge, that
theſe, and other like ſpeaches of the Holy Fathers, cannot ſtande without your
Tranſubſtantiation, and Real Preſence? Or, that the Godly be Subſtantially,
and in déede in theire Bodies ioined togeather? Or, that the Vngodly be verily vnited,
and mingled with the Diuel?
                  
                     You might rather haue remembred, that touchinge this vnſpeakeable Vnitie
bitwéene Chriſte, and the Faitheful, that is to ſaie, bitwéene the Heade, and the
Body,
                     Cyprian. De Coena Domini. 
                     S. Cyprian writeth thus: Noſtra, & Chriſti Coniunctio nec miſcet
Perſonas, nec vnit Subſtantias: ſed affectus conſociat, & confoederat voluntates:
The Coniunction, that is bitweene vs, and Chriſte, neither mingleth Perſonnes, nor
vniteth Subſtances: but ioineth affections, and knitteth vvilles. Likewiſe
ſaithe S. Cyril,Cyrill. in Iohan. Lib. 4. Cap. 29. Initium, & fundamentum in Sanctificatione Chriſtus eſt, Per Fidem,
ſcilicet, & non aliter: Hoc enim modo in nobis habitat: The Beginninge, and Fundation
of our Holineſſe is Chriſte: By Faithe, I meane, and none othervviſe. For in this
ſorte Chriſte dwelleth in vs. Likewiſe
                      Lyra, one of your owns late Doctours:
In quantum per Sacramentum Euchariſtiae unimur Deo,Nicol. Lyra in Iohan. Cap. 6. viuimus Spiritualiter:
Noſtra autem vnio apud ipſum eſt per Fidem, & Dilectionem: So far foorth, as
wee are vnited vnto God by the Sacramente of Thankeſgeeuinge, wee liue Spiritually: But
the Vnion, that is bitvveene him, and vs, is by Faithe, and loue. And, expoundinge
theſe woordes of S. Paule,Nicol. Lira, 1. Cor. 6 Qui adhaeret Deo, vnus Spiritus eſt: He that
eleueth vnto God, is one Sprite with God: He ſaithe,
                      Vnus, non ſecundum rem,
ſed ſecundum affectionem: One Sprite with God, not One in deede, or accordinge to
the Truthe: but One in Loue, or accordinge to affection.
                  
                  
                     And yet, ſomme what farther to remoue you from your fantaſte of your Real
Preſence,Chryſo in Epiſt. ad Coloſ. Hom. 6. 
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, as he is alleged before: Dominum ipſum amplecteris:
cum illo commiſceris: & ſubuectus Coniungeris Corpori illi, quod ſurſum
ſedet in Coelis: Thou embraceſte the Lorde him ſelfe: thou arte tempered with him: and
beinge carried vp (by Faithe, and affection) thou arte ioined with that Body, that fitteth
in Heauen.
                     Leo, De Aſcenſione Domini, Sermon. 3. 
                     In like ſenſe ſaithe Leo: Chriſtus ineffabili modi coepit eſſe Diuinitate
Praeſentior, qui factus eſt Humanitate loginquior: Chriſte by vnſpeakable meanes beganne
to be the neare to vs by his Diuinitie, the further he is made from vs by
his Humanitie.
                  I doubte not, M. Harding, but ye maye eaſily ſée, that hitherto your Real Preſence
is but weakely proued.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Againe we maruel with what face ye dare allege Theophylacte for you,Not a Figure, but the Fleaſhe it ſelfe of our Lorde, Tranſubſtantiatiō. who in moſte euident
woordes ouerthroweth your figuratiue tropical, and energical Doctrine touchinge this bleſſed Sacramente.
For he ſaith vppon this ſixthe Chapter of S. Iohn: Marke wel that the Breade, whiche is eaten
of vs in the Myſteries,Vntruthe. For he manifeſtely affirmeth a. Figure. His vvordes be theſe, It is not onely a Figure. Ergo he graunteth, it is a Figure. 
                     is not onely a certaine Figure of our Lordes Fleaſh, but the Fleaſh
it ſelfe of our Lorde. For he ſaide not, the Breade that I ſhal geue is the Figure of Fleaſhe, but it is
my Fleaſhe. For the Breade is with ſecrete woordes through the Myſtical bleſsinge and comminge
vppon of the Holy Ghoſte, changed into the Fleaſhe of our Lorde.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Theophylacte ſaithe, The Breade is not onely a certaine Figure of our
Lordes Fleaſhe, but the Fleaſhe it ſelfe of our Lorde. This Obiection in my Former
Replie is many wheres anſweared. Wée graunte, The Breade is not a
bare, or a naked Figure: but by waie of Sacramente, or Myſterie, it is the
Body of Chriſte it ſelfe. So the Water of Baptiſme, is not an emptie Figure
of the Bloude of Chriſte: but it is Chriſtes Bloude it ſelfe, bicauſe it is the Sacramente
of Chriſtes Bloude.Bernard. Super Miſſus eſt. Hom. 3 Auguſti. Contra Maximi. Lib. 3. And therefore S. Bernarde ſaithe, Lauemur in
Sanguine eius: Let vs be waſſhed,
                      (not in Water, but) in the Bloude of Chriſte. S.
Auguſtine geueth this general Rule, as I haue often reported, In Sacramentis videndum
eſt, non quid ſint, ſed quid Significent: In Sacramentes wee muſte conſider,
not vvhat thei be (in ſubſtāce, & nature) but vvhat thei Signifie. Tertullian ſaith,
Chriſtus acceptum Panem,
                     Tertull. Contra Marcion. Lib. 4. 
                     & Diſcipulis ſuis diſtributum Corpus ſuum illum Fecit,
dicēdo, Hoc eſt Corpus meum, hoc eſt, Figura Corporis mei: Chriſte hauing taken the
Breade, and hauinge deliuered the ſame to his Diſciples. Made it his Body, ſaieinge, This
is my Body, That it to ſaie, This is a Figure of my Body. And to appointe
a corruptible Creature to this vſe, and to make it an effectual inſtrumente of
ſutche high, and Hidden Myſteries, it is not the Woorke of any mortal man, but
the onely Power, and woorkinge of the Holy Ghoſte: as it ſhal farther appeare
in the nexte Clauſe, in mine anſweare to the woordes of S. Ambroſe. beda
ſaithe thus,Beda in Octauis Epiphaniae. 
                     Panis, & Vini Creatura in Sacramentum Carnis, & Sāguinis Chriſti
ineffabili Spiritus ſanctificatione transfertur: The Creature of Breade, and Wine by the
vnſpeakeable Sanctification of the Holy Ghoſte, is changed
                      (not into the very Real Body,
and Bloude, but) into the Sacramente of the Body, and Bloude of Chriſte.
                     
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Neither Maketh S. Ambroſe, whiche alſo ye bringe in, any better for you. VVoulde God
ye woulde admitte him for Vmpeere in this pointe. Verily in the booke, and chapter, that ye referre
vs vnto, he disputeth as it were of pourpoſe againſte you, as though he foreſawe the time, when
the Churche ſhoulde be troubled with the Hereſie of Sacramentaries. Tu fortè dicis, &c.
Perhappes thou ſayeſt,De Sacr. Li. 4. Ca. 4. De Pane. Conſecration. My Breade is common: But this Breade is Breade, before the woordes of the
Sacramentes: ſo ſoone as conſecration commeth, of Breade is made the Fleaſhe of Chriſte. Let vs then
auouche this, howe that, whiche is Breade, maye be the Body of Chriſte? By Conſecration. Then
with what woordes and ſpeaches is conſecration made? Euen with thoſe of our Lorde Ieſus. For
what ſo euer els is ſaide (he meaneth at the Maſſe) it is praiſegeuinge to God, and prayinge for the
People, for Kinges, for the reſte. VVhen the Prieſte commeth to the Conſecration of the honorable
Sacramente, there he vſeth not his owne woordes, but the VVoordes of Chriſte. Therefore
it is the woorde of Chriſte, that maketh the Sacramente.God maie vvel be Omnipotēte, without either Tranſubſtantiation, or Real Preſence. VVhat woorde of Chriſte? Soothely
that ſame woorde whereby al thinges be made. Our Lorde Commaunded, and Heauen was made.
Our Lorde Commaunded, and earthe was made. Our Lorde Commaunded, and the ſeas were made.
Our Lorde Commaunded, euery Creature was engendred. Seeſt thou then, howe woorkeful is the
woorde of Chriſte?Operatoriꝰ Theſe be the vvordes alleaged by the Defender. VVel then, if there be ſo greate Power in the woorde of our Lorde Ieſus, that
thinges beganne to be, whiche were not: howe mutche more is it woorkeful,S. Ambroſe ſaith, The Bread and VVine are the ſame thinges, they vvere before Cō
                        ſecration: notvvithſtandinge they be novve made a Sacramente. 
                     Vt ſint, quae erant,
& in aliud commutentur, That thinges be whiche were, and be chaunged into an other
thinge? Here, Sir Defender, Conſtrewe me theſe wordes, and what ſenſe can you draw foorth of them,
but this: If by the workinge Power of our Lordes woorde, thinges haue a beinge, whiche before were
nothinge, and had no beinge at al, as Heauen, Earthe and Seas: howe mutche more Power hath it
to woorke, that thinges whiche were before, and had a beinge, nowe alſo be, or haue a beinge, but be
changed into an other thinge, in Aliud,
                     Vntrue expoſition. That vvere contrarie to S. Ambroſe. For then vvere they not the ſame thinges, their vvere before. into a thinge of an other Subſtaunce? For by this phraſe is

ſignified a Subſtantial chaunginge,Omnipotente Povver. whiche aptly is called Tranſubſtantiation: And, I praie you, good
Sir,The Elementes after Conſecration be, or haue a beinge. who ſaieth, that the Elementes. I meane Breade and VVine, paſſe quite awaie, and go to nothinge?
Though you ſo belie vs, we ſaie not ſo: God forbid. VVe ſaie, that after conſecration they be: But what?
O fonde folio. VVhat Being haue thinges, vvhen the
                           •
                        e Subſtance is gonne
                           •
                        . Not theſelſeſame they were, whereby the Former Subſtance is excluded, but the Body and Bloude of
our Lorde. Againe in that we ſaye with S. Ambroſe, in aliud commutantur, They be chaunged
into an other thinge: foloweth it not thereof good logike, Ergo they be? VVil not this argumente
holde in Schole, the verbe paſsiue beinge reſolued,A 
                           〈…〉
                         truthe 
                           〈…〉
                         modeſtie. 
                     Sunt commutata, Ergo ſunt? For that
whiche ceaſſeth to be, or goeth to nothinge, ye cannot properly ſaye of it, that it is chaunged: but rather
that it is ended, or periſheth. Nowe ſyr, I reporte me to euery man, that hath any ſenſe, whether
I maie not lawfully geue you the Menti, as for manners ſake I maye vſe the Italian terme, and
chalenge you in plaine termes of a lye, for vtteringe this vntruthe, vppon that Holy Doctours S.
Ambroſe. ſpecially ſpeakinge as you do in your Engliſhe Tranſlation, by your ſelfe allowed thus:
For what can be ſaide more plainely, then that, whiche Ambroſe ſaithe, Breade, and VVine remaine
ſtil the ſame they were before, and yet are chaunged into an other thinge? Zeale moueth me to ſaie beyonde
the modeſtie of my natural diſpoſition, VVhat is iuggling, what is lieing. what is falſhed, what
is falſefieinge, what is wickednes of falſaries, if this be not?
                  Neither is the ſaieinge, wherewith this Defender belyeth S. Ambroſe, al onely falſe, and contrary
to the Catholike Faithe, but alſo abſurde, vnreaſonable, and fooliſhe. For if Breade, and VVine remaine
ſtil after Conſecration, the ſame they were before, howe then are they chaunged into an other
thinge?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, onleſſe ye had made S. Ambroſe a Prophete, ye thought,
he coulde not ſo handeſomely haue ſerued your tourne. But what, and of whom
he propheſied, and how far ſawe before, wée ſhal ſée hereafter. Verily, if that he
the Hereſie, that you imagine, thē he néeded not greately any Sprite of Propheſie
in that behalfe. For he foretolde vs of no newe Hereſie, that was to comme: but
rather tolde vs of his owne Hereſie, that then was preſente. Doubteleſſe, the
woordes that wee reprote, are not ours: they are this owne.
                  But S. Ambroſe ſaithe, The Omnipotente Povver of the VVoorde,
wherewith God made Heauen and Earthe, the ſame Omnipotente Povver of
the ſame woorde, he vſeth nowe in the Conſecration of the Sacramente. Therefore,
ſaithe M. Hardinge, it muſte néedes be geathered, he meante Tranſubſtantiation,
and Real Preſence: as if without theſe newe fantaſies, God coulde not be
Omnipotente. I maye wel anſweare theſe menne, as S. Ambroſe vpon the like
occaſion ſommetime anſweared the wilful blindeneſſe of the Iewes:Ambroſ. De Noe & Arca. 
                     Atramentum
vident: Spiritum Dei non vident: They ſee the Inke
                      (of the Letter written) but the
Sprite of God they ſee not: Euen ſo M. Hardinge, and others of that ſide weigh the
woordes of S. Ambroſe: but his ſenſe, and meaninge they weigh not.
                  
                     Certainely God ſheweth his Omnipotente Povver, as wel in the Sacramente
of Baptiſme, as in the Sacramente of Thankeſgeuinge. Here of I haue ſaide
ſommewhat, as occaſion was offered, in my Former Replie to M. Harding. Leo
ſaithe thus,
                     Articulo. 5. Diuiſion. 4. Leo in Natiuitate Domini, Sermon. 5. Chryſoſto. in Iohan. Homil. 24. Chriſtus originem, quam ſumpſit in Vtero Virginis, poſuit in Fonte Baptiſmatis.
Dedit Aquae, quod dedit Matri: Chriſte laide in the Fonte of Baptiſme
the ſame beginninge, that he tooke in the Virgins Wombe. He gaue the ſame preeminence
to the VVater, that he gaue to his Mother. Euen ſo Chryſoſtome,
Angeli qui adfuerunt (in Baptiſmo) tam inenarrabilis operis modum minime poſſunt
enarrare. Adfuerunt tantùm, & viderunt: nihil tamen operati ſunt: Sed Pater tantùm, &
Filius, & Spiritus Sanctus. The Angels, that were preſente at the Baptiſme, are not h
                           •
                        ble
to vtter the manner of that vnſpeakeable VVoorke. They were Preſente onely,

and ſawe: but they did nothinge: but onely the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghoſte.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe he ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. in Iohan. Homil. 24. Ex Spiritu, & ſenſibili Aqua omnia haec admirabilia, & humanam
excedentia cogitationem, exoriuntur: Al theſe vvoonderful woorkes (wrought
in Baptiſme) ſo far excedinge the thought of man, ſpringe of the Sprite, and of Senſible
Water.
                  
                  Thus the Holy Fathers vſed oftentimes to auance, and to magnifie the Holy
Myſteries, the better to bringe theire Hearers to the déepe, and inwarde conſideration
of the ſame:Auguſt. Ad Bonifaciū, Epiſt. 23 and therefore, as S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Sacramenta tantae rei,
non niſi eiuſdem rei vocabulo nuncuparunt: They expreſſed the Sacramenta of ſo
greate a thinge, none otherwiſe, then by the name of the ſame thinge. So S.
Paule ſaithe,1. Cor. 10. Pachymer. in 4. Cap. Hierarch. S. Germanus. De Corpor. & Sangui. Chriſti Chryſoſtom. in Pſalm. 50. 
                     The Rocke vvas Chriſte: So an other ſaithe, as I haue otherwheres
alleged, The Oile is Chriſte: and an other, Manna erat Chriſtus,
qui deſcendit de Coelo: The Manna (that rained in the Wilderneſſe) vvas Chriſte,
that came downe from Heauen.
                      So ſaithe S. Chryſoſtome, reportinge the ſtorie of
Dauid: Accipiens Aquam allatam bibere noluit: Sed ſemetipſum reprehendit, & Domino
eam libauit. Non enim Aqua erat, ſed Sanguis: Dauid receiuinge of the VVater,
                     
(that his menne had gotten with greate daunger from the middes of theire enimies)
woulde not drinke of it: But founde faulte with him ſelfe, and powred it out vnto the
Lorde: For it vvas not VVater, but Bloude.
                     
                  
                  I beſeche thée,2. Reg. 23. good Chriſtian Reader, marke wel theſe Woordes. The ſtorie is
cleare. It was in deede onely a Cuppe of Water, and nothinge els. Yet Chryſoſtome
ſaith, It vvas Bloude: It vvas no VVater.
                  
                  In thoſe dayes, it was no daunger, thus to ſaie. The people was inſtructed,
and wel acquainted with this phraſe, or manner of ſpeache, and knewe the meaninge.
They were taught, that the Rocke, the Oile, and the Manna in the Wilderneſſe,
were onely Sacramentes of Chriſte: and that, notwithſtandinge they
were called by thy name of Chriſte, yet in déede, and in Subſtance they were not
Chriſte.
                  Therefore I maye anſweare M. Hardinge herein, as S. Auguſtine ſommetime
anſweared the Pelagian Heretiques:Auguſt. Contra Iulianum, Lib. 1. 
                     Vobis Pelagianis nondum litigantibus,
ſecuriùs loquebantur Patres de his Articulis: Before that you Pelagians beganne
to quarrel, the Fathers, and Doctours ſpake without feare, and freely of theſe Articles.
                     
                  
                  
                     Athanaſius ſaithe of the Arian Heretiques,Athanaſi. Contra Arian. Sermon. 4. 
                     Incorporalia Corporaliter excipientes,
quae probè dicta erant, interpretationibus deprauauerunt: Takinge Spiritual thinges in
a Corporal, or Fleaſhely meaninge
                      (as doothe M. Hardinge, and other his felowes)
by theire interpretations they haue depraued the thinges, that were rightly ſpoken. S. Ambroſe
ſaithe of the Breads, and the Wine, Sunt, quae erant, & in aliud mutantur:
They remaine the ſame, that they vvere, and are changed into an other thinge.
                     
Nowe is the filde woonne: M. Hardinge bloweth a Maigne Triumphe. Here, ſaithe
he, Sir Defender, Conſtrue me theſe VVoordes, Soothely, good Reader, I diſtruſte not
greately, but this poore Defender might eaſily Conſtrue theſe VVordes, were he
neuer ſo ſimple a clerke. The Natural Creatures of the Breade, and Wine in the
Supper of our Lord (ſaith S. Ambroſe) remaine ſtil in Subſtance, as they were before:
yet are they changed into an other thinge, that is to ſaie, they are made the
Sacramente of the Body, and Bloude of Chriſte: whiche before they were not.
                  Notwithſtandinge this ſhorte Conſtruction, beinge cleare, and plaine, maye
ſéeme ſufficient, yet for that M. Hardinge ſo déepely appoſeth vs, and willeth vs to
Conſtrue him theſe VVordes, wée wil bothe Conſtrue, and Pars them too for
his pleaſure.
                  
                     Therefore,
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 80. 
                     to warrante our former Conſtruction, S. Auguſtine ſaithe thus:
Accedat Verbum ad Elementum: & fit Sacramentum: Let the VVorde be added to the

Elemente,
                     Changed into an other thinge. 
                     or outwarde Creature: and it is made a Sacramente, that is to ſaie,
                      an other
thinge. Againe he ſaithe, Sacramenta ſunt Signa rerum, Aliud exiſtentia, Aliud
Significantia: Sacramentes are Signes, or Tokens of thinges, beinge by Subſtance One
thinge,Auguſt. Contra Maximi. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. and Signifieinge an other thinge. So ſaithe Chryſoſtome of the Water
of Baptiſme, Cùm hoc Elementum acceperit Spiritum Sanctum, fit Sacramentum:
Et iam non erit Aqua Potationis, ſed Sanctificationis: Non erit Aqua communis,
ſed Refectionis:Chryſoſtom. in Pſalm 22. 
                     When this Creature of Water hath receiued the Holy Ghoſte, it
is made a Sacramente: and nowe it is not Water to drinke, but water to Sanctifie: Not
common Water, but Water to Refreſhe.
                  
                  
                     Thus the Elemente, or outwarde Creature bothe remaineth, and is changed:
It remaineth in proper, & plaine kinde of ſpeache: It is changed vnproperly, that
is to ſaie, by the waie of a Sacramente, or a Myſterie. So M. Hardinges owne
Gloſe ſaithe vpon the Decrées:
                     De Con. Diſt 2. Hoc eſt. In Gloſae. Coeleſte Sacramentum dicitur Corpus Chriſti, ſed
Impropriè. Vnde dicitur, Suo modo: Non rei veritate, ſed Significante Myſterio:
vt ſit ſenſus, Vocatur Corpus Chriſti, id eſt, Significat Corpus Chriſti: The
Heauenly Sacramente is called the Body of Chriſte, but vnproperly (that is to ſaie, not
in plaine, and ſimple manner of ſpeache). Therefore
                      S. Auguſtine ſaithe, It is ſo
called after a ſorte: that is, not in truthe of mater, but by a Myſterie ſignifieinge:
that the ſenſe maie be this, It is called the Body of Chriſte, that is to ſaie, It ſignifieth
the Body of Chriſte.Auguſt. De Doctrina Chriſtia. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. 
                     So ſaithe S. Auguſtine, De Signis differens, hoc dico, Ne
quis in eis attendat, quòd ſunt, ſed potiùs, quòd Signa ſunt, id eſt, quòd Significant:
Intreatinge of Signes (or Sacramentes) thus I ſaie: Lette noman conſider in them, that
thei be in Subſtance, but rather, that they be Signes, that is to ſaie, that thei Signifie
(ſomme other thinge). In this ſenſe, & meaninge S. Auguſtine ſaithe againe,
Dominus ait,Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 4. Ipſe (Iohannes) eſt Elias: Iohannes autem ipſe ait, Ego non ſum Elias.
Rectè ergo Iohannes propriè reſpondit: Nam Dominus Figuratè: Our Lorde ſaide of
Iohn the Baptiſte: This is Elias: But Iohn him ſelfe ſaithe, I am not Elias. Therefore
Iohn anſweared wel in plaine manner of vvoordes: For our Lorde ſpake in a Figure.
Thus in ſundrie ſortes of ſpeache, Iohn is Elias: and the ſame Iohn is not Elian:
and bothe are true.
                  
                  
                     But what better expoſitoure of S. Ambroſe can we finde, then S. Ambroſe him
ſelfe? I truſte, M. Hardinge wil not ſaie, that ſo Holy a Father was a falſifier,
and a lier, ſpecially in declaringe his owne minde. Thus therefore he ſaithe:
Ante Benedictionem Verborum Coeleſtium,Ambroſ. De ijs qui initiantur, Cap. 9. alia ſpecies nominatur: poſt Conſecrationem,
Corpus Chriſti Significatur. In comedendo, & potando, Carnem, & Sanguinem,
quae pro nobis oblata ſunt, Significamus. In Similitudinem accipis Sacramentum.
Eſt Figura Corporis,Ambroſ. 1. Corinth. 11. Ambroſ. De Sacrament. Lib. 4. Cap. 4. & 5. & Sanguinis Domini. Similitudinem pretioſi Sanguinis
bibis: Before the Bleſſinge of the Heauenly woordes, it is called an other Kinde: After
the woordes of Conſecration, the Body of Chriſte is Signified. In Eatinge, and Drinkinge,
wee Signifie the Body, and Bloude, that were offered for vs. Thou receiueſt
the Sacramente for a Similitude, or for a likeneſſe. It is a Figure of the Body, and Bloude
of our Lorde. Thou drinkeſt the likeneſſe of the pretious Bloude.
                  
                     Thus like fourme of woordes the ſame S. Ambroſe vſeth of the Sacramente
of Baptiſme:
                     Ambroſ. De Sacramen. Lib. 1. Cap. 5. Vidiſti Aquam? Sed non omnis Aqua ſanat: Sed Aqua ſanat, quae habet
Gratiam Dei. Aliud eſt Elementum: Aliud Conſecratio: Haſte thou ſeene the
VVater? But of VVater healeth not. But that VVater healeth, that hath the Grace of
God. The Elemente (or Creature of Water). One thinge: and the Conſecration
is an other thinge.
                  Thus the Breade remaineth: and thus it is changed. It remaineth in Subſtance:
but it is changed in Myſterie.
                  
                  But M. Hardinge heauily preſſeth theſe Woordes, Mutantur in Aliud: that is,
                     
ſaithe he,Changed into an other thinge. 
                     into a thinge of an other Subſtance. For by this phraſe is ſignified a Subſtantial
changinge, whiche aptely is called Tranſubſtantiation. I will not here vſe your courteous
eloquence, M. Hardinge: nor ſaie vnto you, as you ſaie to others, I praie you,
good Sir: but thus I ſaie, I praie you, M. Hardinge, who gaue you this rule? who
taught you this Leſſon? De Coelo eſt, an ex Hominibus? Came it from Heauen, or is
it of Menne?
                      Haue the Holy Fathers thus taught you, or is it onely you owne
fantaſie? What Grammar, What Logique, What Philoſophie, What Diuinitie
euer tolde you, that, Aliud, euermore ſignifieth a thinge of an other Subſtance?
If ye haue an Authour, why comme you without him? If it be onely of your ſelfe,
why ſhould wée beléeue you?
                  If, Aliud, ſignifie onely a Subſtance, and nothinge els, why doothe S. Auguſtine
ſaie,Auguſt. Contra M
                           ••
                        imi. Lib. 3. Cap. 12. as it is before alleged, Sacramenta ſunt Signa terum, Aliud exiſtentia, aliud
Significantia? Why ſaithe S. Auguſtine againe, Aliud eſt Sacramentum, Aliud
Virtus Sacramenti? Why ſaithe S. Ambroſe, Aliud eſt Elementum, Aliud Conſecratio?
                     Auguſt. in Iohan. Tracta. 26. Ambroſ. De Sacram. Lib. 1. ca. 5.
For by your Diuinitie the Sacramente, the Fourme, the Conſecration,
be Accidentes onely, and maie not be taken for the Subſtance. Verily for ought,
that I can learne, Aliud, is nothinge els, but Res alia, an other thinge, whether
it be the Subſtance, or the Accidente. For, I thinke, ye haue no
                        •
                      forgotten
the Olde rule, Vnumquod
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in ſuo genere eſt quid.
                  
                  Wée ſaie, The Nature, and Subſtance of the Breade, & Wine is not clearely
changed, or cōſumed into Nothinge, as many haue dreamed in theſe later daies.
Here M. Hardinge commeth roughly in, as his manner is, and ſaithe, ye belie vs:
vvee ſaie not ſo: God forebid. Thus he crieth out, before he be ſtriken. Salomon
ſaithe,Prouerb. 28. 
                     Impius fugit, nemine perſequente: The gilty fleeth, before he be chaſed.
                     
For, notwithſtandinge there be multitudes of folies in his Doctrine, yet with
this folie wée charge him not. But whether any of his Felowes haue ſo ſaide, or
no,4. Senten. Diſt. 11. Quidam. I reporte me to his Maiſter, Peter Lombarde. His woordes be theſe, Quid ergo
fit de Subſtantia Panis, & Vini? Illi dicunt, vel in praeiacentem materiam reſolui,
vel in nihilum redigi: What then becommeth of the Subſtance of the Breade, and
VVine? They ſaie, either that it is reſolued into the mater, that was before, or els, that it is
conſumed into nothinge.
                  
                  
                     Mary God forebid, ſaithe M. Hardinge. So coye, and careful he is, for his holy
Fourmes, and his kingedome of Accidentes. He ſaithe, The whole Subſtance of
the Breade is cleane aboliſhed, not one parte thereof remaininge: yet maie it not
be turned into nothinge. And, as if the mater were wel woorthe ſomewhat, be aſſureth
the ſame ſadly with a greate deteſtation, God forebid. Hereof ſomethinge
might be ſaide, if it were any thinge woorthe the hearinge. But, good Reader, thou
ſhalt loſe nothinge by the ſilence: For, I aſſure thée, verily it is woorthe nothinge.
                  Yet M. Hardinge firſte geueth vs his courteous menti: and afterwarde, in his
familiar manner, chargeth vs by plaine termes with a lie: and ſuddainely crieth
out, as he ſaith, beyonde the modeſtie of his natural diſpoſition, What is Iuggſinge:
what is Lieinge: what is Falſehedde: what is Falſifieinge: what is wickedneſſe of Falſaries,
if this be not? I might ſaie: O Sirs, Holde the man. Good Chriſtian Reader, in al
theſe Whattes, thou wilte happily thinke, there ſhould be ſomewhat. Now be it, in
déede it is but a pangue of M. Hardinges Rhetorique: leſte thou ſhouldeſt thinke,
that hauinge ſpente ſo many waſte woordes, in the ende he had ſaide nothinge.
                  But, what is the mater, M. Hardinge? What moueth you, to make this piteous
outcrie? For ſoothe bicauſe wée ſaie, The Breade, and VVine remaine the ſame,
they were before. But theſe be S. Ambroſes owne woordes: they be not ours: wée
make them not: wée change them not: but reporte them ſimply, as wée finde them.
As they were written in Latine by the Authour, theſe they are: (Panis, & Vinum)

                     ſunt, quae erant,
                     Changed into an other thinge. 
                     & in aliud mutantur: The Breade and VVine are the ſame, that
they vvere: and are changed into an other thinge.
                      Therefore, it appeareth, al theſe
Exclamations, of vvhat is lugglinge? vvhat is Lieinge? &c. perteine vnto S.
Ambroſe the Authoure hereof, and not vnto vs.
                  
                     Nowe, for ſo mutche as it hath pleaſed M. Hardinge ſo earneſtly to calle vs
foorthe to conſtrue him theſe vvoordes, I beſéeche thée, good Reader, marke wel,
what Conſtructions he, and his Felowes haue imagined, & fanſied vpon the ſame.
Firſte of al Lanfrancus, the chiefeſt Champion of that ſide, thought it the wiſeſt
waie,
                     Lanfrancur De Euchariſt. 
                     vtterly to denie theſe woordes, and to ſaie, They were neuer written by S.
Ambroſe. For thus he ſtormeth againſt Berengarius: O mentem amentem: O hominem
impudenter mentientem: O puniendam temeritatem: Ambroſium accire teſtem
praeſumis, quòd Panis, & Vinum Altaris, per Conſecrationem non definant eſſe, quoderant,
ſed commutentur in aliud, quod non erant? Et quidem ſi de Sacramentis, ſeu de coeteris,
de quibus Ambroſius ſcripſit, omnes reuoluat Libros, quos Eccleſia in vſu nunc
habet, tale quid ab Ambroſio dictum, taliter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      expoſitum, nuſquam repetire valebit:
O madde minde: O impudent Lier: O raſheneſſe woorthy of pouniſhement: Dareſt thou to
allege S. Ambroſe for a witneſſe, that the Breade and Wine of the Aultar leaue not by Conſecration,
to be that they were before: but are changed into an other thinge, that they were
not? Nowe truely if he peruſe al the Bookes, that S. Ambroſe hath written, either of the
Sacramentes, or of other maters, I meane ſutche Bookes, as the Churche hath no we in vſe, he
ſhal neuer finde any thinge ſo vvritten by S. Ambroſe, and ſo expounded.
                  
                  But M Hardinge thought, he might not wel thus doo without empeachement
of his modeſtie. For the very ſame woordes are to be founde extante, & apparent in
euery Booke. Therefore allowinge the woordes, he thought it beſte to folowe his
Maiſter Peter à Soto, and to delaie, & qualifie the ſame with ſome Conſtruction.
                  Thus therefore he ſaithe, Sunt, quae erant, & in aliud mutantur: Doothe it
not folowe by good Logike, Mutata ſunt, ergo ſunt: They be changed: Ergo
they be? In Louaine, perhaps: In other Vniuerſities, I doubte, whether it haue
hitherto benne allowed, or no. For by this Logique, where as S. Hierome ſaithe,
Superbia mutata eſt in Humilitatem,
                     Hieronym. in Matthae. Cap. 18. M. Hardinge maie conclude, as he doothe
nowe, Superbia mutata eſt: Ergo eſt: Pride is changed into Humilitie: Ergo Pride
is,
                     
                     Roman 1. 
                     or remaineth ſtil. And, whereas S. Paule ſaithe, Commutauerunt Veritatem Dei
in mendacium: By this Logique M. Hardinge maie ſaie, Mutata eſt, Ergo eſt: The
Truthe of God is changed into a Lie: Ergo, It is Goddes Truthe ſtil notwithſtandinge.
                     
                  
                  
                     And to take further viewe of M. Hardinges Conſtruction, thus he ſaithe,
Panis, & Vinum ſunt, quae erant, id eſt, qualia erant: The Breade, and VVine be in
Subſtance the ſame, that they were: that is to ſaie, They be in qualities, or Accidentes,
as they were. They are changed,
                      in Aliud, into an other thinge: that is,
Into an other Subſtance. Thei are Changed: that is, Thei are Tranſubſtantiate.
They be: that is: They be not: That they vvere: that is, that they vvere not.
Thus Subſtance, is Accidens: Accidens, is Subſtance: Beinge, is not Beinge:
Not Beinge, is Beinge: Remaininge, is not Remaininge: Changinge, is not
Changinge: And the ſame thinge, is not the ſame.
                  With ſutche prety Conſtructions M. Hardinge can teache vs to expounde the
Anciente Fathers. Theſe be their keies of the Kingedome of Heauen. Herewith
there is nothinge ſo cluſe ſhutte, but they can open it: There is nothinge ſo open,
but they can ſhut it. Here might I conclude with M. Hardinges owne woordes,
and rightly ſaie, as he ſaithe, vvhat is Iugglinge? vvhat is Lieinge? &c. But it
ſhalbe beſte to leaue his owne eloquence, and modeſtie to him ſelfe.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The places of Gelaſius, and Theodorite in apparence ſeeme to make mutche for you, and more then

any other Doctours. And though theſe twoo doctours were altogeather of this opinion, that after
Conſecration the Subſtance of Breade and VVine remaineth, what reaſon is it, they onely in ſo
greate a matter ſhoulde preiudicate all other Holy and learned Fathers, and whiche is more, the general
Councels, andVntruthe. For this fantaſie vvas neuer allovved through the vvhole Churche of Chriſte: as it ſhal appeare. the whole Churche of Chriſte? The Catholike Faithe we finde in them bothe
within fewe lines after the woordes of this Defenders obiection, firſte by Gelaſius thus expreſſed:
Sacramenta Corporis & Sanguinis Domìni in diuinam tranſeunt, Spiritu Sancto perficiente,
Subſtantiam: permanent tamen in ſuae proprietate Naturae; The Sacramentes (ſaithe
he) of the Body and Bloude of our Lorde paſſe ouer into a Diuine Subſtance by the woorkinge of the
Holy Ghoſte. Yet remaine they ſtil in the proprietie of their owne Nature. By diuine Subſtance he
meaneth the 
                        •
                     leaſ he of our Lorde aſſumpted of the VVoorde.The truthe cōfeſſed by Theodorit' Dialog. 1. Nowe ſaithe Theodoritus, the Myſtical
tokens, be vnderſtanded to be the thinges, whiche they be made, and are beleeued, and adored, as
beinge the thinges whiche they are beleeued to be. But euery man knoweth they are beleeued to be
made the Body and Bloude of Chriſte, and therefore be duely adored and woorſhipped: ſo after the
minde of Theodorite, they be the Body and Bloude in deede, not Breade and VVine, as before Conſecration.
                  The Subſtance or Nature of Breade and VVine ceaſſeth not to be, ſaithe Gelaſius: (VVhereas your
interpreter addeth of his owne heade this woorde So)Vntruthe. VVithout queſtion it is ſo. For the vvoordes be, Non definit eſſe Subſtantia Panis. we telle you and him, in Theodorite it us not
ſo. Ergo it remaineth, ſaye ye. VVee graunte the Subſtance, or Nature of Breade and VVine remaineth
after Conſecration, ſo as Gelaſius vnderſtandeth by the name of Subſtance,A peeuiſhe vntruthe. It had benne too great a folie. whiche is nothinge
elles but the very Nature (as commonly we ſpeake of Nature) that is to ſaie,Nature i
                           •
                         Gelaſius, and Subſtance in Theodorite is taken for naturall propertie. Dialog. 2. In Logi
                           •
                        s Cap. 23. the natural properties
of Breade and VVine: for ſo he expoundeth him ſelfe afterwarde, ſayinge, Yet they remaine
in the proprietie of their owne Nature. They remaine (likewiſe ſaithe Theodorite) in their Former
Subſtance, Figure, and Forme, and be ſeene and felte as before.
                  And there to maie Damaſcenes definition of Subſtance perteine, who ſaieth, that Subſtance is
euery that, what ſo euer by it ſelfe is beinge, and hath not beinge in an other. And thereforeVntruthe manifeſte: Reade the Anſvveare. ſht be
the Accidentes haue their beinge by themſelues in this Sacramente, and be not ſtaied on any other
thinge: in this conſideration, Subſtance of them maye ſo be reported, as if them ſelues were Subſtance.
VVhicheSubſtantial conſiſtinge of Accidentes: O folie. ſubſtantiall conſiſtinge of the Accidentes lackinge a propre name, becauſe it is
the mighty and extraordinary hande of God, is alſo extraordinarely called of Gelaſius, and Theodoritus
by the name, whiche the thinge had before, to witte, the Subſtance of Breade and VVine.
And no maruell if they ſpake not inO exacte folie. A heape of Vntruthes vvithout ſenſe. moſt exacte wiſe of this ſecrete pointe of Doctrine (of
Fourmes and Accidentes) at what time it was not as yet by the Churche ſo clerely, and fully
diſcuſſed: (as it was neuer pet vntil this daie). But ſithens of the Schoolemen (ignorante
and Fantaſtical Sophiſters) it hathe benne more diſtinctly named the exiſtence of
Accidentes without their Subiect, that is, without an other thinge whereupon they mighte ſtaye.
                  Againe whereas Breade and VVine by theire nature doo nourriſhe,Vntruthe. M. Harding by one dreame expoū
                        deth another. this vertue alſo remaineth
in the Accidentes geuen to them by the Almightie VVoorde of God, who changeth Creatures
to theire betteringe, not to theire impairinge. This was the meaninge of Gelaſius, and
The doritus, where they ſaye, the Breade and VVine to remaine in theire Former Subſtance or
Nature. Otherwiſe ſhoulde they be contrary to them ſelues, as they, whiche alſo doo acknowledge
the nature of Breade and VVine to be changed into a more excellent Subſtance, by the workefull
woorde of Chriſte.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  As for theſe two Fathers, Gelaſius, and Theodoretus, notwithſtandinge
M. Hardinge would ſaeme to make ſmal accoumpte of them, for that they be, as he
ſaithe, but onely twoo, yet he rather catcheth holde in ſomme darke, or doubteful
woorde by them vttered, then he woulde ſéeme vtterly to geue them ouer. Gelaſius
ſaithe, The Sacramentes paſſe ouer into a Diuine Subſtance: If he had ſaide, They paſſe ouer
into a Diuine Accidente, it woulde ſomewhat better haue ſhadowed theſe mennes
purpoſe. But other Diuine Subſtance M. Hardinge can imagine none, ſauinge

onely Chriſtes Body Subſtantially, and Really conteined vnder the Fourmes of
Breade and Wine. And this fantaſte, notwithſtandinge Gelaſius neuer knewe
it, muſte néedes be allowed againſte, al, that Gelaſius him ſelfe can ſaie to the contrarie.
                  But if M. Hardinge had better remembred the placinge, and meaninge of this
woorde, Subſtantia, and, that as wel Gelaſius, as other learned Fathers vſe the
ſame as Diuines, and not as Natural Philoſophers, he ſhould eaſily haue founde
his owne errour.
                  It maie pleaſe thée therefore, good Chriſtian Reader, to vnderſtande, That the
Promiſe of Mercie, The Grace of God, Our Faithe in Chriſte, Goddes Woorde, &
the Holy Sacramentes, that are the aides, and healpes of our Faithe, are of the
Holy Anciente Writers called a Subſtance.
                     Cyprian. De Simplicit. Praelatorum. So S. Cyprian ſaithe, Subſtantiam
Salutis amittunt: They loſe the Subſtance of Saluation.
                      So ſaithe Irenaeus, Quamuis
ſint in Operibus materialibus, tamen putant ſe non amittere Spiritualem Subſtantiam:
Although they liue in worldly,
                     Irenae. lia. ca. 1. In eodem Cap. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Chryſoſtom. in Epiſt. ad Hebrae. Homil. 21. 
                     or filthy woorkes, yet wey thinke, they loſe not the
Spiritual Subſtance.
                      Likewiſe againe he ſaithe of the folies, and Vanities of
the Valentinian Heretiques, Inſubſtantiuum oſtendit figmentum ipſorum: He
ſhewed, that theire Inuentions, and Diuiſes were voide of Subſtance. So S. Chryſoſtome,
Fides dat Subſtantiam rebus: Imò potiùs non dat Subſtantiam, ſed ipſa eſt
Subſtantia earum: Faithe geueth thinges theire Subſtance: Or rather it geueth not
Subſtance vnto thinges, but it ſelfe is theire Subſtance. In like manner ſaithe Tertullian,
Deus Idololatriae Subſtantiam cohibuit:
                     Tertull. Aduerſus Marcion. Lib. 2. 
                     God forebade the Subſtance of Idolatrie.
So ſaithe Abbate Panormitane, Continentia non eſt de Subſtantia
Ordinis: Single, or loſe life is not of the Subſtance of Holy Orders.
                      And an other
ſaithe,Abbas Extrae. De Clericis Coniugatis. Cū Olim. Pupilla Oculi. Pag. 14. 
                     Enim, non eſt de Subſtantia Conſecrationis: This woorde, Enim, is not of
the Subſtance of Conſecration. By theſe, and other like examples, it maie appeare,
that in caſes of Religion, subſtance is not euermore taken for Chriſtes Body
couered with Accidentes.
                  
                     If al theſe examples wil not yet ſuffiſe, to growe neare to our purpoſe, S.
Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſ. De Elia, & Ieiunio. Cap. 3. Quid eſt Ieiunium, niſi Subſtantia, & Imago Coeleſtis? VVhat
is Faſtinge, but a Subſtance, and an Image of Heauen?
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe Tertullian calleth Baptiſme, Diuinam Subſtantiam, A Diuine Subſtance.
His woordes be theſe:
                     
                        Tertull. De Baptiſmo. This is one of Tertullians errours. Quid feſtinat innocens aetas ad Remiſsionem Peccatorum?
Cautiùs agitur in ſaecularibus: Vt cui Subſtantia terrena non creditur, Diuina
credatur? VVhy haſteth this innocente age (he meaneth Children) to the Remiſsion
of their Sinnes? VVee are mutche more wary in worldely thinges. Is it meete,
wee ſhoulde committe the Sacramente of Baptiſme, whiche is a Diuine Subſtance, vnto
them, vnto whome wee woulde not committe the Subſtance of the Earthe?
                  
                  By theſe wee maie ſee, in what ſenſe Gelaſius calleth the Sacramente of
Thankeſgeuinge, A Diuine Subſtance. Verily none otherwiſe, but euen as
S. Ambroſe calleth Faſtinge, A heauenly Subſtance. And as Tertullian calleth
the Sacramente of Baptiſme, by the ſame woordes, A Diuine Subſtance.
And what can al this auaile M. Hardinge, to proue, either his Tranſubſtantiation,
or his Real Preſence?
                  
                  
                     But why dealeth he ſo doubly? Wherefore diſſembleth he the woordes of Gelaſius,
that immediatly in the ſame ſentence wente before? For Gelaſius him
ſelfe ſo clearely, and plainely expoundeth his owne minde, as no Louanian Doctour
can doo it better.
                     Getaſius contra Eutychetem. 
                     Thus he ſaithe, Non deſinit eſſe Subſtantia Panis, vel
Natura Vini. Et certè Imago. & similitudo Corporis, & Sanguinis Chriſti in
Actione Myſteriorum celebratur: There leaueth not to be the Subſtance of
Breade, or the Nature of VVine. And in deede the Image, or Repreſentation,

and likeneſſe of the Body, and Bloude of Chriſte is publiſhed in the Miniſtration of the
Myſteries. And againe in the woordes nexte immediately folowinge,
                      Sacramenta
tranſeunt in Diuinam, Spiritu Sancto perficiente, Subſtantiam: permanent
tamen in ſuae proprietate Naturae: The Sacramentes, by the woorkinge of the Holy
Ghoſte, paſſe into a Diuine Subſtance: yet notwithſtandinge, they remaine ſtil in the propertie
of their ovvne Nature.
                  This Image, or Repreſentation, or Likeneſſe, or Memorie of the Body, and
Bloude of Chriſte is it, that Gelaſius calleth the Diuine Subſtance.
                  
                  
                     And in like ſenſe S. Auguſtine calleth the ſame, Coeleſtem Panem: The
Heauenly Breade. Thus he writeth, as he is alleged by Gratian: Coeleſtis
Panis,De Con. Diſt. 2. Hoc eſt. quod dici
                           •
                        us. qui Caro Chriſti eſt, ſuo modo vocatur Corpus Chriſti: cùm reuera ſit Sacramentum
Corporis Chriſti:Cyprian. De vnctione Chriſmatis. 
                     The Heauenly Breade (of the Sacramente) whiche
is the Fleaſhe of Chriſte,
                      after his ſorte is called the Body of Chriſte: whereas in deede
it is the Sacramente of Chriſtes Body. Likewiſe ſaithe S.
                      Cyprian, Diuerſa Nomina,
vel Species ad Vnam reducuntur Eſſentiam: & Significantia, & Significata eiſdem
vocabulis cenſentur: Diuerſe names, or kindes (of thinges) are brought vnto one Subſtance:
That is to ſaie, The thinges, that doo
                      Signifie, and the thinges, that be Signified,
are reckened bothe by one name: That is, as y Body of Chriſte is called Breade:
ſo is the Breade called Chriſtes Body.
                     
                  
                  
                     To be ſhorte, as Gelaſius calleth the Sacramente, A Diuine Subſtance, euen
ſo Gratian ſaithe to the ſame purpoſe, Quidam non improbabiliter exponunt hoc loco,
Carnis,De Con. Diſt. 2. Species. & Sanguinis Veritatem, ipſam earundem efficientiam, id eſt, peccatorum
Remiſsionem: Somme there be, that in this place, not without good reaſon, by theſe
woordes, The Truthe of Chriſtes Fleaſhe, and Bloude, vnderſtande the Effecte,
or vvoorkinge of the ſame, that is to ſaie, The Remiſsion of Sinnes.
                  
                  For anſweare vnto Theodoretus, it maie pleaſe thée, for ſparinge of time,
to reade my Former Replie to M. Hardinge.Arti. S. Diul. 26. Et Articul. 10 Diuiſ. 4. It is true, that Theodorete ſaithe,
The Myſtical Tokens, that is to ſaie, the Sacramentes, be vnderſtoode to be
the thinges, whiche they be made, and be beleeued: That is, That they be Myſteries
of Chriſtes Body: or that in a Myſterie, or by waie of a Sacramente, they
be the Body of Chriſte. But it is true alſo, that he ſaithe, bothe immediately folowinge
in the ſame place, and alſo before: Signa Myſtica poſt Sanctificationem
non recedunt à Natura ſua:
                     Theodoret. in 2. Dialogo, Inconfuſus. Auguſt contra Maximin. Lib. 3. Cap. 22. 
                     Manent enim in Priori Subſtantia, & Figura, &
Forma: The Myſtical Tokens (or Sacramentes) after the Conſecration departe
not from their ovvne Nature. For they remaine ſtil in their Former Subſtance,
and Fourme, and Figure.
                      And, as I haue often alleged orte of S. Auguſtine,
In Sacramentis videndum eſt, non quid ſint, ſed quid Significent: In Sacramentes
wee muſte conſider, not vvhat they be (in déede, and of theire owne Nature) but
what they Signifie.
                      So ſaithe S. Chryſoſtome, Antequàm Panis Sanctificetur,
Panem eum nominamus:
                     Chryſoſtom. Ad Caeſarium. 
                     Diuina autem illum Gratia ſanctificante, mediante Sacerdote,
liberatus eſt quidem ab appellatione Panis: Dignus autem habitus eſt Dominici
Corporis appellatione: Etiamſi Natura Panis in illo remanſerit: Before the Breade
be Sanctified, wee calle it Breade. But after that by the meane of the Prieſte the Heauenly
Grace hath hallowed it, it is diſcharged from the name of Breade, and is voucheſaued to be
called by the name of our Lordes Body: notvvithſtandinge the Nature of the Breade
remaine ſtil. So ſaith Theodorete him ſelfe, Seruator noſter commutauit nomina: &
Corpori quidem Symboli nomen dedit,
                     Theodoret, Dialo. 1. 
                     Symbolo verò nomen Corporis: Our Saueour
hath made exchange of y• names: And vnto his Body hath geuen y• name of
                      (Breade, whiche
is) the Sacrament: and vnto the Sacrament hath geuen the name of his Body.
                     
                  
                  Neuertheleſſe, notwithſtandinge theſe woordes bothe of Theodoretus, and
of Gelaſius, (The Subſtance of Breade, and VVine, after the vvoordes of Conſecration

remaineth ſtil) be ſo plaine,Nature: Vertue. that noman without bluſſhinge maie denie
them, Yet hathe M. Hardinge one good ſhifte leaſte in ſtoare. The Subſtance, ſaith
be, ſommetimes is vſed for the Accidente: euen as diſcretely, and to ſo good pourpoſe,
as if he had ſaid, Fire is Water, or, Light is Darkeneſſe. And ſo by this Conſtruction,
Subſtance ſommetimes is no Subſtance. This is M. Hardinges owne
peculiare Diuinitie, without the witneſſe of any of al the Learned Fathers, Gréeke,
or Latine, one, or other. For, good Reader, thou maiſte not thinke, that any man,
either wel aduiſed, or learned, woulde ſaie the like.
                  The Fathers, ſaithe he, ſpake not hereof in moſte exacte vviſe. Perhaps
they had not Learned theire Logique Rules, or vnderſtoode not the Principles of
Natural reaſon, no not ſo mutche, as a childe maie eaſily vnderſtand: but vſed Subſtance
for Accidentes: Accidentes for Subſtance: and one thinge for an other: as
menne that knewe not, what they ſaide. In deede, M. Hardinge, this is not, as
you ſaie, Exacte vviſe: It ſéemeth rather to be, Exacte folie.
                  
                  Ye adde further, Damaſcene ſaithe, Subſtance is euery that, what ſo euer by it
ſelfe is beinge, and hathe no beinge in an other.
                      What needed you here to allege Damaſcene?
Children know, that Ariſtotle, and others longe before him wrote the
like. Notwithſtandinge to this Maior ye ſet a Minor of your owne. Theſe Accidentes,
ſaie you, haue theire beinge by them ſelues: and be not ſtaide in any other
thinge. O, M. Hardinge, this thinge woulde haue had ſomme better proufe.
Why allege you not, either S. Auguſtine, or S. Ambroſe, or S. Chryſoſtome,
or S. Hierome, or ſomme other Catholique Father to this pourpoſe? Your ſimple
woorde is no good warrante. Ye proue that thinge, that is Vniuerſally confeſſed,
and needed no proufe: but that ye ſhoulde proue, ye leaue vnproued. This in
Sophiſtrie is called Petitio Principij. The ſimpleſt ſhifte, that can be vſed.
                  
                     Damaſcenes Maior is Confeſſed, and true. But your Minor, and Concluſion,
are bothe Vntrue. For whereas you ſaie of your ſelfe: The Accidentes haue their
Beinge by them ſelues: wee ſaie, the ſame Accidentes haue theire Beinge in the
Breade, and Wine, as in theire Subiectes. Sundrie of your owne felowes haue
ſaide,De Con. dis. 2. Species. In gloſſ. 
                     Accidentia illa ſunt in Aere, tanquam in Subiecto: Theſe Accidentes are
in the Aire, as in theire Subiecte. Therefore by theire iudgement, they haue not
theire Beinge, as you ſaie, by them ſelues. You maie alſo remember, that your
Maiſter him ſelfe neuer durſte preciſely to determine this mater: but onely paſſeth
it ouer darkely, and doubtefully, as beinge not wel reſolued, what to ſaie. His
wordes be theſe: Mihi videtur fatendum, Accidentia illa exiſtere ſine Subiecto: It
ſeemeth vnto me,
                     
                     4. Senten. diſ. 22 Si autem. 
                     or, es I can gheaſſe, theſe Accidentes haue theire Being without a Subiect.
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVee muſte 
                        〈◊〉
                      beholde, ſaithe Euthymius, a Greeke Doctour, the Nature of the thinges,
whiche be ſet before vs:VVhat is the Vertue, and Povver of your Accidente
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      but the vertue, or power of them.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Euthymius, although one of the meaneſt Doctours, ſaithe right wel, and
as the Learned Fathers ſaide before him. But, M. Hardinge, doo you take your
Authours at al aduentures, as they comme to hande: or doo you conſider, what
they ſaie
                        •
                      Tel vs. I beſeech you in your fantaſie, what are thoſe thingꝭ y• 
                     Euthymius
ſaithe, are ſet before vs? Whether are they the Body, and Bloude of Chriſte,
or clarour Accidentes? If it be Chriſtes very Body and Bloude ſubſtantially,
Really, & in deede, VVhy ſhoulde vvee not conſider the Nature of them? what
haue they offended you?Cyrill. in Iohan. Lib. 4. Cap. 12. Or what imperfection finde you in them? Cyrillus ſaithe,
Caro Chriſti Natura viuifica eſt: The Fleaſhe of Chriſte by Nature hath power to geue

Life.
                     
                     Came not to deſtroie And Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe, My Fleaſhe is Verily Meate: and My Bloude is
Verily Drinke. Therefore the Nature hereof is wel woorthy to be conſidered.
But if there be nothinge there ſet foorthe, but onely your bare, and naked Accidentes,
What Povver, What Vertue is there in them? What Doctoure, or Father
euer taught vs, that wee ſhould haue Remiſſion of Sinne, and be ſaued by
your Accidentes?
                  
                  
                     But, as I ſaide, Euthymius writeth wel, folowinge herein the Doctrine
of the Ancient Learned Fathers.
                     Baſilius De Spiritu Sancto. Cap. 15. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     S. Baſile ſaithe, Si qua Gratia eſt in Aqua, ea
non eſt ex Natura Aquae, ſed ex praeſentia Spiritus: If there be any Grace in the VVater,
(of Baptiſme) it is
                      not of the Nature of the VVater, but of the preſence of the Sprite.
Cyprian ſpeaking of y• Oile, ſaith thus: Sanctificatis Elementis iam non propria Natura
praebet effectum: Sed Virtus Diuina potentiùs operatur: It is not Nature, that
geueth effecte, or force vnto the Elementes beinge Sanctified: but the Diuine Povver
woorketh more mightily.
                     Cyprian. De Vnction. Chriſmatis. 
                     So ſaithe S. Chryſoſtome. Petra erat Chriſtus: Non enian
ipſius Petrae Natura Aqua ſcatutiebat: Sed alia quaedam Spiritualis Petra omnia
operata eſt, hoc eſt. Chriſtus: The Rocke was Chriſt. For it vvas not by the Nature of
the Rocke,Chryſoſt. 1. Cori. Homil. 18. 
                     that the VVater guſſhed out: but a certaine other Spiritual Rocke wrought al
theſe thinges, that is to ſaie, Chriſte. In like manner the Anciente Father
                      Origen ſpeakinge
of the Power,
                     Origen in Matt. Cap. 15. 
                     and Vertue of Our Lordes Supper ſaithe thus, Illud, quod
Sanctificatur per Verbum Dei, & per Obſecrationem, non ſuapte Natura ſanctificat
vtentem: The thinge, that is Sanctified by the Ʋ
                        Ʋoorde of God, and by Praier, ſanctifieth
not him, that vſeth it, by the Nature of it ſelfe. By theſe, and other like aduertiſementes,
theſe Godly Fathers meante to withdrawe Our mindes from the
outwarde corruptible Creatures, to the Spiritual, and Inwarde vnderſtandinge
of the Sacramentes. Therefore Euthymius in the ſame place ſaithe, Panis habet
Similitudinem quandam ad Corpus,Euthymius in Math. Cap. 64. & Vinum ad Sanguinem: The Breade hathe a certaine
Likeneſſe vnto the Body, and the VVine a certaine Likeneſſe vnto the Bloude.
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhen it pleaſed our Sauiour Chriſte at his laſte Supper to inſtitute this bleſſed Sacramente, at
whiche he toke Bread and VVine,The Doctrine of tranſubſtā
                        tiation. Li. 83. quae. and turned them into his Body and Bloude, he would in ſuch wiſe aduance
theſe Creatures to a muche excellenter condition, as they ſhoulde loſe no whit of their former
VertuesVntruthe, fon le and Childiſhe. As though Chriſte had died to ſaue Accidentes. For the ſonne of man came not to deſtroie, but to ſaue: and, as S. Auguſtine ſaithe, is not cauſe
that any thinge tend vnto not beinge.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  At the laſte M. Hardinge hathe founde ſomme Scripture: and that, God
wote, ful aptely he applteth to ſerue his pourpoſe. The Sonne of Man, ſaithe be,
came not to deſtroie, but to ſaue: Ergo, The Breade, and VVine loſe no white of theire
Former Vertues.
                     Luke 9.
                  
                  Here, I beſéeche you, M. Hardinge, what came the Sonne of Man to ſaue?
Muſte wee beléeue, be came from Heauen, to Saue your Accidentes? Was this
the cauſe of Chrictes comming? It this the Religion ye haue Learned in Louaine?
S.1. Corin. 6. 
                     Paule ſaithe, Nenquid de bubus cura eſt Deo? Hathe God any ſpecial care for Oxen?
                     
Might not one mutch beter ſaie, Hathe God any care for your Fourmes, for your Shevves,
for your empty Accidentes?
                  Perhaps ye wil ſaie, I preſſe you ouer heauily. Ye meante, that Chriſte
came to Saue Breade, and Wine. How be it, ſo ye cannot ſaie: For by your Doctrine
the Nature, and Subſtance of the Breade, and the Wine, by the comminge,
and preſence of Chriſt, are quite aboliſhed, nothinge remaining, but onely the Accidentes.
But be it, that Chriſte came, to Saue theſe Creatures, Then is your

Religion mutche like vnto the Diuinitie of the Olde Heretiques called the Manichees.
                     Change in Accidentes. Auguſtin. ad Quoduuſtdeum.
                      Of them S. Auguſtine writeth thus: Herbas, atque arbores ſic putant viuere,
vt ea & ſentire credant, & dolere, cùm laeduntur: nec aliquid inde ſine cruciatu corum
quenquam poſſe vellere: They thinke, that Herbes, and Trees haue life, ſo for foorthe,
that they beleeue, they haue ſenſe, and feelinge, and ſuffer gnefe and paine, when they be
hurte:
                     
                     Ibidem. 
                     and that noman can pul, or plucke ought from them without theire ſmarte: And
againe he ſaithe, Nec oua ſumunt, quaſi & ipſa, cùm frangunturt, expirent: They Eate no
Bgges, imagining, that, when they be broken, theire life, or Soule paſſethe from them.
                     
                  
                  Theſe be mere folies, M. Hardinge. Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe, Hée came to
Saue, not your Accidentes, but Sinners: not Breade, and VVine, but the thing,
that vvas loſte. And wil ye tel vs, that your Accidentes were loſte? Or that
Breade, and VVine were ſutche ſinful Creatures?
                  O, M. Hardinge, haue more reuerence to Goddes Woorde. It is Holy: It
is it, whereby you ſhalbe Iudged. Haue better regarde hencefoorthe, to that ye
write. Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe, Filius Hominis non venit,
                     Luke. 
                           •
                        
                      
                     vt perdat Animas
Hominum, ſed vt ſeruer: The Sonne of Man came not to deſtroie the Soules of men,
but to Saue them.
                      Here in fauoure of your Accidentes, ye haue leafte out the Soules
of Menne, whiche was the knot of the whole. And ſo there muſte needes appeare
in you, either groſſe ignorance, or wilful corruption.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Seeinge then there is a change by al conſent,Vntruthe, euidente, and ſenſible Reade the Anſvveare. and certaine it is that the change is not in the
Accidentes, becauſe wee ſee them remaine as they were before,Change in Subſtance. and God deceiueth not our lenſes in
their true and proper obiecte, whiche is colour, taſte, ſmel, &c. It muſts needes be, that the change be
in ſubſtance,Vntruthe, trifinge, and Sophiſtical. For Subſtance is perceiued by the ſenſes, although by meane of the Accidentes. whiche is to ſenſe incomprehenſible.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  There is a change in the Bread, ſaith M. Harding: But not in the Accidentes
thereof: Ergo, in the Subſtance. In like order of reaſon he might haue ſaide, It
is not a Fearnbuſhe, Ergo, it is a Foxe. Ye maie not looke, M. Hardinge, to
ſteale thus awaie with ſo ſimple Sophiſmes. This poore ſhifte emonge Children
is called Petitio Principij.
                  
                  Your Minor, wherein ſtandeth the whole doubte, and whiche by ſomme Authoritie,
or ſhewe of reaſon, one waie, or other, ye ſhould haue proued true, ye
haue paſte it ſteily ouer without any manner of prouſe at al, and preſume it onely
to be true. And ſo the whole weight hereof ſtandeth not by Truthe, or Reaſon:
but hangeth onely by preſumption.
                  For what Doctoure, or Father euer tolde you, or made you ſo certaine, that
in the Breade there is no change touching the Accidentes? Ye ſaie, your ſenſes tel
you, that the Accidentes remaine ſtil, as they were before. And the ſame ſenſes
alſo tel you, as S. Auguſtine ſaithe, that the Subſtance of the Breade remaineth
ſtil,Ad Infantes: Quod vide
                           •
                        is Panis eſt: quod etiam oculi renuntiant. Chryſoſt. in Mas. Homi. 83. as it was before. But wil you ſo ſuddainely forſake your olde Leſſon? Wil
you nowe put this mater in Compromiſſe to your ſenſes? Howe often, and how
ſadly haue you tolde vs, that theſe be caſes of Onely Faithe, and that in the Iudgemente
hereof, bothe Senſe, and Reaſon muſte be abandoned? And haue you forgotten
that Chryſoſtome ſaith, Nihil ſenſibile traditū nobis eſt à Chriſto Quaecùnque
Chriſtus tradidit, inſenſibilia ſunt: There is no ſenſible thing deliuered vnto vs by
Chriſte
                      (in theſe Myſteries). And againe, 
                        Ʋ
                        Ʋhat ſo euer thinges Chriſte hath geeuen vs,
they are vnſenſible.
                      If they be thinges vtterly vnſenſible, how then can they be
iudged by your ſenſes? Why comme ye not foorthe with the Learned Doctours,
and Catholique Fathers, of whom, ye ſaie, ye haue ſutche plentie. If it be true,

as you ſaie,Change in Accidentes. that there is no change in Accidente, why is it not proued? If it be
ralſe, why is it auouched? Tel vs, howe longe ſhal wee be bounde to your bare
woorde?
                  
                     Verily, S. Auguſtine woulde haue tolde you, that this change is in Accidente,Auguſtin ad Bonifacium Epiſt. 23.
                     and not in Subſtance. For thus he ſaith, as it hathe benne often remembred,
Niſi Sacramenta Similitudinem quandam haberent earum rerum, quarum Sacramenta
ſunt, Omninò Sacramenta non eſſent. Ex hac autem Similitudine plaerunque rerunt
ipſaeum nomina accipiunt: Onleſſe Sacramentes had certaine likeneſſe of the thinges, of
whiche they be Sacramentes, then in deede they were no Sacramentes. And of this likeneſſe
oftentimes they beare the names of the thinges them ſelues.
                     In eadem Epiſin. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Secundum
quendam modum Sacramentura Corporis Chriſti Corpus Chriſti eſt: The Sacrament
of Chriſtes Body after a certaine manner is Chriſtes Body.
                     Auguſtin contra Adimantum Cap. 12. 
                     And againe, Non dubitauit
Dominus dicere, Hoc eſt Corpus meum, cùm daret Signum Corporis ſui: Our
Lorde doubted not to ſaie, This is my Body, when he geue a token of his Body. Likewiſe
ſaithe Tertullian, expounding, & openinge the meaning of Chriſtes woordes.
Hoc eſt Corpus meum, Hoc eſt, Figura Corporis mei: This is my Body, that is to
ſaie,
                     Tertull. contra Marcionem li. 4. This is a Figure of my Body. You knowe, M. Hardinge, that Modus, Simile,
Diſſimile, Signum, and Figura, be in the Predicamente of Qualitie: and
therefore perteine to Accidente, and not to Subſtance.
                  So Chryſoſſtome. where as he amplifieth the Change of the Breade in the
Sacramente of Thankeſgeuinge, he addeth inmediately withal, Sic etiam in Baptiſmo:
                     Chryſot. in Mat. Homi. 13. Ambroſ. De Sacrament, Li. 4. Cap. 4. 
                     Euen ſo is it, that is to ſaie, The like change there is in the VVater of Baptiſme,
                     
In theſe Mutations the Subſtance remaineth ſtil: But the Reſpecte, or
Qualitie, or Accidente is changed. And this is it, that S. Ambroſe ſaide before,
Sunt, quae erant: & in aliud mutantur (In Subſtance) they are the ſame, they were
before: But (in Accidente, or Qualitie) they are turned into an other thinge.
                     
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  And here wee putte you in minde of your falſefieinge of Theodorites woordes,Theodrite falſefied by the Defender. in that ye
make him to ſaie in your Engliſhe, The Myſtical Signes to remaine in their former Subſtance, Fourme
and Kinde, where he ſaitheVntruthe. Euen ſo he faith. Othervviſe M. Hardinge hathe a Subſtance vvithout Kinde. not ſo, but in theire former Subſtance, Figure and Shape. Ye knowe
pardy, there is greate difference betweene the Kinde of a thinge, and his Shape. The oftener ye vſe
that falſebed, as ye vſe it very often, the more ſhal ye be eſpied to be falſe teachers, and growe
out of credite, where truthe is loued.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  If there be any falſehoode, or faulte herein, by your owne Confeſſion, it is
the Interpreters, and not the Authours. You knowe wel, Our contention is
not of the Shape of Breade, but of the Subſtance. Theodoretus ſaith, The Breade
departeth not from his owne Nature, but remaineth ſtil in the former Subſtance,
Figure, and Fourme: Sate you, as Theodoretus ſaithe: Confeſſe plainely, as he
doothe, that the Subſtance of the Breade remaineth ſtil, and, with good leaue, take
the Shape vnto your ſelfe.
                  And yet I ſée no greate cauſe, why ye ſhould ſo mightily crie out, Falſe Teachers,
Falſehed, Falſifieinge, for that the Interpreter hathe expounded this Latine
woorde, Forma, by this Engliſhe woorde, Kinde, For, as it is proued before
by ſundrie examples more at large,
                        
                           •
                        efore, in the ſeconde Part. I. ca. 1. Diuiſion. Athana. De Definitionib. in the Anciente Fathers theſe two woordes,
Forma, and Natura, are often vſed for one thinge. Athanaſius ſaithe, Natura,
Eſſentia, Genus. Forma. vnū ſunt: Nature. subſtance, Kind, and Forme be al one.
Certainely, if the very Subſtance of the Breade ſhould remaine, as Theodoretus
ſaithe, and yet the Kinde of y• Breade ſhould not remaine, it were awo
                        •
                     nder. For,

as there is no Kinde without Subſtance, So is there no Subſtance without
Kinde.
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The woordes whiche ye recite out of S. Auguſtines Sermon Ad Infantes, we finde in Bedevpon
the tenthe Chapter of the firſte Epiſtle to the Corinthians. The whole place is this: This thinge which
ye ſee in the Aulter of God, ye haue ſene it alſo in the night paſte. But what it was, what it meaneth,
the Sacramente of how great a thinge it conteineth,Anſvveare to the place alleged out of S. Auguſtine. as yet ye haue not heard. That then whiche ye
ſawe, is Breade and Chalice, whiche euen your eyes tel you. But that whiche your Faithe requireth
to be inſtructed of, Breade is the Body of Chriſte, the Chalice his Bloude. If the Subſtance of Breade
remained, as before Conſecration, what neede had they to learne, what it were? For of them ſelues,
they might know we the thinges proponed to be Breade, and VVine. But S. Auguſtine, ye ſaie, calleth
that they ſawe Breade, and VVine. Yea Sir, ſo it was, ſo farre as theire eies tolde them. But what
their faithe ought to tel them, he inſtructeth them, ſaieinge: Breade to witte, is the Holy Body of
Chriſte. To this Conſtruction muſte wee ſtande, by S. Auguſtine him ſelfe ſo ſet foorthe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  S. Auguſtines woordes are plaine yenough: howe ſo euer it like you to ſhaowe
them with your Gloſes. Thus he ſaithe, Quod vidiſtis, Panis eſt, & Calix:
quod vobis etiam Oculi veſtri renuntiant: The thinge, that you ſawe, is the Breade,
and the Cuppe: whiche thinge your eies doo reporte vnto you.
                      Where alſo maie be
noted, as by the waie, that S. Auguſtine, contrarie to your Doctrine, M. Hardinge,
referreth the Iudgmente hereof to the reporte, and trial of the ſenſes.
And againe he ſaithe of him ſelfe in the like caſe, Vereor, ne ipſis ſenſibus noſtris
facere videamur iniuriam,
                     Auguſtin. ad Dardanum, Epiſt. 57. 
                     quando id loquendo ſuademus, vbi omnes Vires, officium
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
Sermonis facillimè ſuperat euidentia Veritatis: I feare me, wee ſhoulde doo wronge vnto
our Senſes, if wee would goe about to proue that thinge by ſpeakinge, wherein the euidence
of the Truthe it ſelfe paſſeth al dewtie, and power of Speache.
                     
                  
                  
                     How be it, S. Auguſtine ſaithe further, Quod autem Fides veſtra poſtulat inſtruenda,
Panis eſt Corpus Chriſti, Calix Sanguis: This Obiection maie be anſweared
by that is ſaide before. Theſe twoo ſaieinges are bothe true. Heſychius
ſaithe,Heſythius in Leui. li. 12. ca. 8. Myſterium noſtrum ſimul & Panis, & Caro eſt: Our Myſterie is bothe Breade,
and Fleaſhe. It is Breade in Subſtance, & in deede: It is alſo the Body of Chriſte,
not in Subſtance, but in a Myſterie. Your owne Gloſe ſaithe, as it is before alleged:
Dicitur Corpus Chriſti,De Con. Diſt. 2. Hoc eſt quod. In Gloſſ. ſed impropriè: Vt ſit ſenſus, Vocatur Corpus Chriſti,
id eſt, Significat Corpus Chriſti: It is called the Body of Chriſte: but vnproperly,
or, not in dowe and vſual fourme of ſpeache: The meaninge thereof maie be this: It is called
Chriſtes Body, that is to ſaie, It Signifiethe Chriſtes Body.
                  
                     In a Sacramente wee muſte beholde, not onely the outwarde Elemente,
but alſo the thinge it ſelfe, whereof it is a Sacramente. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Si ad ipſas res viſibiles,Auguſtin. De Baptiſmo contra Donatiſ. Li. 3. Cap. 10. quibus Sacramenta tractantur, animum conferamus, quis neſciat,
eas eſſe corruptibiles? Si autem ad id, quod per illas res agitur, quis non videat,
non poſſe corrumpi? If wee conſider the viſible Creatures, wherein the Sacramentes
are miniſtred, who knoweth not, they be thinges corruptible? But if wee conſider the
thinge, that is wrought thereby, who ſeeth not, It cannot be corrupted?
                  And in the ſame place before alleged, S. Auguſtine fully expoundeth his
owne meaninge, in what ſenſe the Breade maie be called the Body of Chriſte.
Theſe be his woordes:Auguſtin. in Sermone ad Infantes. 
                     Chriſtus leuauit Corpus ſuum in Coelum, vnde venturus eſt,
vt iudicet viuos, & mortuos. Ibi eſt modò ſedens ad Dextram Patris. Quomodò eſt
Panis Corpus eius? Et Calix, vel, quod habet Calix, quomodò eſt Sanguis eius? Iſta,

Fratres, ideò dicuntur Sacramenta, quia in eis aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur:
Chriſte hathe lifted vp his Body into Heauen: from whence hee ſhal comme to iudge the
quicke, and the deade. There is hee nowe ſittinge at the Right Hande of the Father.
Hovve then is the Breade his Body? And the Cuppe, or that is in the Cuppe, howe
is it his Bloude? His anſweare is this: O my Brethren, theſe be called Sacramentes,
for that in them one thinge is ſeene, and an other thinge is vnderſtanded.
                  
                  Thus therefore, the thinge, that wée ſée with our Bodily eies, is the very
Nature, and Subſtance of Breade: but the thinge, that wee ſee with our Faithe,
is the very Natural Body of Chriſte ſittinge in Heauen, and repreſented vnto vs
in the Myſteries.
                  Nowe, I beſeeche thée, good Chriſtian Reader, marke, what Diſcante M.
Hardinge plaieth vpon theſe woordes. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Beleeue the Iudgemente
of your eies: M. Hardinge ſaithe, Senſes be deceiteful: Beleeue not the
Iudgemente of your eies.
                      S. Auguſtine ſaithe, The thinge, that you ſee is Breade:
M. Hardinge ſaithe, It is not ſo: it is no Breade. So handſomely this Gloſe
groweth to the Texte.
               
            
            
               The Apologie.
               Or, that, whiche Origen ſaithe, The Breade, whiche is Sanctified
by the Woorde of GOD, as touchinge the Material Subſtance
thereof, goeth into the Belly, and is caſte out into the priuie.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  In alleginge Origen, Sir Defender, ye plaie your accuſtomed falſe plaie,Vntruthe. For vve haue Corrupted, nor vvord, nor Sentence. To that Material: A proper tranſlation. corruptinge his
ſentence, and falſifieinge his woordes. For they be not as you recite them, but thus: Ille cibus, qui
ſanctificatur per Verbum Dei,
                     Origens vvoordes examined. Origen falſefied bi the Defender. 
                     pèrque obſecrationem, iuxta id quod habet materiale, in
ventrem abit, & in ſeceſſum eijcitur: That meate, whiche is Conſecrated by the VVoorde of God,
and by Praier, accordinge to that Material, whiche it hathe, it goeth into the belly, and is voided
foorthe into the Priuie. Here neither nameth heVntruthe. For he nameth it Breade ſeuen times in that one place. Breade, as you doo (to cauſe the people to thinke,
it is but very Breade) but meate. And that you haue in your Latine▪ 
                     Quod quidem ad Materiam
attinet: whiche is by your Interpreter, As touchinge the Material Subſtance thereof,Vntruthe, O
                           •
                        leſſe ye vvil rather cal it the Material Accidente. it is not Origens,
but your owne forged ſtuffe, to deceiue the ignorante withal, to thende they might be moued
by your falſe handlinge of that Doctour, to beleeue, the mater and Subſtance of very Breade to remaine.
He ſpeakethe not of theVntruthe: For in the ſame place he ſaithe, Nec Materia Panis. mater of Breade, but of that whiche is Material in this Sacramente, meaninge
the Accidentes or Qualities remaininge after Conſecration, whiche be Material, but not the
mater it ſelfe of Breade (as Mater is taken for the one parte of a perfect Subſtance)Vntruthe, ſhameleſſe, and vvithout ſenſe: For vvhat Accidentes he voided foorthe. and the ſame
Accidentes be voided foorthe, as Origen had good cauſe by occaſion of Chriſtes woorde to declare, you
had none to recorde the ſame. But it liked your filthy ſprite withe vile woordes to bringe that
Holy Myſterie, and Bleſſed Sacramente into contempte. VVherein ye do the Deuil Authour of al Heriſies
the greateſt ſeruice, that maie be deuiſed.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Hereſies, falſe plaie, Falſehed, Falſifieinge, Vile vvoordes, Filthy Spirites,
are nowe becomme M. Hardinges ordinarie, and vſual Eloquence. Here
haue we corrupted, as he ſaithe, and belied Origen, for that wee place this woorde.
Panis, in ſteede of Cibus: And, for that wee ſaie, Panis, quod ad Materiam attinet,
in ſteede of theſe woordes, Cibus iuxta id, quod habet materiale. This is
Forges ſtuffe: This is Homble, and ſhameful corruption, to deceiue the ignorante. He that
kn
                        •
                     we not M. Hardinges modeſtie, and manner of writinge, woulde thinke
theſe Tragical termes ſhoulde beare ſomme weight. For ſober menne ſeldome
vſe thus to crie, without ſomme cauſe. Touchinge theſe woordes, Cibus, Panis,
Materiale, Materia, if there be any thinge, that maie miſlike him, it ſhalbe laweful

for him to refourme the ſame,Cibus, panis, Materiale, Materia. & to vſe either the one woorde, or the other, at his
pleaſure. Wee ſtande onely vpon the Subſtance of mater, and ſeeke no ſutche
wanton aduantages by ſhifte of woordes.
                  Neuertheleſſe, Origen him ſelfe, as it appeareth, was not ſo dangerous in
the caſe. For, whereas M. Hardinge ſo ſharply ouerlooketh vs, for once vſinge
this woorde Panis, in ſteede of Cibus, Origen him ſelfe vſeth the ſame woorde,
Panis,
                     1. Corin. 11. Cyril. in Iohan. Lib. 10. Cap. 13 Seuen times togeather in the ſelfe ſame place, without reproufe: Like as
S. Paule alſo fiue times in one place calleth it, Panis: And S. Cyril calleth the
portions thereof, fragmenta Panis: peeces of Breade. And yet were none of
theſe euer condemned therefore, as Corrupters, and Falſifiers.
                  
                  But I beſéeche you, M. Hardinge, if this woorde, Cibus, Meate, whiche Origen
vſeth, and you ſéeme to allowe, were not Breade, what kinde of Meate
then wil you cal it?Irenae. Li. 5. Augetur, & Conſiſtit Carnis noſtrae Subſtantia. Rabanus Maurus. Li. 1. Cap. 31. 
                     Pleaſhe, Fiſhe, or Fruite, I trowe, it was not. You ſafe, Origen
meante thereby your Fourmes, and Accidentes, and Shevves of Breade.
Nowe verily, this was but a quaiſy Meate: and I marueil, that euer any wiſe man
woulde cal it Meate. Irenaeus ſaithe, Of the ſame Meate is increaſed, and conſiſteth
the Subſtance, of Our Fleaſhe.
                      And Rabanus ſaithe, Sacramentum in alimentum
Corporis redigitur: The Sacramente (whiche is the Breade) is turned into Our Bodily
nouriſhemente.
                  
                  Touchinge the other fowle faulte, M. Hardinge ſaithe, his Accidentes, and
Qualities be thinges Material: but the Mater it ſelfe, he ſaithe, they be not.
                      But
where learned he this ſtrange Doctrine? What Diuine, what Philoſopher, what
Logician, what Sophiſter, what wiſe man euer taught him thus to ſaie? Certainely
Accidentes, and Qualities be Accidentales Formae, and in the Scholes
are called thinges Formal: whiche are as farre from thinges Material, as Fire
from Water. Notwithſtanding, theſe menne haue power to make of Accidentes,
Subſtance: Of Fourmes, Maters: Of thinges Formal, thinges Material: and of
one contrarie, to make another: al this onely of them ſelues, without any manner
other Authoritie.
                  M. Hardinge ſaithe, that the Meate, whereof Origen ſpeaketh, is a Material,
(for this is the Light, and cleareneſſe of his Eloquence) but not Materia: and
by this pretie diſtinction he thinketh, the whole mater is fully diſcharged. And emongſte
the ignorante, that cannot iudge, perhaps he maie ſeeme to ſaie ſomewhat.
But Origen him ſelfe, that beſte vnderſtoode his owne meaninge, calleth
the ſame Meate, in the ſame place, by expreſſe, and plaine woordes, not onely a
thinge Material, but alſo the very Mater of Breade it ſelfe: His woordes be theſe:
Nec Materia Panis,
                     Origen. in Matt. Cap. 15. 
                     ſed ſuper illum dictus ſermo eſt, qui prodeſt non indignè Domino
comedenti: It is not the Mater of the Breade, but the woorde ſpoken ouer it, that
profiteth him, that Eateth not vnwoorthily for the Lorde.
                      Nowe Iudge thou indifferently.
Gentle Reader, how iuſt cauſes M. Hardinge had, to moue theſe Tragedies.
                  Further he ſaithe, It liked our filthy Sprite, with vile woordes to bringe the Holy
Myſteries into contempte, and therein doo the Diuel great ſeruice. O, M. Hardinge, ſome
other ſpeache would better become a man of your grauitie. Sutche liquoure ſeldome
floweth from the Sprite of God. We neither encreaſe, or diminiſhe, nor any
waie alter the woordes of Origen: but laie them foorth plainely, and ſimply, as we
finde them. For thus he writeth: Ille Cibus, qui ſanctificatur per Verbū Dei, & per Obſecrationem,
iuxta id, quod habet Materiale, in Ventram abit, & in ſeceſſum eijcitur.
Coeterùm iuxta precationē, quae illi acceſsit, pro portione Fidei fit vtilis: The Meate that is
Sanctified by the Woord of God, and by Praier, according to that Material parte, that is in
it, paſseth into the belly, and ſo foorth into the Priuie, &c. If there be any Filthineſſe
or Villanie herein, it is this Ancient Fathers, whom ye ought not ſo vncourteouſly
to reuile for Vncleaneneſſe of Sprite: it is not ours.
                  
                     
Howe be it,Vile Speache. this is not Origens onely Iudgemente: but the general, and agréeable
Doctrine of al others the Catholique Fathers. And to allege one in ſtéede
of many, S. Auguſtine ſaithe, as he is before alleged, Si ad res ipſas, quibus
Sacramenta tractantur, animum conferamus, quis neſciat, eas eſſe corruptibiles? Si ad id,
quod per illas res agitur,
                     Auguſtin. De Baptiſmo contra Donatis. Li. 3. Cap. 10. 
                     quis non videat, non poſſe corrumpi? If wee conſider the
thinges them ſelues, wherein the Sacramentes be Miniſtred, who knoweth not, that they
be thinges corruptible? But if wee conſider the thinge, that is wrought thereby, who
ſeethe not, that it cannot be corrupted? The Holy Fathers ſpeake not thus of
Chriſtes Body, but of the Breade, whiche is the Sacramente of Chriſtes Body.
So ſaithe S. Ambroſe, Non iſte Panis, qui vadit in Corpus: ſed Panis Vitae Aeternae,
                     De Con. Diſt 2 Non iſte.
                     qui animae noſtra Subſtantiam fulcit: (The Breade that I meane, is) not this
Breade
                      (of the Sacramente) that paſſeth into the Body: but the Breade of Euerlaſtinge
Life, that maineteineth the Subſtance of the Soule.
                     
                  
                  Nowe if there were ſutche filthineſſe, as you haue imagined, in the Holy
Learned Biſhoppes, and Doctours of the Churche, for vtteringe theſe, and other
like woordes, of the corruptible Creatures of Breade, and Wine, what cleane
Sprite then is there in them, that ſpeake ſo filthily of Chriſtes Body it ſelfe, beinge
nowe Vncorruptible,
                     In the. 23. Article. Alexand. Halen. par. 4. quae. 45. Mem. 1. and Glorious, at the Right Hande of the Father? Hereof
I had occaſion to ſpeake ſommewhat in my Former Replie.
                  Alexander of Hales ſaithe, Quidam dicunt, vbicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ponantur Species, ſiue in mundo
loco, ſiue in immundo, ſiue in Ventre Muris, ibi eſt Corpus Chriſti: Somme ſaie,
where ſo euer the Fourmes, or Accidentes be laide, whether the place be cleane, or vncleane,
yea though it be in the Mouſes belly, yet there is the Body of chriſte. Againe
he ſaithe, Si Canis, vel Porcus deglutiret Hoſtiam Conſecratam integram, non video,
quare Corpus Domini non ſimul traijceretur in ventrem Canis, vel Porci:
If a Dogge, or Hogge ſhoulde ſwallowe downe the Hoſte Conſecrate beinge whole,
I ſee no cauſe to the contrarie, but the Body of Chriſte maie paſſe withal into the belly
of the Dogge, or of the Hogge.
                  
                     Likewiſe your owne Clemens, whom ye ſo often cal the Apoſtles Felowe,
writeth thus,
                     Clemens. epiſt. 2. Ne Murium ſtercora inter fragmenta Dominicae Portionis appareant:
Let not Miſe dounge be founde emong the fragmentes, or peecces of the Lordes Portion. Hée
meaneth the Sacramente. Your owne Catholique allowed
                      Gloſe ſaith, Corpus
Chriſti poteſt euomi:De Con. Diſt. 2. Si quis. In Gloſſ. 
                     The Body of Chriſte maie be vomited vp againe.
                  
                  It abhorreth my harte to vtter theſe woordes: They be ſo horrible, and ful
of Filthe. Yet this, M. Hardinge, is your owne Doctrine: This is your Sprite:
This is it, that ye haue ſo longe maineteined with Fire, and Swerde. By ſutche
vncleane, and vnciuile ſpeache, ye bringe Chriſtes Body it ſelfe into contempte,
and lotheſomeneſſe in the hartes of the people.
                  But that you maie the better ſee the conſente, & certaintie of your owne Doctrine,
whereas you are wel contente to expounde theſe woordes of Origen, as
vndoubtedly ſpoken of the Sacramente of Chriſtes Body, your Inſtructer, and
Maiſter, Doctour Gardiner, telleth you, that the ſame woordes perteine nothing
at al vnto the Sacramente: And yet, vnto what thinge els they ſhoulde perteine,
it ſéemethe by the doubtefulneſſe of his anſweare, he was neuer wel reſolued.
His woordes be theſe:Mar. Anton. Conſtantius, ad obiectum 166. 
                     Non de Euchariſtia loquitur Origenes, ſed de Pane ſanctificato
per Verbū Dei, & Orationē, quem communiter manducamus: vel de eo, qui ſolebat
dari Catechumenis, de quo Auguſtinus: Origen ſpeaketh not
                      (theſe woordes)
of the Sacramente: but either of the Breade, that is ſanctified by Our Lordes woorde,
and by Praier, whiche Ʋ
                        Ʋee commonly vſe to Eate: or els hee ſpeakethe of the
Breade, that was geeuen to the Nouices, called Catechumeni, Ʋ
                        Ʋhereof S.

Auguſtine ſpeaketh.
                     Holy Fourmes. If this tale be true, then is yours Vntrue, M. Hardinge,
and al your longe Commentarie of Fourmes, and Accidentes, is but in vaine. It
were good, ye tooke a daie, that ye maie be better agreed vpon that, ye tel vs.
                  And, whereas, to ſhift the mater, ye put your poore Spiritual Fourmes, and
Holy Accidentes to al the paines, to paſſe into y• belly, & ſo foorth into the draught,
and auouche the ſame in ſutche ſober wiſe, as if ye partely vnderſtoode, what ye
ſaide, it maie pleaſe you to vnderſtand, that by the Iudgemente of your owne
Schoolefelowes the Canoniſtes, ye are fowly deceiued. For thus they determine
y• mater,De Con. Diſt. 2. Tribus gradibus, in Gloſſ
                           •
                        . quite againſt you: Species illae alijs cibis non permiſcentur: Non enim in ſtomachum
deſcendunt: quare per ſeceſſum non emittuntur: Theſe Fourmes, or Accidentes
are not mingled with other meates. For they goe not dovvne into the ſtomake:
and therefore they paſſe not into the Priuie.
                  
                  Heareby it maie appeare, that either the Gloſe, or M. Hardinge, is in errour.
But the Gloſe is allowed, and coumpted Catholique: therefore the errour muſte
be M. Hardinges. How be it, to ſaie the truthe, M. Hardinge, and his Gloſe too,
are bothe in errour.
               
            
            
               The Apologie.
               Or that, whiche Chriſte him ſelfe ſaide, not onely after the Bleſſinge
of the Cuppe, but alſo after he had Miniſtred the Communion,
I wil drinke nomore of this Fruite of the Vine. It is wel knowen,
that the Fruite of the Vine is Wine, and not Bloude.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Chriſte (ſaie they) him ſelfe ſaide, not only after the bleſſing of the Cuppe, but after he had Miniſtred
the Communion, I wil drinke nomore of this Fruite of the Vine. Hereunto they adde of theire
owne heades,Vntruthe. For theſe be S. Chryſoſtomesvvords. and not ours. It is wel knowen, that the Fruite of the Vine is VVine, and not Bloude. By this they
woulde ſignifie, that in the Chalice we haue not Chriſtes Bloude, as him ſelfe ſaide, but mere VVine, as
againſte Chriſte they labour to perſwade.
                  But we ſaie,Cap. 22. that thoſe woordes (I wil not drinke from hence foorthe of this generation of the
Vine) either were ſpokenM. Hardinge refuſeth S. Mathevves, and S. Markes Order. only before the communion,This is M. Hardinges Vndoubted Certeintie.
                     As by vvaie of a Sacramente. Othervviſe it is Vntrue. or only after, or in bothe times. If they
were ſpoken before the Communion. (whiche opinion is the more probable) it is very clerly proued by
them, that wine remaineth not, as it ſhal hereafter be deduced.
                  For theſe cauſes it maie wel be ſaide, that we ſhoulde rather folowe the order of Luke, who
witneſſeth that Chriſte ſpake theſe woordes before his maundie, * then Mathewe, and Marke, who tel
it, as ſpoken after. Secondly the order of Luke is confirmed by the circumſtance of the thinges, that
he deſcribeth, more then the other Euangeliſtes. Nowe becauſe in the Chalice of the Olde Lawe
there was certainely not Bloude, but VVine, (whereas Chriſte teacheth, that in his Chalice his owne
Bloude is * conteined) let▪ he diſcrete Reader iudge, whether we muſte not rather thinke, that theſe
woordes of Chriſte▪ I wil not from hencefoorthe drinke of this generation of the Vine, do not rather
perteine to the Cuppe of the Olde Lawe, (as Luke placeth them) then to the Chalice of Chriſte after
the Conſecration, whereof Mathewe, and Marke reherſe them.
                  Fourthly, and laſily, when Mathe we, and Marke reherſe that Chriſte ſaide, he would not from
hencefoorthe drinke of that generation of the Vine, they bothe, in muche like ſorte of ſpeakinge, adde
thereunto theſe woordes,Mathae. 26. Mark. 14. Nevve drinkinge. (whiche in the Apologie were guilfully lefte out) Vntil that daie, when I
wil drinke it Newe with you in the Kingedome of God my Father. If Chriſte ſpeake of a Newe
drinkinge, whiche is to come, by likelyhoode the drinke paſte is Olde. VVhat exclamation would be
ſufficient to expreſſe, that in thisA vveighty pointe of Saluation. Yet M. H. him ſelfe, by his Confeſſion, vnderſtandeth i
                           •
                         not. weighty point of Saluation, our Engliſhe Cleregie are contentVantruthe, vaine and arro
                           •
                         gantc. to
blinde the people,Vntruthe, vaine and arrogante. the right worſhipful, yea the Honorable of our Countrie in ſo vile a ſorte, that after
many Fathers woordes miſreported, and wrongfully wreſted, they doubte not to attempt the ſame
in Chriſtes owne ſaieinges, and in thoſe ſaieinges of his, whiche euidently proue the contrarie.
                  
                     
But nowe let vs graunt of our free liberalitie,The Fruite of the Vine. contrarie to ſo many good and ſtronge reaſon
                        •
                     ,
that Chriſte ſaide after conſecration. I wil not from hencefoorthe drinke of this generation of the
Vine, vntil the Kingedome of God come. Then it muſte be further vnderſtanded, that the Kingedom
of God is taken in Scripture ſommetime for the preſente ſtate of the Churche,The Kingdome of God taken tvvo vvaies. Matth. 3. after Chriſtes reſurrection
in this wòrlde, accordinge to that is ſaide oftentimes, in Scripture, The Kingedome of God draweth
nigh: ſommetimes alſo for the ioye of Heauen: as when Chriſte ſaithe, I diſpoſe for you a
Kingedome, as my Father hathe diſpoſed for me, that ye may eate and drinke at my table, &c. Now
if we take theſe woordes of Chriſte, ſpoken before Conſecration, it is not vnconuenient, to vnderſtand
them of either of bothe Kingedomes: that is to ſaie, of the Kingedome of Reſurrection, or of Glorie,
as CHRYſoſtome and other do witneſſe, becauſe bothe were to come at that time. But if we take them
ſpoken after conſecration,Luc. 2
                           •
                        . as we rather vpon confidence of the truthe, then for neceſſitie, at this time
do graunt, then theſe woordes (Vntil the Kingdome of God come) are to be meant only of the Kingedome
of Glorie. For theſe holy Myſteries belong to the Kingdome of Chriſtes Reſurrection and Aſcenſion.
Neither were they practized by the Apoſtles in the Churche of Chriſte, vntil the Holy Ghoſte came
downe vpon them.
                  And ſo the newnes of it there, is fruition of it, not vnder the fourmes of Breade, and VVine,Vntruthe, grounded vpon a mere folie. as we haue it nowe, but face to face without al figure and fourme. Then is it to be noted that
Chriſte ſaide not, I wil drinke nomore of the Fruite of the Vine, But, I wil not from hencefoorthe
drinke of this generation of the Vine: Of this I ſaie, whereof now I haue dronken,Vntruthe, threapte vpon Chriſte him ſelfe. whiche is vnder
the fourme of wine my Bloude, whiche am the true Vine. For whereas this Apologie ſaithe (it is wel
knowen, that the fruite of the Vine is VVine, and not Bloude) it ſeemeth to declare that the Authours
thereof are ig
                        •
                     orant in the holy Scriptures, whereA fond Cauil. For vve ſpeake onely of a Natural Vine. they might haue founde the fruite of ſome Vine
to be called Blou
                        ••
                     .Gene. 49. For Iucob ſaide to his ſonne Iadas, bearing the Figure of Chriſte, He ſhal waſſhe
his robe in VVine, and his cloke in the Bloude of a Grape. Lo, a Grape hathe his Bloude: a Grape is
the fruite of the Vine: and therefore it is not wel knowen, that the fruite of the Vine is not Bloude.
The Holy Ghoſte did in theſe woordes of Iacob prophecie,In. 1. Cori. 10. that Chriſte the true Vine ſhould geue the
Grape of his Body to be preſſed vpon the Croſſe, from whence the VVine was ſhedde,As in a Myſterie. Othervviſe it is Vntrue. whiche is in our
Chalice as Chryſoſtome alſo noteth. And now is it no wonder if we expound y• woord (Vine) myſtically.
                  O what ſtrength Truthe hath? howe plainely ſhe dareth to ſhewe her face, r
                        •
                     tt nipping the
Scriptures, nor miſengliſhinge them, nor diſſemblinge any iote, that may ſeeme to make againſte hir.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Marke,1. Gentle Reader, howe mightily M. Hardinge wraſtleth, and what
paines he takethe, to drawe this place to his pourpoſe. Firſte he aſſureth vs for
certaine, that Chriſte ſpake theſe woordes Before the Conſecration, and that therefore
they perteine nothinge to the Sacramente.2. Neuertheleſſe, afterwarde he
graunteth, as he ſaithe, of his free liberalitie, that Chriſte ſpake the ſame woordes
After the Conſecration,3. & that they perteine ſpecially to y• Sacramente. And yet
againe vpon further affiance, and boldneſſe of the cauſe, he ſéemeth to ſaie, It maie
be, that Chriſte ſpake the ſame woordes at bothe times: that is, as wel After the
Conſecration, as Before.
                  Againe, he ſaithe, S. Lukes rehearſal is more likely, then S. Mathewes:
For that S.4. Luke writeth eche thing in Order: and S. Mathe we out of Order.
                  Againe,5. One Cuppe is firſte the Wine of the Olde Teſtamente: and immediately
after the ſame Cuppe is the Wine of the Newe Teſtamente.
                  Againe,6. The Kingedome of God, ſommetime is the ſtate of the Churche,
ſommetime it is the ſtate of Glorie.7. Againe, The Fruite of the Grape ſommetime
is very Natural Wine,Anton. Conſtantius ad Obiectum. 27. ſommetime it is the very Bloude of Chriſte. Notwithſtandinge
Steuin Gardiner ſaithe, that neither the Natural Wine, nor
Chriſtes very Bloude, but the Accidentes, and Fourmes are the Fruite of the
Vine.8. Yet againe he ſaithe, Chriſte Dranke his owne very Bloude at the Supper:

and euen nowe him ſelfe Drinketh the ſame his owne Bloude in the kingedome
of Heauen.The Fruite of the Vine.
                  
                  In the ende M. Hardinge, after he hathe wel wandred, and walked him ſelfe,
bothe Before, and After: In Order, and out of Order: This Waie, and that
Waie: with the Olde Cuppe, and with the Newe: and hathe wel ſtated him ſelfe
by coniectures, and likelihoodes: at the laſte be bloweth vp the Tr
                        •
                     umphe, with a
iolly corrage, and crieth out, O what ſtrength Truthe hathe, and howe plainely ſhe dareth
to ſhe we her face.
                  
                  Here, by the waie, a man might demaunde of M. Hardinge, notwithſtandinge
the greate Confidence he pretendeth in his cauſe: If Chriſte ſpake theſe
woordes, Before the Conſecration, of the very Natural Wine of the Grape, and
of the Ceremonial Cuppe of the Old Lawe,Before. howe dranke he then afterward of the
ſame Natural Wine of the Grape, after a Newe Sorte? or howe was the ſame
Natural Wine fulfilled in the Kingdome of God? If Chriſt ſpake y• ſame woord?
After the Conſecration,After. the Subſtance of Wine, by theſe mennes fantaſie, beinge
vtterly aboliſhed, and nothinge there remaininge, but onely the Accidentes, howe
was it then the Fruite, or generation of the Vine?
                  
                  But, to leaue theſe vnfruiteful gheaſſes, vntil M. Hardinge haue better agreed
with him ſelfe vpon ſomme certainetie, wee ſaie, that the Cuppe of Bleſſinge,
whiche Chriſte calleth the Cuppe of the Newe Teſtamente, not withſtandinge
it were made in a Myſterie the Sacramente of Chriſtes Blonde▪ yet in Nature,
and Subſtance was very Wine ſtil, and, as Chriſte him ſelfe 
                        ••
                     lleth it, the
very Fruite, and generation of the Grape, as it was before.
                  
                     The woordes of the Euangeliſte S.
                     Matthae. 2
                           •
                        
                      
                     Mathewe are very pl
                           ••
                        ne: Hee tooke the
Cuppe: and, when hee had geuen thankes, hee gaue it them, ſaieinge, Drinke ye al of it: For
this is my 
                        •
                     loude of the Newe Teſtamente, that is ſhedde for many▪ for the Remiſſion of
Sinnes. I ſaie vnto you, that I wil not Drinke hencef
                        •
                     ourthe of this Fruite of the Vine,
vntil that daye, when I ſhal Drinke it Newe with you in the Kingedome of my Father.
To auoide the manifeſte truthe of this rehearſal, M. Hardinge ſaithe, S. Mathewe
vttered one thinge for an other: the Later for the Former: the Cuppe Conſecrate,
for the Cuppe Vnconſecrate: and placed his maters out of order. And by this poore
ſhifte, he thinketh the Storie of the Goſpel is fully anſweared.
                  
                  
                     But let vs ſee, what the Learned Fathers haue iudged, and written in
this behalfe. So ſhal the weight of theſe coniectural gheaſſes, and the Face
of M. Hardinges Truthe, whiche he ſo mutche magnifieth without cauſe, the
better appeare.
                     Clemens in 
                           •••
                        dagogo. li. 2. Cap. 2. Clemens Alexandrinus hereof writeth thus, Quòd Vinum
eſſet, quod benedictū eſt, Chriſtus oſtendit, dicens Diſcipulis, Non bibam ex
Fructu Vitis huius, donec bibe
                        •
                     o ipſum vobiſcum in Regno Patris mei: That it
vvas VVine, that was Bleſſed (at the Supper) Chriſte him ſelfe ſhewed his Diſcipſes,
ſaieinge: I vvil nomore Drinke of the Fruite of this Vine, vntil I ſhal Drinke it with
you in the Kingedome of my Father. What ſo euer it ſhal Pleaſe M. Hardinge to
thinke of the ſenſe hereof, he muſte needes confeſſe, the woordes are very plaine.
Likewiſ
                              •
                           . ſaithe S.
                      Cyprian, Dominus Sanguinem ſuum Vinum appellauit, de botris,
& acinis plurimis expreſſum, atque in Vinum coactum:Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epiſt. 6. The VVine preſſed
our of Cluſters, and manie Grapes, and ſo made VVine, Our Lorde called his
Bloude. S.
                      Auguſtine ſaithe, Et Vinum fuit in Redemptionis noſtrae Myſterio, cùm
Dominus diceret,Auguſtin. De Eccleſ
                           •
                        aſt. Dogmatibus Ca. 75. Non bibam àmodo de hoc genimine Vitis: There vvas
VVine in the Myſterie, or 
                           •
                        acramente of Our Redemption, when Our Lorde ſaide,
I vvil nomore Drinke hencefoorthe of this Fruite of the Vine. Here
note thou, good Reader, howe handſomely S. Auguſtine, and M. Hardinge
agree togeather. S. Auguſtine ſaithe plainely, it vvas the Sacramente:

                     M. Hardinge ſaithe plainely, it vvas not the Sacramente. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Theſe vvoordes vvere ſpoken after the Conſecration: M. Hardinge findeth
faulte with S. Mathewes order, and ſaithe, They vvere ſpoken before the
Conſecration. S. Auguſtine folowing the plaine woordes of Chriſt, ſaithe, It vvas
VVine: M. Hardinge folowinge his owne woordes, againſte bothe S. Auguſtine,
and Chriſte too, ſaithe vndoubtedly, It vvas no VVine.
                  
                     Againe S.
                     Auguſti. Quae. Euangelicar. Li. 1 Cap. 43. Auguſtine ſaithe, Dominus per Vini Sacramentum, commendat
Sanguinem ſuum. Quid enim aliud, Nouum Vinum, niſi Immortalitatem renouandorum
Corporum intelligere debemus? Our Lorde by the Sacramente (not of Fourmes,
or Accidentes, but
                     ) of VVine, commendeth vnto vs his Bloude. For what other thinge
maie wee vnderſtande the Nevve VVine to be, but the Immortalitie of our Bodyes, that
ſhalbe reuewed? S.
                      Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Cùm Dominus hoc Myſterium traderer,
Vinum tradidit.Chryſoſt. in Mat. Homi. 83. Etiam poſt Reſurrectionem ſine Myſterijs in ſimplici menſa Vino
vſus eſt. Ex genimine, ait, Vitis: quae certè Vinum, non Aquam producit:
Our Lorde, when he deliuered this Myſterie, deliuered (not Accidentes, but) VVine.
And after his Reſurrection, being at a plaine table without the Myſteries, he vſed VVine.
For ſo he ſaithe, Of the fruite of the Vine: VVhiche vine ſurely beareth, not
VVater,Cyprian. Lib. 2. Dionyſius, & Lyra in Matth. ca. 26. but VVine. M. Hardinge ſaithe: Who ſo euer expoundeth theſe woordes
as ſpoken of y• Myſteries, belieth bothe the Holy Fathers, and Chriſte him ſelfe.
S. Chryſoſtome expoundeth the ſame woordes, as ſpoken of the Myſteries, and
to that p
                           •
                        urpoſe applieth the woordes of Chriſte. Therfore, by M. Hardinges Concluſion,
he belieth bothe the Holy Fathers, and Chriſte him ſelfe.
                  
                  In like manner S. Hierome ſaithe, Chriſtus in Typo Sanguinis ſui non obtulit
Aquam,
                     Hiero
                           •
                        y aduerſus Iouinian. Lib. 2. 
                     ſed Vinum: Chriſte in the Signification of his Bloude, offered, not
Water, but Wine.
                      By theſe fewe, I truſte, it maie eaſily appeare to the indifferent
Reader, howe iuſte cauſe M. Hardinge had, thus to proclaime, and publiſhe
the Face, as he ſaithe, of his Truthe: and with ſutche courrage, and countenance
to crie out, that wée haue wilfully corrupted the woordes of Chriſte.
                  
                     M. Hardinge ſaithe further. Theſe Defenders adde of their owne heades,
                      It is VVel
knovven, that the Fruite of the Vine is VVine, and not Bloude. I thoughte
M. Hardinge would not haue piked ſo ſimple a quarrel to theſe woordes, of whoſe
heade ſo euer they had benne added. For, I trowe, he hathe but ſeldome hearde, or
ſeene, that a Natural Vine hath borne Natural Bloude. Now be it, theſe woordes
proceded not altogeather of our owne heades.
                     Chryſoſt. in Mat. Homi. 83. 
                     S. Chryſoſtome alſo of his heade
vttered the ſame. For thus he writeth, Ex genimine Vitis: quae cert
                        •
                      Vinum producit,
not Aquam: Of the Fruite of the Vine: whiche Vine verily bringeth foorthe, not
VVater,cyprian. 2. Epiſt. 3. Dionyſius & lyra in Matth. ca. 26. 
                     but VVine. S. Cyprian ſaithe, Inuenimus Vinum fuiſſe, quod Dominus
Sanguinem ſuum dixit: Wee finde, it was VVine, that our Lorde called his Bloude.
And Dionyſius, Lyra, and other like Doctours of M. Hardinges owne ſide, ſaye,
De hoc genimine Vitis: id eſt, de Vini, quod generatur in Vinea: Of this Fruite
of the Vine: that is to ſaie, Of the VVine, that groweth of the Vine.
                  
                  Againe M. Hardinge ſaithe, It is to be noted, that Chriſte ſaide not, I wil
drinke nomore of the Fruite of the Vine: But, I wil not from hencefoorthe drinke of this
Generation of the Vine: as if there were ſomme maruilous greate difference bitweene
theſe twoo woordes, Fruite, and Generation. And this thinge, hee
ſaith, is wel woorthy to be noted. Verily the difference bitwene theſe two woordes
is as greate, as is the difference bitwéene Enſis, and Gladius: or Liber, & Codex:
bitweene which woordes, ſound onely excepted, it is harde to diſcerne, whether is other.
M. Hardinge ſaithe, It is to be noted, that Chriſte ſaide not, I wil drinke nomore of
the Fruite of the Vine:
                     
                     Hilari. in Mat. Canon. 30. Yet S. Hilarie ſaithe, Bibentes ex Vitis iſtius Fructu: Drinkinge
of the Fruite of this Vine. If theſe woordes, as beinge doubtefully ſpoken,

maie be ſhifted into ſome other ſenſe: Yet Clemens Alexandrinus,
                     Clemens in Paedagogo, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. as he is before
alleged, & as he is tranſlated by Gentianus Heruetus, ſaithe plainely, Non bibam
de hoc Fructu Vitis: I wil nomore Drinke of this Fruite of the Vine.
                      And S. Cyprian
ſomewhat in plainer wiſe ſaithe, Non Bibam ex iſta Creatura Vitis: I wil
nomore Drinke of this Creature of the Vine.
                      Therefore, I thinke, M. Hardinge him
ſelfe wil ſaie, This note was not greately woorthe the notinge.
                  Yet farther he ſaith,Cyprian. Lib. 2. Epiſt 3. 
                     Theſe Defenders ſeeme to be Ignorante of the Holy Scriptures: VVhere they
might haue founde the Fruite of ſomme Vine to be called Bloude. For Iacob ſaide of Chriſte, He ſhal
waſhe his Robe in VVine and his Cloke in the Bloude of a Grape. It is a harde ſhifte, M. Hardinge,
ſo ſuddainely to conueie ye mater from ordinarie vſe of ſpeache, vnto an Allegorie,
Wée ſpeake of a Natural grovvinge Vine, whiche, wée ſaie, beareth not
Bloude, but onely Wine. But, as touchinge that ye ſaie, Chriſte is called a Vine
in the Holy Scriptures, it is onely an Allegorie, or a Figure of ſpeache. For although
Chriſte, for cèrtaine properties, maie be reſembled vnto a Vine▪ yet is he not
therefore verily, & in déede a Natural grovvinge Vine. Therefore it was greate
violence, thus to force yewoordes of the Scriptures to this purpoſe. Otherwiſe, by
ye like phraſe of ſpeache, one ſaithe, Lachryma eſt quidam Animae Sanguis: A teare
is a certaine Bloude of ye Soule.
                      And S. Auguſtine ſaith, Vident Sanguinē Corpoiū:
Animarum Sanguinem non vident: They ſee ye Bloude of ye Bodies: but the Bloude
of the Soules thei ſee not.
                     Androcides. An other called Wine, Terrae Sanguinem, the Bloude
of the Earthe. Yet maie not M. Hardinge ſaie, that either the Soule of Man, or
the moulde of the Earthe, in déede hath Natural, & Real, & very Bloude. Theſe be
onely certaine Figures, & Fourmes of ſpeache. But Chriſte, when he ſaide, I wil
nomore Drinke of this fruite of the Vine, Spake plainely, & ſimply, & without Figure.
And therefore Chryſoſtome ſaith, as it is alleged before, Ex genimine Vitis: quae
certè Vinum producit,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Matthae. Homil. 83. 
                     non Aquam: Of the Fruite of the Vine: whiche Vine verily bringeth
foorthe, not Water, but Wine.
                      But Chryſoſtome ſaithe, The Wine, yt was
ſhedde from Chriſtes Body, that is to ſaie, the Bloude of Chriſte, is in the Cuppe.Chryſoſtom. 1. Corin. 10.
This is true, as in a Myſterie, or by a Figure of ſpeache: bicauſe Chriſtes Bloude
is repreſented in the Cuppe. Otherwiſe, if wée ſpeake ſimply, & plainely, and without
Figure, Chryſoſtome ſaith, In vaſis Sanctificatis non eſt ipſum Corpus Chriſti:
ſed Myſterium Corporis eius continetur:
                     Chryſoſtom. in Matthae. Homil. 11.
                     
                        In the Sanctified veſſels, there is not the
very Body of Chriſte in deede: but a Myſterie of that Body is therein conteined.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 1.
               And in ſpeakinge thus, wee meane not to abaſe the Lordes Supper,
or to teache, that it is but a colde Ceremonie onely, & nothinge to
be wrought therin: (as many falſely ſclaunder vs, we teache) For we
affirme, that Chriſte dooth truely, & preſently geeue him ſelf wholy in
his Sacramentes: In Baptiſme, that we maie put him on: & in his
Supper, that wee maie Eate him by Faithe, & Sprite, & maie haue
Euerlaſtinge Life by his Croſſe & Bloude. And wee ſaie not, this is
donne ſleightly & coldely, but effectually & truely. For although wee
doo not touche the Body of Chriſte with teethe, and mouthe, yet wee
holde him faſte, and eate him by Faithe, by Vnderſtandinge, and by
Sprite. And it is no vaine Faithe, that comprehendeth Chriſte: neither
is it receiued with colde deuotion, that is receiued with Vnderſtandinge,
Faithe, & Sprite. For Chriſte him ſelfe altogeather is ſo
offered, and geeuen vs in theſe Myſteries, that wee maie certainely
knowe wee be Fleaſhe of his Fleaſhe, and Bone of his Bones: and
that Chriſte continueth in vs, and wee in him.
            
            
               
               M. Hardinge.
               It is eaſy to be perceiued,By vvhome is oure Lordes Supper more abaſed, by the Defenders, or by the Catholikes. who abaſeth more our Lordes Supper, whether ye, that teache it to be
veryVntruthes tvvo togeather: For vvee neuer called it either Bakers Bread, or onely Figure. Bakers Breade and VVine with theVVhat ſo euer corruptible Creature is honoured as God, it is an Idole. onely Figure of Chriſtes Body and Bloude, or we who beleeue
it to be his true Body and Bloude, with the onely Fourmes of Breade and VVine (Of whiche
Fourmes neither Chriſte, nor his Apoſtles euer tolde vs one woorde). VVether ye,
that wil haue it a Figure of Chriſtes whole Body abſent, or wee, who wil haue Chriſtes Body preſent
in deede, with a Figure of his Deathe, whicheVntruthe. For Chriſtes Deathe is as Preſente, as his Body. Deathe is abſente onely. VVhether ye, that cal it an
Vntruthe, grounded vpon a dreame. No Learned Doctour euer ſaide thus. Idol when it is worſhipped, or we that do according to our dueitie adore it, becauſe that Roial Body
(as Chryſoſtome ſaith) whiche is ſet before vsVntruthe, ſtā
                     ding in vvronge Expoſition. For Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Aſcende ad Coeli portas: imò non Coeli, ſed Coeli Coelorum. to be ſeene now in Earthe, is woorthy of the moſt highe
Honour. But whether of thoſe two is the colder Ceremonie and more ſimple Supper, to haue Breade and
VVine with a Signe onely of Fleaſhe and Bloude, or to haue Reall Fleaſhe and Bloude with ſuche
formes of Breade and VVine, asVntruthe, grounded vpon a dreame. No Learned Doctour euer ſaide thus. by the Power of God do noleſſe bodily nouriſhe vs, then the Subſtance
it ſelfe would haue done: wee doubte not of wiſe mens iudgement. Ye haue your carnal Bankettes
fatte and full inoughe of the beſte fleaſhe, and it is with you ſuperſtitious to Eate drie and
Lenten meates. But ye wil haue your ſpiritual Bankettes ſo leane, and Carreine, as a man maye wel
diſcerne, whether ye haue more phantaſie to your Fleaſhe, or to your Spirite.
               Ye write,The Sacramentaries teache nothing to be vvrought in their lordes Supper. 1. Corin. 11. VVhat is Supper properly. that many falſely ſclaunder you, ſayinge that ye teache nothinge to be wrought in the
Lordes Supper, whereas ye affirme, that Chriſte dothe truely and preſently geue his owne ſelfe in his
Supper, that we may eate him by Faith and Spirite. And other worke in the Lordes Supper ye ſhewe
none. And this whiche ye ſhewe, a man may doubte, whether it be a thinge wrought in the Lordes
Supper, or no. VVel may ye ſaie, that it is a thinge wrought in thē whiche come to the Supper: but that
it is wrought in the ſupper it ſelfe, ye ſhewe it not: the Supper beinge that which is called Coena, to
witte, the meate recetued, not Coenatio, whiche is the acte of ſuppinge. For ſith that ſupper is nothinge
els but meate and drinke ſet vpō the Table to be receiued by ſuche as come vnto it, that whiche
is wrought in the Lordes Supper, muſt be wroughtThe Breade is for vs, not vvee for the Breade. in the meate and Drinke, which our Lorde hath
at his table. And as the matter whereof our Lordes Supper is made, is Breade and VVine: ſo the Supper
made thereof is our Lordes Body and Bloude, into whiche the Breade and VVine by the Almighty
power of the VVoorde is changed. So that if ye wil ſhewe Chriſte him ſelfe to beChriſte made: Chriſt VVroughte: A ſtraunge Diuinitie. made or
Vntruthe. For M. Harding vvel knovveth, that this fonde folie vvas neuer Catholique. wrought in our Lordes Supper, ye muſte ſhewe Breade and VVine to be changed into Chriſte him
ſelfe, and ſo to be Eaten of his faithfull at his Table. But whereas there are three thinges, chriſte,
taht makth the Supper, the Communicantes that receiue the Supper, and the Supper it ſelfe: ye
ſaye that Chriſte for his parte geueth his owne ſelfe verily preſente, likewiſe that Cōmunicantes
for their parte Eate him by faithe and ſpirite. And ſo ye ſhewe, that the maker of the Supper worketh,
and that the Cōmunicātes worke. But al this while ye ſhew vs not what is wrought in the matter
of the Supper, that is to ſaie, in the Breade and VVine, nor what is made. O great ſclaumder
that ye were charged withal, whiche not ſo muche as by your owne woorde ye are diſcharged of.
               Howe muche ſounder is theSutche vnchriſtian ſcornes, againſt Chriſtes ordinance are very vnſeemely. Catholike doctrine,The proper vvorke of our Lordes Supper. whiche reacheth the proper woorke of our
Lordes Supper to be the turninge of the Subſtance of Breade and VVine into his Body and Bloude?
VVhiche woorke bicauſe ye wil not confeſſe, yee haue deuiſed a woorke of your owne workinge,
whiche is not propre to our Lordes Supper. For if I can receiue Chriſte in my houſe at home by Faithe
and Spirite, how is that workeChriſt offereth him ſelfe vnto our Faithe: and by our Faithe he is receiued. proper to his Supper, whiche maye be Wrought without his Supper?
Or can I not beleeue in Chriſte, or lifte vp my Spirite vnto himSuthche unchriſtian ſcornes, againſt chriſtes ordinance are very vnſeemely. excepte I come to Supper? Or
If I doo call for Chriſte, dothe he not geue him ſelfe by grace vnto me?
               But (ſaie ye) at the Lordes Supper Chriſte geueth him ſelfe verily preſente.Hovv make the Defenders Chriſte verily Preſente in his Supper. To what purpoſe?
I praie you. That wee maie Eate him (ſaie ye) by Faithe, and Sprite. VVel reaſoned forſoothe. Haue
ye foregotten the geuinge to eate, and eatinge that, whiche is geuen, to be Relatiues, one of them hauinge
relation to the other? If Chriſte doo exhibite him ſelfe verily preſente, as your Latine Texte
hath, or geueth his owne ſelfe verily and preſently, as your Interpreter telleth your tale for you:
Chriſt offereth him ſelfe vnto our Faithe: and by our Faithe he is receiued. dooth not he ſo exhibite or geue himſelfe, as he wilbe receiued? Or dothe he ſhewe in one hande a
piece of Breade, and with the other ſtrike vs on the heade with a ſtone? If he geue vs him ſelfe verily
preſent, as ye ſaie, wee take him verily Preſente. And then (onleſſe ye meane by him ſelfe, his

grace, which is of Chriſte, and not Chriſte him ſelfe) we eate him verily Preſente, not onely by Faithe,
and Sprite, but by takinge him intoThis is the Caniballes Diuinitie. S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Non hic Panis. qui vadit in ventrem.
                   our Mouth, and Body. If it pleaſe him at any time to be Eaten
by Fatthe and ſpirite alone, (after whiche ſorte he is dately eaten by thoſe that humbly cal vpon him)
then he geueth not him ſelfe verely Preſent, but by Faithe and ſpirite, other wiſe named grace, or ſome
ſpiritual effected of his workinge. But in our Lordes Supper the Scripture requireth a ſpecial and
peculiar preſence of chriſte, to witte, of his fleaſhe, ſo as it maye be Eaten. If then he geeue him
ſelfe verely preſent, as ye ſaie, he is preſent in his owne perſon, God and Man, with Body, with
Bloude, with Soule, with Godhed. If ye meane the very preſence of his Godhed, that preſence belongeth
nomore to Chriſte, them to the Father, and to the Holy Ghoſte. And ſo haue ye not declared any
pecultar preſence belonginge to his Supper. For by Preſence of his Godhed he is alwaies verely
preſent, as well before Supper, as at, or after Supper: becauſe he filleth Heauen and Earthe. It remaineth
that either ye vnderſtande not your ſelues, or wilfully deceiue that infinite number of
Soules, for Whoſe ſake Chriſte hath ſhedde his Bloude.
               
                  Vntruthe. For the fineſt, and beſte Learned Fathers haue maineteined the ſame: As ſhal appeare. Your errour in makinge the Preſence of Chriſte in Baptiſme like to his preſence in the Supper
is to groſſe.The preſence of Chriſte in Baptiſme and in the Supper is diſtincte, vvhiche the Defenders make to be like. For although Chriſte woorke bothe our Regeneration and our nourriſhment by his
Diuine Sacramentes, yet in Baptiſme our Regeneration is by name attributed in the Goſpell to the
Holy Ghoſte alſo, to ſhewe that Chriſtes preſence there is ſpirituall. But his Supper conſiſteth of
his Body and Bloude, whiche are ſo vnited to Chriſte, as they are peculiar to the ſeconde perſone in
Godhed. Againe for aſmuche as they are receiued into vs, as foode to nourriſhe our Bodies to Reſurrection,
Vntruthe. For there is no ſutche worde in al the Goſpel. as the Goſpell ſaieth, and nomans Body is otherwiſe nouriſhed then by Eatinge in
deede that meate whereof he is nourriſhed, and the Fleaſhe of Chriſte, as him ſelfe ſaithe, isS. Cyprian ſaithe, Cibus mentis, non Ventris.
                   meate
in deede, and his Bloude Drinke in deede: VVe are forced to beleue an other maner of preſence in the
Sacramente of the Aulter, then in Baptiſme. And therefore ye haue handled this matter to ſleightly
and coldely.
               VVhere as ye ſaie, wee do not touche the Body of Chriſte with Teeth and Mouth,Heatheniſhe, and Vnchriſtian ſcoffinge. are ye ſo accuſtomed
to ſwallowe downe whole morſelles,That vvee touche Chriſtes Body, and eate it vvith our mouthe, and hovv. In. 1. Corin. Homi. 
                        •
                     4. as ye neuer touche them with your Teeth? Or haue ye
learned to eate that, whiche ye touche not with your Mouthe? If Chriſte ſaide, Take, Eate, this is my Body,
and the Apoſtles tooke and Eate the ſame, neither coulde they take and Eate without touchinge: it
ſemeth ye handle eatinge to ſleightly and coldely, when ye wil haue it without touching. Chryſoſtome
a more Subſtanital handler of thinges then any of you is, ſaieth of Chriſtes Body, Quod omnium
maximum eſt at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      praecipuum, in terra non conſpicaris tantùm, ſed tangis: ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſliontangis,
ſed comedis, & 
                        •
                     o accepto domum redis. Of al thinges that be in earthe, what is the greateſt,
and the chiefeſt,As you See Chriſtes Body in the Sacramente, euen ſo yee Touche it, and ſo yee Eat
                        •
                      it: and none othervviſe. S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Fide Chriſtus tangitur: Non tangitur Corpore.
                   that doeſt thou not onely ſee, but toucheſt: neither onely doeſt thou touche it, but
alſo eate it, and hauinge receiued it, thou goeſt home againe. How we touche it we knowe, for it is
not now a mortall and corruptible Body, wherein we maie faſten our Teeth, but glorious, and immortall,
Vntruthe, Childiſhe, and vnſauerie. The Learned Fathers neuer knevve theſe folies. and therefore we touche it by the reaſon of the Accidentes of Breade and VVine▪ with whoſe
Formes (as S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh) it is couered or vailed,In Lib. Sentent. Proſp. The Defenders imaginarie holdinge of Chriſte holdeth not Chriſte as he is in the Sacrament. Matth. 26. and ſo commeth it to our Teethe, and to our
Mouthe, and nourriſheth bothe our Bodies and Soules to life Euerlaſtinge. Nay but we ſaie ye) holde him
faſte, and Eate him by Faith, by Vnderſtanding, and by the Spirite. I praie you be not to haſ
                     ••
                  e to holde
him, before ye haue him. How came ye by him? His grace he geueth diuerſe waies, but him ſelfe Bodely
and preſently as man, he neuer promiſed to geue otherwiſe, then when he ſaide, Take, Eate, this is my
Body. And then IudasIudas had a very meane Faithe. (who had but a very meane Faithe) becauſe he receiued the Sacramente, receiued
him alſo. And our Bleſſed Lady although ſhee had a moſte perſitte Faithe, receiued him not
after that ſorte, becauſe then ſhee receiued not the Sacramente. How can ye aſſure your ſelues,
that your Faithe takeht the Body of Chriſte,Vntruthe, As ſhal appeare. But vvhere vvas Chriſtes Body promiſed to your Mouthe▪
                   whiche was neuer promiſed to your Faithe? If your
Faithe take him not as he is in the Sacramente, how can your Faithe holde him faſte there?
               As here before ye haue ſaide muche and proued litle againſt the Reall Preſence, wreſtinge and
ſtretchinge certaine Fathers ſentences and the Scripture it ſelfe to that purpoſe, not wholy and Faithfully,
but by piecemeale and p
                     •
                  tchedly alleaged, ſo as ye might beſte make them ſerue to the mainetenance
of your falſe Doctrine: right ſo in the concluſion of that parte of your Apologie, with a like
grace ye heape a number of mangled auctorities together, wherby to perſwade, that for aſmuche as

the Fathers haue aduertiſed vs to lifte vp our mindes to heauen warde,Bakers Breade. we ſhould not thinke we Late
the Fleaſhe of Chriſte as beinge here preſent with vs vnder the Forme of Breade. Therefore whereas
ye laye to the Catholikes charge, as though by their Sacriledge the people were berefte of a greate
benefite, in that they be taught to be content with the one kinde, vnder the ſame receiuing noleſſe then
if they had bothe: howe muche more woorthely are ye to be charged with the crime of Sacriledge,
thatVntruthe For vve robbe them not, but offer them in deede, and verily the Body of chriſte: and ſhevve them vvhere, and vvherevvith they maie receiue it. robbe them of the greateſt Treaſure that is in the Churche, ſo muche as in you lieth, the Body
and Bloude of our Lorde: and in ſteede thereof pretende to deliuer vnto them a piece of Bakers Bread,
and a cuppe of vvine? But let vs ſee what good reaſon or auctoritie ye bringe out of the Fathers
againſte the true preſence of Chriſte in the Bleſſed Sacramente.
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  O M. Hardinge, your conſcience knoweth, and wil teſtifie againſt your ſelfe,
that wee neuer called the Holy Sacramente of Chriſtes Body, Bakers Breade,
nomore then wee cal the Sacramente of Baptiſme, a paile of VVater. Wee haue
alwaies ſpoken honourably, and reuerently hereof, as it was meate wee ſhoulde
ſpeake of the Myſteries of the Deathe of Chriſte, and as the Holy Catholique Fathers
haue euermore vſed to ſpeake before vs.
                  Theſe wilde, and wanton, & vnſeemely ſpeaches agree rather with your Doctrine.
For, cal your owne woordes alitle to remembrance. In your Firſte Anſweare,
                        M. Hardinge Articulo. 24.
ye cal the Holy Sacramente, as it is vſed, and Miniſtred by vs, accordinge
to the Order of the Holy Fathers, A peece of Breade not vvoorthe a pointe: In
this place ye cal the Holy Miniſtration ſo vſed by vs, A leane, and a Carrien Banket:
In the nexte diuiſion, ye cat it A Toie. Theſe be your woordes, M. Hardinge,
and maie wel ſtande, bothe with the Sobrietie of your Sprite, and alſo with the
whole Subſtance, and tendure of your Religion.
                  
                     Wee cal it, The Sacramente of Thankeſgeuinge, and the Sacramente of
Chriſtes Body, and Bloude. And with the Holy Father S. Auguſtine wee ſaie,
In Sacramentis videndum eſt,Auguſt▪ Contra Maximin. Lib. 3. Cap. 22. non quid ſint, ſed quid Significent: In Sacramentes wee
muſte Conſider, not vvhat thei be (in them ſelues) but what they
                      Signifie.
                  
                     Wee haue no ſpecial regarde to the Breade, Wine, or Water: For they are
Creatures Corruptible, as wel after Conſecration, as they were before: But wee
directe our Faithe Onely vnto the very Body, & Bloude of Chriſte: not as beinge
there Really, and Fleaſhel
                           •
                         Preſente, as ye haue imagined: but as ſittinge in Heauen
at the Righthande of God the Father. The Holy Father Chryſoſtome ſaith,
although in general woordes, not ſpeakinge ſpecially of this Sacramente: Oculi
Fidei,Chryſoſt. in Geneſ. Homil. 24. quando vident haec ineffabilia bona, ne ſentiunt quidem haec viſibilia. Tantum
inter haec, & illa intereſt: The eies of our Faithe, when they beholde theſe vnſpeakeable
good thinges, they doo not ſo mutche, as marke theſe out warde thinges, that we ſee with
our Bodily eies So greate is the difference bitvvene theſe thinges And herein reſteth
the groſſeneſſe of your errour, y• ye diuide not the one thinge from the other.
S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. in Iohan. Tracta. 26. Auguſtin. De Doctrina Chriſtiana. Lib. 3. Cap. 5. Origen. In Prologo in Cantica Canticor. Aliud eſt Sacramentum, aliud res Sacramenti: The Sacramente
of Chriſtes Body is one thinge: and the Subſtance of the Sacramente, (or Chriſtes
Body repreſented by the Sacramente) is an other thinge. And againe he ſaithe,
Ea demùm eſt miſerabilis animae ſeruitus, Signa pro Rebus accipere: To take the
Signes (or Sacramentes) in ſteede of the thinges them ſelues, (that be Signified) is
the miſerable bondage of the Soule. In like manner Origen ſaithe, Simpliciores neſcientes
diſtinguere, ac ſecernere, quae ſint, quae in Scripturis Diuinis Interiori Homini,
quae verò Exteriori deputanda ſint, vocabulorum ſimilitudinibus falſi. ad ineptas quaſdam
Fabulas, & figmenta inania ſe contulerunt: Simple menne, not hable to diſcerne in
the Holy Scriptures, what thinges ought to be applied to the vtter Man, and what to the
Inner, beinge deceiued by the likeneſſe of woordes, haue turned them ſelues to a ſorte of peeuiſhe
Fables, and vaine Fantaſies.
                  
                     
Ye cal our Doctrine naked,Figure. Chriſtes Deathe. Abſente or Preſente. and colde, for that wée ſaie, The Sacramente
is a Figure. And yet bicauſe ye cannot in any wiſe denie, but the ſame woorde,
Figure, to the ſame purpoſe is commonly vſed of al the Anciente Catholike Fathers,
and Doctours of the Churche, Therefore ye thought it good to qualifie, and
to mince the matter, and to ſaie, It is a Figure, not of the Body, but of the Deathe
of Chriſte. And here it is a worlde to ſée, howe pitifully ye trouble your ſelfe with
your varietie, and change, and ſhifte of Figures.
                  Firſte you ſaie, The Sacramente, by the Iudgemente of Damaſcene, is called
a Figure before the Conſecration,M. Hard. Artic. 12. Diuiſion. 2. that is to ſaie, before the Sacramente be a
Sacramente. Afterwarde vpon better aduiſe ye ſaie, The Fourmes onely, & the
Shewes, & Accidentes are the Figure of Chriſtes Body. Againe you ſaie, Chriſtes
Body Inuiſible, is a Figure of Chriſtes Body Viſible: that is to ſaie, A thinge
vncertaine, is a Figure of a thinge moſte certaine. Nowe laſte of al ye ſaie, as, I
thinke, noman euer ſaide before, The very Body of Chriſte it ſelfe is a Figure of the
Deathe of Chriſte. Thus many prety ſtrange vnknowen Figures ye are drtuen to
diuiſe, thereby to auoide one ſimple, plaine, vſual, & common Figure. For, to leaue
an infinite number of other Anciente Fathers,Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 3. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Dominus Figuram
Corporis ſui Diſcipulis ſuis commendauit, & tradidit: Our Lorde commended,
and deliuered to his Diſciples a Figure (not, as ye ſaie, of his Death, but) of his Body.
                  
                  Whereas you ſaie, The Body of Chriſte is preſent in déede, & that his Deathe
is Abſente onely: If ye liſte to cauille, as yée doo, &, as your māner is, idlely to plaie
with the woordes, and phraſes of the Ancient Fathers, ye might as wel, and by
as good warrante, ſaie, that Chriſtes Deathe is as Preſente, as his Body. For S.
Cyprian ſaithe,Cyprian. Lib. 2. Epiſt. 3. Chryſotom. in Acta, Homil. 21. Hieronym. in Pſalm. 97. De con. Diſt. 2. Quid ſit. 
                     Paſsio Chriſti eſt Sacrificium, quod offerimus: The Sacrifice, that
wee offer, is the Paſsion of chriſte. Chryſoſtome ſaith, In Myſterijs Mors Chriſti
perficitur: The Deathe of Chriſte is vvrought in the Myſteries: S. Hierome
ſaithe, Chriſtus nobis quotidiè Crucifigitur: Vnto vs Chriſte is Crucified euery
daie.
                      And S. Gregorie ſaithe, Chriſtus iterum in hoc Myſterio Moritur: In this
Myſterie
                      (of ye Holy Communion) Chriſte is put to Deathe againe.
                      By theſe woordes
thus preſſed & rackte, as your manner is, ye maie eaſily proue, not onely y• Chriſtes
Body, but alſo that his Paſſion, & Deathe, & Bloude ſheddinge is verily Preſente.
                  Ye ſaie, ye Adore the Sacramente with godly Honour. Wee anſweare you,
as Chriſte ſometime anſweared ye woman of Samaria, Vos Adoratis, quod neſcitis:
Ye Adore,
                     
                     Iohan. 4. 
                     and woorſhip, ye know not what. For who euer willed you thus to Adore
the Sacramente? Who taught you, who bade you ſo to doo? What Prophete?
What Apoſtle? What Father? What Doctour of the Churche?
                  But here, M. Hardinge, ye doo vs great wronge, to ſaie, wée cal Chriſtes Body
an Idole.
                     Chryſoſt. 1. Corin. Homil. 24. For wée knowe, and haue euermore Confeſſed with Chryſoſtome, that
the Body of Chriſte is woorthy of the higheſt Honoure: & wée Adore it, and woorſhip
it, euen as the very Body of the Sonne of God. How be it, as it is ſaide before,
Chriſtes Body is one thinge, and the Sacramente is an other. The Sacramente
is in Earthe: Chriſtes Body is in Heauen, at the Right Hande of God the
Father.Chryſoſtom. in eadem Homilia. And therefore Chryſoſtome ſaith in the ſame place, A ſcende ergo ad Coeli
portas, & diligenter attende: imò non Coeli, ſed Coeli Coelorum: & tunc, quod
dicimus, intueberis: Mounte vp therefore vnto the gates of Heauen, and diligently conſider:
Naie, I ſaie not, vnto the gates of Heauen, but vnto the gates of the Heauen
of Heauens: and ſo ſhal ye ſee the thinges, that wee ſpeake of.
                     
                  
                  But what meante you, M. Hardinge, thus out of ſeaſon to preſſe in with your
Lenten Argumente, and to ſaie, It is Superſtitious with you, to Eate drie, and Lemen
Meates? If ye ſaie, there can be no Superſtition in choiſe of meates, either yée
are deceiued your ſelfe, or els ſéeke occaſion by the waie, to deceiue others.
                  
                     
Tertullian ſaithe,
                     Lenten meates. Tertull. in Epiſtola De Cibis Iudaicis. Deus ventre non colitur, nec cibis, quos Dominus dicit perire,
& in ſeceſſu, naturali Lege purgari. Nam qui per Eſcas Dominum colit, prope
eſt, vt Dominum habeat ventrem ſuum: God is not honoured with the Belly, nor
vvith meates, whiche the Lorde Chriſte ſaithe, doo periſhe, and are purged in conueiance
by Natural Order. For vvho ſo by Meates honoureth the Lorde, in a manner
maketh his Belly to be his Lorde.Hilari. in Pſal
                        
                           •
                        um. 64. 
                     S. Hilarie ſaithe, Haeretici ſicco Panis Cibo
viuunt. Sed quis tandem orioſi huius propoſiti profectus eſt? Totum hoc inane,
at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ridiculum eſt, & cum ipſis Superſtitionis cauſis miſerabile: Heretiques liue
by drie Breade. But what profit is there in this idle purpoſe? It is altogeather vaine,
and fooliſhe, and in reſpecte of the cauſes of their Superſtition, it is alſo Miſerable.
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. ad Nepotianum. Quid prodeſt oleo non veſci, & moleſtias quaſdam, difficultates
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
ciborum quaerere, Caricas, Piper, Nuces, Palmarum fructus, Similam, Mel,
Piſtacia? Audio praetereà, quoſdam contra regulam, hominum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Naturam, aquam non
bibere, nec veſci Pane: ſed ſorbitìunculas delicatas, & contrita olera, betarum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſuccum,
non Calice ſorbere, ſed Concha: Prò pudor. Non erubeſcimus iſtiuſmodi
ineptijs? nec taedet Superſtitionis? Inſuper etiam famam abſtinentiae in delicijs
quaerimus: What auaileth it, to eate no Oile, and with paine, and mutche adoo, curiouſely
to ſeeke for meates, Figges, Peper, Nuttes, Dates, fine white Breade, Hoony, and
Piſtacia? Biſide this, I heare ſaie, there be ſomme, whiche contrarle to the common order,
and Nature of menne, wil neither drinke water, nor Eate breade: but ſeeke for delicate ſuppinges,
and Herbes ſhridde togeather, and the iuice of Beetes, and receiue the ſame, not out of a
Cuppe, but out of a Shelle. Phy for ſhame. Doo vvee not bluſſhe at ſutche fooliſhneſſe?
Are vvee not vveery of ſutche superſtition? And yet biſide al this, liuinge in
ſutche curiouſe delicacie, wee looke to be prayſed for our Faſtinge. To leaue al others,
                     
Eraſmus,Eraſm. in Anno. in 14. ad Roma. 
                     a man of greate Iudgemente, ſaithe, Maior eſt in his rebus Superſtitio
apud Chriſtianos, quàm vnquam fuit inter Iudaeos: There is more Superſtition
herein emonge Chriſtians, then euer was emonge the Iewes. Wée weighe not the choiſe
of Fiſhe, or Fleaſhe: but the burthen of the minde, and the ſnare of the Conſcience.
                     
                  
                  But, to paſſe ouer your néedeleſſe Lenten talke, the Feaſte, that wee ſette before
the people, is neither drie, nor carrien, (notwithſtandinge it liketh you, by
your vnciuile termes, ſo to cal it) but Spiritual, Holy, and Heauenly: I meane, the
very Body of Ieſus Chriſte the Sonne of God, to the comforte, and reliuinge of
Body, and Soule. And yet, for as mutche as it ſo wel deliteth your eares, to calle
it carrien, wée refuſe not the name. Chryſoſtome likewiſe, although in more
reuerende, and Ciuile ſenſe, calleth it Carrien. Theſe be his woordes, Vbi eſt Cadauer,
ibi ſunt Aquilae.
                     Chryſoſtom. 1. Corin. Homi. 24. 
                     Cadauer Domini corpus eſt propter Mortem. Aquilas autem
appellat, vt oſtendat, ad alta eum opotere contendere, qui ad hoc Corpus accedit,
& nihil cum terra debere illum habere commune, nec ad inferiora trahi, & repere,
ſed ad ſuperiora ſemper volare, & in Solem Iuſtitiae intueri, mentiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         oculum
habere acutiſsimum. Aquilarum enim, non Graculorum, eſt haec Menſa:
Where as the carrien is, there are the Egles. The Carrien is the Body of Chriſte,
in reſpecte of his Deathe. But he nameth Egles, to ſhewe, that, who ſo wil approche to this
Body, muſte mounte alofte, and haue no dealinge with the Earthe, nor be dravven, and
creepe dovvnevvarde: but muſt euer more flee vp, and beholde the Sonne of Iuſtice,
and haue the eie of his minde quicke and ſharpe. For this is a Table of Egles,
                      that flee on
highe: not of Iaies,
                      that créepe beneathe.
                  
                     Ye adde further, But, ſaie ye, at the Lordes Supper Chriſte geueth him ſelfe verily preſente.
To what purpoſe? I praie you. That wee maie Eate him (ſaie ye) by Faithe, and Sprite. VVel
reaſoned forſoothe. Now forſoothe, M. Hardinge, this is Hicke Scorners Logique,
farre vnméete for a man of your grauitie.
                  
                  
                     
                     Haue ye foregotten (ſaie you) the geuinge to eate,
                     Verily Preſente. 
                     and eating that whiche is geuen, to be Relatiues,
one of them hauing relation to the other? If Chriſte doo exhibite him ſelfe, verily preſente, dooth
not he ſo exhibite or geue him ſelfe, as he wilbe receiued? If he geue him ſelfe verily preſent, wee take
him verily Preſente. And then wee eate him verily Preſente, not onely by Faithe, and sprite, but by
takinge him into our Mouth, and Belly. Verily, M. Hardinge, this, of your parte, was
not very wel reaſoned. For a man maie haue Chriſte verily Preſente, although he
haue him not in his mouth.Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 50. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Habes Chriſtum In Praeſenti,
per Signum: In Praeſenti, per Fidem: In Praeſenti▪ per Baptiſmatis Sacramentum: Thou
haſte Chriſte in the time Preſente, by his Signe, or Token: In the time Preſente, by Faithe:
In the time Preſente, by the Sacramente of Baptiſme.
                      And S. Auguſtine imagineth
Chriſte thus to ſaie vnto the people of Caper
                        •
                     aum,Augu. in Pſal. 9
                           •
                        
                      
                     Non hoc Corpus, quod videris,
manducaturi eſtis: Ye ſhal not eate (with your bodily mouthe) this Body of
mine, that you ſee.
                      Wée remember wel the Relation, that is bitweene Geuing, and
Receiuing: and therefore wée marueile ſo mutche the more, that you ſo vnſkilfully
woulde abuſe it. For as Chriſte offereth his Body Spiritually to our Faith, and
Sprite: euen ſo Spiritually by our Faithe, and Sprite wée receiue it. And where
ye ſaie. Wée take Chriſtes Body into our Mouthes, and Bodies, as hauing foregotten
that Chriſte ſaithe, The woordes, that I haue ſpoken, be Sprite, and Life, S. Auguſtine
woulde ſoone haue remoued you from this groſſe errour. For thus he ſaithe
vnto you, Quid paras Dentem, & Ventrem? Crede: & manducaſti: What pre
                              •
                           areſt
thou thy Tooth, and thy Belly? (This Eatinge is Spiritual). Beleeue (in Chriſte)
and thou haſte eaten.
                  
                  
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſ. in Lucam, Li. 6. Ca. 8. Fide tangitur Chriſtus: Fide videtur. Non tangitur
Corpore: non oculis comprehenditur: By Faithe Chriſte is touched: By Faithe he
is ſeene. He is not touched vvith Body: He is not ſeene with eie.
                  
                  Likewiſe ſaithe Gregorius Nyſſenus S. Baſiles Brother,Gregor. Nyſſen. De Creatione Hominis, Cap. 20 
                     Ego aliam Eſcam agnoſco,
quae Similitudinem quandam proportionis eſcae huis corporis gerat: Cuius voluptas
atque ſuauitas ad animum ſolummodò tranſeat: I knowe an other kinde of Meate,
bearing the Likeneſſe, and reſemblance of our bodily Meate
                      (for y• this inwardly féedeth the
minde, as the other outwardely féedeth the body) The pleaſure, and ſweeteneſſe whereof
(goeth not into y• Mouth, or Belly, but) paſſeth onely into the soule. Thus wée
vnderſtande our ſelues, M. Hardinge: and deceiue not, as you ſaie, the Soules, that
Chriſte hath bought. God foregéeue you, and others, that ſo haue donne, that the
Bloude of many be not required at your handes.
                  
                     Your errour, ye ſaie, in makinge the Preſence of Chriſte in Baptiſme like to his Preſence
in the Supper, is too groſſe. Here is one erroure more, then any of the Learned
Catholique Fathers euer noted. S.
                      Chryſoſtome ſaithe, In the Sacramente of
Baptiſme wee are made Fleaſhe of Chriſtes Fleaſhe,
                     
                     Chryſo. in Epiſt. ad Ephe. Hom. 20 Bernard. Super Miſſus eſt. Hom. 3 Leo in Sermon. de 4. Feria. Ca. 1. 
                     and Bone of his Bones. S.
                      Bernarde
ſaithe, Lauemur in Sanguine eius: Let vs be vvaſſhed in his Bloude. Leo ſaith,
Chriſti Sanguine rigaris, quando in Mortem ipſius Baptizaris: Thou arte vvaſhte in
the Bloude of Chriſte, when thou arte Baptized in his Death.
                  
                  By theſe fewe it maie appeare, that Chriſte is Preſente at the Sacramente
of Baptiſme, euen as he is Preſente at the Holy Supper: Onleſſe ye wil ſaie, wée
maie be made Fleaſhe of Chriſtes Fleaſhe: and be waſhte in his Bloude: and be
part
                        •
                     takers of him: and haue him Preſente, without his Preſence. Therefore
Chryſoſtome, when he hath ſpoken vehemently of the Sacramente of the Supper,
he concludeth thus, Sic & in Baptiſmo, Euen ſo is it alſo in the Sacramente
of Baptiſme. The Body of Chriſte is likewiſe Preſente in them bothe. And for
that cauſe Beda ſaithe,Beda in 1. Cor. 
                           ••
                        
                      
                     Nulli eſt aliquatenus ambigendum, tunc vnumquen
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Fidelium
Corporis Sanguinis
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Dominici participem fieri, quando in Baptiſmate
Membrum Chriſti efficitur: Noman maie doubte, but euery Faitheful man is then made
                        
partetaker of the Body and Bloude of Chriſte,
                     Spiritual Eatinge. 
                     vvhen in Baptiſme he is made the
Member of Chriſte.
                      As for your Real, and Fleaſhely Preſence, it hath benne often
talkte of on your parte, but neuer proued.
                  Wée ſaie, Wée touche not chriſtes Body with our Mouthe, or Téeth. VVhat,
ſaie you, be ye vſed to ſwallowe down whole morſelles? Sutche childiſhe, and wāton talke,
M. Hardinge, ſpecially in the debatinge of maters of Religion, woulde better becomme
ſomme lighter Perſonne. Wée knowe, that, as S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Gratia Chriſti non Conſumitur morſibus:
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 27. Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 25. 
                     The Grace of Chriſte is not Conſumed
by moreſelles.
                      Ye might haue made the like anſweare to S. Auguſtine: For
he ſaith to you, as I haue alleaged him before, What prepareſte thou thy Toothe,
and thy Belly? O M. Hardinge, the Eatinge of the Body of Chriſte, is a woorke
Spiritual, and needeth neither bruſinge of toothe: nor ſwallowinge of throte: nor
healpe of the owtwarde, and bodily mouthe. If ye know thus mutche, why doo you
diſſemble it? If ye know it not, ye comme too rathe, to ſpeake of theſe thinges.
                  
                     S. Baſile ſaith,
                     Baſili in Pſal. 33. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Baſili in eund. Pſalmum 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Cyprian. De Coena Domini. Augu in Pſal. 48 Augu in Iohan. Tracta 26. 4. Senten. Diſt. 10 Secundum hos. Chryſo. in 1. Cor. Homil. 24. Eſt Spirituale Os Interioris Hominis, quod nutritur recipiens
Verbum vitae, quod Verbum eſt Panis qui deſcendit de Coelo: There is a Spiritual
Mouthe of the Inner man, whiche is nouriſhed by receiuinge (Chriſte) the Woorde of
Life, whiche is the Breade that came from Heauen. Againe he ſaith,
                      Guſtare, & vide
                        •
                     e,
quòd ſuauis eſt Dominus. Saepe obſeruauimus, vires animi habere nomina ab aliqua ſimilitudine
Membrorum Corporis. Quoniam ergo Dominus noſter eſt Verus Panis, & eius
Caro eſt Verus Cibus, neceſſe eſt, eam voluptatē, quae ex illius Panis delectatione affertur,
in nobis per guſtum exiſtere Spiritualem: Taſte ye, and ſee, that our Lorde is groceous.
Wee haue oftentimes marked, that the Powers of the minde haue theire names, from ſomme
likeneſſe of the partes of the Body. Therefore ſeeinge our Lorde is Breade in deede, and
his Fleaſhe is Verily Meate, it cannot be choſen, but the pleaſure, and ſweeteneſſe of that
Breade muſte be wrought in vs (not by our bodily mouthe, but) by the Spiritual taſte of
the soule.
                  
                     S. Cyprian ſaith, Eſus Carnis eius, quaedam eſt auiditas, & quoddam deſiderium
manendi in eo: The Eating of that Fleaſhe, is a certaine greedineſſe, and a certaine deſire
to dwelle in him. S.
                      Auguſtine ſaith, Ipſe eſt Panis Cordis noſtri, Chriſte is the Breade
(not of our Belly, but
                     ) of our Harte. And againe, Intus Eſuri, Intus ſiti: Hunger
thou vvithin: Thirſte thou vvithin. Likewiſe againe he ſaithe, vide
                        •
                     e,
Fratres, Panem Coeleſtem: Spirituali Ore manducate: O my Brethren, beholde this
Heauenly Breade: Eate it with the Spiritual, or Inner Mouthe of the Minde.
                  
                  Thus are wee taught to eate that Spiritual Meate, without chewinge, or
ſwallowinge, or vſe, or office of the bodily Mouthe. Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaith,
Non manducans, manducat: & manducans, non manducat: He that eateth not, eateth:
and he that eateth, eateth not.
                     
                  
                  But Chryſoſtome ſaith, Quod omnium Maximum eſt, atque Praecipuum, in terra
non conſpicaris tantùm, ſed etiam tangis: nec tangis tantùm, ſed etiam comedis:
The greatteſt, and woorthieſt thinge that is, thou dooſte not onely beholde in the Earthe,
but alſo toucheſte it: Neither dooſte thou onely touche it, but alſo cateſt it.
                      Here, I
beſeche you, M. Hardinge, diſſemble no l
                        •
                     nger: but ſpeake plainely. Howe doo you
beholde the Body of Chriſte in the Sacramente? With what ſenſes? With
what eies doo you ſée it? If ye ſaie, with your bodily eies, why ſaie you, Chriſtes
Body is there Inuiſible, couered with Accidentes, and cannot be ſéene? If ye ſaie,
(as it is in deede) that yée ſee the ſame Body onely with the Spiritual eies of your
Minde. then ye allege Chryſoſtome directely, and plainely againſte your ſelfe.
                  
                     But S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Habet Fides oculos ſuos, Faithe hath her eies, to
ſee vvithal.Auguſt. Epiſt. 84. Bernard. Meditation. Cap. 6. 
                     And S. Bernarde ſaithe, Viſio animae, intellectus eſt: The ſeeinge
of the Soule, is vnderſtandinge. With theſe eies wée ſée Chriſte, that is to ſaie,
wée vnderſtande Chriſte, or beléeue in Chriſte. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Velamen poſitum

erat contra faciem eorum,Iudas. ne viderent Chriſtum in Scripturis:Augu. in Euaengelium ſecund. Lucam Serm. 49 Chry
                           •
                        oſto. in Geneſim, Homil. 10. 
                     There was a
vele laide ouer theire face, that they ſhoulde not ſee Chriſte in the scriptures.
                  Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Non tantum praeſtare poſſunt Corporales oculi, qui viſibilia
cernunt, quantum oculi piritus, qui ea, quae non videntur, néque ſubſiſtunt, videre
poſſunt: Theſe bodily eies, that ſee thinges viſible, cannot doo ſo mutche, as the eies of the
Sprite. For theiſe eyes are hable to ſee the thinges, that be not ſeene, and haue no beeinge.
Likewiſe againe he ſaithe,
                     Chryſo. De Verb. Eſai. Vidi Domi. Homil. 3. Oculi animi, etiamſi Parietes, etiami moenia,
etiamſi montium moles, etiami coelorum Corpora compererint obſtantia, omnia
facilè praetercurrunt: The eies of the minde, notwithſtandinge they finde VValles, or
Mountaines, or the Bodies of the Heauens to ſtande againſte them, yet wil they eaſily
paſſe through them al. With theſe eies, ſaithe
                      Chryſoſtome, wee ſee that moſte woorthy,
                     Chryſo. in Marcum Homil. 6. Hierony. in Amos. Lib 3. Ca 9. Ambroſ. in Oratione▪ De Fide Reſurrectionis.
                     and moſte glorious Body of Chriſte. Therefore he ſaithe, Credamus, & videmus
Praeſentem Ieſum: Let vs beleeue: and vvee ſee Ieſus Preſente before
vs. Likewiſe S. Hierome ſaithe, Eſt intelligentia Spiritualis, qua Chriſtus cernitur:
There is a Spiritual vnderſtandinge, vvherevvith Chriſte is ſeene. Otherwiſe,
S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Chriſtum nunc ſecundum veritatem videre non poſſumus:
As now, according to the Truthe, (with bodily ſight) vvee cannot ſee Chriſte.
                  Nowe, as the Body of Chriſte is ſeene, ſo is it touched: and, as it is touched,
ſo is it Eaten. But it is not ſeene with Bodily eies: It is not touched with bodily
fingers:Ambroſ in Lucam, Li. 6. Ca. 8. For S. Ambroſe ſaith, Fide tangitur Chriſtus: Fide Chriſtus videtur: By
Faithe Chriſte is touched: By Faithe Chriſte is ſeene: Therefore the Body of Chriſte
is not Eaten with the bodily mouthe, but onely by Faith, whiche is the Spiritual
mouthe of the Soule.
                  
                     Iudas, ye ſaye, who had but a meane Faithe, bicauſe he receiued the Sacramente, receiued Him
alſo. O, howe mutche is poore Iudas beholden to theſe menne? Chriſte calleth
him the Childe of Perdition:
                     Iohan. 6. Iohan. 13. S. Iohn ſaithe, The Diuel was entred into him. Againe
Chriſte ſaithe, He was a Diuel. Therefore this Meane Faithe, that you allowe
him, muſte néedes be a very litle prety Faithe: euen ſutche a Faithe as ye might
wel allowe the Diuel.
                  
                     Yet with the ſame Meane Faith, ye ſaie, Receiuinge the Sacrament, he receiued Chriſte
alſo. Firſte it is not wel and thorowly agreed vpon, that Iudas receiued the Sacrament,
or was preſent at al at the Laſte Supper. S. Hilarie ſaithe plainely, He was
gonne foorthe aboute his wicked pourpoſe,
                     
                     Hilar. in Matth. Canon. 30. 
                     and receiued it not. But be it, that S.
                      Hilarie
were deceiued, and that Iudas receiued the Sacramente. Yet, as it is ſaide before,
Chriſtes Body is one thinge: and the Sacramente of Chriſtes Body is an other
thinge. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Diſcipuli manducabant Panem Dominum: Iudas
Panem Domini,Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 59. contra Dominum: The Diſciples did eate the Breade, vvhiche is the
Lord: But Judas did eate (not the Lorde, but) the (Sacrament, whiche is the
                     ) Breade
of the Lorde,Augu. in Pſal. 3. 
                     againſt the Lorde. And yet in plainer ſorte he ſaithe,
                      Chriſtus adhibui
                        •
                     
Iudam ad Conuiuium, in quo Corporis, & Sanguinis ſui Figuram Diſcipulis
ſuis Commendauit, & tradidit: Chriſte admitted Judas vnto his Table, whereat he gaue, and
deliuered vnto his Diſciples a Figure of his Body. Againe S. Auguſtine ſaithe, as in
the Perſonne of Chriſte,
                     Augu. De Ciuita. Li. 21. Cap. 25. Qui in me non manet, & in quo ego non manco, ne ſe dicat,
aut exiſtimet manducare Corpus meum, aut Sanguinem meum bibere: He that abideth
not in me, and I in him, let him not ſaie, or thinke, that he either eateth my Body, or
drinketh my Bloude.
                  
                  The obiection that ye make of the Reſurrection of our bodies, is light, and vaine,
and to ſmal pourpoſe. For if noman ſhal haue parte in the Reſurrection, but onely
they that haue receiued the Sacramente of Chriſtes Body, then are al the Holy
Fathers, Patriarches, and Prophetes of the Olde Teſtamente, Abraham, Iſaac,
Iacob, Moſes, Aaron, and ſutche others: then are infinite numbers of Chriſtian

Children:Promiſſe made to Faithe. then are many Godly Martyrs, whiche, beinge Baptized in the Bloude
of Chriſte, were taken out of this life, before they coulde receiue the Sacramente,
vtterly excluded for euer from al hope of Reſurrection. But Chriſte, when he ſpake
theſe Woordes, meante not the reciuinge of the Sacramente, but the Spiritual
Eatinge of his Very Body, and the Spiritual Drinkinge of his Very Bloude:
Whereof he is made partetaker vnto Reſurrection, and Life Euerlaſtinge, who ſo
euer beleeueth in the Death of Chriſte. And therefore S. Baſile ſaith of the Sacramente
of Baptiſme,
                     Baſilius, Des ancto Baptiſmate. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Baptiſma eſt vis, & efficacia ad Reſurrectionem: Baptiſme is a
Povver, and a ſtrength vnto Reſurrection. But hereof wee ſhal haue occaſion offered to
ſaie more hereafter.
                     
                  
                  Further, Howe can ye aſſure your ſelues, ſaye you, that your Faithe receiueth the Body of
Chriſte, VVhiche was neuer promiſed to your Faithe? By the waie, I beſéeche you, M. Hardinge,
when, or where was Chriſtes Body euer promiſed to your Mouthe? Verily
Chriſte promiſed his Body to he receiued by Faithe, and by Faithe Onely, and
none othervviſe.
                     Iohan. 6. For thus he ſaithe, Ego ſum Panis ille Vitae: qui venit ad me, non
eſurier: & qui credit in me, non ſitiet vnquam: I am that Breade of Life: He that commeth
vnto me, ſhal neuer hunger: and he that Beleeueth in me, ſhal neuer thirſte.
                      Here
haue you, M. Hardinge, a plaine promiſſe made vnto our Faithe. But of your
Mouthe, wée heare nothinge. If you haue ought to ſhewe out of the Scriptures,
Doctours, or Councelles, let it appeare, & that in plaine woordes, without coloure.
Otherwiſe, if ye cauil in woordes, wée muſte ſaie, ye haue nothinge. Therefore
the Auncient Father Origen ſaith, Idcircò dicitur Panis vitae, vt habeat Guſtus Animae,
quod deguſter:
                     Origen. in Cantica, Homil. 2. 
                     Therefore is Chriſte called the Breade of Life, that (our Faithe
whiche is) the Taſte of our soule, maie houe, what to taſte.
                  
                  Clemens Alexandrinus ſaithe,
                     Clemens in Paedagog
                           •
                        , Lib. 1. Cap. 6. Comedite Carnes meas, & Bibite Sanguinem
meum: Euidenter Fidei, & Promiſsionis, quod eſt Eſculentum, & Poculentum dicens
allegoricè: Eate my Fleaſhe, and Drinke my Bloude: Meaninge hereby vnder an Allegorie,
or, by vvaie of a Figure, the Meate, and Drinke, that is of (our
                     ) Faithe, and (his
                     )
Promiſſe.
                  Tertullian ſaith,
                     Tertullian. De Reſurrectione Carnis. Eundem Sermonem Chriſtus etiam Carnem ſuam dixit: quia Sermo
Caro factus eſt. Proinde in cauſa vitae recipien dus: Deuorandus auditu: Ruminandus
intellectu: & Fide Digerendus eſt: The ſame Woorde, Chriſte called his
Fleaſhe: For the Woorde was made Fleaſhe. Therefore he muſte be receiued in cauſe of Life:
He muſte be Deuoured by hearing: He muſte be chevved by vnderſtandinge:
He muſte be Digeſted by Faithe.
                  S. Cyprian ſaithe,
                     Cyprian. De Coena Domini. Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 26. Augu. De Verb. Apoſtol. Serm. 2. Quod eſt eſca Carni, hoc eſt Animae Fides: As Meate is to
the Fleaſhe, ſo is Faithe vnto the Soule. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Credere in eum,
hoc eſt, Manducare: Illud Eibere, quid eſt, niſi viuere? To Beleeue in him, is to Eate
him. That Drinkinge of him, what is it els, but to liue by him?
                  I truſte, M. Hardinge, it maie appeare hereby, there is ſomme promiſſe made
hereof vnto our Faithe. Nowe ſhewe you as euidente Promiſſe made to your
Mouthe, and Belly: and then your Reader happily wil beleeue you.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 2.
               And therefore in celebratinge theſe Myſteries, the People are
to good pourpoſe exhorted, before they comme to receiue the Holy
Communion, to lifte vp theire Hartes, and to directe theire mindes
to Heauen warde: bicauſe he is there, by whom wee muſte be fedde,
and liue.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     I praie you,Surſum Corda. Whiche theſe Myſteries meane ye? Thoſe that ye haue in your newe communion, or
thoſe that we haue at the aulter of God in the Catholike Churche of Chriſte? If ye meane your owne
newe deuiſed toye, thereof ye cannot bringe any ſufficient reaſon againſte the Churche, pardy, whiche
condemneth the ſame. If ye meane the Holy Myſteries of the Catholike Churche, ye miſreporte the mater.
For by that exhortation, ye ſpeake of,Vntruth. Here M. Hardinge miſreporteth his ovvne Maſſe-booke. the people are not prepared to receiue the Communion onely, nor
chifely: but to diſpoſe them ſelues accordingly and as it becommeth them to praie: for to that ende be
theſe woordes, Surſum corda, vp with your hartes, pronounced by the Prieſte in the Preface before
prayer. Reade S. Cyprian in Sermone 6. De Oratione Dominica. And ye ſhal finde him to referre
the whole to praier. But what if we admitte your woordes, refuſinge your Heretical meaninge? VVe
graunte, the people are to good purpoſe ſo exhorted, as ye ſaie, and that he is in Heauen, whoſe fleaſh we
feede on in this Sacramente, thereby to attaine to life Euerlaſtinge. VVhat conclude ye of this? Ergo
he is not here? For at that marke ye ſhoote, euery man maye ſee. Here we tel you, that your Rhetorike is
better ſtuffe,A fooliſhe argument. In Epiſt. ad Heb. Homil. 17. Chriſte is both in Heauen and alſo here in the Sacrament. then your Logike: for your argumente is fooliſhe. VVith the one ye maie leade the ſimple
perhaps, with the other ye moue the Learned to laugh at you. For Chriſte is in Heauen, and alſo here,
as Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Et hic plenus exiſtens, & illic plenus, Vnum Corpus.
                     Chriſte is in Heauen, by the Subſtance of his Body: & here by vvorkinge, or by Grace. He is here fully,
and there fully, one Body. Theſe two propoſitions, Chriſte is in Heauen, and Chriſte is here, may wel
ſtande togeather, without iuttinge the one the other out of place. He is there at the right hande of
the Father viſibly, he is here vnder the Formes of Breade and VVine, inuiſibly: there in glorie, here in
Myſterie▪ yet as truly and fully here, as there, concerninge hisVntruthe. For Chryſoſtome neuer, neither vvrote ſo, nor meante ſo. Subſtance, as Chryſoſtome ſaith. Ye procede
foorth, and ſaie.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It maye becomme you, M. Hardinge, as wel to cal the reuerende Miniſtration
of Chriſtes Holy Myſteries, a Toie, as to cal the Goſpel of Chriſte, Erroure, and
Hereſie. So likewiſe Libanius the Heathen, although a man, I trow, not of your
Profeſſion, ſaide ſommetime, that al the Bookes, either of the Scriptures, or of any
y• Chriſtian Fathers,Socrat. li. 3. ca. 22 Chriſtianorum Libri ridiculi▪ & nugaces, ſi cum Iuliani Libris conferantur. in compariſon of Iulianus the Renegates Bookes, were toies.
and trifles. Howe be it, Our Toies be the ſame Toies, that were once vſed, and
allowed vniuerſally throughout the Catholique Churche of God, before your Maſſe
was euer knowen, and were then thought no Toies.
                  
                  Touchinge theſe woordes, Surſum corda, Lifte vp your Hartes, ye ſaie they
were applied in olde times vnto praier, and not onely, or chiefely to the Miniſtration
of the Sacramente: and that, as ye ſéeme to ſaie, by the witneſſe of S. Cyprian.
As for theſe emptie Woordes, Onely, or Chiefely, ye vſe them onely as a
falſe light, to blinde your Reader. For in our Apologie yee founde them not.
                  Touchinge S. Cyprian, Yée thought it beſte to diſſemble, and to ſhifte his
woordes, and to commaunde him to ſilence. For thus he ſaithe, euen directely againſte
the whole practiſe of your Churche:Cyprian. in Oratione Domini. 
                     Sacerdos ante Orationem, Praefatione praemiſſa,
parat Fratrum mentes, dicendo, Surſum Corda: vt dum reſpondet Plebs, Habemus
ad Dominum, admoneatur, nihil aliud ſe, quàm Dominum, cogitare debere:
Before Praier, the Prieſt with a Preface prepareth the hartes of the Brethren, ſaieinge vnto
them, Lifte vp your Hartes: that, when the People anſvveareth, VVee lifte them
vp vnto the Lorde, they maie be put in minde, to thinke of nothing els, but of the Lorde.
                     
Where is this order, M. Hardinge, where is this Eccleſiaſtical Tradition now becomme?
Throughout your whole Territorie of Rome, in what Churche, in what
Chaple is it keapte? Where doothe your people anſweare the Prieſte at the Common
Praier? Or where dooth the people vnderſtande, either the meaning of the Sacramentes,
or any thing, that is pronounced by the Prieſt? Or why are you ſo vnaduiſed,
to allege manifeſte Authorities againſt your ſelfe?
                  
                     
                     Ye ſaie,
                     Surſum Corda. 
                     the people was taught by theſe woordes, not to cōſider, what was meant
onely by y• Sacramentes, but to geue attendance vnto y• Praier: Wherein your own
Maſſebooke is caſ
                           •
                        ly hable to control you. And in the Greeke Liturgies, not before
any other publike Praier, but immediately before the Holy Miniſtration, the
Prieſte ſaithe, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Let vs lifte vp our Hartes. And Chryſoſtome
ſaithe,
                     Chryſo. ex varijs locis in Matthae. Homil. 9. Augu. in Pſal. 39 Clamamus in conſpectu Sacrificij, Surſum Corda: Wee crie alowde
in the ſight of the Oblation, Lifte vp your Hartes. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Surſum
Corda Habeamus. Si Reſurrexiſtis cū Chriſto, dicit Fidelibus Corpus, & Sanguinem
Domini accipientibus, dicit, Si Reſurrexiſtis cum Chriſto, quae ſurſum ſunt,
ſapite: vbi Chriſtus eſt in Dextra Dei ſedens: Quae ſurſum ſunt, quaerite: nō quae ſuper
terram: Let vs lifte vp our Hartes. If ye be riſen againe with Chriſte, he ſaith vnto the
Faitheful, he ſaithe vnto them, that receiue the Body, and Bloude of our Lorde,
If ye be riſen againe with Chriſte, ſauer thoſe thinges, that are aboue: where Chriſte is al
the right Hande of God: Seeke for the thinges that be aboue: not for the thinges, that be
in Earthe.
                     Auguſt. De Bono Perſeueran Li. 2 Cap. 13. Auguſt. De Bono Viduitatis, Cap 16. Alexander Halen. 4. Quaeſt. 37. mem. 1. Arti. 3. Par. 1. Cap. 9. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, In Sacramentis Fidelium dicitur, vt Surſum Corda
habeamus ad Dominum: At the Miniſtration of the Sacramentes of the Faithful,
it is ſaide, Let vs lifte vp our Hartes vnto the Lorde.
                  
                     Likewiſe againe, Inter Sacra Myſteria Cor habere Surſum iubemur In the
time of the Holy Myſteries, wee are commaunded to Lifte vp our Hartes.
                  
                     But what néede wee to rehearſe the Ancient Fathers? Your own late New Doctours
haue ſaide y• like. And to leaue the reſte, your own Manipulus Curatorum,
that is to ſaie, the Ordinarie, and Direction of al your whole Cleregie. ſaith thus,
Sacerdos ante Canonem dicit, Surſum Corda: Quaſi dicat, quòd volens ſumere
iſtud Sacramentum, debet habere Cor ſuum eleuatum ad Deum: Before the Canon
the Prieſte ſaithe, Lifte vp your Hartes: As if he vvoulde ſaie, vvho ſo vvil
receiue this Sacramente, ought to haue his Harte lifted vp vnto God.
                  Theſe woordes be plaine, and can in no wiſe be denied. It were wiſedome,
M. Hardinge, in ſutche caſes, to auouche nomore, then ye knowe. Otherwiſe your
woordes wil goe for Toies.
                  
                  Howe be it, the matter beinge graunted, that theſe woordes perteine to the
Holy Miniſtration, yet if wee woulde reaſon thus, Chriſtes Body is in Heauen:
Therefore it is not Really, and Fleaſhely in the Sacramente, Ye ſaie, VVee ſhoulde
make a fooliſhe Argumente: Our Rhetorique is better ſtuffe, then our Logique.
                  
                  This Argumente, M. Hardinge, is taken of the Nature of Chriſtes Humanitie:
whiche beinge the Very Natural Body of a Man, by the Iudgemente of the
Auncient Fathers, muſte needes be in one onely place at one time, and can reache
no further. For otherwiſe it were not a Very Natural Mannes Body. Therefore
S. Auguſtine ſaithe,De Conſe. Diſt. 2. Prima. Auguſti. Contra Fauſtum, Lib. 20. Cap. 11. as he is alleged by Gratian, Corpus Domini, in quo
Reſurrexit, in vno loco eſſe oportet: The Body of our Lorde, wherein he roſe againe,
muſte needes be in one Place.
                         Like wiſe againe he ſaithe, Chriſtus ſecundum
Praeſentiam Corporalem, ſimul & in Sole, & in Luna, & in Cruce eſſe non potuit:
Touchinge Bodily preſence, Chriſte coulde not be in the Soone, in the Moone, and
vpon the Croſſe, al at once.
                     
                  
                  
                     And againe,
                     Augu. Epiſt. 221. Chriſtus vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſt, Virtute, non Opere: Diuinitate, non Carne: Chriſte
is euery where, By his Power, not in deede: By his Godhed, not by his Fleaſhe.
                  
                     S. Cyril ſaithe,
                     Cyrill. in Iohan. Lib. 9. Cap. 22. Chriſtus cum Diſcipulis ſuis, etfi non Corpore, tamen Virtute
Deitatis ſemper futurus eſt: Chriſt wil euermore be wt his Diſciples, by the Povver of his
Diuinitie: although not in his Body. Therefore, to conclude, S. Auguſtine ſaith,
Videre Aſcendentem:Aug
                           •
                         in Pſal. 46 Credite in Abſentem: Sperate venientem: Tamen per Miſericordiam
occultam etiam ſentire Praeſentem: Behold Chriſte Aſcendinge: Beleaue in Chriſte
beinge Abſente: Truſte in Chriſte, that ſhal comme againe, And yet by his priuie mercie

feele him Preſente.Chriſtes Body in one place. 
                     Beleeue, ſaith S. Auguſtine, in Chriſte, Beinge nowe Abſente,
and not here.
                  
                  Thus the Auncient Catholique Fathers were bolde reuerently to reaſon of
Chriſtes Humanitie: yet was not M. Hardinge yet borne, that ſhoulde ſo bitterly
charge them with Fooliſhe Argumentes.
                     Ruffini in Hieronym. Inuectiua Prior. Nay, rather Ruffinus ſaithe, Stulta
adinuentio Calumniae eſt, Corpus Humanum aliud eſſe putare, quàm Carnem: It is
but a Fooliſhe findinge of a Cauil, to ſaie, that the Body of a Man is any other thing,
then Fleaſhe.
                  
                  
                     But Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Chriſte is whole here, and whole there. But Chryſoſtome
in the ſame place many waies expoundeth his whole meaning: For thus he
ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſ. in Epiſt. ad Hebr. Hom. 17 
                     if it woulde haue pleaſed M. Hardinge to haue ſeene his woordes, Offerimus
quidem, ſed ad Recordationē facientes Mortis eius: Hoc Sacrificium Exemplar illius
eſt: Hoc, quod nos facimus, in Commemorationem fit eius, quod factum eſt. Idipſum
ſemper offerimus: Magis autem Recordationem Sacrificij Operamur: Wee offer in
deede: But in Remembrance of his Deathe. This Sacrifice is a Token, or Figure of that
Sacrifice. The thinge, that wee doo, is ſonne in Remembrance of that thinge, that was
donne before. VVe offer alvvaie the ſame thing (y• Chriſte offered). Nay rather, wee
woorke the Remembrance of that Sacrifice (that Chriſte offered). Notwithſtanding,
to ſpare time,
                     
                     Artic. 6. Diui. 8. 
                     this Obiection is anſweared more at large in my Former Replie
to M. Hardinge.
                  
                  But, whereas M. Hardinge ſaith, Chriſtes Body is as fully here, as it is in Heauen, concerninge
the Subſtance, as Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                      He woulde, vnder the name of that Holy
Father, wilfully warrante a greate Vntruth. For Chryſoſtome ſaith not, Chriſtes
Body is Preſente in Subſtance: He hathe no ſutche woordes: He ſaithe not ſo: He ſaithe
the contrarie: as namely, where he ſaithe, as it is before alleged, The very Body of
Chriſte it ſelfe is not in the Holy veſſels:
                     
                     Chryſoſtom in Matth. Homil. 11. 
                     but the Myſtene, or Sacramente thereof is there
conteined.
                  
                  
                     Touchinge theſe woordes, Onleſſe ye can diuiſe a Newe Grammare, & make
Surſum to be Deorſum, & cōtrarie to Nature, turne al thinges vpſidedown, & thus
make your Conſtruction, Surſum Corda, Looke dovvnevvarde, they wil but
meanely make for your pourpoſe. S. Hierome ſaithe, Secundus Aduentus Saluatoris
in Gloria demonſtrandus eſt. Stultum eſt ergo illum in paruo, aut abſcondito
loco quaerere,Hieron. in Matthae. Cap. 14. qui totius eſt Mundi Lumen: The Seconde Comming of our Saueoure
ſhalbe declared in Glorie. Seeinge therefore he is the Light of the Worlde, it is greate folie,
to ſeeke him in any ſmal Corner.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 3.
               Cyrillus ſaithe, when wee comme to receiue theſe Myſteries, al
groſſe imaginations muſte quite be bauniſhed.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhy do ye not by your quotation directe vs to the place, where this ſaieinge of Cyrill maye
be founde? Knowe ye not that wee haue good cauſe to ſuſpecte your dealinge? Do we not almoſte
euery where finde you in manifeſte lies?This is a quainte eaſte of M Hardinges Copia Verberū. If ye meane plaine Truthe, why deale ye not plainely?
Chriſtes ſaieinge muſte needes be true,Cyril guilefully alleaged. Iohan. 5. The place of Cyril tourned vpon the Defenders. VVho euil dothe, hateth light. Bicauſe ye knewe the place
maketh directely againſte you, and ſubuerteth your whole Sacramentarie Doctrine, ye thought it good
policie, to take a woord or two for your purpoſe, and leaue the reſte, truſtinge it ſhoulde not be eſpied.
VVherein ye do like the Scorpion, that caſteth foorth his venim with the ſpirte of his taile, and foorthwith
creapeth awaie into a hole. VVoulde God as ye abuſe the name of Cyril, ſo ye woulde ſtande
to the Truthe by him euen in that place, whiche ye allege, Subſtantially declared VVho liſteth to ſee the
place, let him reade Cyrilles anſweare to Theodori
                        •
                     es reprehenſion of the eleuenth anathematiſme againſt

Neſtorius. There he ſheweth, that Neſtorius deſtroyed the meane of the Vnion of be the Natures
in Chriſte, to thintent the Body of Chriſte might be founde but a common body as men haue, and not
a Body propre of the VVoorde,The Hereſie of Neſtoriꝰ. hauinge power to viuificate, or quicken al thinges.Neſtorius Hereſie ſtoode neither in Tranſubſtantiation, nor in Real Preſence. For Neſtorius
diuided Chriſte, and taught the woorde to be the Sonne of God, not of Mary: and Chriſte Man the Sonne
of Mary onely, as Man: and diſſolued the whole Myſterie of the incarnation ſo, as Chriſte ſhoulde be an
other certaine Sonne beſide the VVoorde. And becauſe theThe meaning is this: VVee cā
                        not be fedde, or nouriſhed by Chriſte, as he is in his Diuine Nature: but only by the Faithe that vvee haue in his Fleaſhe Crucified. Nature of Godhed cannot be eaten, thereof
he talked vainely and prophanely, that in the Sacramente wee eate Fleaſhe, and not Godhed. For
confutation of this deteſtable Hereſie, Cyril bringeth him to the conſideration of the Bleſſed Sacramente,
and oppoſeth him, whether he thought, that in the Sacramente Chriſte beinge (by his Doctrine)
Man beſides God the VVoorde, wee eate a man, as one woulde ſaie, after ſutche ſorte, as the
Barbarous people of the newe founde Lande America, called Caniballes, eate one another. But becauſe
that were abſurde, and beaſtly, Cyril ſaithe that wee eate not a common Body, though the
Nature of GodhedVntruth guilefully encloſed: For neither the Fleaſh of Chriſte in ꝓ per ſpeache can be Eaten. properly be not eaten, but that Body whiche is Proprium verbi, the proper
Body of the VVorde, whiche quickenethe al thinges, by receiuinge whereofVVee receiue vvhole Chriſte, God, and Man, not vvith our Mouthe, but by Faith, & Sprite. wee receiue whole
Chriſte, God, and man. And here Cyril layeth to Neſtorius charge, as though he draue men to groſſe
cogitations touchinge this Sacramente.The groſſe imaginations that Cyril vvould to be eſchevved in receiuing the bleſſed Sacramente. The woordes be theſe: Num hominis comeſtionem,
&c. VVhat doeſt thou pronounce this our Sacramente to be eatinge of a man (the Greeke
is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) and driueſte vnreuerently the Minde of them as haue beleued vnto groſſe imaginations,
and attempteſt with humaine imaginations, to treate of thoſe thinges, whiche are attained
by an onely, pure, and exquiſite Faithe? Theſe be the groſſe imaginations, whiche Cyrill
woulde to be banniſhed at the receiuing of this Sacramente, and that wee eate the Body of Chriſte,
not as beinge a common Body, as the Body of euery mortal Man: And though the Nature of Godhed
be not eaten, that yet we eate that Body, whiche is the proper Body of the VVoorde, that
quickeneth al thinge. Nowe asA fond 
                           •
                        uaſiō. For the groſſeneſſe hereof ſtoode not in Chriſtes Body, but in the manner of Eatinge. we haue not that groſſe imagination of eatinge a common Body,
(which of the Grekes, by a terme plainer to the learned, is called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) whē we receiue
this Sacramente: ſo it is euident by Cyril, that in the ſameVVith Our mouth vvee receiue Onely the Sacrament: VVith our Faith vvee Eate the Body of Chriſte Incarnate, Verily, and in deede. we eate verely, and in deede the Body
of Chriſte, the VVoorde incarnate. For otherwiſe his ſaieinges had not made ought againſte the
Hereſie of Neſtorius. And thus receiuinge Chriſtes Body in the Sacramente, we receiue it truely, and
with Faithe, and without groſſe imaginations. Al this weighed, howe proue ye now, Chriſte to be ſo
lodged in Heauen, that notwithſtandinge his owne VVoorde,O fonde groſſeneſſe. VVee lacke not Chriſte: Although vvee haue him not Fleaſhely Preſente in our mouthes. wee lacke him here in theſe Holy Myſteries?
But let vs conſider your other Authorities.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Touchinge the quotation in the margine, eſcaped in the Printe, that faulte, I
truſte, ſhal be amended. But howe wil you amende your faulte, M. Hardinge, ſo
often alleginge ſutche thinges, as your Conſcience knoweth to be moſte Vntrue?
I wil not wander far, to put you in minde. In the laſte line of your Former Diuiſion,
ye auouche that vpon Chryſoſtome, that you knowe, Chryſoſtome neuer,
neither Wrote, nor meante. As for the manifeſte Lies, wherewith ye ſo
ſharply, and ſo often charge vs, though there were ſomme Truthe in your chalenge,
as there is none, yet might not wée therein in any wiſe compare with you.
Concerninge the affiance, ye woulde ſéeme to haue in theſe woordes of Cyril, ye
thought it good ſkil, thus to crowe out with ſomme courrage, before the fight.
                  In what ſenſe the Godhed maie be eaten, or not eaten, I haue already ſaide
ſo mutche, as then ſeemed ſufficiente, in my Former Replie to your Firſte Anſweare.
The meaninge of Cyrillus is this, Wée cannot, neither knowe, nor
beleeue on, nor féede vpon the Diuine Maieſtie of God, as it is pure, and Simple,
and in it ſelfe: But al our knowledge, and al our Faithe, whiche is our Spiritual
Féedinge, and Life, is deriued vnto vs through Ieſus Chriſte, and ſtandeth onely,
and wholy in this, that the Sonne of God hath taken the Very Nature, and Subſtance
of our Corruptible Fleaſhe, and ioined the ſame in One Perſonne vnto his

Godhed.
                        Neſtorius. Hila. in Pſal. 14
                           •
                        . Therefore S. Hilarie ſaithe, Cognitus fieri Deus hominibus, niſi aſſumpto
Homine, non potuit. Quia Incognoſcibilem cognoſcere, niſi per Naturam noſtram,
Natura noſtra non potuit: God coulde not be knovven vnto menne, but by
the Receiuinge of Man vnto him. For God that ſourmounteth al knowledge, Our Nature
coulde not knowe,
                     
                     Auguſt. Confeſſionū. Li. 7. Ca. 18 
                     but by the meane of our Nature.
                      So ſaithe S. Auguſtine,
Quaerebam viam comparandi roboris, quod effect idoneum ad fruendum te: Nec inueni,
donec amplecterer Mediatorem Dei, & Hominum, Hominem Chriſtum Ieſum:
I ſought a waie to geate ſtrengthe, whereby I might be hable to enioie thee: But I founde
it not, before that I embraced Ieſus Chriſte, vvhiche is the Mediatoure bitvveene
God, and Man. Againe he ſaithe, Chriſtus Cibum, cui capiendo
inualidus eram, miſcuit Carni: Quoniam Verbum Caro factum eſt, vt infantiae
noſtrae lacteſceret Sapientia tua: Chriſte tempered, and mingled his Meate (whiche
is his Godhed) vvith his Fleaſhe: whiche Godhed otherwiſe I was not hable to receiue.
For the VVoorde vvas made Fleaſhe, that thy wiſedome (o God) might becomme
milke vnto our chilhoode.
                  
                  Neſtorius Hereſie ſtood not either in Tranſubſtantiation, or in Real Preſence:
but onely in the diſſolution of the Perſonne of Chriſte, in that he diuided the
Manhed of Chriſte from his Godhed: and ſo concluded in the ende, that Chriſte
was onely a bare Natural Man, in al reſpectes, as others were. If it had benne
ſo, then could wée not haue benne ſaued by the Deathe of Chriſte, nomore then by
the Deathe of Codrus, and Decius: who beinge nothinge els, but Very Natural
Menne,Hieronym. ad Epheſios, Cap. 1. gaue them ſelues to Deathe for the ſafetie of theire Countries. Neither
could wée beléeue in Chriſte Crucified: that is to ſaie, wée coulde not Eate, nor
Feede vpon the Body of Chriſte,
                     Cyrillus ad Reginas: Ex Epiſt. ad Hebrae. or haue life by it. Cyrillus ſaithe: Quomodo purgabi
                           •
                        
nos ab operibus mortuis? Sanguis enim Communis Hominis nihil habet maius,
quàm Sanguis Tauri, aut Hirci: Howe then ſhal Chriſte deliuer vs from deadly woorkes?
For the Bloude of Common Man hath nothinge more,
                      (to woorke Saluation) then the
Bloude of a bulle, or a goate.
                      And therefore the ſame S. Cyril imagineth Chriſte
to ſaie thus:Cyrill. in Iohan. Lib. 4. Cap. 18. 
                     Mortalem Carnem aſſumpſi: Sed quia Naturaliter Vita exiſtens habito in
ea, totam ad meam Vitam reformauli I haue taken Mortal Fleaſhe vpon me ſelfe. But, for
as mutche, as I Naturally beinge Life, dwel in the ſame. I haue refourmed that vvhole
Fleaſh vnto my Life.
                     Leo De Paſsion▪ Domi. Sermo. 13. So ſaithe Leo, Verus venerator Dominicae Paſsionis, ſic Crucifixum
Ieſum Oculis Cordis aſpiciat, vt illius Carnem ſuam eſſe cognoſcat: Let the
true woorſhipper of our Lordes Paſsion ſo behold Chriſt Crucified with the eies of his harte, yt
he maie vnderſtande, that the Fleaſhe of Chriſte is his Fleaſhe. But hereof, I trowe,
M. Hardinge wil moue no greate queſtion.
                  Further it is fully Confeſſed of either ſide, that wée by Faithe Eate the very
Body of Chriſte, not as the Body of any other Common Natural Man, but as
the Body of the Sonne of God: and, that the ſame Body ſo eaten by Faithe, and
none otherwiſe, géeueth Life. But, how that Body maie be Eaten, therein ſtandeth
the whole doubte. Hereunto S. Cyril anſweareth thus: Num Hominis Comeſtionē
hoc noſtrum Sacramentum pronuntias?
                     Cyrill. Anathematiſmo. 11. 
                     Et irreligioſè ad Craſſas Cogitationes
vrges mentem corum, qui crediderunt? Et attentas humanis rationibus tractare ea,
quae Sola, Pura, & Exquiſita Fide accipiuntur? Dooſte thou ſaie, that our Sacramente is
the Eating of a Man? And dooſt thou vnreuerently, and without Religion force the mind
of the Faithful vnto groſſe, (and Fleaſhely) cogitations? And goeſt thou about with
Natural imaginations to deale thoſe thinges, that be receiued by Onely, Pure, and Perfite
Faithe? Theſe woordes ſéeme plaine, & frée from quarrel. Yet hereof maie grow an
other doubte. For, by M. Hardinge Iudgement, to thinke, that Chriſtes Body is
to be receiued into our Mouthes, and Bellies, is no manner Groſſe Imagination.
But wée ſaie, as Cyrillus ſaith, to auoide al ſutche vncomely, & Fleaſhly Vanities,

                     Chriſtes Body, and Bloude,
                     Spiritual Eatinge. are a Spiritual foode, and muſte be receiued, not with
Mouthe, or Teethe, but with Onely, Pure, and Perfite Faithe.
                  
                  
                     Concerninge M. Hardinges fantaſie, Pope Nicolas vnder a Solemne Proteſtation
woulde haue vs to ſaie,
                     De Conſe. Diſt. 2. Ego Berēgarius. Ego Corde, & Ore profi
                        •
                     eor, non tantùm Sacramentum,
ſed etiā Corpus Chriſti in Veritate, ſenſualiter manibus Sacerdotum tractari, frangi,
& dentibus Fidelium atteri: I profeſſe with Harte, and Mouthe, that not onely
the Sacramente, but alſo the Body of Chriſte it ſelfe in very Truthe, and deede is ſenſibly
touched, and broken with the Prieſtes handes, and torne vvith the Teeth of the
Faithful. But this talke is ſo fonde, and ſo vtterly voide of diſcretion, that the
very Barbarous Gloſe is faine to cōtrol it in this ſort: Niſi ſanè intelligas (iſta) Verba
Berengarij, in maiorem incides haereſim, quàm ipſe habuit: Onleſſe thou wiſely
vnderſtand theſe Woordes of Berengarius, thou wilte fal into a greatter Hereſie, then
euer he helde any.
                  
                  
                     S. Cyrils woordes be plaine,
                     Sola, Pura, Exquiſita Fide. Sola▪ Pura, & exquiſita Fide accipiuntur:
Theſe thinges be receiued (not by Mouthe, but) by Onely, Pure, and Perfite Faithe.
Likewiſe againe he ſaith, Initium, & Fundamentum in Sanctificationem, & Iuſtitiam,
Chriſtus eſt,Cyrill. in Iohan. Lib. 4. Cap. 39. per Fidem, ſcilicet, & non aliter. Hoc enim modo in nobis habitat:
Chriſte is the Beginninge, and Fundation vnto Holineſſe, and Righteouſneſſe: I meane by
Faithe, and none othervviſe. For by Faithe Chriſte dvvelleth in vs. So ſaith
Clemens Alexandrinus,Clemens in Paedagogo, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Hoc eſt Bibere Ieſu Sanguinem, participem eſſe incorruptionis
eius: This is the Drinkinge of the Bloude of Ieſus, to be made partetaker of his
Immortalitie. Origen ſaith, Eſt ergo ipſe vulneratus: Cuius nos Sanguinē bibimus,
id eſt,Origen. in Numer. Homi. 16. Athana. in illud Euangelij, Quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dixerit verbum. Doctrinae eius verba ſuſcipimus: He was woounded: whoes Bloude vvee
Drinke, that is to ſaie, the VVoordes of vvhoes Doctrine vvee receiue.
                  
                     But what is there ſo plaine, as theſe woordes of Athanaſius? Quot Hominibus
ſuffeciſſet Corpus eius ad Cibū, vt Vniuerſi Mundi alimonia fieret? Propterea Aſcenſionis
ſuae in Coelum mentionem fecit, vt eos à corporali intellectu abſtraheret: Vnto howe
many menne coulde Chriſtes Body haue ſuffiſed for meate, that he ſhould be y• Foode of al the
Worlde? Therefore he made mention of his Aſcenſion into Heauen: that he might vvithdravve
them from corporal, and Fleaſhely vnderſtanding.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, I beſeche you, tel vs by the waie, when ye teache vs, that
Chriſtes Body is Fleaſhely Preſente: that it is receiued into the Mouthe: that it
is chevved, and bruſed with teethe: and that it paſſeth further into the belly,
howe doo you withdrawe our mindes from Fleaſhely, and Corporal vnderſtandinge?
If this Eatinge be Spiritual, what Eatinge maye be coumpted Corporal?
                  
                     Hereof S. Auguſtine ſaith thus, Cùm videritis Filium Hominis aſcendentem, vbi
erat priùs,Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tractat. 27. Certè vel tunc videbitis, quòd non eo modo, quo putatis, erogat Corpus
ſuum: Certè vel tunc intelligetis, quòd Gratia eius non conſumitur morſibus:
When ye ſhal ſee the Sonne of Man Aſcendinge vp, where he was before. Then ſhal ye ſee,
that he geeueth not his Body (to be Eaten
                     ) in ſutche ſorte, as you imagine: Then ſhal
ye vnderſtande, that his Grace is not conſumed by morſelles. And therefore againe
he ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Verbis Domi. Secūd. 
                           •
                        uc. Sermon. 33. Nolite Pauces parare, ſed Cor: Prepare not your Iavves, but your
Harte.
                  This is the Very, True, Spiritual, and Onely Eating of Chriſtes Body: and,
what ſo euer fantaſie M. Hardinge hath diuiſed biſides, of his Mouth, & Teethe,
is, as S. Cyril ſaithe, a Vaine, Vnreuerente, Groſſe, and Fleaſhely Imagination.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 4.
               The Councel of Nice, as it is alleged by ſomme in Greeke, plainely

forebiddeth vs to be baſely affectioned, or bent towarde the Breade,
and Wine, whiche are ſette before vs.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As the former parte of the ſentence, whiche ye bringe out of the Nicene Councel,Vntruthes two togeather. Read the Anſvveare. ſoundeth nothing
againſt the Catholikes, (for they alſo teache the ſame):Vntruthes two togeather. Read the Anſvveare. ſo the later parte is directly contrary to
your Doctrine, which ye thought good to leaue out, leſt thereby ye ſhould haue marred your whole matter.
Sutche nipping,A marke to knovve Heretikes by. The vvordes of the Nicene Councel, vvhiche make plainely for the Catholike Doctrine touchinge the Sacrament of the Aulter. and roundinge of ſentences hath euer ben taken for a marke to know Heretikes by.
Amonge wiſe men ſutche practriſe worthely bringeth you into ſuſpicion of Vntruthe. The wordes of
the Councel truely reported be theſe: Let vs not at the Diuine Table baſely behold the Bread and Cuppe
ſette before vs: but liftinge vp our minde, let vs by Faithe vnderſtande on that Holy Table to be laide
the Lambe of God, that taketh awaie the ſinnes of the VVorlde, of Prieſtes Sacrificed vnbloudely. And
receiuing his precious Body, and Bloude verily, let vs beleue theſe to be the pledges of our Reſurrection.
For in conſideration hereof we take not mutche, but a litle, that we may knowe, we receiue not to fillinge
(of the Body) but to Sanctimonie. Take the ende with the beginninge, and what maketh this
decree of that Holy Councel for defence of your Sacramentarie Doctrine? And here, who be more baſely
affectioned and bent towarde the thinges ſet on that Table, ye, that make them but Breade, and
VVine, or wee, that, after Conſecration, beleue vnder the formes of Breade, and VVine verily to be made
Preſente the Body, and Bloude of Chriſte? VVhether is a baſer exerciſe, to feede onVntruth▪ vile, and ſ
                           •
                        lau
                           •••
                        
                        rous: VVee ee
                           •
                        e not vpon 
                           •
                        ommon Brea
                           ••
                        , and VVine: VVee fe
                           •
                        de vpon the Very Body, and Bloud of Chriſt. common Breade,
and VVine, and to dwel in the iudgement of the ſenſes, or to eate the very Fleaſhe of Chriſte, the Breade
of Life, that came downe from Heauen, to immortalitie of the Body, and Soule, to forſake the ſenſes,
and folowethe vnderſtandinge ofYour Faith, without Goddes VVoord, is no Faithe. Taithe? VVel we agree with you, not to be ouer baſely intent
to the Breade, and Cuppe. But why do not ye performe that, as foloweth there after your owne allegation
out of that Councel? VVhy do ye not with thoſe. 318. Holy Fathers, and with the whole Churche
of Chriſte vnderſtande by Faithe on that Holy Table to be laide the Lambe of God, that taketh awaie
the Sinnes of the VVorlde? VVhy do ye not recante your wicked Doctrine againſte the bleſſed Sacrifice
of the Maſſe? Reade the whole ſentence, ioyninge the ende to the beginninge. Saie not al thoſe Holy
and Learned Fathers, the Lambe of God on this ſacred Table (thei meane the Aulter) to be Sacrificed of
the Prieſtes vnbloudely?
                  Againe why bringe ye the Chriſten people from the Body of Chriſte whereby they are redemed,
to aVntruthe. For vvee t
                           •
                        ache 
                           •
                        either bare Bread, nor bare Figure: Reade the Anſvveare. bare piece of Breade,Al Tropes and Figures of the Sacramentaries be excluded by Verdite of the Nicene Councel. teachinge it to beVntruthe. For the Learned Doctours, and Fathers vſed commonly the ſame Tropes, and Figures. but the Figure of his Body? Saieth not this Councel,
that wee receiue the Precious Body, and Bloude of our LordeVVee receiue Chriſte Verily, and in dee
                           •
                        e: although neither Fleaſhely, nor vvith bodily mouthe. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, verily, and in deede,
Vntruthe. For the Learned Doctours, and Fathers vſed commonly the ſame Tropes, and Figures. whereby in dede al your tropes, and Figures be quite excluded? Againe if theſe were but Breade,
and VVine, as ye teache, woulde the Councel ſaie, that we take them not to ſacietie, but to Sanctimonie
and Holynes? VVhat Holynes can we haue of Breade, and VVine? VVhat, Holynes obteine
                        •
                      we
not by eatinge of the Body of Chriſte, beinge the proper Body of the VVorde, or God the VVordes owne
Body, that hathe Power to viuificate, and quicken al thinges? Thus we come within you, Defenders, as
it were, and claſpinge with you, wringe yourO braue Captaine. weapon out of your handes, and with the tother end
of it ſtricke you downe. As it is not harde to vs by learninge to ouerthrowe you, ſo we beſeche God
to ſtrike down the pride,Act. 9. and ſtubbernes of your hartes, as he did Paule, wherewith ye reſiſte the manifeſte
Truthe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée allege this place, although briefely, yet ſimply, and truely, and without
any manner fraude, or guile. But if roundinge, and clippinge of the Holy Fathers
be the marke of an Heretique, as it is here auouched, then haue wée one marke
more, whereby to knowe M. Hardinge. For this is his ordinarie vſage, and practiſe
of courſe.
                  Touchinge either the Beginninge, or the Ende of this Decrée, there is no
cauſe, wherefore any Woorde therein written ſhoulde of out parte be diſſembled.
The Holy Fathers in that Councel teache vs, vtterly to withdrawe our eie
                        •
                      from
the Breade, and Wine, beinge nothing els, but Creatures tranſitorie, and corruptible:

and by Faithe to beholde the Very Body of Chriſte, whiche is Repreſented
in the Myſteries. To like pourpoſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe, as it is alleged before,
Ea demùm eſt Miſerabilis animae Seruitus,
                     The Lābe laide vpon the Table. 
                     Signa pro Rebus accipere:
                     Auguſt. De Doctrina Chriſtiana, Lib. 3. Cap. 5. 
                     & ſupra
Creaturam Corpoream oculum Mentis ad hautiendum Aeternum Lumen leuare
non poſſe: This is the Miſerable Bondage of the Soule, to take the Signes in ſteede
of the thinges, that be Signified: and not to be hable to lifte vp the eie of the
Minde, aboue the Corporal Creature, to receiue the Light Euerlaſtinge.
                      And therefore
immediately before the Holy Miniſtration, the Prieſte ſaith vnto vs, as it is
ſaide before, Lifte vp your Hartes. In this ſorte the ſame Fathers ſpeake of the
Water of Baptiſme:Concil. Nicen. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Baptiſma noſtrum Oculis Senſibilibus ſpectandum non eſt, ſed
oculis Intellectus. Vides Aquam? Cogita Vim, & poteſtatē Dei, quae in Aquis latet:
Our Baptiſme maie not be conſidered with the Senſible, or Bodily Eies, but with the Inner
Eies of the Minde. Seeſte thou the Water? Thinke of the Might, and Power of God,
that lieth Hidden in the VVater. Thus, as in the One Sacramente they withdrawe
vs from the Water, euen ſo in the Other Sacramente they withdrawe vs
from the Breade.
                  But it foloweth in the ſame Decrée, Let vs by Faithe vnderſtande, on that Holy
Table to be laide the Lambe of God, that taketh awaie the Sinnes of the World. If y• Auncient
Fathers, to the end to ſturre vp, and to enflame the Hartes of the people, had
not ſommetimes vſed vehemente phraſes, and extraordinarie kindes of Speache,
M. Hardinge might many times ſpare his penne, and keepe ſilence. But he dooth
the Fathers greate wronge, that preſſeth onely theire 
                        •
                     are woordes, & diſſembleth
their meaninge. Gregorie Nyſſene S. Baſiles Brother diſcréetely, and learnedly
openeth this whole mater. Thus he writeth:Gregor. Nyſſen. De Anima, Ca. 11 
                     Cùm in habitudine loci alicuius, vel negorij
in loco exiſtentis, intelligibiliū aliquod extiterit, Abuſiuè id ibi eſſe dicimus, propter
operationē eius, quae ibi eſt, locum pro habitudine, & operatione accipientes.
Cùm enim dicere deberemus, Ibi Operatur, dicimus, Ibi eſt: When any Spiritual
thing is in ye conſideratiō of ſomme place, or els in conſideratiō of ſomme mater being in a place,
Wee ſaie, the ſame Spiritual thing is there, by an Abuſe, or by an Extraordinarie
vſe of ſpeache: bicauſe of the effecte of that Spiritual thinge, that there is
vvrought: taking the place in ſteede of Conſideration, of Workinge in ye Place. For, where
wee ſhould ſaie, There it VVoorketh, thus wee ſaie, There it is.
Euen ſo, where as
theſe Fathers ſhould haue ſaide, The Effectes, or Graces, y• wée haue by Chriſtes
Body, are laid before vs vpon y• Table, by Abuſe of Speache they ſaie, the Body of
Chriſte is laid vpō y• Table.De Conſe. Diſt. 2. Species. Likewiſe ſaith Gratiā. Quidā nō improbabiliter exponūt,
Carnis, & Sanguinis Veritatem, Ipſam 
                           •
                        orundem efficientiam, hoc eſt, Remiſsionem
Peccatorum: Somme menne not without good reaſon, by the Truthe of Chriſtes
Fleaſhe, and Bloude, vnderſtande the Effecte, or vvoorkinge of the ſame, that is to
ſaie, the Remiſsion of Sinnes.
                     
                  
                  
                     And as theſe Fathers ſaie, Chriſte is
                      Laid vpon the Table, euen ſo, by like phraſe of
ſpeache,
                     
                     De Conſe. Diſt. 2. Quid ſit. 
                     S. Gregorie ſaith, Chriſte is
                      killed vpon the Table: Chriſtus iterum in hoc
Myſterio moritur: Eius Caro in populi ſalutem patitur: Chriſte dieth againe in this
Myſterie: His Fleaſhe ſuffereth for the Saluation of the people. So ſaith
                      Chryſoſtome,
Vt in Coelo coelatur Deus,Chryſ in Matth. Homil. 4. ſic in Scripturis abſconditur. Non omnes intelligunt Deum Veritatis, poſitum in Scripturis: As God is couered in Heauen, ſo is he couered in
the Scriptures. Al menne vnderſtande not God, that is laide in the Scriptures. So
ſaithe Athanaſius,Athanaſ. De Interpreta. Pſalm. Hieronym. De Vita Eremitica. Hieronym. ad Gaudentium. Eſt etiam in Verbis Scripturarum Dominus: Our Lorde is in the
VVoordes of the Scriptures. So ſaithe S.
                      Hierome, Supra nudam metuis humum
ex eſa ieiunijs membra collidere. Sed Dominus tecum iacet: Thou arte a fraide to laie
thy body, worne out with faſting, vpon the bare ground. Yet the Lord lieth vvith thee.
Againe, Nudus, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſuriens ante fores noſtras Chriſtus in paupere moritur: Chriſte

naked, and hungrie, lieinge before our gate, dieth in the poore.
                  And, to leaue other like ſaieinges, and ſentences of the Ancient Fathers, Pope
Adrian ſaithe in your late Councel of Nice,The Lambe laide vpon the Table. 
                     In Scripturis Sanctarum imaginum Agnus
Praecurſoris digito oſtenſus depingitur:
                     De Con. Diſt 3. Sextam Sanctā. 
                     In the Scriptures of the Holy Images, is
painted the Lambe of God, that John Baptiſte ſhewed with his finger.
                  
                  
                     Theſe ſaieinges muſte be qualified with a gentle Expoſition: and maie not be
rackte extréemely to the ſounde, and rigour of the Letter. Chryſoſtome thus expoundeth
theſe woordes of S. Paule to the Galathians:Chryſoſt. in Epiſt. ad Gala. Cap. 3. Quibus Chriſtus ante Oculos
priùs depictus erat, in vobis Crucifixus. Atqui Chriſtus non apud Galathas, ſed
Hieroſolymis fuit Crucifixus. Quomodo igitur dicit, in vobis? Vt oſtendat vim Fidei,
quae poteſt etiam procul diſsita cernere: indicans, quòd illi oculis Fidei, exactiùs
cernerent, quàm nonnulli, qui praeſentes adfuerant, ea
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , quae gerebantur, conſpexerant:

                        Ʋnto whome Chriſte was painted out, and Crucified emonge you before your Eies.
Yet was not Chriſte Crucified in Galathia, but at Hieruſalem. How then ſaithe S. Paule vnto
the Galathians, Chriſte was Crucified emongſt you? His meaninge was, to ſhewe the
ſtrengthe of Faithe, vvhiche is hable to ſee thinges, though thei be far avvaie:
and that they by the Eies of Faithe ſawe the Deathe of Chriſte more plainely, and perfitely,
then many, that were preſente at his Deathe, and ſawe thoſe thinges that were donne.
                  
                  Thus the Fathers in this Councel ſaide, Chriſtes Body is Laide foorthe
vpon the Communion Table, that is, not vnto our bodily Eies, or ſenſes, but
vnto the eies of our Faithe: I meane, by waie of a Myſterie, or Sacramente: but
not verily, or in déede. In this ſenſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto the people, Vos
eſtis in Menſa:
                     De Con. Diſt. 2. Quia paſſus. 
                     Vos eſtis in Calice: You are laide vpon the Table: you are in
the Cuppe. As the people is laide vpon the Table, ſo is Chriſtes Body laide
vpon the Table: And as the People is in the Cuppe, ſo is Chriſtes Bloude in
the Cuppe. The people is there by waie of a Myſterie: euen ſo is Chriſtes Body
and Bloude there by waie of a Myſterie, and none otherwiſe. Thus M. Hardinge,
wée withdrawe not the people of God, as ye vntruely ſaie, from Chriſtes
Body to a péece of Breade: But rather wée leade them, as the Ancient Fathers
euer did, from the Creature of Breade, to the Beholdinge, Receiuinge, and Eatinge
of Chriſtes very Body, and Bloude.
                  In what ſorte, and ſenſe Chriſte is nowe Vnbloudily Sacrificed by the Prieſte,
for ſhortneſſe ſake,Arti. 17. Diui. 14 gentle Reader, I muſte referre thée vnto my Former Replie
to M. Hardinge.
                  How the Holy Myſteries be pledges of our Reſurrection, it hath partely bene
ſaide before, and partely ſhalbe ſaide hereafter more at large.
                  How wée maie receiue the Body of Chriſte in deede, and verily, without either
Tranſubſtantiation, or Real Preſence, I haue bothe touched before in this Treatie,
and alſo in my Former Replie.Artic. 4. Diui. 8. Certainely S. Auguſtine ſaithe, The Receiuinge
of Chriſtes Body in deede, and the Receiuinge of the Sacramente, are ſundrie
thinges. Thus he writeth, Oſtendit Chriſtus, quid ſit, non Sacramentotenus,
ſed re vera Corpus Chriſti Manducare,
                     Auguſt. De Ciuit. Li. 21. Ca. 21. 
                     & eius Sanguinem Bibere: Chriſte ſheweth,
what it is, to Eate his Body, and to Drinke his Bloude, not by vvaie of Sacramente,
but verily, and in deede. For the Eatinge of the Sacramente with Mouthe, and
Toothe, is not the very True Eatinge of Chriſtes Body: but a token, or Myſterie
of the ſame. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Qui Manducat Intus, non Foris: qui Manducat
in Corde,
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tractat. 26. 
                     non qui premit Dente: He that Eateth VVithin, not he that Eateth
VVithout: He that Eateth
                      (Chriſtes Body) in his Harte, not he yt bruſeth
                      (the Sacramente)
vvith his Toothe. Who ſo by Faithe receiueth the Body of Chriſte, receiueth
it Subſtantially, Really, Verily, and in déede: and dwelleth in Chriſte, and
Chriſte in him. Thus is Chriſtes Body receiued, as theſe Holy Fathers ſaie, not

to the fillinge, or contentation of the Body, but vnto the Holineſſe, and Sanctification
of the minde.
                  
                     Thus ye comme within vs, M. Hardinge, as ye ſaie: and cloſpe with vs: and ouerthrow
vs by Learninge: and wringe our weapon out of our handes: and with the other ende thereof
ye ſtrike vs downe.Thraſo in Lunucho. 
                     Me thinketh, I heare one ſaie, Deni
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            metuebant Omnes iam me:
If ſome Gnato ſtoode by you, I trowe, wee ſhoulde haue a prety plaie. But vnſenſible
menne are wée, that feele none of theſe deadly blowes. I wil anſweare you,
as S. Auguſtine ſometime anſweared Paſcentius the Arian Heretique, Facile eſt,
vt quiſque Auguſtinum vincat:
                     
                     Auguſt. ad Paſcent. Epiſt. 174. 
                     videris, vtrùm Veritate, an Clamore: It is an eaſy mater
to ouercome Auguſtine: But ſee you whether it be by Truthe, or by noiſe of vvoordes.
And againe, Non bonum Homini eſt Hominem vincere: Sed bonum eſt homini, vt
cum Veritas vincat volentem: quia malum eſt Homini, vt eum Veritas vincat muitum.
Nam ipſa vincat neceſſe eſt, fiue negantem, ſiue confitentem: It is not good
for a man, to conquere a man: but it is good for a man, that the Truthe maie conquere
him vvith his good vvil. For it is il for a man, that the Truthe ſhoulde conquere him againſte
his wil. But whether he wil, or wil not, the Truthe muſte needes Conquere
him.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 5.
               And, as Chryſoſtome very aptely writeth, wee ſaie, that the Body
of Chriſte is the Deade Carkeſſe, and wee our ſelues muſte be the
Egles: meaninge thereby, that wee muſte flie on highe, if wee wil
come to the Body of Chriſte. For this Table, as Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
is a Table of Egles, and not of Iaies. Cyprian alſo: This Breade,
ſaithe he, is the foode of the Soule, and not the meate of the Belly.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  In deede Chryſoſtome ſaithe, as ye reporte But Sirs, what meane ye? To Eate the Body of Chriſte,
whiche is the dead Carcas, in reſpecte of his deathe (for onleſſe he had fallen, we had not riſen againe)
muſte we ſo be Egles, as we vſe no office of mans Body to this kinde of Eatinge? Muſte wee
flie ſo hie, as we looke not to finde this Body in Earthe? Can wee not Eate this Body, excepte wee
flie vp to Heauen?In. 1. Corin. Cap. 10. H
                           •
                        
                        mil. 24. Can we not come by it, but there? Can we not Eate him, but there? Yes forſoothe.
O Earthly Diuinitie: Then haue you litle to doo in Heauen. VVee neede not goe out of the Earthe for the matter. For Chryſoſtome him ſelfe in the ſame Homilie.
from whence ye fetche this,VVhat Egles muſte vvee be, and hovve hie muſte vvee flie to come to the Eatinge of Chriſtes Body. ſaithe, that whiles wee be in this life, this Myſterie is cauſe, that
theNot by pullinge Chriſte dovvne to vs: but by liftinge vp our Hartes to him. Earthe to vs is become Heauen. He that deſireth to knowe, what Egles we muſte be, and how
hie wee muſte flie to come to the Eatinge of this Body woorthely, let Chryſoſtome euen there expounde
Chryſoſtome. He nameth Egles (ſaithe he) to ſhewe, that he muſte get him vp on highe, that commeth
to this Body, and that he muſt haue nothinge to doo with the Earthe, neither be drawen downewarde
to baſe thinges, and creape, but alwaies flie vpwarde, and beholde the Sunne of rightuouſneſſe,
&c. VVill ye yet heare him more plainely declare, what he meaneth by this highe Egles flight?
VVipe awaie (ſaithe he) all filthe from thy Soule, prepare thy minde to receiue theſe Myſteries. If
the Kinges Childe arraied in purple and Diademe were deliuered vnto thee to beare, wouldeſt thou
not caſte downe on the grounde all that thou holdeſt,VVhat is meante by the hie Egles Flight. Chryſoſtome acknovvlegeth Chriſtes very Body Preſente in the Sacrament. and receiue him? But nowe, when thou receiueſt
not the Kinges Childe,VVith thy Faithe, not vvith thy Mouthe. but the onely begotten Sonne of God, tell me, I praie thee, arte not afraide?
And doeſt not caſte awaie all loue of worldly thinges, and garniſhe thy ſelfe with him onely, but
doeſt thou yet looke downe on the Earthe, arte thou yet in loue of thy money? arte thou yet geuen to
the Earthe? If it be ſo, what forgeueneſſe, what excuſe ſhalte thou finde? This ſpirituall flyinge
vp requireth Chryſoſtome: and yet in that Homilie he declarethVntruthe. For Chryſoſtome ſpeaketh onely of the Preſence of Grace: of this groſſe & fleaſhly Preſence, he ſaithe nothinge. the Body of Chriſte to be preſente
here in Earthe, meaninge in this Holy Sacramente, yea that very Body, whiche was Nayled, Beaten,
whiche was not ouercome by Deathe, whiche the Sonne ſeinge Crucified, tourned awaie his beames,
for whiche the vaile of the Temple was rente aſunder, ſtones and all the Earthe quaked, the Body

that was made all Bloudy,To Receiue, or Beare Chriſte. and beinge thruſte in with a ſpeare, powred foorthe Fountaines of Bloude
and VVater to all the worlde healthfull. Thus ye ſee, howe farre Chryſoſtome is from your ſtrange
Doctri
                        •
                     e, concerninge the very andVntruthe. For Chryſoſtome not once nameth Real Preſence. Reade the Anſvveare. Reall preſence of Chriſtes Body in the Sacramente of the
Aulter. Of whiche Aulter, and of the Sacrifice of that Body made and offered by the Prieſtes, and of
the Adoration due thereto, in that Homilie he ſpeaketh moſte plainely: That to proue your purpoſe,
yee muſte ſeeke for an other Homilie, whiche ye are neuer like to finde: for Chryſoſtome ſerueth not
your turne. As neither Cyprian, whome ye alleage, and againſt whome, God knoweth. Verely we
confeſſe with Holy Cyprian,Cyprian al
                        
                           ••
                        aged by the Defen
                        
                           ••••
                         to no 
                           •••
                        pole. and the Fathers of the Nicene Councell, that the Body of Chriſte, whiche
we receiue in the bleſſed Sacrament, is the foode of the Soule, and not common meate to fille the panche.
And therefore of the outwarde Formes we take but litle,Vntruthe. For the Nicene Coſicel maketh no mention of any ſutch Fourmes. And, beinge but idle Fourmes, and Shevves, hovve are they 
                           •
                         Spiritual foode, or hovve can they ſerue to make you Holy: according to the Nicene Decree, acknowledginge,
that ſpiritual foode to ſerue to Sanctimonie, not to Sacietie. Laſtely ye bringe for you S.
Auguſtine in theſe woordes.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here M. Hardinge caſteth his colours, to ſhadowe that thinge, that wil not
be hidde. Whereas Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Thou receiueſt not the Kinges childe,
but the onely begotten Sonne of God, he ſo racketh, and preſſeth theſe woordes, as
if the Fathers in their writinges had neuer vſed any kinde of Figure: and as if
wee were bounde vnder paine of damnation, to receiue what ſentence ſo euer they
haue ſpoken, accordinge to the very rigoure, and extremitie of the Letter.
                  But the better to diſcloſe the ſenſible groſſeneſſe of this erroure, I truſte,
Gentle Reader, it ſhal not be neither paineful, nor vnprofitable for thée, to conſider
a fewe other ſutche examples, and phraſes of ſpeache, commonly, and familiarely
vſed by the Catholique Learned Fathers to like purpoſe. Therefore, as Chryſoſtome
ſaithe, wee receiue in the Holy Myſteries the Onely begotten Sonne of
God, meaninge by Faithe Onely, not by Mouthe, euen ſo he writeth of the Sacramente
of Baptiſme,Chryſoſt. in Epiſt. ad Coloſſen. Homil. 10. 
                     Si quis tibi Purpuram, aut Diadema dediſſet, nonne prae quouis
auro accepiſſes? Ego verò tibi non Ornatum Regium tribuam, ſed ipſum Regem
induendum exhibeo. Et quomodò, inquies, Chriſtum poterit quis induere? Audi, quid
Paulus dicat: Quotquot in Chriſtum Baptizati eſtis, Chriſtum induſtis: If any man had
geeuen thee a Princely Robe, or a Crowne, wouldeſt thou not ſet more by it, then by any
Gold? But I wil geeue thee, not a Princely Robe, but the Prince him ſelfe, to put vpon
thee. Thou wilte ſaie, howe maie a man put on Chriſte vpon him? Heare, what S. Paule
ſaithe: As many of you, as are Baptized in Chriſte, haue put on Chriſte.
                      S. Cyril ſaithe,
Diſcant omnes,
                     Cyrill in Iohan. LIb. 2. Cap. 36. 
                     ne, antequam firmiores ſint Catechumeni, Chriſtum eis, antequam oporteat,
Baptiſmi Myſterio commendent
                           •
                        : Let al menne take heede, that thei deliuer
not Chriſte, in the Sacrament of Baptiſme, vnto the Beginners, or Nouices, before they be
ſtronge in the Faithe, and before it be conuenient.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. in Apocalyp. Homil. 11. Chryſoſt. De Sacerdot. Lib. 3. Sancti Chriſtum accipiunt in Manu, & in Fronte: Holy
menne receiue Chriſte bothe in their Hande, and in their Foreheade. S.
                      Chryſoſtome
ſaithe, Adeſt Sacerdos, non Ignem geſtans, ſed Spiritum Sanctum: The Prieſte is
preſent, Bearinge, not Fire, but the Holy Ghoſte.
                  
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſ. De Ioſepho Patriarcha. Portant in Typo Chriſti munera: portaturi in Euangelio
munerum Largitorem: They carrie Chriſtes giftes in a Figure: In the Goſpel they ſhal
carrie (Chriſte him ſelfe) the geuer of the giftes. And againe, Mortem non timebis,
ſi geras Chriſtum:Ambroſ. De Puga Saeculi, Ca. 9. Athan. Oration. Prima Contra Arianos. 
                     Thou ſhalt not feare Deathe, if thou beare Chriſte.
                  Athanaſius ſaithe, Apud nos ſeruatur Puerulus ille, quem Herodes interficere
ſaiagebat: The ſame Childe is keapte emongeſt vs, whome Herode laboured ſo
earneſtly to deſtroie. S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Ciedo Apoſtolo Paulo, Chriſtum in
ſe loquentem circum ferenti: I beleeue the Apoſtle P
                              •
                           ule,
                      carrieinge Chriſte aboute
ſpeakinge vvithin him.Chryſoſtom. in. 2. Timoth. homi. 2.
                  
                  
                     
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Concionatores tradunt Chriſtum Diſcentibus: The
Preachers deliuer Chriſte vnto their Learners.To Receiue, or Beare Chriſte. 
                     S. Cyril ſaithe, Verum Manna
Chriſtus erat: qui per Figuram Mannae Priſcis illis à Deo dabatur: Chriſte was the
very True Manna:
                     Auguſt. De Doctrina Chriſtiana, Lib. 4. Ca. 16. Cyrillus, in Euang. Iohan Lib. 3. Cap. 34. Hiſtoria Longobardica, Legenda. 59. 
                     whome vnder the Figure of Manna God gaue vnto the Fathers
of the Olde Teſtamente. It is written in M. Hardinges owne Legende,
                     
Chriſtophorus portauit Chriſtum in Humeris, & in Ore per Confeſsionem: Chriſtopher
bare Chriſte on his ſhoulders: and he bare Chriſte in his Mouthe by his Confeſsion.
                  
                     An other of his Doctours ſaithe, Chriſtus venditus fuit in Ioſepho: Ligatus
in Sampſono: Suſpenſus in Botro, & in Serpente Aeneo: Crucifixus in Iſaaco:
Chriſte vvas ſolde in Ioſephe: He vvas bounde in Sampſon: He vvas Hanged vp in
the Cluſter of Grapes, and in the Braſen Serpente: and he vvas Crucified in Iſaac.
                  
                  Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Fortalitium Fidei, Lib. 1. Quocunque quis peruenerit, Paulum videbit vbique in omnium
Ore circumferri: Whither ſo euer a man comme, he ſhal ſee Paule carried aboute
euery vvhere,Chryſoſtom. ad Populam Antiochen. Homil. 16. in the Mouthe of euery man. And to ende this longe rehearſal,
S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Detractor Diabolum portat in Lingua: The Sclaunderer
carrieth the Diuel vpon his tongue.
                  I doubte not,Auguſt. De Salutaribus Documentis. Cap. 26. but M. Hardinge wil better bethinke him ſelfe, and not require
vs, to take al theſe ſaieinges, without any manner of fauourable expoſition, barely,
and nakedly, as they lie. Otherwiſe he muſte néedes encombre him ſelfe with
a greate number of inconueniences.
                  
                     Of theſe phraſes, and manners of ſpeache, S. Auguſtine géeueth his iudgemente
in this ſorte:
                     Auguſt. De Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 18. Cap. 48. Omnia Significantia videntur quodammodò earum rerum, quas
Significant, ſuſtinere perſonas: Al Signes, or Tokens ſeeme in a manner to beare the
perſonnes of the thinges them ſelfe, that thei Signifie. As for example he ſaithe,
Sicut dictum eſt ab Apoſtolo, Petra erat Chriſtus: quoniam Petra illa, de qua hoc dictum
eſt, Significabat Chriſtum: So the Apoſtle ſaithe, The Rocke vvas Chriſte:
For that the Rocke, whereof it was ſpoken, Signified Chriſte.
                  
                     Likewiſe Athanaſius ſaithe,
                     Athana. Oratio. Contra Sabellij Gregales. Qui Regis Imaginem videt, Regem videt: & dicit,
En tibi Regem. Neque tamen duos Reges conſtituit: neque Imaginem particulam
eſſe Regis, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Regem particulam Imaginis eſſe iudicat: He, that ſeeth the Image
of a Kinge, ſeeth the Kinge: and ſaithe, Beholde, there is the Kinge. And yet (ſo
ſaieinge) he maketh not twoo Kinges: Nor thinketh he, either that the Image is a parcel of
the Kinge, or that the Kinge is parcel of the Image.
                  
                  
                     S. Gregorie in plainer wiſe ſaithe thus,
                     Gregor. in Iob. Lib. 29. Cap. 16. Eundem Agnum Iohannes oſtendendo,
Eſaias praeuidendo, Abel offerndo loquutus eſt. Et quem Iohannes
in oſtenſione, quem Eſaias in loquutione, Hunc Abel Significando in Manibus tenuit:
Iohn the Baptiſte by pointinge with his finger, Eſaias by foreſeeinge, Abel
by offeringe, ſpake al three of One Lambe. And Abel by Singnifieinge, helde the
ſame Chriſte in his handes, whom Iohn helde by pointinge, and whom Eſaias helde
by Propheſieinge.
                     Gregor. in. 1. Regum, Ca. 2. Li. 2. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Intus ad Chriſtum reſpicit, quem per conſiderationem
portat in Corde: In wardely he beholdeth Chriſte, whom by Meditation he
Beareth in his Harte.
                  Sutche Amplifications, and vehemente, and extraordinarie ſpeaches, notwithſtandinge
in ſome caſes they maie be dangerous, yet oftentimes they ſeeme neceſſarie,
the better to quicken the dulneſſe, and negligence of the people. And therefore
Chryſoſtome ſaithe,Chryſoſt. De Sacerdot. Lib. 3. 
                     Beholde, The Lambe of God is ſlaine: The Bloude
euen novve is dravven from his ſide: and the whole people is coloured, and made
ridde and Bloudy with the ſame: Not for that it was ſo in deede: but to lifte vp, and
to withdrawe the Hartes of the people, from the outwarde Corruptible Creatures
of the Breade, and Wine, to a Spiritual, and Myſtical vnderſtandinge, that is to

ſaie, to the Eatinge, and Drinkinge of the very Body, and Bloude of Chriſte. And
to that ende he ſaithe, Aquilas appellat, vt oſtendat, ad alta eum oportere contendere,
qui ad hoc Corpus accedit: He calleth vs Egles, to ſhewe, that he muſte
mounte on highe, and flee alofte, who ſo wil approche neare to that Body.
                      Likewiſe
he ſaithe,Chryſoſt. in. 1. Corin. Homil. 24. Chryſoſt. Ad Popul. Antiochen. Homil. 61. Hieronym. ad Hedibiam. Auguſt. Quaeſt. Euangelicar. Lib. 1. Cap. 42. 
                     In Coelum, vocat nos, ad Magni Regis Menſam: Chriſte calleth vs
vp into Heauen, vnto the Table of the greate Kinge.
                      And againe, illum Surſum
ſedentem hic deguſtamus: Wee beinge here beneath, taſte him ſittinge in Heauen aboue.
So ſaithe S. Hierome, Aſcendamus cum Domino in Coenaculum Magnum,
ſtratum, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         mundatum: & accipiamus ab eo Surſum Calicem Noui Teſtamenti:
Let vs Aſcende vp with our Lorde into that great Dininge Chamber adourned, and
made cleane: and there aboue let vs receiue of him the Cuppe of the Newe Teſtamente.
                     
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Auguſtine, Vbi fuerit Corpus, illuc Congregabuntur Aquilae, id eſt,
in Coelum: Illuc Congregabuntur Aquilae: dictum eſt de Spiritualibus, qui eius Paſsionem,
Humilitatem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      imitando, tanquam de eius Corpore ſaturantur: Where as the
Carkeſſe ſhalbe, thither ſhal the Egles reſorte togeather: that is to ſaie, Into Heauen: Thither
ſhal the Egles reſorte togeather: This is ſpoken of the Spiritual Faitheful menne, that folowinge
his Paſsion, and Humilitie, be filled, as it were, vvith his Body.
                  
                     So ſaithe Leo,De Con. Diſt. 2 In quibus. Circa hoc Corpus Aquilae ſunt, quae alis circumuolant Spiritualibus:
Aboute this Body there are Egles, that flee aboute vvith Spiritual
vvhinges.
                  
                     Thus are the Faitheful made Egles: Thus is the Earthe become Heauen:
Not for that Chriſtes Body is pulled downe, as M. Hardinge imagineth, but for
y• our mindes, & affections be lifted vp. For ſo Chryſoſtome him ſelfe expoundeth
his owne meaninge:
                     Chryſoſt. in Homil. De Pentecoſte. Hodiè nobis Terra facta eſt Coelum, non ſtellis de Coelo in Terram
deſcendentibus, ſed Apoſtolis ad Coelum Aſcendentibus. Quia effuſa eſt Copioſa
Gratia Spiritus Sancti, & vniuerſum Orbem operata eſt Coelum: non immutans
Naturam, ſed voluntatem emendans: This daie the Earthe is made Heauen: not by
the Starres comminge downe vpon the Earthe: but by the goeinge vp of the Apoſtles into
Heauen. For the abundante Grace of the Holy Ghoſte is powred out, and hath turned
the vvhole VVorlde into Heauen: not by changinge of Nature, but by correctinge
the vvil of Man.Chryſoſt. Ad Hebraeos, Homil. 16. 
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe, Apoſtoli in Terra conſtituti,
in Coelo conuerſabantur. Et quid dico, in Coelo? Altiores erant Coelo: etiam al
                        •
                     o
Coelo: Et ad ipſum Dominum peruenerunt: The Apoſtles dwellinge in the Earthe, had
their conuerſation in Heauen. But what ſaie I, In Heauen? They were higher then Heauen:
yea then the Seconde Heauen: and came euen vnto the Lorde him ſelfe. Againe he
ſaithe,
                     
                     Chryſoſt. De Foenit
                           •
                        n. Homil. 6. Chryſoſt. in 1. Corinth. Homil. 24. Dauid Terram in Coelum vertit: & Homines facit Angelos: Dauid turneth
the Earthe into Heauen: and of Menne he maketh Angels. Againe he ſaithe in
this ſelfe ſame place by M. Hardinge alleged;
                      Vt Terra nobis Coelum ſit, facit hoc Myſterium.
Aſcende igitur ad Coeli Portas, & diligenter attende: Imò non Coeli, ſed
Coeli Coelorum: & tunc, quod dicimus, intueberis: This Myſterie couſeth, that vnto
vs the Earthe is Heauen. Aſcende vp therefore vnto the Gates of Heauen: and
marke diligently. Naie, I ſaie not, Vnto the Gates of Heauen: but, Vnto the Gates of
the Heauen of Heauens. And ſo ſhalt thou ſee the thinges, that I tel thee.
                  
                  
                     Nowe iudge thou, good Chriſtian Reader, how true it is, and howe agréeable
with S. Chryſoſtomes Doctrine, that M. Hardinge ſaithe, Muſte wee flee ſo highe,
that we looke not to finde this Body in Earthe? Can wee not Eate this Body, excepte wee flee vp into
Heauen? Can wee not comme by it, but there? Can wee not Eate him, but there? Yes forſoothe: VVee
neede not goe out of the Earthe for the mater.
                  Verily, Chryſoſtome, when he ſaithe, Wée receiue the Sonne of God, maketh
mention, neither of Tranſubſtantiation, nor of Real, and Fleaſhely Preſence,
nor of Eatinge with Mouthe, or Teethe: But onely ſendeth vs to the force, and

woorkinge of Faithe,To touch, to Holde Chriſte. and Sprite: whereby onely, and by no waie els, wée receiue
and Eate in déede, and Verily the Body of Chriſte.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 6.
               And S. Auguſtine ſaithe, How ſhal I holde him, beinge Abſent?
Howe ſhal I reache my hande vp to Heauen,In Iohan. Tracta. 50. to laie holde vpon him
ſittinge there? He anſweareth, Reache thither thy Faithe, and then
thou haſte laide holde on him.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Vpon theſe woordes of S. Iohn,Iohan. 1
                           •
                        . The Biſhoppes and Phariſeis gaue Commaundement, that if any
knewe, where Ieſus were, he ſhoulde ſhewe it, that they mighte apprehende him, S. Auguſtine expoundinge
the ſame, in a contrary ſenſe, ſaithe: Let vs nowe ſhewe the Iewes, where Chriſte is:
woulde God they woulde heare,S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh not of receiuinge Chriſte in the Sacramente, but by Faithe onely. and laie holde on him. VVhere he ſpeaketh not of receiuinge Chriſte,
ſo as we receiue him in the Sacramente,And by Faithe Onely vvee receiue Chriſte in the Sacramente. but of receiuinge him by Faithe Onely. And there he
wiſheth and exhorteth the Iewes to come to the Faithe, and teacheth them how they maie profitably
laye holde on Chriſte, whome their Forefathers laide holde on with violent handes to their damnation.
Let them come to the Churche (ſaithe he) let them heare, where Chriſte is, and laie holde on him.
After certaine woordes, he maketh this obiection to him ſelfe: VVel, the Iewe anſwereth me,
howe ſhal I holde him, that is Abſent? Howe ſhal I reache vp my hande to Heauen, that I maie
laie holde on him, whiche ſitteth there? Reache thither thy Faithe (ſaithe Auguſtine) and then
thou haſte laide holde on him. Then foloweth in the ſame line that, whiche plainely declareth all
this to be meante of layinge holde of Chriſte by Faithe,He ſpeaketh not of the receiuinge of the Sacrament: but he ſpeaketh of the receiuinge of the Very Body of Chriſt: vvhich is vvrought onely by Faithe. not by receiuinge the Communion.
Parentes tui tenuerunt carne, tu tene corde. Thy Forefathers (thou Iewe) tooke holde on Chriſte
in Fleaſhe: take thou holde on him in thy Harte. There he ſheweth howe Chriſte maye be holden,
though concerninge the viſible and senſible preſence of his Body, he be in Heauen at the Right
hande of the Father. All this, and what ſo euer is ſaide there, vpon the Texte before recited, implieth
not ſo muche as any colour of argument againſte the Truthe of Chriſtes very Body in this
moſte Bleſſed Sacramente. And thus all your allegations and reaſons concerninge this mater beſufficiently
anſweared.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It is true, that M. Hardinge ſaithe, S. Auguſtine in this place ſpeaketh nothinge
of purpoſe and ſpecially of the Sacramente. Certainely it had benne great
vanitie for him, to wil his Hearers, to ſéeke for the Sacramente in Heauen aboue.
But he ſpeaketh of the embracinge, and holdinge the very Body of Chriſte, beinge
nowe in Heauen. Whiche thinge is wrought onely by Faithe, and none otherwiſe:
Whether it be in the Sacramente, or without the Sacramente. Infinite ſentences
haue benne vttered by the Holy Fathers to like purpoſe.
                  
                     S.
                     Auguſt. Aduerſus Iudaeos. ca. 9. Auguſtine ſaithe, Accedite ad eum, & illuminamini: Quid eſt, Accedite, niſi,
Credite? Comme vnto him, and receiue the Light: What is, Comme vnto him, but, Beleeue
in him? Againe,
                      Ambulando non laborabitis: Ibi enim Acceditis, vbi Creditis:
Your walkinge ſhal not be paineful to you: For there ye Comme to him, where ye
Beleeue in him.
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 48 Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 121. Auguſt. De Natura & Gra. Ca 69. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Exijt de Manibus eorum: Non enim apprehendere
eum potuerunt, quia Manus Fidei non habuerunt: Chriſte departed out of their
handes. For they coulde not laie holde on him, bicauſe they had not the Handes of Faithe.
Againe, Chriſtus non rectè tangitur: id eſt, non rectè in eum Creditur: Chriſte is not
vvel touched: that is to ſaie, Chriſte is not wel Beleeued. Likewiſe againe he ſaith,
Sunt in Corde Spirituales Manus: There be certaine Spiritual Handes in the Harte.
And therefore S.
                      Ambroſe ſaithe, Stephanus in Terris poſitus, Chriſtum tangit
in Coelo:Ambroſius Sermone. 98. 
                     Steuin beinge in the Earthe, (by Faithe
                     ) toucheth Chriſte beinge in Heauen.
                  
                  
                     
                     But as S.
                     Faithe receiueth, &c. Auguſtine ſo often ſaithe, wée Embrace, & Holde Chriſte by Faithe:
ſo is not M. Hardinge able to ſhewe, that he euer once ſaide, Wée Holde Chriſte
with Mouthe, or Teethe, or receiue him downe into Our Bellies. And therefore
S.
                     Ambroſius in Lucam. Lib. 10. Cap. 24. Ambroſe ſaithe, Non Corporali tactu Chriſtum, ſed Fide Tangimus: VVee
touche not Chriſte by Bodily touchinge: but vvee touche him by Faithe.
And againe, Fide Chriſtus Tangitur: Fide Chriſtus videtur. Non Corpore Tangitur:
non Oculis comprehenditur:Ambroſius in Lucam, Lib. 6. Cap. 8. By Faithe Chriſte is touched: By Faithe
Chriſte is ſeene. He is not touched with our Bodies: He is not holden with our Eies.
Likewiſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Dominus conſolatur nos, qui ipſum iam in Coelo ſedentem
Manu contrectare non poſſumus:Auguſt. in Epiſt. Iohan. Tracta. 1. Sed Fide contingere (poſſumus). The
Lorde Comforteth vs, that cannot novve Touche him vvith Hande, ſittinge in
Heauen: 
                        〈◊〉
                      by Faithe vvee maie touche him.
                  
                     Nowe, for as mutche as M. Hardinge ſaithe, S. Auguſtine in this place maketh
no mention of the receiuinge of Chriſtes Body in the Sacramente, it ſhal
not be from the purpoſe to conſider, what he hath written otherwheres, touchinge
the ſame.
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 7. 
                     Thus he ſaithe, Chriſtus eſt Cibus noſter, quo nihil dulcius: Sed ſi
quis habeat Palatum ſanum in Corde: Chriſte him ſelfe is oure Meate, then
whiche there is nothinge more ſauerie: ſo that a man haue a ſounde taſte in his Harte.
Againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 26. Dominus dixit ſe Panem, qui de Coelo deſcendit, hortans vt
Credamus in eum. Credere enim in eum, hoc eſt Manducare Panem viuum.
Qui Credit in eum, Manducat: Inuiſibiliter Saginatur, quia Inuiſibiliter renaſcitur.
Infans Intus eſt: Nouus Intus eſt: vbi nouellatur, ibi ſatiatur: Our Lorde called him
ſelfe the Breade, that came from Heauen, exhortinge vs to Beleue in him. For to
Beleue in him, that is to Eate the Breade of Life. He Eateth, that Beleeueth in
him. He is fedde Inuiſibly, bicauſe he is newe borne Inuiſibly. In wardely he is an Infante:
Inwardely he is Newe. Where he is renewed, there is he filled.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe Euſebius Emiſſenus,De Con. Diſt. 2. Quia Corpus. 
                     as he is alleged by Gratian: Cùm ad Reuerendum
Altare Coeleſtibus Cibis ſatiandus accedis, Sacrum Dei tui Corpus, & Sanguinem
reſpice, Honora, Mirare: Mente Continge: Cordis Manu Suſcipe: &
maximè hauſtu Interiori aſſume: VVhen thou commeſt vnto the Reuerende Aultare,
(or Communion Table) to be Fedde with the Heauenly Meates, beholde the
Holy Body, and Bloude of thy God: Honoure it: Woonder at it: Touche it (not with
thy Bodily Mouthe, but) vvith thy Minde: Receiue it (not with thy Bodily
Hande, but
                     ) vvith the Hande of thy Harte: and ſpecially take it with thy Inner
taſte.
                  
                     Therefore S.
                     Auguſt. Feria. 2. Paſchatis. Auguſtine ſaithe, Quiſquis cum Fide, & timore Verbum Dei audis,
conſolatur te Fractio Panis. Abſentia Domini non eſt Abſens. Habeto Fidem:
& tecum eſt, quem non vides. Ideò Dominus abſentauit ſe Corpore ab omni Eccleſia,
& Aſcendit in Coelum, vt Fides aedificetur: VVho ſo euer thou be, that with Faithe,
and Feare heareſt ye Woorde of God, the Breakinge of Breade doothe Comforte thee. The
Abſence of our Lorde is not Abſente. Haue thou Faithe: and he, whom thou ſeeſt
not, is with thee: Therefore our Lorde, as touchinge his Body, hath Abſented him
ſelfe from al his Churche, and is Aſcended into Heauen, that our Faithe maie be edified.
                  
                  
                     And in this ſelfe ſame place, that M. Hardinge ſaithe, maketh ſo litle for our
purpoſe, he ſaithe thus: Quomodo tenebo Abſentem? Quomodo in Coelum manum
mittam,Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 50. vt ibi ſendentem teneam? Fidem mitte: & Tenuiſti. Parentes tui tenuerunt Carne:
Tu tene Corde. Quoniam Chriſtus Abſens, etiam praeſens eſt. Niſi Praeſens eſſet, à
nobis ipſis teneri non poſſet. Sed, quoniam verum eſt, quod ait, Ecce ego vobiſcum ſum
vſque ad Conſummationem Saeculi, & abijt, & hîc eſt: Et redijt, & nos non deſeruit.
Corpus enim ſuum intulit Coelo: Maieſtatem autem non abſtulit Mundo:
How ſhal I holde Chriſte, beinge Abſent? Howe ſhal I thruſte my hande into Heauen, that I

maie holde him Sittinge there? Sende vp thy Faithe: and thou holdeſt him. Thy Fathers (the
Iewes) helde him in Fleaſhe: Holde him thou in thy Harte. For Chriſte beinge Abſente,
is alſo Preſente. Onleſſe he were Preſente, wee coulde not holde him. But, for as
mutche as it is true, that he ſaithe, Beholde, I am with you vntil the ende of the worlde,
Therefore he is gonne, and yet is here. He is comme againe, and hath not forſaken vs.
For he hath auanced his Body into Heauen: but he hath not vvithdravven
his Maieſtie from the VVorlde.
                  Al theſe thinges wel conſidered, whereas M. Hardinge in the ende concludeth
with theſe woordes: Thus al your Allegations, and Reaſons, concerninge
this mater, be ſufficiently anſweared, I doubte not, but his diſcrete, and indifferent
Reader wil thinke, He crewe longe, before it was daie.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 1.
               Neither can wee awaie in our Churches with theſe Shewes,
and ſales, and markettes of Maſſes, nor with the carrieinge about,
and woorſhippinge of the Breade: nor with ſutche other Idolatrous,
and Blaſphemous fondneſſe: whiche none of them can proue, that
Chriſte or his Apoſtles euer ordeined, or leafte vnto vs. And wee iuſtly
blame the Biſhoppes of Rome, who without the Woorde of God,
without the Authoritie of the Holy Fathers, without any example
of Antiquitie,In Ceremoniario Roma. Eccleſ. after a Newe guiſe, doo not onely ſet before the People
the Sacramental Breade to be woorſhipped as God, but doo alſo
carrie the ſame aboute vpon an amblinge Palfraie, whither ſo euer
them ſelues iourney: in ſutche ſorte, as in olde times the Perſians
fier, and the Reliques of the Goddeſſe Iſis were ſolemnely carried aboute
in Proceſſion: and haue brought the Sacramentes of Chriſte
to be vſed now as a ſtage plaie, and a ſolemne ſighte: to the ende, that
Mennes eies ſhould be fedde with nothinge els but with madde gaſinges,
& fooliſhe gaudes, in the ſelfe ſame mater, wherein the Death
of Chriſte ought diligently to be beaten into our Hartes, and wherein
alſo the Myſteries of our Redemption ought with al Holineſſe,
and reuerence to be executed.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The thinges, whiche it liketh your Sathanical Sprite with blaſphemous woordes toVntruthe For vvee honour the Holy Myſteries: and you profanely diſhonoure them. diſhonour,
and bringe in contempt, are ſuche, as neither your praiſes can make more praiſe woorthy, nor your
vpbraidinges any whit of leſſe eſtimation. If any by the ſtinkinge breath of your vile woordes be
puffed awaie into your damned ſide,Matth. 
                           •
                        . Luc. 3. A Prieſte maye iuſtly enioy his neceſſary liuinge for ſeruinge at thaulter, and for ſayinge Maſſe. VVe knovv no VVoorſhippers of Breade. who ſo euer they be, they ſhewe them ſelues to haue benne light
chaffe, not ſounde wheate. Yet for good folkes ſake, that I maie leaue your vile eloquence to your
ſelues, and anſweare the matter by you railed at, and belied, and other wiſe not diſproued: I praie
you, good Sirs, theVntruthe. For, as it is novve vſed, there is no viler diſhonour, nor greatter Bla
                           •
                        phemie. Maſſe beinge the higheſt and moſte Honorable Seruice, that is donne to God in
his Churche (whiche other wheres beinge already proued, I treate not of in this place), why ſhould
not a Prieſte, by whome onely it is, and maie be donne,Vntruthe. For Chriſte neuer called his Diſciples, or ſente them abroade, to ſaie Maſſe. beinge called to that vocation, and ſtate of
life, haue rewarde, and liuinge for it? Raile againſte the Maſſe, and Prieſtes ſeruinge at the Aulter
of God vntil your tongues burne in your head in Hell Fire: VVe tell you, Prieſtes of the Catholike
Churche ſellAlas, they haue it not. Othervviſe for moonie it ſhould avvaie. not the Fruite and Merite of Chriſtes Bloude offered in the Maſſe, but onely for their
miniſterie and labour require neceſſarie ſuſtenance of Life.
                  But for your Defence, yee confeſſe that ye cannot awaie with the carryinge about and woorſhippinge
of Breade. No more cannot wee. To whoſe charge laye ye this? Be there any ſuche
Idolaters nowe, that woorſhip Breade? They woulde be knowen.God forebid, there ſhoulde be vvater in the Sea. God forbid we ſhoulde ſuffer

Idolaters to liue amongeſt vs. Soothely in the Catholike Churche wee knowe none. If ye cannot
away with the Honour whicheVntruthes, and moſte fonde, and blaſphemous folies. all deuoute Chriſten people doo to the † bleſſed Sacramente, (wee
meane to Chriſtes Body, and Chriſte him ſelfe † preſente in Subſtance vnder † the Forme of Breade) then
can not we take you for Chriſtians. Mocke, ſcoffe, ieſte, and raile at vs with the Iewes, we dare not,
but Honour our Lorde Chriſte, where ſo euer our Faithe findeth him verily and in Subſtance preſente.
                  If through feruent zeale (as ſometimes it happeneth) abuſes in certaine places haue crepte
in, no good Catholike manYet not one of your Catholique Prelates amēdeth them. defendeth them. Mary wee knowe all is not to be abrogated that
miſliketh your corrupte taſte.Vntruthe, fonde and Heatheniſhe. For God him ſelfe ſaithe, in vaine they woorſhip mee. &c. And muche is righte Holy Deuotion pleaſant in the ſighte of God,
and therefore allowed in the Churche, whiche your hote ſprite calleth Idolatrous, and blaſphemous
fondneſſe. And though the Ceremonie and manner, whereby ſutche deuotion is ſhewed, cannot be
prooued by ordinance of Chriſte or of the Apoſtles expreſſed in Scripture, yet Chriſten people doubte
not but God accepteth their good hartes.
                  The Biſhop of Rome ye blame vniuſtly, I might ſaie alſo proudely. For procuringeVntruthes foure together. For he diſhonoureth Chriſte. He hath neither Goddes vvorde, nor the Authoritie of al the Fathers, nor the examples of Antiquitie. Honour and
worſhip to Chriſte in the Bleſſed Sacrament, he hath the * woorde of God, * the authoritie of al Holy
Fathers, and the * examples of antiquitie, asNote, that in the ſame one litle Article, M. Hardinge hathe ſente vs tvvelue greate Vntruthes. I haue at large proued in my anſweare to your companion
Maiſter Iuel his eight negatiue Article. But the amblinge Horſe offendeth you. VVhy be ye not
alſo offended with the Aſſe and her fole, that bare theVntruthe. For this is onely the Sacramente of that ſame Body. ſame Body at Ieruſalem, whiche the Horſe
beareth at Rome: Then Viſible and weightie, nowe Inuiſible, and of no weight? That was donne in
Pompe to the honour of Chriſte, and ſo is this. Ye ſaie this is done after a new guiſe. So then was that.
Neither is it true whiche ye ſaie, that the Biſhoppes of Rome doo carrie about with them the Sacramente
whither ſo euer they iourney.Doo the M. Hardinge ſcoffe at theſe games, or ſpeaketh he in earneſt? Ye might haue learned in that Booke, our of whiche ye alleage
that matter to ſcoffe at,Lib. Ceremoniarum Eccleſiae Ro. Sectione. 12. Ca. 1. Baldachinū. that ſuche a ſolemnitie is vſed ſpecially, when the Pope rideth in Pontificalibus.
Then (as the Booke telleth) a white Palfrey trapped, gentill, and faier, with a cleare ſoundinge
bell hanginge at his necke, is lead, which carrieth the Monſtrance, or Pixe with the moſt Holy Body of
Chriſte, ouer the whiche noble Citizens ſhal beare a Canopie. Thus the Booke of Ceremonies.
                  
                     VVhy ſhould a vviſe man ſpeake ſo fondely? Reade the Anſvveare. And I praie you, what euill is this? If it be good to carry about that moſte holy Body, by whiche
as Chriſte once redeemed vs, ſo by the ſame deuotely honoured of faithefull people, and carried abrode
and brought to certaine places, hath in olde times (as yet alſo dothe continually) to the greate comforte
and helpe of ſundry perſons beinge in diſtreſſe, wrought miraculouſely healthfull remedies: If
the Iſraelites founde healpe at Gods hande byThey did it againſte Goddes vvil: and ſpedde thereafter. Read the Anſvveare. bringinge the Arke into the fielde with them, as they
marched forewarde againſte the Philiſtians:1. Reg. 4. 1. Reg. 5. if the Philiſtians cried out for feare when they perceiued
the Arke to be in the Iſraelites armie, and ſaide, Venit Deus in Caſtra. Vae nobis. God is
come into their Tentes. Alas we are vndone, &c.
                  And concerninge the order of the Ceremonie, whereasGraue Conſiderations. the people be deſirous to beholde the
Body of their Redeemer with their Faithe by their carnall ete directed to the Forme of Breade,In the order of this Ceremonie nothinge appeareth to a Chriſten man vnſeemely or vnreaſonable. no
man is able to holde vp on hie the Sacramente, ſo as conuenient it were to be donne bothe to ſatiſfie
their Deuotion, and to mainetaine their Faithe: for the Pope him ſelfe commonly is an aged man,
and therefore ouer weakeA Horſe ſupplieth the Pope
                           •
                         eſ
                           •
                        ice. for that Seruice, ſpecially arraied in Pontificalibus, as in ſuche ſolemnities
he is. Againe the inſtrument that ſerueth for that purpoſe is ſo greate and weighty (for ſo it
apperteineth to the honour of Chriſte,) the waie ſo longe, the ayer for the more parte there ſo hote: as
no other man is well able for lacke of ſtrength to beare it ſo as meete it is to be borne. In this caſe
† why may not a Horſe be put to that ſeruice, to ſupplie that whiche by naturall weakeneſſe faileth
in man? VVherein he ſerueth not, as one that beareth a male, but as the Aſſe that bare Chriſte, as
the Kine that drewe the Arke.
                  Neither ought the cuſtome of bearinge the moſte Holy Body of Chriſte,The cuſtome of carryinge the Sacramēt, vvhere the Pope goeth, is neither Nevve nor Strange. where the Pope goeth, ſeeme
Newe and Strange. For we Reade in the life of the Bleſſed Martyr Steuen the firſte, who was Pope of
Rome aboue thirtene hundred yeres paſt, that Tharſitius the Deacon (who at length alſo ſuffred death
for Chriſte) bare our Lordes Body, at what time he attended vpon the Bleſſed Man Pope Steuen, as he
went to his Martyrdome. VVho deſireth to ſee this deſcribed at large, the ſame maie he finde in
(that Greate fonde Fabulare) Simeon Metaphraſies a Greeke writer, wel approued, and highly
eſteemed in the Greeke Churche, In vita Stephani Primi.
                  
                  
                     
For witneſſe whereof we haue S.Sale of Maſſes. Ambroſe, who deſcribeth how certaine faithful perſons caried
It vvas a greate abuſe of the Sacramente: and yet vvithout either Pyxe, or Pompe: And therefore vvas aftervvarde vtterly takē avvaie throughout the vvhole Churche of God. this bleſſed Sacrament with them,In Oratione funebri in Satyrum Fratrem. Innocent. 3. De Myſterijs Miſſae. Lib. 6. when they wente to the Sea, of whome his Brother Satyrus obteined
the ſame in a Shipwracke, and by helpe thereof, hanginge it in a ſtole about his necke, ſeekinge
for none other ſuccoure, caſte him ſelfe into the Sea, and miraculouſly eſcaped ſafe to lande. Neither is
the ſame by him done without a ſpeciall Myſterie, though vnknowen to the more parte. Although,
ſaithe a learned Pope, a reaſon cannot be geuen of al thinges, what ſo euer haue benne brought in vre
by our Forefathers: yet I thinke, quoth he, that therein lie hidden profounde Myſteries.
                  I reporte me nowe to the ſecrete conſciences of good Chriſten people, whether the Biſhoppes of
Rome vſe not the Bleſſed Sacrament reuerently and bonorably or no,This Defender folovveth Iulian, Lucian. Porphyriabus;, Celſus, and ſuche other vvicked Infidels. but ratherIf yee had not theſe games from thence, then tel vs, from vvhence yee had them. as the Perſians Fire,
and the Reliques of the Goddeſſe Iſis, as a ſtage Plaie, madde gaſinges, and fooliſhe Gaudes, as it liketh
this wicked Chammes broode to raile. VVherein they folowe the ſheppes, whiche Iulian the Apoſtata,
Lucian, Porphyrius, Celſus, and ſutche other Prophane Helhoundes haue trodden before them. For
after the like manner they railed at the Holy Myſieries of Chriſten Religion, namely Celſus, who as
Origen writeth of him, obiected to the Chriſtians the Sacrifices of Mithra, (whiche was an Idoll
that the perſians woorſhipped, and called by the name of the Sunne) from whence he ſaide they had
taken all their Sacramentes,Cōtra Celſum Lib. 6. De Mithra vide Suidam in dictione. Rites, and Ceremonies. And righte ſo (as we finde in S. Auguſtine
writinge againſt the Manichees) the Payn
                        •
                     mes founde faulte with the Chriſten people forMoſte vaine vntruthes. For S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh neither of Honour, nor of Adoration, nor of Chriſtes Body, nor of Fourmes. Honour
donne to the * Body and Bloude of Chriſte vnder * Formes of Breade and VVine, ſaitinge that they
Honoured Bacchus and Ceres.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Concerninge theſe Satanical Sprites, & ſtinkinge breathes, & vile Woordes, &
ſutche other like flowers of your Eloquence, M. Hardinge, I confeſſe me ſelfe to be
far inferiour, and neuer hable to make you anſweare. It is true, that ye ſaie, The
Woorkeman is woorthy of his hiere.2 Corinth. 9. S. Paule ſaith, The Lorde hath appointed, that
who ſo Preacheth the Goſpel, ſhoulde liue by the Goſpel. But where did Chriſte euer ſaie
vnto you, Goe into al the worlde, and ſaie Priuate Maſſe, and offer me vp vnto my Father,
for Remiſſion of Sinnes? What Apoſtle, what Prophete, what Doctour, what Father
euer taught you ſo to doo? If ye ſette your ſelfe a woorke without Commiſſion,
and renne foorthe, when noman biddeth you, then are ye your owne menne: and of
reaſon ought to paie your ſelues.
                  If your Maſſes, as you ſaie, were neuer ſette to open ſale, wherefore then was
this Decrée written in the Councel of Oxforde,
                     Conſtitution Othonis Legat inae, Folio. 143. 
                     Venalitatem Miſſarum diſtrictè
inhibemus? VVee ſtreitly forbidde the Sale of Maſſes. Thinke you, that
ſo many wiſe Fathers would forebidde that thinge, ye neuer was vſed? In the late
Conference holden at VVoormes, the Biſhop of Sidon, beinge there preſente,
durſte not ſaie, as you dare ſaie, there was no ſutche vnlawful ſale, but onely
ſaide,In Colloquio VVormatien. Con
                           •
                        eſſis. 5. 
                     It vvas out of ſeaſon to talke thereof. His woordes be theſe, Quid attinebat
de Miſsis venalibus, de Mercatu Indulgentiarum, &c. mentionem intempeſtinam
inducere? What was it to the purpoſe to ſpeake of the Sellinge of Maſses and Pardonnes,
out of ſeaſon?
                     
                  
                  The Prieſtes, ye ſaie, of the Catholique Churche ſel not the fruite, and Merite
of Chriſtes Bloude. No marueile: For thei haue it not to ſel. But if ye had Chriſte
him ſelfe, ye would ſette him to ſale, as other your Fathers haue donne before you.
Sutche a one was he,Gregor. Lib. 2. Epiſt. 33. of whom S. Gregorie writeth, Ieſum Chriſtum Dominum
noſtrum Haeretico, accepta Pecunia, venundedit: He tooke Monie, and ſolde Ieſus
Chriſte our Lorde vnto an Heretique.
                      And, when the Biſhop of Rome ſelleth
his Pardonnes, what other thinge woulde he ſeeme to ſel, but onely the Fruites,
and Merites of the Bloude of Chriſte?
                  Ye ſaie further, God forebidde, wee ſhoulde ſuffer Idolaters to liue emongeſt vs. And yet
your neare frendes haue thought, ye haue not benne far from the mainteinance

of Idolatrie.Vaine Deuotion. 
                     Polydorus Vergilius intreatinge of the woorſhippinge of Images,
ſaithe thus,Polydor. De Inuentorib. Rer. Lib. 6. Cap. 13. 
                     Eo inſaniae deuentum eſt, vt haec pars Pietatis parum differat ab Impietate:
They are ſo far proceded in madneſſe, that this parte of Holineſſe is not far
from vvickedneſſe. And Ludouicus Viues ſaithe, He ſeeth no greate difference
bitwéene certaine Chriſtians Woorſhippinge their Images, and the Olde Heathens
adouringe their Idolles.
                  
                     Ye ſaie, The Carrieinge aboute of the Sacrament is right Holy deuotion, pleaſante in the ſight
of God: and Chriſtian People doubt not, but God accepteth their good Hartes. Euen ſo, no doubte,
as when he ſaide ſometime vnto the Iewes,
                     Eſai. 1. 
                     Quis requiſiuit iſta de manibus veſtris?
Who required theſe thinges at your handes?
                  
                     S.
                     Auguſt. De Conſen. Euangeliſt. Lib. 1. Cap. 18. Auguſt. In quae. ex veteri Teſtament. quae. 43. Chryſoſtom. in Acta, Homil. 49. Gabriel. Lect. 26. Auguſtine ſaithe, Socratis ſententia eſt, Vnumquen
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Deum ſic coli oportere,
quomodo ſe ipſe colendum eſſe praeceperit: The Judgement of Socrates is this, That
euery God ought ſo to be woorſhipped, as he him ſelfe hath commaunded. Againe
he ſaithe, Conſtat, Fidem ſtultam non ſolùm minimè prodeſſe, ſed etiam obeſſe: It is
certaine, that a fooliſhe Faithe, not onely dothe no good, but alſo hurteth. Chryſoſtome
ſaith, Tales ſunt Diabolo venādi artes: qui praetextu Pietatis laqueos tegit: Sutche ſleightes
of huntinge hath the Diuel. Vnder the Colour of Holineſſe he hideth his ſnares.
                  
                  
                     But, as touchinge the ſolemnitte of carrieinge ye Sacrament, your owne Doctour
Gabriel Biel coulde haue tolde you, Chriſtus nō dedit Diſcipulis Sacramentum,
vt ipſum honorificè conſeruarent: ſed dedit in ſui vſum, dicens, Accipite, & Manducate:
Chriſte gaue not the Socramenté to his Diſciples to the ende thei ſhoulde keepe
it vvith Honour: But he gaue it to them for their vſe, ſaienge to them, Take, and Eate.
Likewiſe ſaithe Humbertus,Citatur à Caſſandro in Liturgijs. Chriſtus non tantùm Benedixit Panem, & reſeruauit
frangendū in craſtinum: nec fregit tantùm, & repoſuit: ſed fractum ſtatim diſtribuit:
Chriſte did not onely Bleſſe the Breade, and reſerue it to be broken the nexte daie: nor did he
onely Breake it, and laie it vp: but beinge broken ſtreight vvaie he deliuered it.
                  
                  Al this ſtrange ſolemne Feſtiual guiſe Pope Vrbanus the fourthe learned,
not of Chriſte, or Paule, but onely by the Reuelation of Dame Eua the Anchareſſe:
and by her good aduiſe founded the Newe Feaſte of Corpus Chriſti, and cauſed
the Sacramente to be borne aboute in Proceſſion.
                  But the Anciente,Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 51. & woorthy Father Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Diſcamus, Chriſtum
ex ipſius voluntate honorare: Nam qui honoratur, eo maximè honore laetatur, quem
ipſe vult: non quem nos optamus: Let vs learne to honour Chriſte after his ovvne vvil.
For he that is honoured, deliteth moſte in that honour, that he him ſelfe vvoulde haue:
not in that honoure, that wee can Fa
                              •
                           ſie.
                      Notwithſtandinge, when ye Sacramental
Breade is carried onely vpon a horſe, and the Pope him ſelfe is borne alofte, in a
Chaire of Golde, vpon the ſhoulders of ſixe, or eight Noble menne, I praie you,
whether of them hath greatter Honour?
                  For the reſte, The Pope, ſaithe M. Hardinge, is and olde Man: he rideth in his
Pontificalibus: he is loden with Apparel: The Pyxe is weighty: The VVeather
is hoate: there is none other Creature to ſupplie his roome: Therefore it is lately
concluded in Louaine in greate ſolemne ſadneſſe, that a Horſe muſte be had in, to
plaie the Popes parte, and to carrie the Monſtrance.
                  
                     Here, for as mutche as M. Hardinge hath purpoſely made mention of the
Popes ridinge in his Pontificalibus, and the Solemnitie, and Pompe thereof is
knowen to fewe, it ſhal not be impertinente, briefely to diſcloſe the order thereof.
Thus therefore it is written in the Ceremoniarie of Rome:Ceremoniar. Section. 12. Cap. 5. Sic Papa equitat in
Pontificalibus in aliquam Ciuitatem. Cardinales deſcendunt ex equis, & accedunt reuerenter
ad Papam, & oſculantur illi pedem. Epiſcopus Ciuitatis accedit ad Papam
cum debitis reuerentijs, & offers illi Crucem oſculandam: quam Pontifex reuerenter,
cum Mitra tamen, oſculabitur. Non enim commodé poterit ei abſtrahi equiti ab

equeſtribus. Miracles. Si tamen placuerit & Mitram deponere, non erit inconueniens. Deinde
Praelatus incipiat Antiphonam, Ecce Sacerdos Magnus: Thus the Popes Holineſſe rideth
into any Cittie in his Pontificalibus. The Cardinalles lighte from their Horſes, and
comme reuerently vnto the Pope, and kiſſe his foote. The Biſhop of the Cittie commeth
likewiſe to the Pope with dewe reuerence, and offereth him the Croſſe to kiſſe: whiche the
Pope ſhal kiſſe reuerently, keepinge on his Miter notvvithſtandinge. For while
be ſitteth on horſe backe, his horſemenne cannot very eaſily take of his Miter, and ſette it
on againe. Howbeit, if it ſhal like him to put of his Miter, it ſhalbe no greate inconuenience.
Afterwarde the Biſhop ſhal beginne this Antheme, Beholde the Greate Prieſte. And
ſo he pricketh foorthe in his Pontificalibus.
                  The carrieinge out of the Arke of God into the fielde in the time of Eli the
Highe Prieſte,1. Regum. 4. boadeth no very good Argumente for the carrieinge of the Sacramente.
For at that time the Armie of Iſrael was ouerthrowen, thertie thouſande
Souldiers were ſlaine, and emongeſt them the twoo Sonnes of Eli: The Arke was
taken: Eli him ſelfe fel backe from his Chaire, and brake his necke. Therefore, M.
Hardinge, ye ſhal haue mutche adoo to make good your Proceſſion by this example.
                  This mater, ye ſaie, hath benne proued by ſundrie Miracles. Firſte, whether
there haue benne any ſutche Miracles wrought, or no, it is vncertaine. But were it
graunted, yet maie not your Miracles alwaies ſtande for good proufes. Your owne
Doctour Alexander de Hales ſaithe,Alexand. Halen. Parte. 4. quae. 53. Mem. 4. Arti. 3. 
                     Miracula fiunt aliquando humana procuratione:
aliquando Diabolica operatione: Miracles be wrought ſometime by the woorkinge,
and procurement of menne: and ſometime by the conueiance of the Diuel.
So ſaithe Nicolaus Lyra, an other of your owne Doctours, ſpeakinge likewiſe of
your owne Miracles:Nicol. Lyra, in 14. Ca. Danielis. 
                     Fit aliquando in Eccleſia maxima deceptio populi in Miraculis
fictis à Sacerdotibus, vel eis adhaerentibus, propter Lucrum temporale.
Et talia extirpanda ſunt à bonis Praelatis, ſicut iſta extirpata ſunt à Daniele: In the Churche
                     
(of God) the People is oftentimes mutche deceiued by Feined Miracles, either by the
Prieſtes, or by Prieſtes familiars, for Temporal gaine. And ſutche Miracles muſt
be rooted out by good Biſhoppes, as theſe were rooted out by Daniel. Theſe woordes I am
the more willinge to rehearſe in this place,Reioinder, Pag. 9. a. Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 13. for that it liketh you, to carpe, and to
pike quarrels at the ſame in your Reioinder.
                  
                     To like purpoſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Contra iſtos, vt ſic loquar, Mirabiliarios,
cautum me fecit Deus meus, dicens, In nouiſsimis temporibus exurgēt Pſeudopropherae,
facientes Signa, & Portenta, vt in errorem inducant, ſi fieri poteſt, etiam Electos. Ecce,
Praedixi vobis. Ergo cautos nos fecit Sponſus: quia & Miraculis decipi non debemus:
My God hath warned me to be ware of theſe Moungers of Miracles, ſaieinge,
In the laſte daies ſhal riſe vp Falſe Prophetes, woorkinge Signes, and Woonders, to the ende,
if it be poſsible, to bringe the Electe into erroure. Beholde, I haue fore warned you. Therefore
the Bridegrome hath willed vs to beware: For vvee maie not be deceiued, no not
by Miracles.
                  The tales, that ye allege, of Tharſitius, and Satyrus, make nothinge, either
for the Adoration of the Sacramente, or els for the Popes Palfraie. Wemen,
and Children, and Laie menne vſed then to carrie home the Sacramente in
their Naptekinnes,Articulo. 1. and to keepe it in forcelettes, as in my Former Replie it is
largely ſhewed. But theſe were Abuſes of the Myſterie: and therefore afterwarde
were aboliſhed.
                  It greeueth you mutche, that wée ſaie, The Pope cauſeth, the Sacramental
Breade to be carried before him vpon a horſe, as the Kinges of Perſia vſed in olde
times to carrie the Fiere, whiche they called Orimaſda, and imagined the ſame
to be their God. And therefore ye crie out in your Paſſion, Chammes broode,
Helhoundes, and what ſo euer might ſerue you beſte: euen with like Sobrietie,

and modeſtie,The carricinge of the Sacramente. as they, whoe ſommetime in the like caſe cried out, Magna Diana
Epheſiorum: Great is Diana of the Epheſians. Howe be it, other example more
agréeable to reſemble your folie, wée coulde finde none.
                  
                     Neither maie you iuſtly,
                     Actor. 19. 
                     and truely ſaie, ye haue receiued none of your Orders,
and Vſages from the Heathens. Your owne Gloſe noteth vpon the Decrées,
Clerici euntes ad Tumulos mortuorum portabant ſecum Sacramenta Corporis,De Con. Diſt. 1. Non oportet, In Gloſa.
& Sanguinis Chriſti: & ſuper tumulos ea diſtribuebant. Et haec Conſuetudo facta
fuit a Gentibus: The Clerkes (or Prieſtes) goeing to the graues of the deade, carried with
them the Sacramentes of the Body, and Bloude of Chriſte: and made diſtribution thereof
ouer the graues. And this ſame Cuſtome vvas vſed emong the Heathens. Nicolaus
Leonicenus ſaith,
                     Nicola. Leonicenus, In Varia Hiſtoria, Libr. 2. Cap. 21. Iſidis Sacerdotes in Aegypto vtebātur Lineis veſtibus, & ſemper erāt
deronſo capillo: quod etiam per manus traditum ad noſtra vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tempora perueniſſe
videtur. Siquidem ij, qui apud nos Diuino Cultui, & Sacris Altaribus praeſident,
barbam, comam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nutrire prohibentur: & in Sacris vtuntur lineis amictibus: The Prieſtes
of ye Goddeſſe Iſis in Egypte vſed to weare linen ſurpleſſes, and euermore had theire heade
ſhauen: Whiche thinge ſeemeth to haue benne deriued from them vnto our time, from hande
to hande. For they, that emonge vs Miniſter Goddes Seruice, and ſerue the Holy Aultars,
are forebidden to ſuffer the heare of theire heade, or theire bearde to growe: and in theire Diuine
ſeruice vſe Linen Garmentes.
                     Epiphani. Lib. 3. Haereſi. 51. De Collyridienis, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Nazianzen. ad Heronem. Epiphanius ſaithe, that the Heretiques called Collyridiani,
vſed to ſet foorth, & to carrie about Breade (no doubte, but the Sacramente)
in ye Honoure of ye Bleſſed Virgine Marie. Nazianzenus ſéemeth thus to cōplaine
of ſomme ſutche vnſéemely behaueours in his time: Quid referam, ſaithe he, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ?
What ſhal I ſpeake of the Holy Myſteries turned now into a plaie,
or a Comedie? For ſo Claudius Du Sainctes your owne Doctour expoundeth
theſe woordes, Myſteria in comoedias conuerſa.
                  Of the like diſorder of the Heathens, Apuleius ſéemeth to ſaie, Dicimus Deos incedere
humanis pedibus: Wee tel you, that our Goddes goe on mennes feete.
                      The whole
difference bitwéene you, and them, in this behalfe, ſtandeth onely in this, that
your God goeth on Horſe féete,Claud. Du Sainctes, De Liturgijs. In Praefat. Apuleius, Lib. 11. and theire on mannes féete.
                  But the Holy Sacramente of Chriſtes Deathe was neuer appointed vnto vs
to this ende, to be carried thus aboute in open ſhewe: but onely to be receiued, as
Chriſte him ſelfe commaunded, in remembrance of his Body, and Bloude. And
therefore S.Cyprian. De Coena Domini. Auguſti. Contra Fauſtum, Lib. 20. Cap. 13. 
                     Cyprian ſaithe, Recipitur, non includitur: It is receiued: it is not
ſhut vp.
                  
                  That ye allege, as out of S. Auguſtine, that the Painimes founde faulte
withe the Chriſtian people, for Honoure donne to the Body, & Bloude of Chriſte,
vnder your Fourmes of Breade, & Wine, it is an open, and a manifeſte Vntruthe.
For S. Auguſtine in that place ſpeaketh not one woorde, neither of the Body, and
Bloude of Chriſte: nor of your Fourmes, and Accidentes: nor of any manner Adoration,
or honoure donne vnto the Sacramente. It ſhal behoue you to write
hereafter more aduiſedly: Otherwiſe the Learned wil ſaie, ye either knowe not, or
care not,Artic. 8. Diui. 24 what ye write. This Obiection of S. Auguſtine is anſweared more at
large in my Former Replie.
                  
                     Touchinge the mater,
                     Augu. De Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 1. Cap. 29. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaith, Deus meus vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Praeſens eſt, vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
totus, nuſquam incluſus: qui poſsit adeſſe ſecretus, abeſſe non motus: My God is euerywhere
Preſente, euerywhere whole, ſhut vp, or incloſed novvhere: Hable ſecretely to
be Preſente,
                     Chryſoſt. De Ieiunijs. & Lectione Geneſeos. 
                     and to be Abſente without mouinge. And S.
                      Chryſoſtome ſaith, Magnum,
crede mihi, bonum eſt, Scire, quid ſit Creatura, & quid ſit Creator: & quae ſint Opera,
quis verò Opifex. Si enim hoc diligenter ſcirent diſcernere Haeretici, nunquam vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
omnia confunderent, &, quae Surſum ſunt, facerent Deorſum. Non dico, quòd Coelum,
& Stellas deorſum, terram autem ſurſum ducerent: ſed quòd Regem ab excelſis

Sedibus deducentes cum Creaturis, & Operibus collocauerint: Creaturam verò
Diuinis honoribus affecerint. Beleeue me, it is a greate matter, to vnderſtande, what
is the Creature, and what is God the Creatoure: what are the Woorkes, and what is
the VVoorkeman. For, if theiſe Heretiques coulde make diligente difference hereof,
they would not thus make confuſion of al thinges, nor place thoſe thinges beneathe, that be
aboue. I meane not, They either pulle down the Heauen, or the Starres, or ſet vp the Earthe
(in theire Place): But that they pulle downe the Kinge him ſelfe from his high
throne, and place him emongeſt his vvoorkes and Creatures: and of the other
ſide, vvoorſhippe a Creature vvith Godly Honoure.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 2.
               Biſides, where they ſaie, and ſommetime doo perſuade fooles,
that they are hable by theire Maſſes to diſtribute, and applie vnto
mennes commoditie al the Merites of Chriſtes Deathe, yea, although
many times the parties thinke nothing of the mater, and vnderſtande
ful litle, what is donne, this is a Mockerie, a Heatheniſhe
fanſie, and a very ioie. For it is our Faith, that applieth the Deathe,
and Croſſe of Chriſte to our benefite, & not the Acte of the Maſſinge
Prieſte. Faithe had in the Sacramentes (ſaithe Auguſtine) doth iuſtifie,
and not the Sacramentes.
                  Origen. ad Roma. Li. 3. Cap. 3. And Origen ſaithe: Chriſte is
the Prieſte, the Propitiation, and Sacrifice: vvhiche Propitiation
commeth to euery one by meane of Faithe. And ſo, by this reckeninge,
wee ſaie, that the Sacramentes of Chriſte, without Faithe,
doo not once profite theſe, that be a liue: a greate deale leſſe doo they
profite thoſe that be deade.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     Vntruthe encloſed. For this is your Catholique Doctrine, as ſhal appeare. Leaſte any piece of your Apologie ſhould be without a witnes, for proufe that ye are his children,
who is the father of lies: ye make vs to affirme, that by our Maſſes we diſtribute and applie
to men indifferently, how: ſo euer they be diſpoſed, for ſo ye meane, as it appeareth partely by that ye
ſaie here, and ſpecial by your Doctrine other wheres vttered, al the Merites of Chriſtes Deathe. But
tel vs,Your ovvne Scholaſtical Catholique Doctoures, M. Harding. Reade the Anſvveare. who euer taught this Doctrine in the Catholike Churche?
                  Yea, God is ſo good, and prone to beſtowe his mercie, that, not onely when a man is through
faithe prepared for it, he geueth it abundantly vnto him: but alſo though he of his owne parte haue
no faithe preſently, yet for others ſake, whiche are Gods derely beloued frendes, he farethe the better,
and hath that gifte obteigned to him.A ꝓper ſhifte. VVee ſpeake of Sacramentes: M. Hardinge anſvveareth vs of Praier. As, when S. Steuen praied at his deathe for thoſe, that perſecuted
him, for whom prayed he then, but for thoſe, who had no Faithe at al in Chriſte? And when
this grace was geuen vnto them, as that from theire Iewiſhnes they came to the faith of Chriſte, who
ſhal exclude that bleſſed Martyr from this worſhip and honoure, that throughe his praier, as by one
ſpecial meane, that grace was applied vnto them?
                  VVhat effecte his praier tooke,The effecte of S. Steuēs Praier. Act 9. Serm. 1. de Sanctis. Cō
                        tra duas Epiſt. Pelagian Ad Bonifacium, Lib. 1. Ca. 19 Heb. 5. if any man thereof doubte, he maye thinke it to haue wrought
mutche for the benefite of others of leſſe malice, ſeinge that it did ſo mutche in Paule. VVho as the
Scripture ſaithe, yet breathinge out threatninges and ſlaughter againſte Chriſtes Diſciples. was ſo
chaunged and conuerted, that of a Perſecutour he became an Apoſtle. For, as S. Auguſtine writeth,
Si Sanctus Stephanus ſic non oraſſet, Eccleſia Paulum non haberet: If S. Steuen had not
praied ſo, the Churche ſhoulde not haue had Paule. Nowe, if thoſe that be no Prieſtes, without
publike Auctoritie of Conſecrating the Body and Bloude of Chriſte, yet by waie of praier doo obteine,
that men be conuerted to the Faithe, whiche is the applyinge of one fruite of Chriſtes merites, mutche
more the publike Miniſter, and Biſhop, whiche aſſumpted from amonge men, is ordeined for men, in
matters belonginge to God, that he may offer vp giftes and Sacrifices for ſinnes.
                  
                     
And nowe if ye liſte to learne what kinde of applyinge we vſe in our Maſſes,The Applieing of Chriſtes Deathe we doo offer vp
vnto God firſte,VVhat kinde of applying is in the Sacrifice of the Maſſe. Lib. 1. de vocat. Gentium, Ca. 4.
                     Vntruthe, P
                           •
                        aſphemous, and horrible his Sonne, repreſentinge his paſsion, and celebratinge the memorie of the ſameVntruthe. For Chriſte 
                           •
                        eu 
                           〈◊〉
                         bade you to offer him vp vnto his Father. accordinge
to Chriſtes inſtitution.
                  But what meaſure of good we procure them, to God onely is that knowen. If (as the Learned
Biſhop Prosper ſaithe) the grace of our Sauiour paſſe ouer ſome Perſons (as we ſee it to happen) and if
the Praier of the Churche (wherein the Sacrifice is conteined, after S. Auguſtines Minde) be not admitted
for them: it is to be referred to the ſecrete iudgèmentes of Goddes iuſtice, and it is to be acknowledged,
that the depth of this ſecrete may not be opened in this life.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Thus ye ſaie, M. Hardinge: Ye make vs to affirme, that by our Maſſes wee diſtribute;
and applie to menne indifferently the Merites of Chriſtes Deathe: howe ſo euer they be diſpoſed in token,
that ye are the Children of him, who is the Father of lies. Therefore ye ſaie, Tel vs, who
euer taught this Doctrine in the Catholike Churche?
                  
                     If ye be ſo vnſkilful, M. Hardinge, and ſo far to ſéeke in your owne Doctours,
then it maie pleaſe you to vnderſtande, that the moſte Catholique Pillers of your
Catholique Churche haue euen thus taught vs. Thomas de Vio, otherwiſe called
Caietanus, a Catholique Cardinal of your Catholique Churche of Rome, in the
Conference he had at Auguſta in Germanie with Doctour Luther, ſaide thus,
Fides non eſt neceſſaria acceſſuro ad Euchariſtiam:Paralip. Vrſper. Anno. 1518. Faith is not neceſsarie for him,
that wil receiue the Sacramente of thankeſ geuinge. Notwithſtandinge otherwheres
he acknowledgeth, this was an errour: and confeſſeth, it was commonly receiued
and beleeued of many, euen in your Catholique Churche of Rome. Thus he writeth.
                     
In hoc videtur communis multorum error,Cardinal Caie
                        
                           •
                        anus, De Vſis Spiritualium, Quae. 3. quod putant, hoc Sacrificium ex ſolo
Opere Operato habere certum Meritum, vel certam ſatiſfactionem, quae applicatur
huic, vel illi: Herein ſtandeth the Common Errour of many, that thei thinke, this Sacrifice
hath a certaine Mente, or Satiſfactiō, whiche is applied to this man, or to y• man (not by
meane of the Faithe of the receiuer, but) by the Onely meane of the Woorke, that is
wrought (by the Prieſte).
                     
                     Biel. Lection 81. Iacob. De Valentia, Sermo. 2. De Epiphania. Gabriel Biel ſaith, The Prieſte receiueth the Sacramente: and
the
                      vertue thereof paſseth into al the Members of the Churche. Iacobus de Valentia
ſaithe, The Prieſte is the Mouthe of the Body. Therefore, when the Prieſte
receiueth the Sacramente, al the Members are refreaſed. Againe he ſaithe, Nos
Communicamus Ore Sacerdotis: Wee, that be of the People, doo Communicate, or
receiue the Sacramente, by the Mouthe of the Prieſte.Thom. De venerabil. sacramet. Aliar. Cap. 1 Thomas of Aquine youre
Angelical Doctour ſaithe thus, Sicut Corpus Domini ſemel oblatum eſt in Cruce pro
debito Originali, ita offertur iugiter pro quotidianis delictis in Altari: As the Body
of our Lorde was once offered vpon the Croſſe for the debte of Original Sinne, ſo
it is daily offered vpon the Aultare for the debte of Daily Sinnes.
                  
                     This Doctrine, not longe ſithence, was holden for Catholique, and was ſtrongly
mainteined by your Catholique Doctours. Catharinus, one of the woorthies
of your Late Chapter of Tridente,Catharinus, De Incruento Sacrificio Noui, & Aeterni Teſtamentes. 
                     ſaith, Apparet, quòd pro peccatis ſub Nouo Teſtamento,
poſt acceptam Salutaris Hoſtiae in Baptiſmo efficaciam commiſsis, non habemus
pro Peccato Hoſtiam illam, quam Chriſtus obtulit pro Peccato Mundi,
& pro delictis Baptiſmum Praecedentibus: Non enim niſi ſemel ille Mortuus eſt: Et ideò
ſemel duntaxat hoſtia illa ad hunc effectum applicatur: It appeareth, that for the Sinnes
committed vnder the Newe Teſtamente, after that wee haue receiued in Baptiſme the
Power of the Healthful Sacrifice, vvee haue nomore that sacrifice for Sinne,
vvhiche Chriſte once offered for the Sinne of the VVorlde, and for sinnes committed
before Baptiſme. For Chriſte neuer died but once. And therefore that Sacrifice of
Chriſte Crucified is applied vnto vs once onely to this effecte.
                  
                  Hereby M. Hardinge, ye maie ſée, that this Doctrine lacketh no defence emongeſt

your Catholiques.The Applieing of Chriſtes Deathe. The ſumme, and meaninge hereof is this, That our Sinnes
committed after Baptiſme, are not foregéeuen by the Death of Chriſte, but Onely
by the Sacrifice of the Maſſe. Whiche thinge, what it ſéemeth to you, I cannot
tel: But vnto al Godly eares it ſeemeth an horrible greate blaſphemie.
                  Here, to ſpeake of Praiers, ſpecially in ſo large a ſorte, it was far impertinente
to your pourpoſe, as beinge vtterly no parte of this queſtion.
                  The Merites of Chriſtes Deathe, whereof wée entreate, are conueied vnto
vs by God, and receiued by vs. God conueieth them to vs onely of his Mercie:
and wée receiue them Onely by Faithe. But the waies, whereby either to
procure Goddes Mercie, or to enkendle our Faithe, are many and ſundrie. Goddes
Mercie is procured ſommetime by Praier, ſommetime by other Meanes. But to
bréede, or encreaſe Faith in vs, there are moe waies, then can be reckened. Somme
menne are moued Onely by the Hearinge of Goddes Woorde: Somme others by
the beholdinge,Euſeb. Li. 4. Ca. 8 and weighinge of Goddes Miracles. Iuſtinus the Martyr was
firſte alluered to the Faithe by the crueltie of the Tyrannes, and by the Conſtancie,
and Patience of Goddes Sainctes.Cyprian. De Laude Martyrij. S. Cyprian ſaith, Tanta eſt vis Martyrij,
vt per illam credere etiam cogatur, qui te vult occidere: So greate is the
Power of Martyrdome, that thereby euen he is forced to beleeue, that woulde kille thee.
                     
S. Auguſtine ſaithe,Auguſt. Confeſ. Lib 3. Cap. 4. He was ſturred vp to comme to Chriſte, by readinge a Heathen
Booke written by Cicero, called Hortenſius. Thus he ſaithe, Ille Liber mutauit
affectum meum, & ad 
                           •
                        eipſum, Domine, mutauit Preces meas: That
                      (Heathen)
Booke changed my minde, and turned my praiers, ô Lorde, vnto thee.
                  
                  Emonge other cauſes, the Sacramentes ſerue ſpecially to directe, and to aide
our Faithe:Auguſt. Contra Fauſtum. Lib. 19. Cap. 16. For they are, as S. Auguſtine calleth them, Verba viſibilia, Viſible
VVoordes: and Scales, and Teſtimonies of the Goſpel.
                  All this notwithſtandinge, wee ſaie, It is neither the Woorke of the Prieſte,
nor the Nature of the Sacramente, as of it ſelfe, that maketh vs partetakers of
Chriſtes Deathe,Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 80. but onely the Faithe of the Receiuer. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Vnde eſt iſta tanta Virtus Aquae, vt Corpus tangat, & Cor abluat, niſi faciente Verbo?
Non quia dicitur, ſed quia creditur: From whence hathe the Water this
greate power, that it toucheth the Body, and waſſheth the Harte, ſauinge by the VVoorkinge
of the VVoorde? Not for that it is pronounced, but for that it is beleeued.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe Heſychius,Helych. in Leuit. Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Cyrill. in Leuit. Lib. 3. Gratia Dei comprehenditur Sola Fide: The Grace of God
(of our parte)
                      is receiued by Onely Faithe. So ſaithe Cyrillus, Siclus Fidei
noſtrae Formam habet. Si enim Fidem obtuleris, tāquam Pretium, à Chriſto, velut Ariete
immaculato in hoſtiam dato, accipies Remiſsionem Peccatorum: The Sicle hath the
Fourme of our Faithe. For if thou offer vp thy Faithe, as the Price, thou ſhalt receiue
Remiſsion of thy Sinnes, from Chriſte that vnſpotted Ramme, that was geeuen for a Sacrifice.
                  
                  Where ye ſaie, ye offer vp Chriſte, the Sonne of Godde, Really, and Subſtantially
vnto God the Father, If ye ſpeake in your dreame, it is a very pleaſante
phantaſie: but if ye be awake, and knowe, what ye ſaie, then is it a greate blaſphemie:
as in my Former Replie it maie appeare more at large.Art
                           ••
                        eul. 17.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 1.
               And as for theire bragges, they are woonte to make of theire Purgatorie,
though we know, it is not a thing ſo very late riſen emōgeſt
them, yet is it no better then a blockiſhe, and an olde Wiues deuiſe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Purgatorie ſemeth not to vs a thinge, that wee ſhoulde mutche bragge of, no more then ye
                        •
                      wil

bragge of Hel.Povver ouer Purgatorie. VVe tremble at the remembrance of it rather then bragge of it. VVel, howe ſo euer
it be,Purgatory acknovvleged by the Defenders to be of antiquitie. Apoc. 21. wil ye, nil ye (we ſee)No marueile. It vvas receiued of the Painimes, longe ere the Apoſtles vvere borne. ye be driuen to confeſſe the ſame to be no newe thinge.
                  In deede if you cal them Papiſtes, among whom the Doctrine of praieing for the deade,Vntruthe. Reade the Anſvveare. whereof
neceſſarely foloweth the Doctrine of Purgatorie, is deliuered, taught and holden: then are the Apoſtles,
who deliuered it by Tradition, (as Chryſoſtome and Damaſcene reporte) Papiſtes. Firſte,This fantaſie vvere ſommevvhat, if vvee had no Purgation in Chriſtes Bloud. foraſmutche
as nothing that is defiled commeth into the Kingdome of Heauen, and ſome departe out of this
Life, though in the Faithe of Chriſte, and Children of the Euerlaſtinge Kingdome, yet not throughly
and perfitly cleane: it remaineth, that ſutche after this Life before they come to the place of Euerlaſtinge
ioye,2. Cor. 7. haue theire Purgation. Furthermore the Apoſtle ſaithe, Seeinge then we haue theſe
promiſes derely beloued, letA doughty Argumente, to proue Purgatorie. vs cleanſe our ſelues from al filthines of the Fleaſhe, and Spirite, makinge
perfite our ſatisfaction in the feare of God. VVho ſeeth not hereof to folowe, that to many,
whiche be iuſtified, ſomewhat of ſatisfaction, and Holynes lacketh? VVhiche if they be taken
from hence, before they atteine to the meaſure of Holynes requiſite, be they not then after this Life in
ſtate to be purged and cleanſed?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here are wée comme to the Paper VValles, and Painted Fieres of Purgatorie.
For ſo it liked M. Harding, not longe ſithence, pleaſantly to ſport at it in the Pulpites,
as a bugge méete onely to fraie Children. Yet now, vpon better aduiſe, and
déeper ſtudie, he tremblethe, God wote, and quaketh for feare, to remember the
tormentes, that ſomme body hath ſithence tolde him to be there. Howe be it, Let
him not ſo mutche diſmaie him ſelfe. The Pope, as he either firſte made it, or
receiued it by hande from the Heathens, and firſte allowed it, euen ſo hathe he
the whole Iuriſdiction, and Power ouer it, and commaundeth in, and out at his
pleaſure.
                  Whether ye make bragges hereof, or no, I leaue it in queſtion. Certainely for
this,Panormi. De Electione. Cap. Licet. and other like cauſes, One of your felowes ſaithe, Papa poteſt, quicquid
Deus ipſe poteſt: The Pope can doo, vvhat ſo euer God him ſelfe can doo.
An other ſaith, Animae exiſtentes in Purgatorio, ſunt de Iuriſdictione Papae: & Papa,
ſi vellet,
                     Iohan. Angelus. 
                     poſſet totum Purgatorium euacuare: The Soules being in Purgatorie, are
                      (in
the Popes Peculiare, and) vnder the Popes Iuriſdiction: and the Pope, if it might
ſtande with his pleaſure, were hable
                      (to make gaole deliuerie, and) to auoide al Purgatorie.
And to this pourpoſe,Clemens Pap. 6. in Bulla. The Pope him ſelfe Commaundeth, and Chargeth
the Angels of God, to fetche foorthe from thence, whom ſo euer, and howe
many ſo euer he wil haue deliuered, as hereafter in a place more conuenient it ſhal
better appeare. If theſe ſéeme to be no bragges, then let them hardly be called by
ſomme other name, that maie ſeeme to pleaſe you better.
                  Ye take good holde, in that wée Confeſſe, This Imagination of Purgatorie
is no Newe fanſie. Howe be it, your aduantage herein is not ſo greate. There
haue benne errours, and great errours from the beginninge. S. Auguſtine ſaith,
Origenes ipſum Diabolum, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Angelos eius poſt grauiora pro Meritis, & diuturniora
ſupplicia,
                     Auguſt. de Cluitate Dei, Lib. 21. Cap. 17. 
                     ex illis Cruciatibus eruendos, atque ſociandos Sanctis Angelis credidit:
The Ancient Learned Father Origen beleued, that the Diuel him ſelfe, and his Angels, after
greate, and long pouniſhement ſuffered for theire wickedneſſe, ſhalbe deliuered from theire tormentes,
and ſhalbe placed
                      (in Heauen) with the Holy Angels of God.
                     Origen. in 
                           •
                        piſt. ad Roman. Ca. 6 Lib. 5. 
                     Origen him ſelfe
ſaith, There were ſomme, that thought, that Chriſte ſhould goe down into Helle,
and there be Crucified againe, to ſaue them, that by his Preachinge, and Former
Death could not be ſaued. Againe ye ſame Origen ſaith of him, ſelfe, Ego puto, quòd
poſt Reſurrectionē ex mortuis indigebimus Sacramento cluente nos▪
                     
                     Origen. in Lucā Homil 14. 
                     at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Purgante:
I thinke, that after vvee ſhal riſe againe from the Deade, wee ſhal haue neede of the
Sacramente (of Baptiſme) to waſhe vs, and to Purge vs cleane.
                  
                  
                     
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     The Antiquitie of Purgatorie. Quidam nullas Poenas, niſi Purgatorias, volunt eſſe poſt
Mortem: Somme menne wil haue no pouniſhemente to bee after Deathe, but onely the
paines of Purgatorie.
                  
                     Euen in Paules time there were ſomme,
                     Auguſt. de Cluitate Dei, Lib 21. Cap. 13. 1. Cor. 15. Concil Cartha. 3. Canon. 6. 
                     that, being aliue, were Baptized for
the deade. And by the Councel of Carthage it appeareth, there were ſomme, that
vſed to thruſte the Sacramente into the Mouthe of the Deade Body, meaninge
thereby, as it maie be thought, to procure ſomme relife for the Soule. The woordes
be theſe: Placuit, vt Corporibus defunctorum Euchariſtia non detur. Dictum eſt enim
à Domino, Accipite, & Edite. Cadauera autem nec accipere poſſunt, nec Edere:
Wee thinke it good, yt the Sacramente be not geuen to the Bodies of the Deade. For our
Lorde ſaithe, Take, and Eate. But Deade Bodies can neither Take, nor Eate. Theſe were
Ancient Errours in olde time, as it is eaſy to be ſéene.
                     
                  
                  As for the fantaſie of Purgatorie, it ſprange firſte from the Heathens, and
was receiued emongeſt them in that time of darkeneſſe, long before the comming
of Chriſte: as it maie plainely appeare by Plato, & Vergile, in whom ye ſhal finde
deſcribed at large,Plato in Timaeo. Aeneid 6. Auguſt. De Ciuita. Li. 7. Ca. 7. the whole Common Weale, and al the Orders, and Degrées of
Purgatorie. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, The Olde Heathen Romaines had a Sacrifice,
whiche they called Sacrum Purgatorium, A Purgatorie Sacrifice.
                  
                  You ſaie, If they be Papiſtes, that Defende Purgatorie, then muſte Chriſtes
Apoſtles néedes be Papiſtes. For they haue taught vs Purgatorie, (not by any
woorde that euer they wrote, but) by Tradition. This is as true, as that S. Peter
ſaide Maſſe in Rome with a Golden Cope, and a Triple Crovvne. Onleſſe perhaps
ſomme man wil thinke,1. Tim. 6. where as S. Paule ſaith, Homines Priuati Veritate,
exiſtimantes quaeſtum eſſe pietatem: They be menne voide of Truthe, thinkinge that theire
gaine is Godlineſſe:
                     
                     2. Pet. 2. Or, where as S. Peter ſaithe, Per auaritiam fictis ſermonibus nego
                        
                           •
                        iabuntur
de vobis: Through couetouſneſſe by fained talke they ſhal make ſale of you,
that by theſe woordes they gaue vs Warninge of the very Fourme▪ and Doctrine
of your Purgatorie. For better Authorities, then theſe be, I recken, ye can lightly
finde none.
                  
                     As for Praier for the Deade, whiche, ye ſaie, ye haue receiued by Tradition
from the Apoſtles, notwithſtandinge it were graunted to be true, yet dooth it not
euermore importe Purgatorie. For Chryſoſtome, and Baſile in theire Liturgies
make theire Publike, and ſolemne Prater in this ſorte: Offerimus tibi rationalem
hunc cultū,Baſil. & Chryſ. in Liturgijs. pro in Fide requieſcētibus, Maioribus, Patribus, Patriarchis, Prophetis,
& Apoſtolis, Praeconibus, & Euangeliſtis, Martyribus, Confeſſoribus, &c.
Praecipuè verò pro Sanctiſsima, immaculata, ſuper omnes benedicta, Domina noſtra
Deipara, & ſemper Virgine Maria: Wee offer, O Lorde, vnto thee this reaſonable ſeruice
for them, that reaſte in Faithe, Our Elders, Our Fathers, The Patriarkes, the Prophetes,
the Apoſtles, the Preachers, the Euangeliſtes, the Martyrs, the Confeſſours,
&c. Specially for the moſte Holy, without ſpotte, bleſſed aboue al, our Lady Goddes
Mother, and euer Virgine Marie. S. Cyprian ſaithe in like manner, Sacrificamus
pro Martyribus,Cyprian. Lib. 3. Epiſt. 6. 
                     VVee make Sacrifice for the Martyrs. Yet, I trowe, ye wil not
conclude hereof, that the Patriarkes, Prophetes, Apoſtles, Preachers, Euangeliſtes.
Martyrs, Confeſſours, and the Bleſſed Virgine Marie, were al in Purgatorie.
Otherwiſe ye woulde mutche enlarge the Popes Dominion.
                  
                  Of the other ſide, in your Maſſes for the Deade, ye haue vſed to praie thus:
Libera eos à Tartaro: è profundo Lacu: ex Ore Leonis: Deliuer them O Lorde
                      (not
from Purgatorie, but) from Hel: from that deepe Doungeon: from the Lions
Mouthe. I trowe, ye are not ſo mutche thral vnto the Pope, that ye wil turne, the
Lions Mouthe, the Deepe Doungeon, and al the worlde, and Helle it ſelfe, into
Purgatorie. Thus ye ſée, M. Hardinge, by your owne Doctrine, ye maie

praie for the Deade,Vncleanſed. and yet be neuer the neare of your Purgatorie.
                  
                  
                     But to healpe forewarde the mater, at the leaſte by ſomme Natural reaſon, ye
ſaie thus, For as mutche as nothinge, that is defiled, commeth into the Kingdome of Heauen, and
ſomme departe oute of this Life, though in the Faithe of Chriſte, and Children of the Euerlaſtinge Kingdome,
yet not throughly and perfitely cleane, it remaineth, that ſutche, after this Life, before they
comme to the Place of Euerlaſtinge toie, haue theire Purgation. To warrante your Minor
in this Argumente, ye bringe in the woordes of S. Paule, as rightly, and as wel
to pourpoſe, as your manner otherwiſe is commonly to handle the Scriptures:
Though our outwarde man be corrupted,2. Cor. 4. and weakened (whiche woordes S. Ambroſe
expoundeth thus, By Oppreſſion, by Stripes, by Hunger, by Thirſte, by Colde,
by Nakedneſſe) Yet our Soule is renewed, and made ſtronger daie by daie. And againe,
Let vs cleanſe our ſelues from al filthineſſe of Fleaſhe,2. Cor. 7. and Sprite. Ergo, ſaie ye,
                      VVe muſt
confeſſe by force of theiſe VVoordes, that there muſte needes be a place, wherein to Purge vs cleane after
this Life. Here maie wée a litle put you in remembrance by the waie: If wée
cleanſe our ſelues, accordinge to theſe woordes of S. Paule, from al manner filthineſſe,
bothe of Fleaſhe, and of Sprite, I beſeeche you, what remaineth there then
further, to be Purged in Purgatorie?
                  
                  Howe be it, to proue the Imperfection, and corruption of Nature, that euermore
hangethe in our Fleaſhe, ye might, in my Iudgemente, haue alleged many
other Authorities,Eſai. 64. Iob. 15. far more pregnante, and clearer, then theſe. Eſai ſaithe, Al
our righteouſneſſe is like vnto a fowle ſtained cloute: Iob
                      ſaithe, Inter Sanctos eius nemo
eſt Fidelis: Et Coeli non ſunt mundi in Conſpectu eius: Emonge the Sainctes of God,
there is none Faitheful:
                     
                     Roman. 7. Augu. in pſal. 143 
                     The Heauens are not Cleane in his ſight. S. Paule ſaithe,
I knovve there is no good thinge in my Fleaſhe. S Auguſtine ſaithe, Let
the Apoſtles of Chriſte them ſelues ſaie, O Lorde, foregeeue vs our offences.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sutche imperfections, and Corruptions, while wee liue, wee euermore carrie
in our Fleaſhe. Therefore, ſaie you, To be Purged hereof, that wee maie be cleane, and
fitte to enter into Heauen, wee muſte needes paſſe thoroughe the Fieres of Purgatorie. By this
meane ye haue wel enlarged the Popes Iuriſdiction. For this beinge true, neither
is there, nor neuer was there any Creature, neither Prophete, nor Apoſtle,
nor Martyr, nor Angel, nor Archangel, nor Heauen it ſelfe, Chriſte onely excepted,
but of force muſte be cleanſed in your Purgatorie.
                     Origen. in Pſal. 36. Homil 3. 
                     And therefore Origen,
a greate fautoure of this erroure, ſaith thus, Vt ego arbitror, Omnes nos neceſſe
eſt venire in illum Ignem: etiamſi Paulus aliquis ſit, vel Petrus: As I ſuppoſe,
al vvee muſte needes comme into that Fiere: Yea althoughe it be Paule, or
Peter.Origen. in Lucā Homil. 14. 
                     And therefore he ſaithe, as it is alleged before, Ego puto, quòd & poſt
Reſurrectionem ex Mortuis, indigebimus Sacramento eluente nos, atque Purgante.
Nemo enim abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſordibus Reſurgere poterit. Neque vllam puto
poſſe animam reperiri, quae vniuerſis ſtatim vitijs careat: I thinke, that after the
Reſurrection from the deade, vvee ſhal neede the Sacramente (of Baptiſme) to
vvaſhe vs, and to make vs cleane. For noman can riſe againe vvithout filthe.
Neither doo I thinke, there can any Soule be founde, voide from al manner of
Sinne.
                  
                     But al theſe be vaine fantaſies: I meane, as wel theſe of M. Hardinge, as
alſo the other of Origen.1. Iohan. 1. 
                     S. Iohn ſaith, Sanguis Ieſu Chriſti Filij Dei purgat
nos ab omni Peccato: The Bloude of Ieſus Chriſte the Sonne of God Purgeth
vs, and maketh vs cleane from al our Sinnes. The Prophete ſaithe, In what
hourre ſo euer a ſinner ſhal repente, and mourne for his ſinnes, he ſhalbe ſafe. Eſai ſaithe,
If your Sinnes ſhalbe as redde as Scarlet,
                     
                     Eſai. 1. Hebrae. 1. 
                     yet ſhal they be made as white, as ſnowe. S. Paule
ſaithe, Chriſtus Purgationem Peccatorum noſtrorum fecit: Chriſte (by his

Bloude) hathe vvrought the Purgation of our Sinnes.Vncleanſed. 
                     Therefore. S. Cyprian
ſaithe,
                     Cyprian. De Paſsione Chriſti. Sanguis tuus, Domine, non quaerit vltionem: Sanguis tuus lauat crimina,
Peccata condonat: Thy Bloud, ô Lorde, ſeketh no reuenge: Thy Bloude vvaſſheth
our Sinnes, and Pardoneth our treſpaſſes.
                  
                     And, whereas you telle vs, out of ſomme Heatheniſhe fantaſie, that Sinnes
cannot be waſhte awaie, but with longe tracte of time, and paine in Purgatorie,
S. Cyprian ſaithe,
                     Cyprian. De Coena Domini. In eodem articulo temporis, cùm iam anima feſtinet ad exitum,
& egrediens ad labia expirantis emerſerit, Poenitentiam Clementiſsimi Dei
benignitas non aſpernatur. Nec Serum eſt, quod Verum eſt: In that very moment
of time, euen vvhen the Soule is ready to paſse, and is euen at the lippes of the partie
ready to yelde vp the Sprite, the goodneſſe of our moſte merciful God refuſeth not repentance.
And vvhat ſo euer is truely donne, is neuer too late.
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. in Geneſ. Homil. 27. Latro in Cruce ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vno die opus habebat. Et quid dico,
vno die? Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      breui hora. Tanta eſt Dei erga nos Miſericordia: The Thiefe on the
Croſſe needed not ſo mutch as one daie, to repēte him ſelfe. What ſpeake I of one daie? No,
he needed not one houre. So greate is the Mercie of God towarde vs.
                  
                  
                     Of the other ſide, if any man departe hence without repentance, S. Auguſtine
ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 80. Imparatum inueniet illum Dies Domini, quem Imparatum inuenerit ſuae
vitae huius vltimus dies: Him ſhal the daie of the Lorde finde vnprouided, whom the
laſte daie of this life findeth vnprouided.
                     Ambroſi. De Bono Mortis. 
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Qui hîc non accipit Remiſsionem
Peccatorum, ibi non erit: He that here in this life receiueth not Remiſsion of
his Sinnes, ſhal not be there. And S. Hierome expoundinge theſe woordes of
Chriſte, Thou ſhalt not goe foorthe thence, vntil thou haue paide the laſte farthinge,
ſaithe, thus,
                     Hierony. in Lamentationes Hieremiae, Li. 1. Cap. 1. Auguſt. De Sermon. Domini in Monte, Lib. 1. Significat ſemper non exiturum elſe: quia ſemper ſoluat nouiſsimum
quadrantem, dum ſempiternas Poenas terrenorum Peccatorum luit: Chriſtes meaninge
is, that he ſhal neuer comme out: for that he muſte euermore paie the laſte farthinge,
whiles he ſuffereth euerlaſtinge pouniſhemente for his Sinnes committed in this worlde.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Auguſtine, Donec ſoluas nouiſsimum quadrantem: Miror, ſi non
cam ſignificat poenam, quae vocatur Aeterna: Vntil thou paie the laſte farthing: I marueile,
but he m
                           •••
                        eth that paine, vvhiche is called Euerlaſtinge.
                  Hereby, M. Hardinge, I thinke, it maie partely appeare, that you mainteine
your painted Fire, and Paper VValles, with painted Authorities, and Paper
Reaſons. Verily the Chriſtian people of the Eaſte Churche of God, whiche
ſommetime was as greate, and as famous, as the Churche of the Weaſt, notwithſtandinge
they beleeued in God, and his Chriſte, and knewe there was boothe Hel,
and Heauen, yet in your Purgatorie thei had no ſkil. One of your Doctoures
ſaithe,Alphonſus De Haereſibus. Li. 8. De Indulgetijs. 
                     Vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in Hodiernum diem Purgatorium non eſt a Graecis creditum: Vntil
this daie, of the Grecians, or of the Eaſte Churche, Purgatorie vvas neuer beleued.
Therefore ye cannot iuſtely ſaie, that your fantaſie herein was euermore
accoumpted Vniuerſal, or Catholique.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 2.
               
                  Auguſtine in deede ſommetime ſaith,Augu. in Pſal. 85. there is ſutch a certaine place:
ſommetime he denieth not, but there maie be ſutch a one: ſommetime
he doubteth: ſommetime againe he vtterly denieth, there is any at al,
and thinketh, that menne are therein deceiued by a certaine Natural
good wil, they beare theire frendes departed. But yet of this one
Erroure hathe there growen vp ſutche a harueſt of thoſe Maſsemongers,
that, the Maſses beinge ſolde abroade commonly in euery Corner,

the Temples of God became ſhoppes, to geate monei: and ſelie ſoules
were borne in hande, that nothing was more neceſſarie to be bought.
In deede there was nothinge more gaineful for theſe menne to
ſelle.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVel railed. If your reaſons, or Authorities were ſo piththy, as your mockes and ſcoffes be ſpiteful,
ye were to be hearde. But thankes be to God, that ſutche ſhrewed beaſtes haue ſhorte
hornes.Act. 25. Nowe to S. Auguſtine. And as Feſtus ſayde to S. Paule, Haſte thou appealed to Caeſar?
to Caeſar ſhalt thou goe: So ſaie wee to you, though not hauinge that Auctoritie ouer you, whiche
Feſtus had ouer S. Paule: To Auguſtine ye referre this mater, and by Auguſtine ſhall ye be iudged.
                  I woulde alleage vnto you ſundrie places of theIt vvas a good pointe of ſkil, vvith a good countenance to paſſe thē ouer. Scriptures, whiche maie Sufficiently proue
Purgatorie to a Chriſten man, that is not contentious, but that wil we doo hereafter as occaſion ſerueth.
Nowe to Saincte Auguſtine.S. Auguſtine affirmeth Purgatorie in plaine and expreſſe vvoordes. 1. Cor. 3. VVe ſaie plainely, that S. Auguſtine affirmeth Purgatorie, and
that itVntruthe. It ſhalbe ſhevved. Reade the Anſvveare. cannot be ſhewed where he doubteth of it, mutche leſſe where he vtterly denyeth any
ſutche to be. In ſundry places of his woorkes he expoundeth the woordes of S. Paule to the Corinthians
of Purgatorie, where the Apoſtle ſaithe, that the woorkes, whiche be builded vpon the fundation
(whiche is Chriſte) ſhalbe tried by Fire. In the 21. Booke de Ciuitate Dei, after that he
hathe declared his iudgemente touchinge paines of diuerſe ſortes, whiche men ſuffer for Sinnes committed,
he ſaithe thus: But paines temporal ſome ſuffer in this life onely: ſome after theire Death:
ſome both now and alſo then, yet before that moſte ſeuere and laſte iudgemente.
                  May it therefore pleaſe you Syrs, to reade S. Auguſtine in ſome ſutche places (for to reade al that
he hathe written to that ende were very mutche,O, ſo careful this good man is for our cares. and a greate lette to your domeſtical cares) and I
thinke verily ye wil ſecretly agree in iudgemente with vs, thoughe for ſhame and conſideration
of the ſtage ye plaie your parte on, openly the ſame ye wil not confeſſe. And therefore in his
booke de Haereſibus ad Quoduultdeum, he condemneth Aërius of Haereſie (and ſo conſequently
al others that be of his opinion) becauſe to the Hereſies of the Arians he had added this, alſo, that none
ought to praie, or make oblation for the deade.
                  VVhere ye make S. Auguſtine very vncertaine in this pointe, as though he ſaide ſommetime there
is ſutche a certain place, ſometime there maie be ſutche a one, ſometime he doubted of it, ſometime
plainely denied any ſutche to be: either ye vnderſtande not S. Auguſtine, or ye ſaie contrary to your owne
knowledge. Verily ye be too bolde with him.Vntruthe Manifeſte. Reade S. Auguſtines vvoordes in the Anſvveare. Firſte that he denieth Purgatory, that is falſe. And
where ye alleage Hypognoſtica in the margent of your booke, reade it once againe at my requeſt, and
your ſelues wil ſaie: the place proueth not your purpoſe.Lib. 5. Hypognoſtic
                           •
                        n. The Author of that woorke, whether he
were S. Auguſtine, whiche Eraſmus beleueth not, or who ſo euer he was, denieth not Purgatory:
but that after the daie of general iudgemente there is any place of Euerlaſtinge reſt, or paine, but
the Kingdome of Heauen, and Hel, that he denieth. VVhiche we alſo denie. And there he ſpeaketh
againſte the Pelagians,Haereſ. 88. who, as S. Auguſtine writeth of them ad Quoduultdeum, promiſed
to infantes dyinge without Baptiſme a certaine euerlaſtinge and bleſſed life without and beſides the
Kingedome of God. VVhiche Hereſie in ſundry places he reproueth. It ſeemeth the woorde Purgatorium,
noted in the margent of that bookeVntruthe. For the margine vvas ſo noted by Eraſmus. by thunlearned Printer, begiled you. VVhiche ſheweth
howe profoundely ye be ſeene in the Doctores.VVhat is that S. Auguſtine doubted of touchinge Purgatory. The thinge, he doubted of, touchinge this matter,
is this: VVhether thoſe temporal paines do onely puniſhe for theVntruth, blaſphemoꝰ againſt the Bloude of Chriſte. Reade the Anſvveare. Satisfaction of the Iuſtice of
God, or alſo do purge and correcte the ſoules of the deade in ſutche wiſe, as temporal paines are wont
to do in this life. But nowe, whether the ſmarte, and ſorowe of thinges lefte behinde, whiche proceded
in this life of Carnal affection, remaine alſo to the ſoules after theire departure from the Body,
whereof S. Auguſtine ſheweth him ſelfe to ſtande in doubte in Enchiridio ad Laurent. cap. 68. & 69.
and whether the fyre whiche ſoules feele in Purgatory as it paineth them,O graue Commentarie: and a vvi
                           •
                        e mater to be called in queſtion. ſo alſo do by degrees diminiſhe
and correcte thoſe venial and Secular affections, whiche they carried with them at theire
Deathe, or whether deathe it ſelfe do ſo ende them, as there remaine not any correction of the minde

yet beinge vicious,Scriptures to proue Purgatorie. but onely the puniſhemente of the ſinne paſte: that is the thinge, whereof S.
AuguſtineThis vvhole mater is concluded vvith ſeeminge, and likely hoode. ſemeth to haue doubted. In effecte his queſtion is, whether the Fire of Purgatorie be
notDouble Fire in Purgatorie: Double Folie. double. The one whiche puniſheth the Venial ſinne paſt: the other whiche diminiſheth and taketh
awaie thaffection of ſinne yet remaininge. Of the firſte he doubteth not: of the other he ſaith,
non redargno,
                     De Ciuita. Dei, Lib. 21. Cap. 26. 
                     quia forſitan verum eſt, I ſaye not againſte it, for per aduenture it is true.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée raite at you, M. Hardinge, euen as Chriſte railed at certaine others, in
whoes ſteppes ye ſéeme to treade, for that they had made of the Houſe of God a
Caue of theeues.
                  
                     The places of the Scriptures, whiche ye thought it beſte to paſſe ouer, and
whereby your Purgatorie by your iudgemente vndoubtedly maie be proued, if a
man be not very contentious,
                     Iohan 5. 
                     I trowe, be theſe: Verily, Verily, I ſaie vnto you, he
that heareth my Woorde, and beleeueth in him, that ſente me, hath Euerlaſtinge Life: and
ſhal not comme into damnation: but hathe paſſed from Deathe vnto Life. Or, that Eſai
the Prophete ſaithe of Chriſte:
                     Eſai. 53. He was wounded for our tranſgreſsions: He was broken
for our iniquities: The chaſtiſemente of our Peace was vpon him: and with his ſtripes wee
were made whole. Or, that S. Paule ſaith, Chriſte hath taken the Obligation, that was
againſte vs,Coloſſ. 2. Apocal. 14. and hathe faſtened it vnto his Croſſe. Or, that S. Iohn ſaith, Bleſſed be the
Deade, that die in the Lorde. Euen ſo ſaithe the Sprite. For they reſte from theire laboures:
and theire Woorkes folowe them. He ſaithe not, they be in Purgatorie: but, they
reſte from theire Laboures.
                     
                     Apocal. 7. 
                     And againe, They ſhal hunger nomore: They ſhal thirſte
nomore. For the Lambe, whiche is in the middes of the throne, ſhal gouerne them, and ſhal
leade them (not into Purgatorie, but) vnto the liuely Fountaines of VVaters: and God
ſhal wipe a waie al teares from theire eies. Theſe, or ſutche other like Places, I trowe,
they be, whereby ye aſſure your ſelfe ſo certainely of your Purgatorie.
                     
                  
                  But vnto S. Auguſtine, wée haue appealed: and to S. Auguſtine, ye ſaie, wée
ſhal goe. Howe be it, if ye conſider the mater wel, ye ſhal finde, that our appeale
liethe not vnto S. Auguſtine. It had benne more indi
                        •
                     ferente dealinge,
to haue ſaide with S. Bernarde,
                     Bernard. in Cantica, Serm. 65. 
                     Ad Euangelium appellaſti: & ad Euangelium
ibis: Ye haue appealed vnto the Goſpel: and vnto the Goſpel ye ſhal
goe.
                  
                  As for S. Auguſtine, notwithſtandinge his Authoritie be greate, and his
learninge deepe, yet in theſe caſes, as it ſhal wel appeare, he can be but a
doubteful Iudge. And a doubteful Iudge, ſo far foorthe, as he doubteth, is no
Iudge.Auguſt. ad Laurenti. Ca. 67. & Diſt. 29. Sciendū. Your owne Canon telleth you, In erroris Labyrinthum nonnulli intricando
impingunt, cùm ante iudicant, quàm intelligant: Many menne geuinge Iudgemente before
they can vnderſtande, by entanglinge them ſelues, fal into a Maze of errour.
                      For howe
can he pronounce ſentence of that, he confeſſeth, he knoweth not? Or how can he
aſſure vs,Auguſt. In 8. qu. ad Dulcitiū q 1. that is not hable to aſſure him ſelfe?
                  
                     Touchinge the certainetie of this Doctrine, to alleage one, or twoo places out
of many, S. Auguſtine writeth thus: Tale aliquid, etiam poſt hanc Vitam fieri,
incredibile non eſt: &, vtrùm ita ſit, quaeri poteſt: Somme ſutch thing (he meaneth
the Fire of Purgatorie) to be after this Life,
                     Augu. De Ciuit. Lib. 21. Cap. 21. it is not incredible: And vvhether it
be ſo, or no,It maie be a queſtion. It maie be a queſtion. Againe, Quòd Spiritus Defunctorum, &c.
ignem tranſitoriae Tribulationis inueniant, non redarguo: quia Forſitan Verum eſt:
That the Sprites of the Deade finde a Fire of tranſitorie Tribulation, I reproue it not: For
Perhaps it is true. Perhaps it is true.Augu. De Fide & Operib ca. 16
                  
                  
                     Againe, Siue ergo in hac Vita tantùm homines iſta patiuntur, ſiue etiam poſt hanc
vitam talia quaedam iudicia ſubſequuntur: non abhorret, Quantum Arbitror,Quantum arbitror. à ratione

Veritatis iſte intellectus huius ſententiae:S. Auguſtine doubteth. 
                     Therefore whether menne ſuffer ſutch thinges onely
in this Life, Or els ſomme ſutche Iudgementes folowe euen after this Life,
                     As mutche as I thinke. As mutche as
I thinke,
                        Augu. De Ciuit. Lib. 21. Cap. 27. 
                     the vnderſtandinge of this ſentence diſagreeth not from the order of the Truthe.
                  
                  
                     And againe he ſaithe, Quis ſit iſte modus, & quae ſint iſta Peccata, quae ita impediant
peruentionem ad Regnum Dei, vt tamen Sanctorum amicorum meritis imperrent indulgentiam,
difficillimum eſt inuenire: Periculoſiſsimum definire Ego certè vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad hoc
tempus, cùm inde 
                        •
                     atagerem, ad eorum indaginem peruenireNō potui. non potui: VVhat
meane this is, and what Sinnes theſe be, whiche ſo lette a man from comming vnto the Kingdome
of God, yt thei maie notwithſtanding obteine Pardonne by the Merites of Holy frendes,
is it very harde to finde: and very dangerous to determine. Certainely I mee ſelfe, notwithſtandinge
greate ſtudie,
                     I coulde neuer attaine to the knowledge. 
                     and trauaile taken in that behalfe, coulde neuer attaine to the
knovvledge of it.
                  By theſe it is plaine, that S. Auguſtine ſtoode in doubte hereof, whether there
be any ſutche Purgatorie Fire, or no. Therefore vndoubtedly he tooke it neither
for an Article of the Chriſtian Faith (for thereof it had not benne lawful for him
to doubte) nor for any Tradition of the Apoſtles.
                  
                  Ye ſaie, S. Auguſtine neuer doubted, whether there were any ſutche Place of
Purgatorie, or ſutche Fire, or no: But onely, whether the tormentes there doo
ſatiſ
                        •
                     ie the Iuſtice of God for Sinne, or no: and whether the ſame tormentes doo
by degrees diminiſhe the Venial Sinnes, and Seculare Affections, whiche ye Parties
carried with them, or no. Notwithſtandinge what ſhoulde any queſtion be
raiſed hereof? Plato, and Vergile, and other Heathen writers, from whom this
Doctrine firſt flowed abroade, woulde ſoone haue put you quite out of doubte. Vergile
hereof emongeſt others ſaithe thus:
                  
                     Quin & ſupremo cum lumine vita reliquit,Aeneid. 6.
                     
                     Non tamen omne malum miſeris, nec funditus omnes
                     Corporeae excedunt peſtes: Penituſ
                           •
                        ue neceſſe eſt
                     
                        Multa diu concreta modis inoleſcere miris.
                     Ergo exercentur poenis, veterum
                           •
                        ue malorum
                     Supplicia expendunt: Aliae panduntur inanes
                     Suſpenſae ad ventos: alijs ſub gurgite vaſto
                     Infectum eluitur ſcelus, aut exuritur igni.
                     
                  
                  But reade you S. A
                           •
                        guſtine, M. Hardinge: you, I ſaie, that, to vſe your owne
woordes, are ſo profoundely ſeene in al the Doctours, that ye maie boldely deſpiſe
al others what ſo euer: Reade, I ſaie, S. Auguſtine: examine better the Places,
and weigh the woordes: And ye ſhal finde, that he neuer neither mentioneth, nor
toucheth any of theſe your prety fantaſies: but ſaithe plainely, vvhether it be ſo,
or no, it maie be a queſtion: I reproue it not: For perhaps it is true.
                  
                  And are ye ſo Profoundely ſeene in al the Doctoures, & Scriptures, M. Harding,
that ye thinke, there is either Fire, or Water, or any other Creature, wherewith
to ſatiſfie the Iuſtice of God againſte Sinne, ſauinge onely the Bloude of the
Lambe of God, that taketh awaie the Sinne of the Worlde? Or thinke you, that S.
Auguſtine woulde turne vs from the Satiſfaction of Chriſte, and ſende vs to ſéeke
for any other? Certainely S. Auguſtine him ſelfe ſaithe, Valeat mihi ad Perfectionem
liberationis tantùm Pretium Sanguinis Domini mei:
                     Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 25. 
                     Let Onely the Price
of the Bloude of my Lorde auaile me to the Perfection of my deliuerie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Double Fiere. Quando aliquis ſe conuerterit ad Deum, Prorſus illi omnia dimittuntur.
Nemo ſit ſollicitus,Augu. De Verbis Domini, Serm. 59 quòd aliquid ei non dimittatur: When ſo euer
any man turneth him ſelfe vnto God, al thinges vtterly are foregeeuen him. Let
noman be doubteful, leſte any thinge happily be not foregeeuen. Chryſoſtome
imagineth God thus to ſaie of a ſinner:
                     Chryſoſt. in Geneſ. Homil. 44. Vnum tantùm requiro, vt confiteatur peccata,
& ab eis deſiſtat: Nec vltrà infero Poenam peccatis: This thinge onely (ſaithe
God) I require of a Sinner, yt he cōfeſſe his Sinnes (vnto me) and leaue ye ſame. Aftervvard
I laie nomore pouniſhemente vpon his Sinnes.Chryſoſt. De B. Philogonio. 
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe, Ego
Fideiubeo: Si quis noſtrum recedat a Peccatis ex animo, & verè Promittat Deo, ſe ad illa
non rediturum, nihil Deum requiſiturum ad Satisfactionem: I wil ſtande bounde in
Goddes behalfe: If any of vs foreſake his Sinnes with al his harte, and make true promiſſe vnto
God, that he wil nomore returne vnto them, that then God ſhal require nothinge els
vnto Satisfaction. He, that knoweth not thus mutche, hath no greate cauſe to
vaunte him ſelfe of his profound knowledge in the Doctours. But it Gods Iuſtice
againſte your ſinne be fully ſatiſfied by the Bloude of Chriſte: If the Onely price
of our Lordes Bloude haue vvrought the perfection of your deliuerie: If there
remaine nothinge vnforegeeuen: If God require no further pouniſhemente:
What ſhoulde you ſeeke for other Satiſfaction in your painted Fires, and ſmokes
of Purgatorie?
                  
                  To conclude, ye ſaie thus, In effecte, S. Auguſtines queſtion is, whether the
Fire of Purgatorie be not double. O M. Hardinge, it ye were ſimple, and meante
ſimply, ye woulde not ſo vainely double the pointe. I beſeche you, what double
Fire of Purgatorie meante S. Auguſtine? Or where was he euer ſo double in dealinge?
By your double Diuinitie, and Profounde knowledge in the Doctoures, ye
haue at the laſte ſkilfully founde out a Double Purgatorie Fire, and a Double
Purgatorie. Howe be it, as you are nowe troubled about the Fire of your Purgatorie:
ſo were ſomme others of your frendes, not long ſithence, as mutche troubled
aboute the VVater.
                     Sir Thomas Moore. Zachar. 9. Sir Thomas Moore ſaide, and helde for certaine, that
in al Purgatorie there is no VVater: no, not one droppe. And that, he ſaide, he
would proue by the wordes of the Prophete Zacharie: Eduxiſti vinctos tuos de lacu,
in quo non erat Aqua: Thou haſte deliuered thy Priſoners out of the Doungeon, wherein
there is no VVater.
                  
                  Of the other ſide,The Biſhop of Rocheſter. Pſalm. 65. 
                     Roffenſis ſaith, Yes, there is in Purgatorie good ſtoare of VVater.
                     
And that, he ſaith, he can proue by the Prophete Dauid: Tranſiuimus per Ignem, &
Aquam: & eduxiſti nos in Refrigerium: Wee haue paſſed through Fire, and VVater:
and thou haſte brought vs foorth into a Place of refreaſſhinge. Albertus, and Roffenſis
ſaie, The Executioners, and Miniſters of Purgatorie, be Holy Angels: Sir Thomas
Moore ſaithe, Out of doubte, they be no Angels, but very Diuels. So handeſomely
theſe dreames agrée togeather.
                  
                     To returne to the mater, where ye ſaye, Wée mutche miſtooke the place of S.
Auguſtine, being deceiued by the Ignorante note in the Margine, where alſo ye ſo
pleaſantly ſporte your ſelfe with our Profounde knovvledge in the Doctoures,
the Woordes of S. Auguſtine,Auguſt. Hypognoſti. Lib. 5. 
                     that ye meane, be theſe, Primum Locum Fides Catholicorum,
Diuina Authoritate, Regnum credit eſſe Coelorum: vnde non Baptizatus
excipitur: Secundum, Gehennam: vbi omnis Apoſtata, & à Chriſti Fide alienus Aeterna
Supplicia experietur: Tertiū Penitùs ignoramus: imò nec eſſe in Scripturis Sāctis
inueniemus: The Firſt Place the Catholique Faithe, by Goddes Authoritie, beleeueth to be
the Kingdome of Heaune: From whence, who ſo euer is not Baptized, is excluded: The
Seconde Place, the ſame Catholique Faithe beleueth to be Hel: Where al Renegates, and
who ſo euer is without the Faithe of Chriſte, ſhal taſte Euerlaſting Pouniſhement. As for any
Thirde Place, vvee vtterly knovve none: neither ſhal vvee finde in the Holy

Scriptures, that there is any ſutche.S. Auguſtine denieth Purgatorie. 
                     If theſe woordes make not againſt your
Purgatorie, yet truely, in any appearance, they make but ſclenderly for your Purgatorie.
S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Any other Thirde place (after this life, biſides Heauen,
and Helle) vvee vtterly knovve none. Neither can vve finde in the Holy
Scriptures, that there is any ſutche.
                  But if al theſe three places, Heauen, Hel, and Purgatorie, had benne certainely
knowen, and Vniuerſally receiued in the Churche, & yet biſides theſe three
places, the Pelagian Heretiques would haue diuiſed, as you imagine, an other ſeueral
Place, to receiue the Soules of ſutche Children, as departed out of this life
without Baptiſme, then coulde not S. Auguſtine haue truely ſaide, Tertium locum
ignoramus: VVee knovve no Thirde place: But rather he ſhoulde haue
ſaide,Fourthe place. 
                     Quartum locum ignoramus, Fourthe place wee knowe none.
                      For, by your
iudgemente, the doubte had benne, not of the Thirde place, but of the Fourthe.
And it had benne a greate ouerſight for S. Auguſtine, in the reckeninge onely of
Foure places, to haue forgotten One: and ſpecially ſutche a One too, as hath benne
founde more gaineful of late yéeres, then the other Three: But his woordes be
plaine: Heauen vvee knovve: and Hel vvee knovve: But any Thirde place
biſides Heauen, and Hel, vvee knovve none.
                  
                  This woorde, Purgatorium, was noted in the Margine, not by the Printer, as
you ſaie, but by Eraſmus, a man of famouſe memorie: whoſe name for learninge, &
iudgemente, hath at al times emonge the Learned, benne mutche eſtéemed: with
whom your yonge Louanian Cleregie maie not wel compare, in the profounde
knowledge of ye Doctours, without great bluſſhinge. And thus mutche, touchinge
this one place of S. Auguſtine, wherein it hath pleaſed you ſo déepely to charge vs
with groſſe ignorance. But for better trial of his iudgemente herein, ye ſhould
haue conſidered, what he hath written otherwheres to like purpoſe.
                  
                     In his Epiſtle to Heſychius he ſaithe thus:
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 80. In quo quen
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      inuenerit ſuus nouiſſimus
dies, in hoc eum comprehendet mundi nouiſsimus dies. Quoniam qualis
in die iſto quiſque moritur, talis in die illo iudicabitur: In what ſtate his ovvne laſte
daie ſhal finde eche man, in the ſame ſtate the laſte daie of the vvorlde ſhal finde him. For
ſutche as euery man in this daie ſhal die, euē ſutche in that daie ſhal he be iudged. Againe,
                     
Qualem inuenit Dominus,Auguſt. in Apocalyp. Homil. 11. Auguſt. ad Petrum Diacon. Cap. 3. cùm hinc vocat, talem & iudicat: As our Lorde
findeth a man, vvhen he calleth him hence, euen ſo he iudgeth him. And againe,
Qui in hac vita Deo nō placuerit, habebit quidem Poenitentiam in Futuro Soeculo
de malis ſuis: ſed indulgentiam in conſpectu Dei non inueniet. Quia etſi erit ibi
ſtimulus poenitudinis, nulla tamen erit correctio voluntatis: Who ſo in this life ſhal
not pleaſe God, ſhal in the worlde to comme haue Repentance for his Sinnes: but Pardonne
in the ſighte of God he ſhal not finde. For although there ſhalbe there the pricke of
Repentance,
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 49. Olympiodorus in Eccleſiaſt. Ca. 9. 
                     yet there ſhalbe no amendemente of the wil. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Vnuſquiſque
cum cauſa ſua dormiet, & cum cauſa ſua reſurget: Euery man ſhal die with his owne
cauſe, and riſe againe vvith his ovvne cauſe. Olympiodorus ſaith, In quocun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
loco &c. deprehendetur homo, cùm moritur, in eo gradu, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ordine permanet in
Aeternum. In what place, or ſtate ſo euer a man ſhalbe founde, when he dieth, in the ſame
ſtate, and degree he ſhal remaine for euer.
                  
                     But to recken vp al, that might be ſaide in this behalfe, it woulde be longe.
A ſimple man, M Harding, without any profounde knovvledge of ye Doctoures,
maie eaſily, ſée, that theſe ſaieinges wil hardly ſtande with your Doctrine of Purgatorie.
Your owne Roffenſis ſaithe,
                     Polydor. De Inuentorib. Lib. 8. Cap. 1. Nemo nunc dubitat Orthodoxus, in Purgatorium
ſit: De quo tamen apud Priſcos, vel nulla, vel quàm rariſsima fiebat mentio.
Sed & Graecis ad hunc vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      diem non eſt Creditum: Quamdiu enim nulla eſſet
cura de Purgatorio, nemo quaeſiuit Indulgentias: No Catholique man now doubteth

of Purgatorie:
                     Ceremonies. 
                     Whereof notwithſtandinge emonge the Ancient Fathers there is either
no mētion at al, or very ſeldome. Yea euen vntil this daie the Grecians Beleue
it not. For ſo longe as there vvas no care for Purgatorie, noman ſought after
Pardonnes.
                      By whiche witneſſe it appeareth, that Pardonnes, and Purgatorie
were brought in iointely bothe togeather. And as the caſe nowe ſtandeth, and as
moſte menne thinke, the Pope could be contented to loſe bothe Heauen, and Helle,
to ſaue his Purgatorie.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 17. Diuiſion. 1.
               As touchinge the multitude of vaine, & ſuperfluous Ceremonies,
wee knowe, that S. Auguſtine did greuouſely complaine of them in
his owne time: & therefore haue we cutte of a great number of them:
bicauſe wee knowe, that mennes conſciences were encumbred aboute
them, and the Churches of God ouerladen with them. Neuertheleſſe
wee keepe ſtil, & eſteeme, not onely thoſe Ceremonies, whiche, wee are
ſure, were deliuered vs from the Apoſtles: but ſomme others too biſides,
whiche wee thought mighte be ſuffered without hurte to the
Churche of God: for that we had a deſire, that al thinges in the Holy
Congregation might, as S. Paule commaundeth, be donne with
comelineſſe, & in good order. But, as for al thoſe thinges, whiche, wee
ſawe, were, either very ſuperſtitious, or vtterly vnprofitable, or noiſome,
or mockeries, or contrarie to the Holy Scriptures, or els vnſeemely
for ſober, & diſcreete people, whereof there be infinite numbres
nowe a daies, where the Romaine Religion is vſed, theſe, I ſaie, wee
haue vtterly refuſed without al manner exception: bicauſe we would
not haue the right worſhippinge of God to be any lenger defiled withſutche
folies.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  S. Auguſtine, whom ye alleage wrongfully againſt the Ceremonies of the Catholique Churche. ſpeaketh
onely of the cuttinge awaie of ſuche manners, and rites, as be crepte into ſome one particulare
Countrie, neither conteined in Holy Scriptures, nor eſtabliſhed by Councels of Biſhops, nor confirmed by
Cuſtome of the whole Churche. But howe proue you by that place, that you maie pul downe Aultars,
and Images: diſallowe the Vowe of Pouertie, Lente, Oile? &c. S. Auguſtine referreth the taking awaie
of any Cuſtome, or manner vnto dewe Authoritie, exhortinge it to be donne. Vbi faculras tribuitur:
VVhere Power is geuen to doo it. Neither els may it be donne lawfully at al, &c. Ye thinke, wee haue
many ridiculous, and fonde thinges, in our Ceremonies. If we had,Vntruthe. For S. Auguſtine, ſpeakinge of his time, ſaithe, Tam multis Praeſumptionibus ita plena ſunt omnia, &c.
                      as in deede wee haue not, would
ye laugh at them, as Cham did at the nakedneſſe of his Father Noe? &c. Laugh on ye curſed Chananees:
but wee wil daunce before the Arke: we willThen be yee circumciſed, as Paule vvas. For this vvas onely a Ievviſhe Ceremonie. ſhire our heade with Paule, &c.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  This mater had benne ouer colde, had not M. Hardinge a litle enflamed his
Choler in the ende, & cried out vpon his Curſed Chananees. His Aultars, his Images,
his Vowes, his Lentes, & his Otles be anſweared ſufficiently otherwheres.
                  
                     S. Auguſtines woordes,
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 119 
                     concerninge this mater, are pregnante and plaine: H
                        •
                     cnimis
doleo, quia multa, quae in Diuinis Libris ſaluberrimè praecepta ſunt, minùs curantur:
& tam multis Praeſumptionibus ſic plena ſunt omnia, &c. This thinge greeueth
me, that ſo many thinges, whole ſomely commaunded in the Holy Scriptures, are not regarded:
and of thinges are ful of ſo many preſumptions,Auguſt. in ead. Epiſtol. 
                     &c. And againe,
                      Quamuis iſta
contra Fidem non ſint, tamen ipſam Religionem, quam Pauciſsimis, & Manifeſtiſsimis
Celebrationum Sacramentis Miſericordia Dei liberam eſſe voluit, ſeruilibus oneribus

ita premunt, vt tolerabilior ſit conditio Iudaeorum: qui etſi tempus libertatis
non agnouerint, Legalibus tamen ſarcinis, non humanis Praeſumptionibus
ſubijciuntur: Al be it theſe thinges be not againſt the Faithe, yet with ſeruile burthens
they ſo oppreſſe our very Religion, whiche God of his Mercie woulde haue to bee
free, vnder very fevve, and moſte manifeſte Sacramentes of Diuine Seruice, that the
ſtate of the Ievves is mutche more tolerable (then the ſtate of the Churche of
Chriſte). For the Jewes, notwithſtandinge they knewe not the time of Libertie, yet were
they ſubiecte to the packes, and burthens of the
                      Lawe (of God): and not vnto the Diuiſes,
and Preſumptions of Menne.
                  
                  
                     Of ſutche Diuiſes,Chryſoſt in Matthae. Homil. 52. 
                     and Preſumptions, Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Non dicunt, Cur
Legem Moſi, ſed Cur Traditionem Seniorum tranſgrediuntur? Vnde patet, eos
multa innouaſſe, cùm Deus contrà vetuiſſet, ne quid adderent, aut minuerent. Sed illi,
cùm timerent, ne Principatum amitterent, ceu legum Latores, vt Maiores eſſe viderentur,
plurima innouarunt. Quae res ad tantam peruenir nequitiam, vt praecepta ſua
cuſtodirent magis, quàm Praecepta Dei: The Phariſeis ſaie not vnto Chriſte, Wherefore
doo thy Diſciples breake the Lawe of Moſes, but, Wherefore doo they breake the
Traditions of the Elders? Whereby it appeareth, that they had altered many thinges:
whereas God had commaunded, that they ſhoulde neither adde, nor diminiſhe. But fearinge,
leſte they ſhoulde loſe their Authoritie, as if they had benne Lawe Makers, to thende they
mighte ſeeme the greatter, they altered mutche. VVhiche thinge (in the ende) grewe to
ſutche a wickedneſſe, that they keapte their ovvne Commaundementes, more then
the Commaundementes of God.
                  
                     In like manner ſaithe S. Cyril,Cyrill. in Iohan. Lib. 8. Cap. 1. Vellent ſuam Doctrinam, & Paternas Traditiones
ab hominibus potiùs ſuſcipi, atque in admiratione, honore
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      haberi. Quicquid
igitur Chriſto credentium acceſſerit, ſibi detractum putant: The Phariſeis woulde, that
menne ſhould receiue, and magnifie their Doctrine, and the Traditions of the Fathers:
Therefore howe many ſo euer Faitheful came vnto Chriſte, they thought ſo many were loſte
from them.
                  
                  
                     It is not true, yt ye ſaie, Traditions maie not be changed, or aboliſhed without
the general Conſente of the whole Churche. For Ceremonies, as thei neuer grew
togeather at one time in al places, ſo can they not lightly be aboliſhed togeather
at one time in al places.
                     Socrates, Lib. 5. Cap. 22. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Socrates, eod. loco. Socrates ſaithe plainely, Videtur mihi, Multa modò in
his regionibus, modò in illis Conſuetudinem obtinuiſſe: It ſeemeth vnto me, that
many thinges haue benne receiued by Cuſtome, novve in one Countrie, and novve in
an other. Againe he ſaithe, In vniuerſum certèe, & in omnibus Obſeruationibus piarum
precum, non poſſunt duae Eccleſiae inueniri, quae prorſus inter ſe conſentiant:
Verily to ſpeake Vniuerſally, in al maner of Obſeruations, or Fourmes of Common Praier,
there cannot tvvo Churches be founde, that agree thorovvly bitvvene them
ſelues. S. Auguſtine ſaithe plainely, Omnia talia, &c, vbi facultas tribuitur, ſine
omni dubitatione reſecanda exiſtimo: Al ſutche thinges, in my iudgemente, ought
to be cut of,
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 19. Diſt. 63. Quia Sancta. 
                     as ſoone as iuſte occaſion, or Power is geeuen, vvithout any manner of
doubtinge. So ſaithe Pope Steuin, Si nonnulli ex Praedeceſſoribus, & Maioribus
noſtris fecerunt aliqua, quae illo tempore potuerunt eſſe fine culpa, & poſteà vertuntur
in errorem, & Superſtitionem, ſine tarditate aliqua, & cum magna Authoritate
à poſteris deſtruantur: If ſundrie of our Predeceſſours, or Elders haue donne certaine thinges,
whiche at that time might wel be donne without hurte, and afterwarde are turned into errour,
and ſuperſtition, vvithout any ſtaggeringe, and vvith greate Authoritie let them be
deſtroied, and aboliſhed by the Succeſſours.
                  
                  We laugh not, as, ye ſaie, at the nakedneſſe of our Father, M. Hardinge. Our
Father is in Heauen, the Father of Light, the God of Glorie: and in him there is
no nakedneſſe. Wée laugh not at any of theſe thinges, but wee ſaie with S. Auguſtine,
                     
as it is alleged before, Hoc nimis doleo, &c. This thinge very mutche greeueth
me,
                     
                     Auguſt Epiſt. 119 
                     that ſo many thinges wholeſomely commaunded in the Holy Scriptures, are not regarded:
and that al thinges are ful of ſo many preſumptions: And that, as S. Chryſoſtome
ſaithe,Chryſoſt in Matthae. Homil. 52. Hieremi. 23. 
                     Theſe thinges are called vpon, and more regarded, then the Lawes, and Commaundementes
of our Father.
                      Our Father ſaithe of you, and of your Felowes:
Volunt facere, vt obliuiſcatur Populus meus Nominis mei propter ſomnia ſua: They
wil cauſe, that my people ſhal foregeate my name, for loue of their Dreames. Our Father
ſaithe,Hieremi. 2. 
                     Two-euils haue my people donne: They haue foreſaken me the Fountaine of the
Water of Life: and they haue ripte vp to them ſelues broken Ceſternes, yt can holde no Water.
Our Father
                      ſaithe,Hieremi. 23. Eſai. 1. Matthae. 15. 
                     What is chaffe vnto the Corne? Who hath required theſe thinges
at your Handes? To be ſhorte, hereof Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe thus, Euery plante, that
my Heauenly Father hath not planted, ſhal be pluckte vp by the Rootes.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 18. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wee make our Praiers in that tongue whiche al our people, as
meete is, maie vnderſtande, to thende they maie (as S. Paule counſelleth
vs) take common commoditie by Common Praier: euen as al
the Holy Fathers, and Catholique Biſhoppes, bothe in the Olde, and
Newe Teſtamente did vſe to Praie them ſelues, & taught the people
to Praie too: leſte, as S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Like Parottes, and Ouſelles
vvee ſhoulde ſeeme to ſpeake, that vvee vnderſtande not.
Neither haue we any other Mediatour, and Interceſſour, by whom
wee maie haue acceſſe to God the Father, but onely Ieſus Chriſte, in
whoſe onely name al thinges are obteined at his Fathers hande.
But it is a ſhameful parte, and ful of Infidelitie, that wee ſee euery
where vſed in the Churches of our aduerſaries, not onely in that thei
wil haue innumerable ſortes of Mediatoures, & that vtterly without
the Authoritie of Goddes Woorde: (So that, as Ieremie ſaithe, the
Sainctes be nowe as many in numbre,Ierem. Cap. 2. & 11. or rather aboue the numbre
of the Cities: and poore menne cannot tel, to whiche Saincte it were
beſte to turne them firſte: And though there be ſo many, as they cannot
be tolde, yet euery one of them hath his peculiare duetie, & office
aſſigned vnto him by theſe folkes: what thinge they ought to aſke,
what to geeue, and what to bringe to paſſe) But biſides this alſo, in
that their doo not onely wickedly, but alſo ſhamefully calle vpon the
Bleſſed Virgine Chriſtes Mother, to haue her remember, that ſhe
is a Mother, and to commaunde her Sonne, and to vſe a Mothers
authoritie ouer him.There is but one Mediatour of Saluation, vvho is Chriſte onely: But the Sainctes his frendes be Mediatours of Interceſſion. 2. Corin. 1.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVee haue but onely one Mediatour to Saluation Ieſus Chriſte, by whoſe merites God is reconciled
vnto vs. But where ye ſaie, that beſides the ſame one Mediatour▪ ye haue none other, thatThis is M. Hardings legierdumaine. For vvee ſpeake onely of ſutche Mediatours, as vvee ought to praie vnto. may Prai or
make Interceſsion for you, that pointe of falſe beleefe ye may keepe for your ſelues. VVe had rather
holde withAs if S. Paule had euer vvilled vs to Praie to Sainctes. S. Paule, who as he praied for al Chriſten menne, ſo he doubted not to ſaie to the
Corinthians, that he hoped to eſcape danger, A diuuantibus vobis in Oratione pro nobis, by the
helpe of you in Praier for vs. If one good man maye helpe an other in this life by Praier, whiles he
hath yet ſome what of his owne to be careful for: muche more the Sainctes, whiche are diſſolued, and
raigne with Chriſte, can healpe vs with their perfite Praier. Ye can tell (I trowe) that S. Hierome

made this argumente within litle of twelue hundred yeeres paſte.Mediatour of Saluation. Neither make we them Gods,
as ye woulde ſeeme to ſaie by the place (whiche beinge ſpoken by the Prophete Hieremie of very
Idolles) ye applie to the frendes of Chriſte.Pſalm. 138. VVhome Dauid ſaithe to be vnto him moſte honorable,
and their dominion to be moſte ſtronge. There is no cauſe why yee ſhoulde wonder, if diuerſe Cities
doo gladly acknowledge ſome one Holy Angel,Sainctes be peculiar patrones of certaine places. Sapien. 3. Apoſtle, Martyr, or Confeſſour, as their chiefe Patrone
and Frende. For if (as it is written) Michael the Archangell was once Prince of the Iewes: and
ſtoode alwaies for the children of Gods people: it is not to be doubted but that Chriſten people haue
nowe alſo theirVntruthe, procedinge of vaine dotage. Patrones. To this purpoſeA graue Authoritie, taken oute of the very Portuiſe. ſome apply that whiche is written, Fulgebunt iuſti,
& tanquam ſcintillae in arundineto diſcurrent, iudicabunt nationes, & dominabuntur populis,
& regnabit dominus illorum in perpetuum: The iuſte men ſhal ſhine, and like ſparkes
of fire in drie kickes ſhal runne abroade: they ſhal iudge nations, and beare rule ouer peoples, and
our Lorde ſhal reigne ouer them for euer. S. Ambroſe is of that opinion plainely, where he ſaithe,
writinge vpon S. Luke,In fine Lib. S. commēt. in Lucam. 
                     Sicut Angeli praeſunt, ita & ij qui vitam meruerint Angelorum. As
the Angels be ouer Nations, ſo they alſo whiche deſerue the Life of Angels.
                  Concerninge the offices that, ye ſaie, wee appointe vnto the Sainctes, ye muſte vnderſtande,
that as God hath ſhewed by any Miracle, what good woorke he hath wrought by this Saincte, rather
then by that: ſo the people deſire to obteigne of God by the ſame Sainctes Praier that thinge,
wherein they maieThis is the certainetie of M. Hardinges Praier. It hangeth of a blinde coniecture. coniecture, that God hath geuen him moſte grace. And becauſe our Lady the
bleſſed Virgine Mary hath more grace geuen to her,Interceſsion of the bleſſed Virgin Mary. then any other Creature (excepte ye can
nameIt is a greatter Grace to be the Childe of God. a greater grace then to be the Mother of God): therefore all Chriſten Nations are moſte
bolde to deſire in Praier to be reliued by her Interceſsion, and Mediation of her Praier made to her
Sonne Ieſus Chriſte, who (we doubte not) heareth her moſte, gladly, as noleſſe intendinge to doo
good by her continually to vs, then we are ſure, that by her he hath done for vs thoſe greate benefites,
whiche continually we doo receiue, for ſo muche as he tooke Fleaſhe of her. And ſeinge that
Chriſte is the firſte begotten amonge many Brothers,Roman. 8. Marie Mother to al that loue Chriſte. Iohan. 19. Spiritual familiaritie vvith the mother of God, in exceſſe of minde and ſoueraine Deuotion. wee that are called into one Heretage with him
and by him, maie take harte to accompt Chriſtes Mother, for our Mother, ſpecially whereas he ſaide
vnto Iohn his Diſciple, and in him to all the Children of Grace, beholde thy Mother.
                  If nowe any ſpirituall man ſuche as S. Bernarde was, deepely conſideringe the greate honour
and dignitie of Chriſtes Mother, doo in exceſſe of mindeOpen Blaſphemie, is Spiritual dalliance: O vvheu vvil M. Hardinge confeſſe a faulte? ſpiritually ſporte and dally (as it were)
with her, biddinge her to remember, that ſhe is a Mother, and that thereby ſhe hath a certaine
right to commaunde her Sonne, and require in a moſte ſweete manner, that ſhee vſe her righte: is
this either impiouſly, or impudently ſpoken? Is not he rather moſte impious and impudent, that findeth
faulte there with? If euer any of you had practiſed in contemplation any of that ſwetenes,
whiche is in Canticis Canticorum, ye ſhoulde haue founde, that there the ſpiritual Soule is bolder
with God her Creator and, ſpouſe, then S. Bernarde euer was with our Lady, beinge but a Creature,
and a member of the ſame Churche with him.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Ye ſaie, There is one onely Mediatoure of Saluation: but there are many
Mediatoures of Interceſsion. And thus with this prety ſimple diſtinction,
ye conueigh your ſelfe awaie inuiſible in a clowde. But to cutte of quarrels, M.
Hardinge, Let vs haue that one onely Mediatoure of Saluation: and then afterwarde
take to you your other Mediatoures of Interceſsion at your pleaſure.
                  
                     Howe be it, if Chriſte onely be the Mediatoure of Saluation, wherefore then
doo you thus cal vpon the Bleſsed Virgine Chriſtes Mother, Salua omnes, qui
te glorificant? Saue thou al them, that glorifie thee. Here ye intrude vpon Chriſtes
office: and make the
                      Holy Virgine a Mediatoure, not onely of Interceſsion, but
alſo of Saluation. Wherefore ſaie ye thus of Thomas Becket, of whoſe Saincthoode,
for ought that I knowe, ye maie wel ſtande in doubte: Tu per Thomae Sanguinem,
quem pro te impendit, Fac nos Chriſte ſcandere, qu
                        •
                      Thomas Aſcendit:
O Chriſte, make vs to Aſcende vnto Heauen, whither Thomas is Aſcended, euen by

the Bloude of Thomas,Mediatour of Interceſsiō. 
                     that he ſheadde for thy ſake. Here you ſeeke, not onely
                     
Interceſſion, but alſo Saluation in the Bloude of Thomas. Wherefore doothe S.
Ambroſe ſaie,
                     Ambroſi in Sermone 6. De S. Margareta. 
                     if it were S. Ambroſe, that wrote the Booke, Reddere debemus
Sanctis honorificentiam, qui nobis Salutem profuſione ſui Sanguinis pepererunt:
qui tam Sacra Hoſtia pro noſtra propitiatione Domino ſunt oblati: Wee muſte
yelde honoure vnto the Sainctes, vvhiche haue procured Saluation for vs, by the
ſheaddinge of their Bloude: Whiche alſo were offered vp vnto the Lorde ſo Holy a
Sacrifice for our Saluation. If wée haue Saluation in the Bloude of Sainctes,
then is not Chriſte the Onely Mediatoure of our Saluation.
                  He is no indifferente Vmpeere, that firſte diuideth Offices equally bitwéene
twoo, and afterwarde alloteth bothe offices to One alone.
                  Notwithſtandinge, the ende, and office as wel of Interceſsion, as alſo of Saluation,
is, to Reconcile vs vnto God, & to procure vs Mercie. But this is Chriſtes
onely office: He reconcileth vs vnto God: He preſenteth vs vnto the Throne of
Grace.Rom. 8. 1. Timoth. 2. And therefore, as S. Paule ſaithe, he euermore maketh Interceſsion, for vs.
And for that cauſe alſo he ſaithe, Vnus eſt Mediator Dei & Hominum, Homo
Chriſtus Ieſus: There is One Mediatoure bitweene God, and Man, Chriſte Ieſus beinge
Man.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Paule requireth the people to make Interceſsion, and to praie for him.
This is true. And God hath commaunded, that al the Faitheful ſhould praie one
for an other. But S. Paule neuer required the people to praie to Sainctes.
S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. Contra Epiſt. Parmeniant, Lib. 2. Cap. 8. Auguſtin. in eod. Lib. Paulus non facit ſe Mediatorem inter Populum, & Deum:
Sed rogat, vt pro ſe orent inuicem omnia Membra Coporis Chriſti: Paule maketh
not him ſelfe a Mediatoure bitweene God and the people: but requireth, that they Praie
al one for an other, beinge al the Members of the Body of Chriſte. Againe he ſaithe of
S.
                      Iohn, Si Iohannes ita diceret, Hoc Scripſi vobis, vt non peccetis: et ſi quis peccauerit,
Mediatorem me habetis apud Deum, & ego Exoro pro peccatis veſtris, Sicut
Parmenianus quodam loco Mediatorem poſuit Epiſcopum inter Populum, & Deū,
quis eum ferret bonorum, atque Fidelium Chriſtianorum? Quis ſicut Apoſtolum
Chriſti, & non ſicut Antichriſtum intueretur? If S. Iohn woulde ſaie, This haue I
written vnto you, that ye Sinne not: and if ye Sinne, ye haue me your Mediatoure before
God, and I vvil intreate for your Sinnes, As Parmenian (the Heretique) in a
certaine place made the Biſhop a
                      Mediatoure bitweene God, and the People, what good,
and Faitheful Chriſtian Man coulde abide him? Who woulde looke vpon him, is the
Apoſtle of Chriſte: and not rather thinke him to be Antichriſte? Here, M. Hardinge,
your ſely diſtinction of Interceſsion, and Saluation, cannot ſaue you.
For Parmenian neuer thought, the Biſhop was a Mediatoure of Saluation.
And yet S. Auguſtine ſaithe, If S. Iohn woulde haue ſaide ſo mutche of
him ſelfe, he had not benne the Apoſtle of Chriſte: but rather ſhoulde haue benne
iudged, and taken for Antichriſte.
                  
                     Ye thinke, the woordes of the Prophete Hieremie ſpoken of Idolles, and Falſe
Goddes, maie not iuſtely be applied to the Sainctes of God. In déede of the Sainctes
parte, it were greate blaſphemie, to calle them Idolles. For they ſée God face
to face, and euermore be with God in Glorie. But in reſpecte of your horrible Abuſes,
and vaine fantaſies, the Woordes of the Prophete be rightly applied. For
you, in your imagination, of the Sainctes of God haue made Idolles: and haue ſo
multiplied, and encreaſed the ſame, that the number of them hath far paſſed the
number of al your Townes, and Citties. And therefore the Anciente Father
Epiphanius applieth the like woordes of the ſame Prophete Hieremie, vnto the
Bleſſed Virgin Marie, beinge then idolatrouſely abuſed by the Heretiques called
                     
Collyridiani,Diſtincte Offices. 
                     euen as the ſame Bleſſed Virgin, & other Sainctes are by you abuſed
nowe. Thus he writteth,
                     Epiphani. Li. 3. Hareſ. 59. Ne quis comedat de errore, qui eſt propter S. Mariam.
Tametſi enim pulchrum ſit lignum, tamen non eſt ad Cibū. Etſi Pulcherrima eſt Maria,
& Sancta, & Honorata: at non ad Adorationē. Hae ver
                        •
                      Mulieres, colentes Mariam,
rurſus renouant Fortunae Mixturam,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . & praeparant Menſam Diabolo, non Deo:
Quemadmodum ſcriptum eſt, Paſcuntur Cibo impietatis. Et rurſus, & Foeminae terunt
Pollinem, & Filij colligunt ligna, vt faciant Placentas oleo ſubactas Reginae Coeli.
Compeſcantur à Hieremia tales Mulieres: & ne turbent Orbem terrarum. Ne dicant,
Honoramus Reginam Coeli: Let noman Fate of this Erroure, touchinge S. Marie. For
though the tree be faire, yet is not this Fruite to be Eaten. Although Marie be bew
                           •
                        ieful,
and Holy, and Honourable, yet is ſhe not to be Adoured. But theſe Women,
vvorſhippinge S. Marie, renewe againe the Sacrifice of Wine mingled in the Honure
of the Goddeſſe Fortuna, and prepare a Table for the Diuel, and not for God.
As it is written in the Scriptures. They are fedde vvith the Meate of VVickedneſſe.
And againe, Theire Women boulte flower: and theire Children geather ſtickes, to make fine
Cakes in the Honoure of the Queene of Heauen. Therefore let ſutche Women be rebuked
by the Prophete Hieremie: and let them nomore trouble the worlde. And let them not
ſaie, vve VVorſhip the Queene of Heauen.
                  Here wée ſee, the woordes, that were ſpoken of the Heatheniſhe Idolles, are
applied by Epiphanius vnto the Mother of Chriſte: not to deface that Bleſſed
Virgin, but to declare the fonde errours of thoſe Heretiques.
                  As for the diſtribution of offices, and ſeueral dewties, limited, and appointed
to eche Saincte in his degree, it ſhable beſte for modeſties ſake to ſaie nothinge.
S. Auguſtine ſpeaking of the Heathens, from whom this parte of your Diuinitie,
M. Hardinge, was firſt deriued, ſaithe thus, Dicebat, ita eſſe vtilem cognitionem
Deorum,
                     Auguſti. De Ciuita. Li. 4. Ca. 22 
                     ſi ſciatur, quam quiſque Deus vim, aut poteſtatem habeat cuiuſque rei. Ex eo
enim poterimus, inquit, ſcire, quem cuiuſque rei cauſa Deum aduocare, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         inuocare debeamus:
ne faciamus, vt Mimi ſolent, & optemus à Libero Aquam, à Lymphis Vinum:
Varro ſaide, The knowledge of the Goddes is Profitable, if a man vnderſtand, what
Power, and Authoritie eche God hathe in euery thinge. For ſo, ſaithe be, wee maie knowe,
whom to cal vpon, and whom to praie vnto: Leſte happily wee doo, as certaine Mimi are
woont to doo: that is to ſaie, Leſte of Bacchus, the God of Wine, vve begge VVater,
or of Lymphae, the Goddeſſes of Water, vve begge VVine.
                  
                  Theſe thinges hauinge theire beginninge emonge the Heathens, haue ſithence
benne brought euen into the Churche of God: and al the Sainctes in Heauen
haue benne appointed, eche one in Order to his Seueral Office: Leſte any one
ſhould intrude into an others roume. Antoninus ſaith. in his time. where S Paule
and Freere Dominike were painted togeather, the manner was, vnder y• Image
of S. Paule to write theſe woordes, Per hunc itur ad Chriſtum: VVee maie come
to Chriſt, by this Saincte:
                      But vnder y• Image of Freere Dominike, they wrote thus,
Sed magis per iſtum: Yet mutche rather by this Saincte: Whereby was meante,
that Freere Dominikes Office, and Authoritie before God, was ſommewhat better,
then S. Paules.
                  
                  
                     Whereas ye teache the people thus to praie vnto the Bleſſed Virgin, Monſtra
te eſſe Matrem: Commaunde thy Sonne: Vſe thy Motherly Authoritie ouer
him: Let him knovve thee to be his Mother, this you ſaie, is no blaſphemie, but
a Spiritual dallicinge. Nowe verily, M. Hardinge, this muſte needes be a bleſſed
kinde of Diuinitie, that can turne Praier into Dalliance.
                  One of your Beaupeeres of Louaine, as a man carrieing his face in his hand,
ſaith boldely,Copus Dialog. 3. Pag. 340. 
                     theſe wordes were neuer vſed in your Churche. And therefore he ſaith with
good courrage, Interim à bonis iſtis viris quaero, Cur non nominant illas Eccleſias, quae

Virginem Matrem tam impudenter appellant?
                     Mother of God. Childe of God. 
                     Cur eas, inquam, non nominant?
In the meane ſeaſon,
                      ſaithe he, this queſtion I demaunde of theſe honeſte menne: Why name
they not thoſe Churches, vvhiche ſo impudently cal vpon that Virgin Chriſtes
Mother? I ſaie, VVhy doo they not name them? Your modeſtie herein, M. Hardinge,
is more praiſewoorthy. You are contented to graunde the facte: and pleaſantly to
excuſe it by a Spiritual Dallieinge.
                  
                  But ye maie tel your ſaide Felowe, that this kinde of Praier was Vniuerſally
vſed throughout al your whole Churche of Rome: that Menne, Women, and
Children, Learned, and Vnlearned were taught, and forced thus to praie: Thou
arte the Queene of Heauen: Thou arte the Lady of Angels: Commaunde thy
Sonne: Shevve thee ſelfe to be the Mother. Ye maie tel him, y• Cardinal Bembus,
ſometime the Popes Secretarie,Bembus in Epiſt. ad Carolum. 5. Concil. Trident. Seſſion. 2. calleth y• ſame Bleſſed Virgine, Dominam,
& Deam noſtram: Our Lady, and Goddeſse. Tel him, that Ambroſius Catharinus
in your Late Chapter at Tridente, repreſenting, as you ſaie, your whole
Catholique Church, calleth y• ſame Bleſſed Virgine Goddes Felovve, by theſe
woordes, Fideliſsima eius Socia: Goddes moſte Faitheful Felovve.
                  
                  Ye maie further tel him,Concil. Oxonienſ. that in your Councel of Oxforde, Chriſtes name
is quite forgotten, and leafte out: and Our Ladies name put in place: For thus it
beginneth, Authoritate Dei Patris, & Beatae Virginis, & omnium Sanctorum,
&c. By the Authoritie of God the Father, and of the Bleſſed Virgine, and of al
Sainctes. Notwithſtandinge ye maie wel anſweare, as before, that al this was
no manner blaſphemie againſt God, but onely a Prety Spiritual Dalliance: euen
ſutche Dalliance,
                     1. Corin. 10. I trowe, as S. Paule meaneth by theſe woordes, Sedit Populus
ad manducandum, & bibendum: & ſurrexerunt ad Ludendum: The People ſate downe
to eate, and drinke: and roſe vp againe to Plaie, or Dallie, that is to ſaie, to committe
Idolatrie.
                  
                  
                     You ſaie, Our Lady, the Bleſſed Virgine hathe more grace geuen her, then
any other Creature, excepte ye can name a greatter Grace, ſaie you, then to be the
                      Mother
of God. Verily, M. Hardinge, to be the Childe of God, it is a greate deale
greatter Grace,
                     Auguſtin. De Sancta Virginitate, Cap. 3 
                     then to be the Mother of God. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Beatior
ergo Maria fuit, Percipiendo Fidem Chriſti, quàm concipiendo Carnem Chriſti.
Materna Propinquitas nihil Mariae profuſſet, niſi foelicius Chriſtum Corde,
quàm Carne geſtaſſet: Marie was more Bleſſed (or ſuller of Grace) in that ſhe Receiued
the Faithe of Chriſte, then in that ſhe Conceiued the Fleaſhe of Chriſte. Motherly
kinreade coulde haue doone Marie no good, onleſſe ſhe had borne
Chriſte more Bleſſedly in her Harte,Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 10. then ſhe bare him in her Fleaſhe. And againe
he ſaithe, Mater mea, quam appellaſtis Foelicem, inde Foelix eſt, quia Verbum Dei
cuſtodtuit: Non quia in illa Verbum Caro factum eſt: My Mother, whom ye haue
called Bleſſed, therefore is Bleſſed, bicauſe ſhe hathe keapte the VVoorde of God: Not bicauſe
the VVoorde in her vvas made Fleaſhe.
                  
                     Therefore ſaithe Epiphanius,Epiphani. Li. 3. Hareſ. 59. Contra Collyridian. Chriſtus dixit, Quid mihi, & tibi eſt Mulier?
Non dum venit hora mea. Qu
                        •
                      non putarent aliqui, magis eximiam eſſe Sanctam
Virginem, Mulierem eam appellauit: veluti prophetans, quae eſſent futura in terra
Sectarum & Haereſe
                        •
                     n genera: vt ne aliqui nimiùm admirati Sanctam, in hanc
Haereſim, eiuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      deliramenta dilabantur. Eſt enim Ludibrium tota res, & anicularum
fabula, &, vt ita dicam, tota Haereſis tractatio: Chriſte ſaide vnto his Mother,
VVoman, what haue I to doo with thee? My houre is not yet comme. Left any man ſhould
thinke, Our Lady vvas of greatter excellencie. he called her VVoman: as it were
propheſieing of the Kindes, and Sectes of Hereſies. that were to comme in the world: Leſt
any man hauinge too great opinion of that Holy Saincte, ſhould fal into this
Hereſie, and into the dotage of the ſame. For in dede the whole materis but a mockerie,

                     and an Olde VViues tale, and ſoothely to ſaie, nothinge els, but the handelinge
of an Hereſie.Origen. in Lucam, Homil 25. Origen hereof ſaithe, Si menſuram tranſcenderit Charitatis,
& qui diligit, & qui diligitur, in Peccato eſt: If Loue paſſe the meaſure of charitie,
as wel he, that Loueth, as alſo he, that is Loued, is in Sinne.
                  
                  
                     But touchinge the mater it ſelfe,
                     Ambroſ. ad Roma. Cap. 1. 
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Ide
                        •
                      ad Reges itur per
Tribunos, & Comites: quia Homo vtique eſt Rex: & neſcit, quibus debeat Rempublicam
credere. Ad Deum autem, quem nihil later, Omnium enim Merita nouit, Promerendum,
ſuffragatore non eſt Opus, ſed mente deuota. Vbicunque enim talis
loquutus fuerit ei, reſpondebit illi: Therefore wee are brought vnto the preſence of
Kinges by Lordes, and Officers: Bicauſe the Kinge is a Man, and knoweth not, to whom
he maie committe his Realme. But to obtaine Goddes fauoure, from whom nothinge
is ſecrete, as knowinge, what euery man is meete to haue, vve neede no ſpokeſman,
but a deuoute minde. For, where ſo euer ſutche a one ſpeaketh vnto God, God wil
anſweare him.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 19. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wee ſaie alſo, that euery perſon is borne in Sinne, and leadeth
his life in Sinne: that no body is able truely to ſaie, his harte is
cleane. That the moſte righteous perſon is but an vnprofitable
ſeruaunte: That the Lawe of God is perfite, and requireth of vs
perfite, and ful obedience: That wee are able by no meanes to fulfil
that Lawe in this worldly life: That there is no one mortal Creature,
whiche can be iuſtified by his owne deſertes in Gods ſight: And
therefore that our onely ſuccour, and refuge is to flie to the Mercie
of Our Father by Ieſu Chriſte, & aſſuredly to perſwade our mindes,
that he is the obteiner of forgeueneſſe for our ſinnes: And that by
his Bloude al our ſpottes of Sinne be vvaſſhed cleane: That he
hath pacified and ſet at one al thinges by the Bloude of his Croſſe:
That he by the ſame One onely Sacrifice, whiche he once offered
vpon the Croſſe, hathe brought to effecte, and fulfilled al thinges,
&, that for y• cauſe he ſaid, when he gaue vp ye Ghoſte, It is finiſhed,
as though he woulde ſignifie, that the price, and ranſomme was
nowe ful paide for the Sinne of al Mankinde. If there be any, that
thinke this Sacrifice not ſufficient, let them goe in Goddes name, &
ſeeke a better. Wee verily, bicauſe wee knowe this to
be the Onely Sacrifice, are wel contente with it alone, and looke
for none other: and, foraſmutche as it was to be offered but Once,
we commaunde it not to be renewed againe: and, bicauſe it was ful &
perfite in al pointes, and partes, we doo not ordeine in place thereof
any continual ſucceſſion of offeringes.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye make a Sophiſtical argumente, when ye teache, becauſe the Lawe of God requireth of vs
ful obedience, that therefore it cannot be ſatisfied in this life by any meanes. For when ye ſaie, it requireth
of vs ful obedience, if ye meaneA vaine folie. For Gods Lavve vvas vvritten for Men in Earth, not for Angels in Heauen. ſuche ful obedience, as is required onely in this life,
then conclude ye falſely, that wee can by no meanes ſatisfie it. But if ye meane ſuche ful obedience,
‡ as is onely perfourmed in Heauen, then ye conclude wel, that wee in this life cannot fulfil ſuche

perfection, as is required in Heauen. But then haue ye ſaide nothinge to the purpoſe. For wee
knowe,God commaundeth not that vvhiche is impoſsible to a man in grace. what marke ye ſhoote at, by your Doctrine vttered in other places. Your meaninge is
A horrible hereſie. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Deus iubet aliquae, quae non poſſumus facere.
                      that no man in this Life is able by the Grace of God to fulfil the Commaundementes. VVee beleeue,
God commaundeth vs nothinge impoſſible to vs.A fonde queſtion For God puniſheth Infantes for theire Original Sinne: yet are theie by no meanes hable to avoide it. Otherwiſe howe coulde he iuſtly puniſhe for not
doinge that commaundemente, whiche by no meanes wee were able to fulfil? VVee are ſure that God
puniſheth noman vniuſtly: for, Non eſt apud dominum Deum noſtrum iniquitas: There is no
iniquitie in Our Lorde God.
                  Moiſes ſpeakinge of the fulfillinge of the Commaundementes of God,Deut. 30. Rom. 10. whiche alſo S. Paule repeteth,
ſaithe that they are not aboue vs in Heauen, neither farre from vs beyonde the Sea: but
harde by thee (ſaithe he) is his woorde in thy mouthe and in thy harte, that thou maiſte doo it. And
Chriſte ſaithe,Matthae. n. 1. Iohn. 5. 
                     Iugum meum ſuaue eſt, & onus meum leue:
                     The cauſe hereof is Gods Mercie S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Omniae mandata facta deputantur, quando quicquid non factum eſt, ignoſcitur.
                      My Yoke is ſweete, and my burden
light: and S. Iohn, His Commaundementes be not heauie. He then, that ſaithe, we can by no
meanes fulfil the Lawe of God, makethVntruthe. For vve make not god Vniuſte: but vve Confeſſe our ſelues to be finners. God vniuſt, and euil, or impotent, and not able to geue
ſo mutche grace, as maie helpe to fulfil his Lawe. Let the diſcrete reader iudge, what blaſphemie
your woordes conteine. Belye vs nomore hereafter. This is our Doctrine. better founded in the worde
of God, and in the Tradition of the Apoſtles, and in the cuſtome of the whole Churche, then that
ye ſhal euer be able to ouerthrowe it. Blaſpheme, and barke againſte it ye maie: ouercome it ye cannot.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Al other thinges here by you touched, M. Hardinge, I wil paſſe ouer: thinkinge
it ſufficient, to note a fewe woordes of the poſſibilitie, and perfourmance
of the Lawe: and ſo mutche the more, for that ye ſeeme therein in ſomme parte, to
renewe the Pelagian Heretiques Olde condemned erroure.
                  As touchinge that ful and perfite Obedience, that is required of vs by the
Lawe, ye anſweare, there are ſundrie ſortes of Perfection: namely, that there
is Perfection in Children: Perfection in Menne: Perfection in Angels: and
Perfection, in God. And further ye ſaie, that in this life wee cannot fulfil ſutche
Perfection, as is required of the Angels of God in Heauen. And this anſweare
ye make, touchinge the Obedience, and perfourminge of the Lawe: As if ye would
ſaie, The Lawe of God was geeuen to Angels: and is to be perfourmed, not in
the Earth, but Onely in Heauen: And, as if God had ſaid to thoſe Bleſſed Sprites,
Thou ſhalt not Kil: Thou ſhalt not commit aduouterie: Thou ſhalt not ſteale:
Thou ſhalt not couete, &c.
                  
                  In your ſundrie Perfections, of Children, Menne, Angels, and God, I
haue no ſkil. The Apologie meante onely of that Perfection, that is required
in Man. How be it, in euery kinde they ſaie, Perfectum eſt, cui nihil deeſt: That
thinge is Perfite, that is ful, and abſolute, and wanteth nothinge.
                     
                  
                  
                     And here, leſte ye ſhoulde deceiue your ſelfe by wronge meaſure, God him
ſelfe hathe ſhewed you,
                     Deuter. 6. Matthae. 22. Deuter. 17. Deuteron. 27. Calat. 3. Iacob. 2. Matthae. 5. 
                     what Perfection he requireth. Thus he ſaithe, Thou
ſhalt loue the Lorde thy God with al thy Harte, with al thy Soule, with al thy Power: Ye ſhal
not turne, neither to the Right hand, nor to the Lefte: Accurſed is he, that ſtandeth not
in euery thinge, that is written in the Lawe, to perfourme the ſame. And S. Iames ſaithe,
VVho ſo offendeth in one Commaundemente, is guilty of al. And Chriſte ſaithe, Be ye
Perfite (not meaſuring your ſelues by your owne habilitie, but) as your Father is
Perfite, whiche is in Heauen. And yet hereby he meaneth not the Perfection, that
is in God, and his Angels, but onely that Perfection, that is required in Man.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe, The Pelagian Heretiques in Olde times vſed the ſame
ſhiftes, that you vſe nowe. For where as the Catholique Learned Fathers ſaide,
Noman is
                      Perfite, and voide of Sinne, they anſweared then euen in ſutche ſorte, as
you doo nowe,
                        Hieronym. ad C
                              •
                           eſiphons. contra Pelagianos. 
                        Noman is
                      Perfite in ſutche degree of Perfection, as God is Perfite.
S. Hieromes woordes be theſe, Aiunt, ad Comparationem Dei, nullum eſſe

Perfectum:Poſsibilitie of the Lavve. Quaſi Scriptura hoc dixerit: They ſaie (euen as you, M. Hardinge, ſaie)
that in Compariſon of God, noman is Perfite: Asthough this were the ſaieinge of the
Scriptures. And therefore he ſaithe vnto them,
                      Nunquid Praecepit mihi Deus, vt
eſſem, quod Deus eſt? Vt nihil inter me eſſet, & Dominum Creatorem?
Vt maior eſſem Angelorum faſtigio? Vt haberem, quod Angeli non habent? I beſeeche
you, hathe God Commaunded me, that I ſhoulde bee the ſame, that God is? That there
ſhoulde be no difference (in
                      Perfection) bitweene me, and my Lorde the Creatoure?
That I ſhoulde be aboue the Highneſſe of Angels? Or that I ſhoulde haue, that the Angels
haue not? It was in vaine therefore, M. Hardinge, thus to borrowe the
                      Pelagians
Weapons, and to make mater of this Perfection. For wee ſpeake not of Angels,
but onely of Menne.
                  
                  
                     Further, tointreate of the Perfite fulfillinge, and accompliſſhinge of the
Lawe, I meane, ſo farre as the Lawe requirethe, the Pelagian Heretiques herein
alſo ſaide,
                     Auguſtin. De 
                           ••
                        ati. & libero Arbitr. Cap. 4. 
                     euen as you ſaie: and none otherwiſe. S. Auguſtine thereof reporteth
thus: Magnum aliquid Pelagiani ſe ſcire putam, quando dicunt, Non iuberet
Deus, quod Sciret ab homine non poſſe fieri. Quis hoc neſciat? Sed ide
                        •
                      iubet
aliqua, quae non poſſumus, vt nouerimus, quid ab ipſo petere debeamus: The
Pelagians thinke them ſelues Cunninge menne, when they ſaie, God vvoulde not
commaunde that thinge, that he knovveth, a man is not hable to doo. And
who is there, that knoweth not this? But therefore God Commaundeth vs to doo ſomme
thinges, that vvee are not hable to doo, that wee maie vnderſtande, what wee
ought to craue of him.
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe vnto one of the ſame Pelagians,Hieronym. ad Cteſiphont. contra Pelagianos. Facilia eſſe dicis Dei
mandata: & tamen nullum proferre potes, qui vniuerſa compleuerit: Ye ſaie, Goddes
Commaundementes be eaſy: And yet ye are hable to ſhewe vs noman, that euer fulfilled them
al togeather.
                  
                  
                     Therefore againe he ſaithe vnto them,
                     Hieronym. cōtra Pelagianos. li. 1. Noli ponere in Coelum os tuum, vt per
Eſſe, & Eſſe poſſe, ſtultorum auribus illudas. Quis enim tibi concedit, poſſe hominem
facere, quod nullus vnquam hominum potuerit? Sette not thy face againſte Heauen,
to mocke fooles eares with theſe woordes, Be, and Can be. For who wil graunte you, that
a man can doo that thinge, that noman euer vvas hable to doo?
                  
                     Likewiſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. De Spiritu, & Litera, Cap. 1. Dixi fieri poſſe, vt ſit homo ſine peccato,
ſi Voluntas ei non deſit, ope Diuina adiuuante: Sed tamen Praeter Vnum, in quo omnes uiuificabuntur,
neminem vel fuiſſe, vel fore, in quo hîc viuente eſſet iſta Perfectio:
I ſaide, It is poſsible, that a man maie bee vvithout Sinne, if he wante not
wil, the Power of God aſſiſtinge him: And yet I ſaide, that biſides Onely Chriſte, in whom
al menne ſhalbe quickened to Life, there vvas neuer man, nor neuer ſhalbe, who
beinge in this life, ſhal haue this Perfection. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Noman can atteine
to this Perfection: and he ſpeaketh of the Perfection, that is required, not of
Angels, but of Menne.
                  
                  
                     Ye wil ſaie, as the Pelagians did, wherefore then doothe Chriſte ſaie, Be ye
Perfite?Matthae. 5. Philip. 3. Hieronym. Aduerſus Pelagian Lib. 1. 
                     Wherefore doothe S. Paule ſaie, As many of vs, as be Perfite? &c. Hereto
S. Hierome anſweareth thus: Quid ergo ſapimus? imo quid ſapere debemus, qui
Perfecti non ſumus? Imperfectos nos eſſe Confiteri, & nondum comprehendiſſe,
nec dun acccepiſſe. Haec eſt hominis vera Sapientia, imperfectum eſſe ſe noſſe.
At
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , vt ita loquar, Cunctorum in Carne Iuſtorum Imperfecta Perfectio eſt: VVhat
then doo wee thinke, or what ought wee to thinke, that be not Perfite? Wee ought to
Confeſſe, that vvee are Vnperfite, and that wee haue not yet gotten, nor taken (that
                     
Perfection) that is required. This is the true wiſedome of a Man, to knowe him ſelfe
to be Vnperfite. And, as I might ſaie, the Perfection of al Iuſte menne liuinge

in the Pleaſhe is Vnperfite.Vnperfite Perfectiō. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Iuſti appellantur, non quòd omni
Vitio careant,Hieronym ad C
                           •
                        eſiphont. Auguſtin. ad Bonifacium Li 3. Cap. 7. ſed quòd Maiori parte Virtutum commendentur: They are called Juſte
menne, not for that they be voide of al manner Sinne, but for that they are furniſſhed
with the greatter parte of Vertues. So likewiſe ſaithe S. Auguſtine, Virtus,
quae nunc eſt in homine Iuſto, hactenus Perfecta nominatur, vt ad eius Perfectionem
pertineat etiam ipſius Imperfectionis, & in Veritate agnitio, & in humilitate
Confeſsio: The Vertue, that is nowe in a iuſte man, ſo farre foorthe is called Perfite,
that it perteineth to the Perfection thereof, bothe in truthe to knovve, and in humilitie
to Confeſſe, that it is Vnperfite. Againe he ſaithe, Omnia mandata facta
deputantur,Auguſtin. Retracta. li. 1. ca. 19. Auguſtin. De Spiritu, & Litera, Cap. 35. quando, quicquid non fit, ignoſcitur: Al the Commaundementes of God
are accoumpted to be donne, when that thinge, that is not downe, is forgeeuen. To conclude,
he ſaithe,
                      Multùm in hac vita ille profecit, qui quàm longè ſit à Perfectione
Iuſtitiae, proficiendo cognouit: He hathe mutche profited in this life, that by his profitinge
hathe learned, howe farre he is from the Perfection of Righteouſeneſſe.
                  
                     Yet neuertheleſſe wee maie truely vſe S. Hieromes woordes, vttered in
the defence, and right of this ſame cauſe: Haec dicentes, non adulamur vitijs: ſed
Authoriratem ſequimur Scripturarum,Hieronymus. ad A
                           •
                        gaſiam. quòd nullus homo ſit abſque Peccato.
Sed concluſit Deus omnia ſub Peccato, vt Omnium miſereatur: Notwithſtandinge we
ſaie thus, yet wee flatter not Vices: but wee folowe the Authoritie of the Scriptures, that
there is nothinge vvithout Sinne. But God hathe ſhutte vp al thinges vnder Sinne,
that he maie haue Mercie of Al.
                     Hieronym. in Ezechiel. li. 14. Cap. 46. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Perſpicuum eſt, omnem hominem,
quamuis ad Perfectionem venerit, tamen indigere Miſericordia Dei: & plenam
Perfectionem ex Gratia, non ex Merito poſsidere: It is moſte certaine, that euery
man, yea although hee be growen to Perfection, yet needeth the Mercie of God:
and that he enioieth ful Perfection, not of his ovvne Deſeruinge, but of Grace.
                  
                     Euen ſo S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. De Ciuita Lib 19. Cap. 27. Ipſa Iuſtitia noſtra tanta eſt in hac vita, vt potius
peccatorum Remiſsione conſtet, quàm Perfectione Virtutum: Our very
Righteouſeneſſe it ſelfe is ſo greete in this Life, that it ſtandeth rather in Forgeeueneſſe
of Our Sinnes, then in Perfection of Righteouſeneſſe.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 20. Diuiſion. 1.
               Biſides, though wee ſaie, wee haue no meede at al by our owne
woorkes, and deedes, but appointe al the meanes of Our Saluation
to be in Chriſte alone, yet ſaie we not, that for this cauſe menne ought
to liue looſely, and diſſolutely: nor that it is yenough for a Chriſtian,
to be Baptized onely, and to Beleeue: as though there were nothinge
els required at his hande. For True Faithe is liuely, and
can in no wiſe be idle. Thus therefore teache wee the people, that
God hathe called vs, not to folowe riot, and wantonneſſe, but, as S.
Paule ſaithe, vnto good vvoorkes, to vvalke in them: That we are
deliuered from the Povver of Darkeneſſe, to the end that vvee
ſhoulde ſerue the Liuinge God: to cutte awaie al the remnauntes
of Sinne, and to vvoorke Our Saluation in feare, and tremblinge:
that it maie appeare, that the Sprite of Sanctification is in Our
Bodies, and that Chriſte him ſelfe dwelleth in Our Hartes.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVith what face can theſe Defenders affirme,Merite, and Mercie. that they teache the people to walke in
good woorkes, whereas beginninge the treatiſe of woorkes in this preſente Apologie, they ſaie,
that wee haueNo aide or helpe vnto Saluation. Othervviſe this report is Vntrue. no helpe, or aide in our woorkes, and deedes? For ſo their Latine woorde Praeſidium
doothe ſignifie, whiche in the Engliſhe, is tourned into Meede. VVhat, Maiſters, is this
the waie to make menne woorke wel, to tel them before hande, that their woorkes be nothing worth,
and that they helpe them neuer a whitte? VVhy then let the Labourers Prouerbe take place, I had rather
plaie for nothinge, then woorke for nothinge.Nazianzen. Si mercenarius es, tantùm expecta mercedem. De Sancto Baptiſm. Is there any Labourer ſo madde, as to woorke for
nothinge? Firſte ye tell the Labourers, that there is no helpe for them in their woorkes, and then ye
crie vnto them to laboure:Is not this a folie, M Hard. Goddes Truthe is no mockerie. yea forſoothe, as harde as thei liſte. Is not this to mocke God and the
worlde? VVhereas ye ſpeake to Chriſtian menne, to thoſe that be Baptized, to ſuche as haue Faithe:
Yet ye tel them, they maie woorke as mutche, as they wil,Vntruthe. For vve: ſaie vvith S. Paule, your vvoorkes ſhal not be in vaine in the Lorde. but al in vaine, &c. Ergo then, although
a liuely Faithe cannot be idle, and ſomme true Faithe is liuely, yet in an other ſenſe.Vntruthe. Reade the anſvveare. there
is a true Faithe whiche is not liuely, but idle. VVhiche true Faithe ſhal become liuely and haue great
aide in woorkes, if it wel learne to leaue idleneſſe, and practiſe that in will and harte, whiche it
beleeueth in vnderſtandinge.
                  But whereas theſe Defenders woulde no helpe or aide to be in Chriſtian mennes woorkes, that
Vntruthe. For it is no Hereſie: it is the Faithe of Chriſt. Reade the Anſvveare. Hereſie maie not ſo eſcape.That good vvoorkes helpe vs. Matthae. 19. Chriſte beinge demaunded of one, what good he ſhoulde doo to obteine
Euerlaſtinge life, ſaide: If thou wilte enter into Life, keepe the Commaundementes. To keepe the
Commaundementes is a woorke: to enter into Life is ſomme helpe to a man. Therefore it is falſely
ſpoken, that in our woorkes there is no helpe for vs. Againe, Chriſte ſaithe, VVho ſo euer forſaketh
his houſe, or brothers, or ſiſters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or landes for my ſake,
be ſhal receiue an hundred folde, and ſhal inherite Life Euerlaſtinge. S. Paule ſaithe, God wil
render to euery man accordinge to his woorke. To thoſe that ſeeke for glorie, and honour, and incorruption,
accordinge to the ſufferance of good woorkes, (he wil render) Life Euerlaſtinge.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here ye trifle, M. Hardinge, although not mutche biſides your common
woonte, yet ſommewhat aboue your ordinarie. Our Doctrine herein is grounded
vpon theſe woordes of Chriſte,Luc. 17. 
                     When ye haue donne al, ſaie, that ye be vnprofitable▪
Seruauntes, and therefore haue deſerued nothinge. In deede, of late yeeres this hath
ben the General Doctrine of your Scholes: Vita Aeterna eſt Merces debita pro noſtris
Meritis: Vita Aeterna, niſi eſſet Merces debita, eſſet incerta. Quia debitum certum eſt:
Miſericordia incerta: Euerlaſtinge Life is a rewarde dewe for our deſeruinges. If Euerlaſtinge
Life were not a dewe rewarde, it were vncertaine. For dewe debte is certaine: Mercie, or ſauoure
is Vncertaine.
                      Thus haue you vtterly drowned the Grace of God, and the
Saluation that we haue onely in Ieſu Chriſte: and haue turned the moſt Comfortable
Doctrine of the Goſpel into a doungeon of Deſperation.
                  Then,Gregori. Naziā. De Sancto Baptiſmate. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . ſaie you, Lette the Labourers Prouerbe take place, I had rather plate for nothinge,
then woorke for nothinge. Verily, M. Hardinge, when other reaſon coulde not
ſerue you, it was reaſon, your Labourers idle reaſon ſhoulde take place. Howe
be it, if ye wil doo nothinge at Goddes requeſte, of good wil, without rewarde,
but muſte be hyered onely for your Penny, then maie your Labourer, be he neuer
ſo ſimple, eaſily tel you, ye are not the Childe of God, but onely a Hyrelinge,
and a Labourer. For the Natural louinge Childe wil Obey his Father, not for
rewarde, but of loue, onely bicauſe hee is his Father.
                  Gregorie Nazianzene ſaithe, Si Seruus es, time plagas: Si mercenarius,
tantum ſpecta Mercedem. At, ſi ſupra hos es etiam Filius, reuerere tanquam Patrem tuū.
Bene facito, quia pulchrum eſt obſequi Patri. Et, quamuis nihil aliud futurum

ſit,Merite, and Mercie. tamen vel hoc ipſum erit Merces tua feciſſe quod gratum eſſet Patri:
If thou be a bonde Slaue, then feare the whippe: If thou be a Hyrelinge, then looke
onely for thy rewarde: But ouer, and biſides theſe, If thou be a (Natural)
                      Childe, then
reuerence (GOD) as thy Father. Doo vvel, bicauſe it is good to Obey thy Father.
Yea, and although thou ſhalt haue nothinge els, yet euen this ſhalbe thy
revvarde, that thou haſte benne Obediente to thy Father.
                  
                     S. Hilarie ſaithe,
                     Hilari. in Pſalm. 118. Nos, ſi ſemel ieiunamus, ſatisfeciſſe nos arbitramur: Si aliquid
ex horreo domeſticarum facultatum inopi damus, impleniſſe nos iuſtitiam credimus, &c.
Sed Propheta totum à Deo ſperat: totum à Miſericordia eius expectat: If wee
faſte once, wee thinke, wee haue ſatisfied: If out of the barnes of Our houſholde ſtoare wee
geeue ſommewhat to the Poore, wee beleeue, wee haue fulfilled the meaſure of Righteouſeneſſe.
But the Prophete hopeth al of God: and truſteth al of his Mercie. Chriſte
ſaithe to his Diſciples,
                     Matthae. 5. Auguſtin. Confeſsion. 
                     Let your Light ſo ſhine before menne (not that ye maie be
rewarded, but) that they maie ſee your good woorkes, and glorifie yur Father, whiche is
in Heauen. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Minùs diligit te, qui diligit aliud praeter te: O
God,
                     Baſil. in Pſal. 32. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     he the leſſe loueth thee, that loueth any other thinge, biſides thee. Likewiſe S.
                      Baſile
ſaithe, Qui non fidit ſuis rectè factis, nec expectat ex operibus iuſtificari, Solā
habet ſpem ſalutis, Miſericordias Dei: He that truſteth not to his ovvne good
deedes, nor hopeth to be iuſtified by his vvoorkes, hathe the Onely hope
of his Saluation, the Mercies of God.
                  Further ye ſaie, A true Faithe maie be idle, and vtterly without woorkes: &
therefore ye thinke it not true, that wee ſaie, A true Faithe is Liuely, and can in no wiſe
be idle. Here perhaps ye wil ſet Faithe vpon the Laſte, and Racke her to a
larger 
                        •
                     iſe. For ſo Latomus, one of your Felowes, ſaithe, that Socrates, and
Plato, and other Heathen Philoſophers had as good vnderſtandinge, and Faithe
in Chriſte, as had Abraham. And Andradius, an other of your Felowes, ſaithe,
that the Heathen, and Infidel Philoſophers had the Righteouſneſſe of Faithe, and
Euerlaſting Life.Illyricus De Sectis Pag 93. Kemnitius in examine Tridēt. Concilij. Pag. 535. Copus Dialo. 1. Pag. 51. His wordes be theſe, Philoſophi, qui ab inani Deorum multitudine
abhorruerunt, &c. illos tu illa Fide, Dei
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         cognitione deſtitutos dices, per quam, ſcilicet,
impius iuſtificatur, & ex qua iuſtus viuit? The Philoſophers, that abhorred, and ſhunned
the vaine multitude of Goddes, &c. wilte thou ſaie, they lacked that Faithe, and that
knovvledge of God, whereby the wicked is iuſtified, and whereby the Righteouſe liueth?
                     
An other or your neare Felowes ſaith, Petrus, non Fidem Chriſti, ſed Chriſtū, Salua
Fide, negauit: Peter denied, not the Faithe of Chriſte: but he denied Chriſte, his Faithe
neuertheleſſe beinge ſafe. If ye cal this True Faithe, M. Hardinge, that maie
be founde in Heathens, and Infidels, and maie wel, and ſafely ſtande with the
abiuringe of Chriſte, then, without queſtion, your True Faithe maie be without
good woorkes.1. Timothe. 5. Fidem abnegauit. But S. Paule, whoſe woordes wee ought rather to credite,
ſaithe farre otherwiſe: He, that hathe no regarde to his owne, ſpecially ſutche, as bee
of his houſholde, hathe denied the Faithe, and is woorſe, then an Infidel. Againe
he ſaithe:Tit. 1 1. Iohn 2. Iacob. 2. 
                     They ſaie, they knowe God: but by theire woorkes they denie God.
                     
S. Iohn ſaithe, VVho ſo ſaithe, hee knoweth God, and keepeth not his Commaundementes,
is a lyer, and the Truthe is not in him.
                      S. Iames ſaithe, Faithe without
woorkes is deade: And the Diuel beleeueth, and tremblethe for feare.
                      But
a Deade Faithe is nomore a True perfite Faithe, then a Deade man is a True
perfite Man. As for the Faithe of Diuels, in deede, and verily it is no Faithe.
                  
                  
                     Certainely S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin in Euangel. Iohan. Sermo 61. Auguſtin. De Fide & Operib. Cap. 23. Qui Fidem habet ſine ſpe, & dilectione,
Chriſtum eſſe credit: non in Chriſtum credit: He that hathe Faithe without Hope,
and Charitie, Beleueth, that there is Chriſte: but hee Beleueth not in Chriſte.
Againe he ſaithe, Inſeparabilis eſt Bona uita à Fide, quae per Dilectionem operatur:

imò verò ea ipſa eſt bona vita: Good Life can neuer be diuided from Faithe,
whiche woorketh by Loue: Naie rather that ſame very Faithe it ſelfe is good Life, S.
                     
Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſ. Li. 6. Epiſt. 36. Vbi quis coeperit luxuriari, incipit deuiare à vera Fide: As ſoone
as a man beginneth to liue wantonly, he beginneth to flee from the True Faithe. Origen
ſaithe,
                     Origen. in Epiſt. ad Roman. Li. 8. Cap. 10. Omnis, qui credit in cum, non crubeſcit. Erubeſcit autem Omnis, qui peccat:
Ergo, qui adhuc ruborem peccati incurrit, credere non videtur: VVho ſo euer
Beleeueth in God, bluſſheth not: But euery man bluſſheth, that woorketh Sinne: Therefore he,
that yet bluſſheth for his Sinne,
                     Origen in Ezechiel. Homil. 9. ſeemeth not to Beleeue. Againe he ſaithe, Malè
credit, quicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      peccat: VVho ſo euer ſinneth, Beleeueth il.
                  
                     To be ſhorte, S. Cyprian ſaithe, Quomodo dicit, ſe credere in Chriſtum,
qui non facit, quod Chriſtus facere praecepit? Howe doothe hee ſaie, He Beleeueth in
Chriſte, that doothe not the thinge, that Chriſte Commaunded?
                  
                  Hereby it is plaine, that True Faithe is liuely, and woorkeful: and, that
an Idle Faithe is in deede no Faithe at al.
                  But you ſaie, Good VVoorkes haue theire rewarde: and therefore, ye ſaie, This
Hereſie maie not ſo eſc
                           •
                        pe. Whether Good Woorkes ſhalbe rewarded, or no, it was
no parte of Our queſtion. For wee vndoubtedly beleue the wordes, that are written
by S. Iohn,
                     Apocalyp. 14. Matthae. 10. 
                     Opera illorum ſequuntur illos: Theire VVoorkes folowe after them:
                     
Wee beleeue the woordes, that Chriſte ſaithe to his Diſciples, He, that geeueth a
Cuppe of colde Water to any of theſe litle Ones for my ſake, ſhal not loſe his rewarde. We
beleeue that,1. Corin. 15. that S. Paule ſaithe, Your Woorke ſhal not be in vaine in the Lorde.
Wee graunte, Good Woorkes haue theire Rewarde: But the ſame Rewarde ſtandeth
in Mercie, and Fauoure, and not in Dewtie.
                  Thus therefore we ſaie, Conſideringe the weakeneſſe, and ſinful corruption
of Our Nature, there can be no Woorkes in vs ſo pure, and perfite, that we maie
thereby of right, and of dewtie deſerue Euerlaſtinge Life. And this, M. Hardinge,
is no Hereſie, but the very plaine Senſe, and Subſtance of Goddes Woorde, and
the vndoubted Doctrine of the Anciente Catholique Fathers of the Churche.
                  
                     Iob ſaithe,
                     
                     Iob 9. 
                     Si Homo velit contendere cum Deo, non poterit ei reſpondere vnum
pro mille: If a man wil diſpute with God, he is not hable to anſweare him one for a thouſande.
And therefore he ſaithe, Verebar omnia Opera mea:
                      I ſtoode in doubte, and
was afraide of al my Woorkes.Iob. 9. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Although 
                        •
                      were perfite, yet my ſoule
ſhal not know it:Eſai. 64. If I woulde iuſtifie mee ſelfe, myne owne Mouthe ſhal condemne me. The
Prōphete Eſai ſaithe, Al our Righteouſeneſſe is like a fowle ſtained clowte.
                  
                     Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtine. De Tempore, Sermo. 49. Non intres in Iudicium cum Seruo tuo. Quid
eſt, Non intres in iudicium cum Seruo tuo? Non ſtes mecum in iudicio, exigendo a me
omnia quae praecepiſti, & omnia, quae iuſsiſti. Nam me inuenies reum, 
                        •
                     i in iudicium intraueris
mecum. Opus ergo eſt Miſericordia tua, potiùs, quàm liquidiſsimo
iudicio tuo: O Lorde, enter not into iudgemente with thy Seruaunte. What meaneth that,
Enter not into iudgemente with thy Seruaunte? Thus mutche it meaneth: Stande not with me
in iudgemente, requiringe of me al that thou haſte commaunded. For if thou enter into iudgemente
with me, thou ſhalt finde me guilty. I haue neede therefore, not of thy vpright
Iudgemente,Auguſtin. Epiſt. 52. ad Mac
                           •
                        don. 
                     but of thy Mercie. Againe he ſaithe, Merita quorumlibet hominum
quae ſunt? Quandoquidem ille, qui non cum Mercede debita, ſed cum gratuita
Gratia venit, Omnes peccatores, ſolus à peccato liber, & liberator, inueuit:
VVhat be the Merites of any menne? For Chriſte that came, not vvith his devve
revvarde, but vvith his Grace, that vvas not devve, founde al menne ſinners, being
him ſelfe onely free from ſinne,
                     Auguſtin. De Spiritu, & Litera. Cap. 33. 
                     and a deliuerer of Sinners. Againe hee ſaithe,
                      Coronat
te in Miſericordia, & Miſerationibus. Hoc fiet in iudicio: vbi cùm Rex iuſtus ſederit in
thro
                        •
                     o, redditurus vnicuique ſecundum opera eius, quis gloriabitur, caſtum
ſe habere Cor? Aut quis gloriabitur, mundum ſe eſſe à peccatis? Ideò illie

neceſſarium fuit cōmemorare Miſerationē, & Miſericordiam Domini, &c. God
crowneth with Fauour and Mercie. That ſhalbe doune in the laſte iudgemente: where as,
when the Juſte Kinge ſhal ſit in his Throne, to render to euery man accordinge to his woorkes,
who ſhal boaſte, that his harte is chaſte? Or who ſhal boaſte, that be is cleane from Sinne?
Therefore it was needeful to make mention of the Pitie, and Mercie of Our Lorde.
And againe,
                     Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 137. Opera manuum mearum non Commendo. Timeo enim, ne cùm inſpexeris,
plura inuenias peccata, quàm Merita: Lorde, I commende not the woorkes of my
handes. For I am afraide, leſte, when thou ſhalte beholde them, thou ſhalt finde moe
ſinnes, then good deſeruinges.
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Hierome,Hieronym. in Eſai. Cap. 64. Origen. ad Roma. Li. 4 Cap. 4. Origen. in Matt. tracta. 8. Si conſideremus noſtra Merita, deſperandum eſt:
If vvee beholde our ovvne Merites, vvee muſte be driuen to deſperation.
                  
                     So ſaithe Origen, Ego vix mihi perſuadeo, vllum opus eſſe poſſe, quod ex debito
remunerationem depoſcat: I doo ſcarcely beleue, that there can be any woorke, that
maie of devvtie require revvarde. Againe he ſaithe, Dicite, vos eſſe Seruos inutiles.
Nam etſi Omnia fecerimus, quae praecepta ſunt, non tamen bonum aliquod
fecimus. Nec enim, ſi verè bona eſſent, eſſemus inutiles. Omne autem bonum noſtrum,
non propriè, ſed abuſiuè bonum dicitur: Saie ye (ſaithe
                      Chriſte) that ye be vnprofitable
Seruauntes. For notwithſtandinge wee haue donne al thinges, that are commaunded.
yet haue vve donne no good thinge. For, if our dooinges were good in deede, then
were wee not vnprofitable. But any good deede of oures is called good, not rightly, or
devvly,Auguſtin. in Pſalm 94. VValden. contra VViclefum. but by abuſe of ſpeache. So ſaith S. Auguſtine, Si Deus vellet pro Meritis
agere, non inueniret, niſi quod damnaret: If God would deale with vs according
to that we haue deſerued, be ſhoulde finde nothinge, but that he might condemne. Therefore,
M. Hardinge,
                      VValdenſis, one of your greate Doctours, hauinge wel, & circumſpectely
weighed the mater of euery ſide, at the laſte concludeth thus, Quid dignum
facimus,Roman. 8. vt participes Coeleſtibus fieri inueniamur? Apoſtolo dicente, Exiſtimo, quòd
non ſūt condignae paſsiones huius temporis ad futuram gloriam, quae reuelabitur in nobis:
Reputo igitur ſaniorem Theologum, fideliorem Catholicum, & Scripturia
Sanctis magis concordem, qui tale Meritum ſimpliciter abnegat: VVhat woorthy
thinge doo wee, that wee maie be founde in the Felowſhippe of the Heauenly Sprites?
The Apoſtle ſaithe, I Judge, that the afflictions of this time are not woorthy of that Glorie,
that ſhalbe reueled in vs. Therefore I take him to be the 
                        •
                     ounder Diuine, the
Faithefuller Catholique, and more agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, that
vtterly denieth al ſutche kinde of Merite.
                  But ye wil ſaie, If wée finde Our ſelues voide of Merite, howe then ſhal
wee ſtand,Apocalyp 22. and be iuſtified before God? S. Iohn ſaithe, Bleſſed are they, that
haue waſſhed theire Roabes (not in theire owne Merites, but) in the Bloude of the
Lambe.
                     Apocalyp. 21. And God ſaithe, I wil geeue the thirſty to Drinke of the VVel of Life (not
for his Deſertes, but) for nothinge.
                  
                  
                     The Ancient Father Origen ſaith,
                     Origen ad Roman. Li. 9. ca. 12. Quia Omnia concluſa ſunt ſub peccato, nunc
non in Meritis, ſed in Miſericordia Dei Salus Humana Conſiſtit: For as mutche
as al menne are ſhutte vp, and Cloſed vnder Sinne, novve the Saluation of Man ſtandeth,
not in mans Merites, but in Goddes Mercie.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. Epiſt. 105. ad Sixtum. Deus in fine Coronabit nos in Miſericordia, & Miſerationibus:
God in the ende wil crowne vs (not with the price of our deſeruinges, but
                     )
vvith Fauour, and Mercies.
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin De Verbis Apoſtoli, Sermo. 15. Pro nihilo ſaluos facies eos. Quid eſt, Pro nihilo ſaluos facies
eos? Nihil in eis inuenis, vnde ſalues: & tamen ſaluas. Quia nihil inuenis,
vnde ſalues: & multum inuenis, vnde damnes: For Nothinge thou ſhalt ſaue them.
VVhat is meante by theſe worde, For Nothing thou ſhalt ſaue them? (This is the meaninge)
Thou findeſte Nothinge in them, vvherefore thou ſhouldeſt ſaue them: and

yet thou ſaueſt them. Thou findeſt nothinge, wherefore thou ſhouldeſte ſaue them: but
thou findeſt mutche, wherfore thou ſhouldeſt condemne them: And againe,
                      Omnes in Mortem
poena debita praecipites ageret,Auguſtin. De Ciuitate. Li. 14. Cap. 1. niſi inde quoſdam indebita Dei Gratia liberaret:
Deſerued paine woulde throwe al menne into Deathe, onleſſe the Vndeſerued Grace of
God deliuered ſomme frome it.
                  
                  
                     S. Baſile ſaithe,
                     Baſil. in Pſal. 32. Non erit Iudicium ſine Miſericordia: Quia non poteſt
homo purus inueniti à ſorde: ne ſi vnus quidem tantùm dies ſit ab eius natali: Iudgement
ſhal not be vvithout mercie: For noman can be founde pure, and cleane from al filthe: no,
though he be but one daie olde.
                     Baſil. De Humilitate. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Haec eſt noſtra integra, & perfecta
gloriatio in Deo, quando propriae Iuſtitiae nos inopes agnoſcimus: Sola autem Fide
in Chriſtū Iuſtificari: This is oure ful, and perfite reioicing in God, when we acknowledge,
that wee are voide of any Our owne Righteouſeneſſe, and are Iuſtified by Onely Faithe
in Chriſte. So ſaithe S. Hierome, In Chriſto Ieſu Domino noſtro: in quo habemus
fiduciam,Hieron. in Epiſt. ad Epheſ. cap. 3. & acceſſum, & confidenttiam per Fidem eius: non per noſtram Iuſtitiam,
ſed per eum, cuius Fide nobis peccata dimittuntur: In Chriſte Jeſu Our Lorde:
in whom wee haue boldeneſſe, and libertie to comme (to God), and truſte, and affiance
by the Faithe of him: not through Our Righteouſeneſſe, but through him, in whoſe name
Our Sinnes be forgeuen.
                  
                  
                     Hereof S. Bernarde in moſte godly,
                     Bernard. in Pſal. Qui habitat. 
                     and comfortable wiſe concludeth thus,
Meritum meum. Miſerationes Domini. Non ſum ego inops Meriti, quam diu
ille non eſt inops Miſerationum. Si Miſerationes eius multae, multus ego
ſum in Meritis. Hoc totum eſt Hominis Meritum, ſi totam ſpem ſuam ponat
in Domino: My Merite is the Mercie of God. So longe as God is not poore of
Mercie, ſo longe cannot I be poore of Merite. If his Mercies be greate, then am I great
in Merites. This is the vvhole Merite of Man, if he put his vvhole affiance
in the Lorde.
                  This is theſe Defenders Horrible Hereſie, M. Hardinge, whiche, you
ſaie, mought not ſo eſcape your handed.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 21. Diuiſion. 1.
               To conclude, we Beleue, that this our ſelfe ſame Fleaſhe, wherein
we liue, although it die, and comme to duſte, yet at the laſte ſhal
returne againe to Life, by the meanes of Chriſtes Sprite, whiche
dwelleth in vs: and that then verily, whatſoeuer we ſuffer here in
the meane while for his ſake, Chriſte wil wipe awaie al teares, and
heauineſſe from our eies: and that we through him ſhal enioie Euerlaſtinge
Life, and ſhal for euer be with him in Glorie. So be it.
            
            
               M. Hardinge.
               Laſt of al, beleue (as ye ſaie) that this very Fleaſhe ſhal returne to Life, and that for the
Spirite of Chriſte, whiche dwelleth in vs. There is no doubte but the Spirite of Chriſte is ſufficient
to raiſe vp their bodies, in whom it dwelleth. But wee ſaie, that the raiſing of our Fleaſhe is alſo
aſſigned in Holy ScriptureVntruthe. For ſo the Fathers of the Old Lavve and al Chriſtan Infantes ſhoulde be vtterly excluded from Reſurrection. to the Real, and Subſtantial eatinge of Chriſtes Fleaſhe, becauſe it is
written: He that eateth my Fleaſhe, and drinketh my Bloude, hathe Life Euerlaſtinge. And I wil
raiſe him againe in the laſte daie. Therefore the Reſurrection of the Fleaſhe is not onely aſſigned in
Holy Scripture to the Spirite of Chriſte, but alſo to the woorthy eatinge of his Fleaſhe. And thus
we haue confuted the Doctrine, wherein ye declare your Faithe: and the chiefe groundes, whereon ye
buylde your New Goſpel, we haue diſproued.
            
            
               
               The B. of Sarisburie.
               The woordes,The cauſe of Reſurrection. wherein ye finde faulte, M. Hardinge, are not oures, but S.
Paules. If they be falſe, why did he write them? If they be true, why doo you
blame them? Here ye ſeeme to checke S. Paule, and not onely vs. Ye ſaie, The raiſing
of our Fleaſh is alſo aſſigned in the Holy Scripture to the Realle, and Subſtantial Eating of Chriſtes
Fleaſhe. But whence had ye theſe woordes, M. Hardinge? Where founde ye theſe
Scriptures? Diſſemble no longer: Deale plainely & ſimply: It is Gods cauſe. For a
ſhewe,Iohn 6. ye allege theſe woordes of Chriſte, written by S. Iohn: He that Eateth my
Fleaſhe, and Drinketh my Bloude, hathe Life Euerlaſtinge: And I wil raiſe him vp againe in the laſte
daie.
                   Theſe woordes wée knowe: and the Eatinge of Chriſtes Fleaſhe we know:
But where is your Real, and Subſtantial, and Carnal Eatinge? Where did S.
Iohn euer tel you, that Chriſtes Body is Eaten vvith Teethe, and conueied further
in ſutche groſſe,Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 25. Idem, tracta. 26. and fleaſhely wiſe into the belly? S. Auguſtine expoundinge
the ſame woordes, ſaithe thus, Crede, & Manducaſti: Credere in Chriſtum, hoc
eſt Manducare Panem Viuum: Iſte Panis Interioris Hominis quaerit eſuriem: Beleeue
thou (in Chriſte): and thou haſte Eaten (Chriſte). To Beleeue in Chriſte,
that is the Eatinge of the Breade of Life: This Breade requireth the Hunger of the
Inner Man.
                  
                  Nicola. Lyra in Pſalm. 111. And Nicolas Lyra, one of your owne Doctours, ſaithe, Theſe woordes
of S Iohn perteine nothinge to the Sacramente. Thus he ſaithe, Hoc Verbum
nihil directè pertinet ad Sacramentalem, vel Corporalem Manducationem: This
Saieinge
                   (of the Sixthe of Iohn) perteineth nothinge directely to the Sacramental, or
Corporal Eatinge. It was ſomme ouerſight of your parte, M. Hardinge, to ſeeke
to proue the Eatinge of the Sacramente by thoſe woordes, that, by your owne
Doctours iudgemente, perteine nothinge to the Sacramente.
               Chriſte ſaithe further,Iohn. 6. 
                  Onleſſe ye Eate the Fleaſhe of the Sonne of Man, and
Drinke his Blonde, ye ſhal haue no Life in you. If there be none other Eating of Chriſtes
Body, whereby wee ſhal liue, but onely your Fantaſtical, and Fleaſhely Eatinge
with Mouthe, and Teethe, then, I beſéeche you, what Life hathe Abraham, Iſaac,
Iacob, Moſes, Aaron, and other Holy Patriarkes, and Prophetes, that were
before the comming of Chriſt? What Life haue a great number of Holy Martyrs?
What Life haue Chriſtian Children, that being Baptized in the Bloud of Chriſte,
departe this Life before they can receiue the Sacramente: that is to ſaie, by your
ſtrange Expoſition, before they haue Really, & Subſtantially Eaten the Fleaſhe
of Chriſte? Wil ye ſaie, They haue no Life? Or wil ye condemne them al to Euerlaſting
Deathe? Or muſte wée thinke, they ſhal neuer riſe againe? Certainely
S. Auguſtine ſaithe preciſely,Auguſtin. in Iohan. tracta. 26. 
                  Qui Manducat, habet Vitam: &, qui non Manducar,
non habet Vitam: VVho ſo Eateth
                   (the Fleaſhe of Chriſte,) hathe Life: and
who ſo Eateth it not, hathe no Life. Hereof wee muſte needes conclude by your Diuinitie,
that Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, Moſes, and other Godly Fathers, that neuer
receiued the Sacramente, haue no Life, but are deade for euer, without hope of
Reſurrection.
               
                  But, to leaue your Fantaſies, M. Hardinge, the cauſe of Our Reſurrection,
as S. Paule ſaithe,
                  1. Corin 15. Origen. Ad Roma. Ca 8. Li. 6. Auguſtin Meditation. Cap. 14. 
                  is the Sprite of God, that dwelleth in vs. Origen ſaithe,
Reſurgemus propter Spiritum habitantem in nobis: Neceſſe eſt enim Spiritui reddi habitaculum
ſuum: VVee ſhal riſe againe bicauſe of the Sprite, that dwelleth within vs: For of neceſſitie
the Sprite muſte haue his Houſe reſto
                        •
                     red vnto him. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Haec mea tota Spes eſt, & omnis fiducia. Eſt enim in ipſo Ieſu Chriſto Domino noſtro
Vniuſcuiuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   noſtrum portio, Caro, & Sanguis. Vbi ergo portio mea regnat, ibi ego
me regnare credo: This is my whole hope, and al my truſte. For in Chriſte Jeſu our Lorde
is Fleaſhe, and Bloude, whiche is a Portion of eche of vs. Therefore vvhere a Portion

of mine reigneth, there I beleeue, that I reigne too.
               
                  S. Cyril ſaithe, Quamuis Mors propter peccatum in Naturam noſtram inſilijt, tamen,Cyrill. in Iohan. Li. 4. Ca. 15. Cyril. in Iohan. Lib. 8. Cap. 47.
quia Filius Dei Homo factus eſt, omnes profectò Reſurgemus: Although
Deathe be fallen into our Nature, yet bicauſe the Sonne of God is made Man,
doubteleſſe wee ſhal al riſe againe. Likewiſe againe he ſaithe,
                   Sic vos effeci participes
Diuinae Naturae, cùm Spiritum meum fecerim habitare in vobis, Chriſtus enim
in nobis eſt per Spiritum, Corruptionem noſtram in Incorruptionem Cōmutans:
So I made you Partetakers of the Diuine Nature, vvhen I cauſed my Sprite to dvvel
in you. For Chriſte is in vs by his Sprite, changinge our Corruption into Incorruption.
Thus the Sprite of God is the Cauſe, and the woorker of our
                   Reſurrection.
And, to comme neare vnto you, y• Sacramentes of Chriſte are alſo Meanes,
and Inſtrumentes, and Seales hereof: but not the Cauſes. S. Cyril ſaithe,
Quòd Myſtica Communio Reſurrectionis quaedam fit Confeſsio,Cyril. in Iohan. Lib. 12. Cap. 58. verbis Chriſti ipſius
probatur. Ait enim, Hoc eſt Corpus Meum: Hoc in Memoriam Mei facite: That the
Myſtical Cōmunion is a certaine Confeſſion of y•
                   Reſurrection, it is proued by the woordes
of Chriſte him ſelfe. For he ſaithe, This is my Body: Doo this in Remembrance of mee.
And therefore in the
                   Councel of Nice,Concil. Nicen. 
                  the Holy Myſteries are called Reſurrectionis
noſtrae Symbola: The Pleadges, or Tokens of our Reſurrection. And S.
Ambroſe,De Con. Diſt. 2. Non iſte. 
                  ſpeakinge diſtinctely hereof, ſaithe, Non iſte Panis, qui vadit in Corpus,
ſed Panis Vitae Aeternae, qui animae noſtrae Subſtantiam fulcit: It is not this Breade (of
the Sacramente) that paſſeth into the Body: but it is the Breade of Euerlaſtinge Life,
that ſuſteineth the Subſtance of our Soule.
               
               
                  And to put the mater further out of doubte, the ſame force vnto Reſurrection,
that is applied vnto the Sacramente of Chriſtes Body, is alſo, and in as ample
ſorte geuen to the Sacramente of Baptiſme.
                  Baſil De Sancto Baptiſmate. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ignatius ad Trallien. Concil. VVormatien. Cap. 5. 
                  S. Baſile ſaithe, Dies Paſchatis eſt
Pignus Reſurrectionis: Baptiſma verò eſt potentia, & vis ad Reſurrectionem:
Eaſter Daie is a pleadge of Reſurrection: But Baptiſme is a povver and ſtrengthe
vnto Reſurrection. Againe he ſaithe, Reſurrectionis Gratiam in die Reſurrectionis
excipiamus: Vpon the daie of Chriſtes Reſurrection, Let vs receiue
(Baptiſme, whiche is) the Grace of Reſurrection. Ignatius ſaithe, Vt Credentes
in Mortem eius, per Baptiſmum participes eius Reſurrectionis efficiamini: That
beleeuinge in his Deathe, by Baptiſme ye maie be made Partetakers of his Reſurrection.
Therefore in the Councel of
                   VVoormes it is written thus: In Aquas demerſio, in
Infernum deſcenſio eſt: Et rurſus, ab Aquis emerſio, Reſurrectio eſt: The Dippinge
into the Water, is the goeinge downe into Hel: and the comminge out of the VVater,
is the Reſurrection.
               In the ende, M. Hardinge, ye blowe vp merily your owne Conqueſt: And thus
yée ſaie, VVee haue confuted the Doctrine, wherein yee declare your Faithe: and the Chiefe
groundes, whereon ye builde your Newe Goſpell, VVee haue diſproued: But, with ſo ſimple
proufes, and ſo many Vntruthes, as, for Honours ſake, maie not wel be ſhewed in
your Triumphe.
            
            
               ❧Here endeth the Seconde
Parte.
         
         
            
            The Thirde Parte.
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 1.
               
                  BEholde, theſe are the horrible Hereſies, for
the whiche a good parte of the worlde is at
this daie condemned by the Biſhop of Rome:
& yet were neuer hearde to pleade their cauſe.
He ſhoulde haue commenced his ſuite rather
againſte Chriſte, againſt the Apoſtles, and againſte
the Holy Fathers. For theſe thinges
did not onely procede from them, but were alſo
appointed by them: Excepte perhaps theſe
menne wil ſaie (as, I thinke, thei wil in deede)
that Chriſte neuer inſtituted the Holy Communion, to be diuided emongeſt
the Faitheful: Or, that Chriſtes Apoſtles, and the Auncient
Fathers ſaide Priuate Maſſes, in euery corner of the Temples, now
tenne, nowe twentie togeather in one daie: Or, that Chriſte and his
Apoſtles banniſhed al the Common People from the Sacrament of
his Bloude: Or, that the thinge, that they them ſelues doo at this
daie euery where, & doo it ſo, as thei condemne him for an Heretique,
whiche dothe otherwiſe, is not called of Gelaſius theire owne Doctoure,
plaine Sacrilege: Or, that theſe be not the very woordes of
Ambroſe, Auguſtine, Gelaſius, Theodorete, Chryſoſtome, and
Origene, The Breade and VVine in the Sacramentes remaine
ſtil the ſame, thei vvere before: The thinge, vvhiche is ſeene vpon
the Holy Table, is Breade: There ceaſeth not to be ſtil the Subſtance
of Breade, and Nature of VVine: The Subſtance, and Nature
of Breade, are not changed: The ſelfe ſame Breade, as touchinge
the Material Subſtance, goeth into the bely, and is caſte
out into the priuie: Or, that Chriſte, the Apoſtles, & Holy Fathers
praied not in that tongue, whiche the people might vnderſtande: Or,
that Chriſte hath not perfourmed al thinges by that one offeringe,
whiche he once offered vpon the Croſſe: Or, that the ſame Sacrifice
was Vnperfite, ſo that now we haue neede of an other.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat crake ye of a good parte of the VVorlde? The greater is the number of thoſe ye haue ſeduced,
the more greeuous ſhal be your iudgement. There be not yet many yeeres paſte, that ye boaſted of
your poore ſmall flocke, alludinge to the fewneſſe of the Flocke, that liued with Chriſte in Fleaſhe,
and made their fewneſſe an argumente of the ſincere Truthe But nowe that through your euil teachinge,
VVho ſo vvanteth diſſolutiō, and vvickedneſſe, maie ſeeke it at Rome. the worlde groweth more to be diſſolute and wicked, ye boaſt of your number. This is certaine,
touchinge groundes of truthe, the Churche erreth not, as that whiche enioyeth Chriſtes promiſe:
and your Congregation teachinge the contrary, muſte therefore be taken for the Children of the Father
of Lies. Though tenne, or twenty Maſſes were not ſaide in one daie by Chriſte, the Apoſtles, or Fathers,
as ye ſcoffe, when the Faithe was firſte Preached,Vntruthe. For in the time of Auguſtine, Ambroſe▪ Hierome, &c. there vvere moe Chriſtians in the vvorlde, then be at this preſente. and fewe beleued, no Churches (whiche
here not without prophane malice ye name Temples) yet beinge builie: this is no ſufficient reaſon,

why we maie not nowe,Fevve, or many. where the Faithe is generally receiued, haue ſundry Maſſes in one Churche in
one daie. Ye make muche a doo about bothe Kindes, and to aggrauate the matter ye vſe the odious
terme of banniſhinge the people from the Cuppe. VVe teache the people forGood cauſes againſt God. good cauſes to be
contente with one Kinde, doinge them to vnderſtande, they receiue the whole Body ofOne Dreame to proue an other. Chriſte, Fleaſhe
and Bloude, no leſſe, then if they receiued Bothe Kindes. The Sacriledge whiche Gelaſius ſpeaketh
of, conſiſtethVntruthe. For it ſtoode in diuidinge of the Sacraments. in diuidinge Chriſte, and the ſame he imputeth to the Manichees, as I haue an other
where declared.To M. Iuelles Chalenge, Artic. 2. And therefore as that toucheth not vs, who doo not diuide Chriſte, but in the Sacramente
geue to the people whole Chriſte, ſo it ſheweth you to be either ſclaunderous, or ignorant.
                  As for the tongue of the Churche Seruice,Hovv ſo euer Chriſte, and his Apoſtles didde, the Pope, and his Cleregie can not doo amiſſe. how ſo euer Chriſte, the Apoſtles, and Holy Fathers
praied, the vſe of the Latine tongue vſed in the Seruice of the Latine Churche is not by any reaſon or
Auctoritie ye can bringe yet, ſo farre diſproued, that the Churche ought to condemne the order
Vntruthe plaine, and ſenſible. For this Order vvas not from the beginninge. from the beginninge receiued, and hitherto continewed.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée make no crakes of our numbers, M. Hardinge, but humbly géeue God
thankes, that, maugre al your practiſes, and policies, hath publiſhed, and proclaimed
the name of his Sonne in euery place through the worlde. The foorth, and
force thereof greeueth you nowe, as it did others your Fathers before you, that
cried out in an agonie,Iohn. 12. 
                     What ſhal wee doo? Al the worlde renneth after him. Of them
S. Cyril ſaithe,Cyrill. In Iohan. Lib. 8. Ca. 1. 
                     Quicquid Chriſto credentium acceſſerit, ſibi detractum putant:
As many Faitheful Beleeuers, as are gotten to Chriſte, ſo many, they thinke, are loſte
from the ſelues.
                     
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge, the Truthe of God hangeth neither of many, nor of fewe.
Liberius the Biſhop of Rome ſaide ſometime to the Arian Emperour Conſtantius,
                     Theodoret. Li. 2. Cap. 16. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                     Non, ſi ego ſolus ſum, idcircò minor eſt ratio Fidei: Although I be alone,
yet the accoumpte of Faithe is therefore no white the leſſe. Chriſte compareth the
Kingedome of God vnto a peece of Leauen, whiche beinge litle in quantitie the
woman taketh, and laiethe in a greate Lumpe of dough, vntil the whole be al
Leauened. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Nemo paucitatem veſtram deploret. Magna enim
eſt virtus Praedicationis.
                     Matthae. 13. Chryſoſtom. in Matthae. Homil. 47. 
                     Et quod ſemel fermentatum eſt, rurſus fermentum ad
coetera efficitur: Let noman bewaile the ſmal number of you. For greate is the Vertue
of Preachinge. And who ſo is once Leauened, is him ſelfe made Leauen to Leauen others.
                     
It is noted in the Gloſe vpon the Clementines, Veritas pedetentim cognoſcitur:
Truthe is knowen by Litle, and by Litle.
                     
                     In Prooemio Clemen. in Gloſſ. Ambroſ. De Noe, & Arca, Ca. 17. Origen. in Pſal. 36. Homil. 2. And S. Ambroſe, Conſtat Diluuium eodem
numero, quo cumulatum eſt, eſſe diminutum: It is knowen, that the 
                              •
                           loudde in the
time of Noe, as it grewe by degrees, ſo by degrees it abated. Origen ſaithe, Ego
concitabo eos in non Gentem. Nos ſumus non Gens: qui pauci ex iſta Ciuitate credimus,
& alij ex alia. Et nuſquam Gens integra ab initio credulitatis videtur aſſumpta:
I ſhal prouoke them by them, that are no people. VVee are they, that were no people,
that Beleeue in Chriſte, a fewe in this Cittie, and a fewe in an other. And neuer was
there any Nation, that was taken whole at the firſt beginninge of the Faithe.
                      The
meaninge hereof is this, that God calleth menne, not al togeather, but nowe a
fewe, nowe moe, as vnto his ſecrete wiſedome ſéemeth beſte. So is it writen
in the late Councel of Baſile,
                     In Con. Baſil. in Epiſto. Synodali. Pag. 152. 
                     Spiritus Sanctus non illuminat omnes eodem tempore:
Sed vbi vult, & quando vult, ſpirat: The Holy Ghoſte doothe not geeue light to al menne
at one time: but breatheth where it wil, and when it wil.
                     
                  
                  
                     This is the Counſel, and the hande of God, M. Hardinge. Wée maie ſaie vnto
you,
                     Tertull in Apolog
                           •
                        t. 
                     as Tertullian ſaide ſometime vnto the Heathens: Exquiſitior quae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      crudelitas
veſtra, illecebra eſt magis Sectae. Plures efficimur, quoties me
                        •
                     imur à vobis. Semen
eſt Sanguis Chriſtianorum: Your earneſt crueltie is an entiſemente, and a prouocation vnto
this Secte: As often as ye recken vs, ye finde vs moe, and moe. The Seede hereof is

Chriſtian Bloude.
                     Fevve, or many, Churche. Temple. Arnobius ſaide ſometime vnto the enimies of the Croſſe of
Chriſte: Nonne haec ſaltem fidem vobis faciunt argumenta credendi, qu
                        •
                     d iam per omnes
terras, in tam breui tempore, & paruo, immenſa nominis huius Sacramēta diffuſa ſunt?
At the leaſte,
                     Arnobius aduer. Gentes, Li. 1. Prouerb. 21. 
                     doo not theſe proufes make you beleeue, that, ye ſee, the greate Secretes of
this Name (of Chriſte) are powred abroade in ſo ſhorte ſpace through al Countries?
                  
                  Fighte not againſte God, M. Hardinge. There is no Wiſedome, there is no
Counſel againſte the Lorde.
                  This is certaine, ye ſaie, touchinge ye groundes of Faithe, the Churche erreth
not. Whether your Churche haue erred, or no, and in what groundes, it ſhal better
appeare hereafter. Truely S. Bernarde ſaithe of your Churche, euen of your
Churche of Rome,
                     Bernard ad Cle
                        
                           •••
                         In Concil. Rhemen. 
                     Inteſtina, & inſanabilis facta eſt plaga Eccleſiae: The wounde of
the Churche is within the bowelles, and paſte recouerie.
                      And againe, Haec ſunt infoeliciſsima
tempora, quae praeuidit Apoſtolus, in quibus homines ſanam Doctrinam non
ſuſtinent:
                     Bernard. ſuper Salue Regina. 
                     Theſe be the vnhappy daies, that the Apoſtle ſawe before, when Menne cannot
abide ſounde Doctrine. This was S. Bernardes iudgemente of your Churche: that
it woulde heare no ſounde Doctrine: and that it for that cauſe ſeemed vtterly paſte
recouerie. Therefore ſo certainely to aſſure your ſelfe of a thinge vncertaine, it
was no wiſedome. Wee maie ſaie of your Popes, and Biſhoppes, whome onely
ye meane by the name of your Churche, as S. Hierome ſaide ſometime of certaine
others your Fathers longe agoe:Hieronym. in Sophoni. Ca. 3. 
                     Non tam indignentur 
                           •
                        obis haec exponentibus, &
Prophetis vaticinantibus, quàm Dominum deprecentur, & ſtudioſ
                           •
                         agant, ne de Sacerdo
                        
                           •
                        ibus,
qui violant Sancta Domini, eſſe mereantur: Let them not take ſtomake againſte vs,
that expounde theſe thinges: nor againſte the Prophetes, that foretolde theſe thinges: But
let them praie vnto God, and take good heede, that they be not of thoſe Prieſtes, that defile
the Holy thinges of the Lorde.
                     
                  
                  
                     Churches, ye ſaie, not without profane malice, ye cal Temples.
                      Malice comme
vnto him, M. Hardinge, that Malice meaneth. The Prophete Dauid ſaithe, The
Lorde in his Holy Temple:
                     Pſalm. 10. 1. Corinth. 3. S. Paule ſaithe, Your Bodies be the Temples of the
Holy Ghoſte: Know ye not, that ye be the Temple of God: If any man defile the Temple
of God,
                     2. Corinth. 6. 
                     the Lorde wil deſtroie him: Ye are the Temple of the Liuinge God: What
agreemente is there bitweene the Temple of God, and an Idole? So many times S.
Paule nameth Temples togeather in one place: and yet, I thinke, without any
greate profane Malice. But it ſhalbe lawful for you, M. Hardinge, to make newe
Sinnes, and to ſaie, The Apoſtles of Chriſte were malicious, & wicked, onely for
that they called the Churche of God by the name of Temple. Would God, ye had
not turned Goddes Temple into the Synagoge of Sathan. Wée ſée by your practiſe,
it is true,Chryſoſtom. in Matthae. Homil. 38. that S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Sicut de Templo omne bonum egreditur,
ita etiam de Templo omne Malum procedit: As euery good thinge proceedeth from
the Temple, ſo euery il thinge proceedeth likewiſe from the Temple.
                  
                  In defence of your Halfe Communion, ye ſaie, For good cauſes ye teache the people
to be contente with one Kinde. And thus ye force the poore people, contrarie to the expreſſe
Woorde of Chriſte, contrarie to the example of the Apoſtles, and al the Holy
Fathers in the Primitiue Churche, and contrarie to the general vſe, and order
of a whole thouſande yéeres, to geeue care to your good cauſes. But theſe cauſes,
no doubte, are greate, and woorthy: Otherwiſe yée would not weigh them againſte
God.Alphonſ. Aduerſus Hareſ. Li. 6. De Euchariſt. But wherefore are they diſſembled. Why are they not tolde vs? Your owne
Doctours, Alphonſus de Caſtro, and Iohn Gerſon, haue laide them out in this
wiſe Particularely, and at large: The daunger of ſheaddinge: The carriei
                           •
                        ge from place
to place:
                     Section vltima. Iohan▪ Gerſon De Communione Laico
                           •
                        . 
                     The fowlinge of the Cuppes: The trouble of Mennes Beardes: The Reſeruinge
for the Sicke: The turninge of the VVine into Vineger: The engendringe of Plees: The
Corruption, or Putrefaction: The Lotheſomeneſſe that maie happen, for ſo many to Drinke

of one Cuppe:
                     Halfecom munion. 
                     The impoſsibilitie of prouidinge one Cuppe, that maie be ſufficiente to ſerue
al the People: In ſomme places VVine is deare: in ſomme other places the VVine wil be
frorne. Theſe, M. Hardinge, be the faireſt, and greatteſt of your good cauſes.
And yet haue you thus concluded in your late Chapter at Tridente, Si quis dixerit▪
                     
                     Concil. Trident. De Commun ſub vna ſpecie, Can. 2.
                     Sanctam Eccleſiam Catholicam non iuſtis cauſis, & rationibus adductam fuiſſe,
vt Laicos, atque etiam Clericos non conficientes, ſub Panis tantummod
                           •
                         ſpecie Communicaret,
aut in eo erraſſe, Anathema ſit: If any man ſhal ſaie, that the Holy Catholique
Churche, without iuſte Cauſes, and reaſons her mouinge, doothe Communicate
bothe the Laitie, and alſo Prieſtes, onleſſe they Miniſter, vnder the onely Fourme of
Breade,
                     
                     Tertul De Praeſcription. 
                     or that the Churche hath erred in the ſame, Accurſed be he. Therefore Tertullian
ſaithe rightly of you: Credunt ſine Scripturis, vt Credant Contra Scripturas:
They Beleeue vvithout the Scriptures, that they maie Beleeue againſte the
Scriptures.
                     
                  
                  
                     But ſpecially, I beſeche you, M. Hardinge, conſider wel theſe woordes of S.
Hierome,Hieronym. in Sophoni. Cap. 1. 
                     and ſée, whether ye maie applie them to your ſelues, or no: In Conſummatione
Mundi ſcrutabitur Dominus Hieruſalem, id eſt, Eccleſiam ſuam cum Lucerna,
& vlciſcetur ſuper viros Contemptores, qui noluerunt Seruare Cuſtodias ſuas, id eſt,
Mandata Domini Contempſerunt: & inſuper Ratione ſe peccare dicentes, blaſphemauerunt
in Cordibus ſuis: In the ende of the VVorlde our Lorde ſhal ſearche Hieruſalem,
that is to ſaie, his Churche, with a Candel, and ſhal wreake him ſelfe vpon the
deſpiſers, that woulde not keepe their watches, that is to ſaie, that deſpiſed the Commaundementes
of God: and ouer, and biſides this, ſaieinge, they hadde good Cauſes, and Reaſons,
vvherefore they ſhoulde offende, (& breake Goddes Commaundementes,)
they blaſphemed in their Hartes.
                  That ye ſurmiſe of Gelaſius, is moſte vntrue. He ſpeaketh not one Woorde
there, of the diuidinge of Chriſte, as you imagine: nor had he any cauſe ſo to
ſpeake. But he ſaithe in moſte plaine wiſe, It is Sacrilege to doo the ſame thinge,
that you doo, that is to ſaie, to diuide the Sacramente, & to Miniſter the One parte,
as ye doo, without the other. Looke better on your Bookes: and Confeſſe the
Truthe,De Conſecrat. Diſt. 2. Comperimus. as ye ſhal finde it. The woordes be theſe: Aut integra Sacramenta
percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur. Quia diuiſio vnius eiuſdem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Myſterij ſine
grandi Sacrilegio non poteſt peruenire: Either lette them receiue the vvhole Sacramentes,
or els let them be driuen from the vvhole. For the Diuiſion ofone and the ſame
Myſterie
                      (or Sacramente) cannot happen without greate Sacrilege. He ſpeaketh not of
the diuiſion of One Chriſte, as you tel vs, but of the diuiſion of One Myſterie.
                  
                  Otherwiſe, touchinge Chriſte,1. Corinth. 8. Euagri. Lib. 2. Cap. 17. wée ſaie with S. Paule, Vnus Dominus Ieſus
Chriſtus, There is One Lorde Ieſus Chriſte:
                      And wée proteſte with the Biſhoppes of
the Eaſte in the Councel of Chalcedon, Accurſed be he, that parteth Chriſte:
Accurſed be he,
                     Concil. Chalcedon. Actio 2. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     that diuideth him.
                  
                  That you ſaie, The order of your Latine Seruice hath euermore benne vſed in
the Latine Churche from the beginning, it is vtterly vntrue. For proufe whereof,
I remitte you to my Former Replie in the thirde Article, & the fiftéenth Diuiſion.
                  The reſte, that ye allege, is not woorthe the anſwearinge.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 2.
               Al theſe thinges muſte they of neceſſitie ſaie, onleſſe perchaunce
thei had rather ſaie thus, That al Lavve, and Right is locked vp in
the treaſurie of the Popes breaſte, and that, as once one of his ſoothinge
Pages, and Clawbackes did not ſticke to ſaie, the Pope is
hable to diſpenſe againſte the Apoſtles, againſte a Councel, and
againſte the Canons and Rules of the Apoſtles: and that he is not

bounde to▪ ſtande, neither to the examples,Diſpenſe againſte Goddes vvoorde. nor to the ordinaunces, nor
to the Lawes of Chriſte.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  To ſaie, that al Lawe and right (your Latine terme is Fas) is locked vp in the treaſurie of the
Popes breaſ
                        •
                     te, it were abſurde and vnreaſonable. Mary to ſaie, that the Lawes reſte in the Popes
breaſte,It is no reaſon that Diuines be required to make good vvhat ſo euer is vvritten by the Canoniſtes or Schoolemen. after a certaine meaninge, as hereafter ſhalbe declared, it isNot altogeather biſide truthe: A Colde Defence. not altogeather beſide truthe
and reaſon. But Sirs, what if ſome meane writer, or Gloſer vpon the Canon Lawe ſpeake ſomewhere
out of ſquare, if al ſhould be exactly tried by Scripture, wil ye laie that to our charge? Shal
the Faithe of the Catholike Churche thereby be called in doubte and queſtion? VVe take not vpon vs to
Defende al that y• Canoniſtes, or Schoolemē ſaie or write: &c. In this kinde or order be many things,
whiche may rather be called rules of maners, then Principles, or ſuch as we terme Axiomata of our
Faithe. Theſe although they be founde written in the Scripture, for aſmuche as they haue benne commaunded
by an occaſion, and for ſome cauſe, they maie for cauſe, and occaſion, and, as we finde in C.
Lector, for neceſsitie, by Gods depute, and Vicare be ſupplied, holpen, expounded. And if the caſe ſo
require, he in the ſame for a certaine cauſe, with a certaine perſone, for a certaine time, with certaine
circumſtances maye diſpenſe, by the ſame ſpirite, they were firſte founded and inſtituted withal,
and with the ſame intention, to witte, for ſome ſpeciall good, and furtherance of Godlineſſe. Suche
adminiſtration of Gods Lawe, and ſuche diſpenſation thereof, as of a precious Treaſure, not free or
at Libertie and pleaſure, but an euen, iuſte, and good diſpenſation, they do attribute to Gods Vicare,
whome this Defender calleth the Popes Paraſites, Pages, and Clawbackes, him ſelfe a very Page,
Slaue, and clawbacke to the Diuel.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, ye rome, and wander, & goe maſket, as a man, that were
benighted, and had loſte his waie. In ſomme caſes, ye ſaie, the Pope maie diſpenſe againſt
Goddes VVoorde: In ſomme caſes he maie not. Faine woulde ye, for ſhame, ſomewhat
limite, & reſtraine his Immoderate Authoritie: but ye knowe not, where to laie
the boundes.15. q. 6. Authoritatem. In Gloſſa. Diſt. 82. Preſbyter. Ye make ſmal accompte of your Schoole Doctoures, and Canoniſtes,
that is to ſaie, of the Principal Pillers of your Catholique Churche: and
thinke them not woorthy to be your guides. How be it, your laboure cannot al be
loſte: For they wil thinke as light of you.
                  But,Felin. De Conſtitutionib. Cap. Statuta Canonum. Colum. 6. 6. q. 1. Quicunabque;. In Cloſſa. for as mutche, as, ye ſaie, they flatter not the Pope, nor be his Pages, or
Paraſites, but ſpeake roundely to him, and tel him his owne, it ſhal not be mutche
amiſſe, to herken a litle, what they ſaie.
                  
                     One of them ſaithe thus, Papa poteſt Diſpenſare contra Ius Naturale: The Pope
maie Diſpenſe againſte the Lavve of Nature. An other ſaith, Papa Diſpenſat contra
Canones Apoſtolorum: The Pope Diſpenſeth againſt the Canons, or Rules of the
Apoſtles.Panormi. Extra De Diuortijs. Ca. Fin. 
                     An other ſaithe, Papa poteſt mutare formam Verborum in Baptiſmo:
The Pope maie change the fourme of VVoordes in Baptiſme. An other
ſaithe, Priuilegium dari poteſt contra Ius Diuinum: The Popes Priuilege maie be
graunted againſte the Lavve of God.Summa Angel. In Dictione Papa. 
                     An other ſaithe, Papa ex Maxima Cauſa poteſt
Diſpenſare contra Nouum Teſtamentū: The Pope vpon a very great cauſe maie diſpenſe
againſte the Nevve Teſtamente. An other ſaith, Papa poteſt Diſpenſare de
omnibus praeceptis veteris,Felin. De Conſtitution. Ca. Statuta Canonum. Felin. De Maioritate, & Obedient. Ca. 2. & Noui Teſtamenti: The Pope maie Diſpenſe for any
commaundemente of the Olde, or Nevve Teſtamente. An other ſaithe,
Papa poteſt Diſpenſare contra Epiſtolas Pauli: The Pope maie Diſpenſe againſte the
Epiſtles of S. Paule. And ſomewhat to qualifie the outrage of the mater, an other
ſaithe, Papa poteſt Diſpenſare contra Ius Diuinum in Particulari, non in Vniuerſali:
The Pope maie Diſpenſe againſt the Lavve of God, in Particulare, not in General.
                     Idem De Maioritate, & Obedien. Ca. fin.
                     And againe, Papa poteſt tollere Ius Diuinum ex Parte, non in Totum:
The Pope maie aboliſhe the Lavve of God, in parte, but not in vvhole.
                  
                     
                     An other ſaithe,
                     Diſpenſe againſte Goddes VVoord. Martinus Papa. 5. Diſpenſauit cum quodam, qui acceperat Germanam
ſuam in Vxorem: Pope Martine, the. 5. diſpenſed with a man, y• had taken to
VVife his ovvne Siſter. Whether this reporte be true, or falſe, I referre mée
ſelfe to the credite of the Authoure.
                     Summa Angel. In Dictione pp. Panormita. Extra, De Electione, & Electi poteſt. Venerabilē. 
                     An other ſaith, Papa poteſt Diſpenſare cum
omnibus Perſonis, niſi cum Patre, & Matre: The Pope maie diſpenſe vvith al Perſonnes
(touchinge Marriage) ſauinge onely vvith Father, and Mother (to Marrie,
or to be Married to theire Children). An other ſaith, Papa poteſt ſupra Ius
Diſpenſare: Et de Iniuſtitia poteſt facere Iuſtitiā: & Sententiam, quae nulla eſt, facere
aliquam: Et de nihilo, facere aliquid: The Pope maie diſpenſe aboue the Lawe: ye Pope
of VVronge, maie make Right:De Tranſlatione Epiſco. Quanto. Hoſtien. De Tranſlatione Epiſcop. Quāto. Heruaeus de Poteſtate Papae. 
                     The Pope of no Sentence, maie make a Sentence: The
Pope of nothinge, maie make ſomme thinge. The cauſe hereof, as an other ſaith,
is this, Quia Papa poteſt, excepto Peccato, quicquid Deus ipſe poteſt: Sinne onely
excepted, the Pope maie doo, vvhat ſo euer God him ſelfe maie doo.
                  
                     An other ſaithe, Papa habet Authoritatem declarandi Scripturas, ita, vt non liceat
oppoſitum tenere, vel opinari:
                      The Pope hath Authoritie ſo to expounde, and to declare
the Scriptures, that it maie not be lawful for any man to hold, or to thinke the Contrarie. For
Cardinalis Cuſanus ſaithe,
                     Cardina. Cuſan. De Authoritat. Eccle. & Conci. Supra & cōtra Scripturam. 
                     as it ſaide before, Scripturae ad tempus adaptatae ſunt, &
variè intellectae, ita, vt vno tempore ſecundū currentē Vniuerſalem ritum exponātur: mutato
ritu, iterum ſententia mutetur:
                      The Scriptures are applied vnto the time, and are diuerſly
derſtanded: ſo that at one time they are taken accordinge to the Vniuerſal Currente order:
whiche order being changed, the meaninge of the Scripture is changed too.
                  
                     An other demaundeth a queſtion,
                     Franciſ. De Maron. in 4. Diſt. 19 q. 1. Articul. 2. 9. quae. 3. Nemo. In Gloſſa. Vtrùm Papa ex Plenitudine Poteſtatis poſsit
omnia: Whether the Pope by the Fulneſſe of his Power maie doo al thinges.
                  An other ſaithe, Si totus mundus ſententict contra Papam, videtur, quòd
ſtandum eſſe
                           •
                         ſententiae Papae: If al the VVorlde vvoulde geue ſentence contrarie
to the Pope, yet it ſeemeth, vvee ought to ſtande to the ſentence of the
Pope. Theſe, M. Hardinge, by your Iudgemente are neither Pages, nor Paraſites:
but good ſadde, and earneſt frendes: ſutche as loue roughly, and plainely to
vtter theire minde, without flatterie.
                  
                     This doubteleſſe is it, that Daniel ſo longe before Propheſied of him, Dabitur
illi os loquens grandia:Daniel. 7. 
                     He ſhal haue a mouthe geuen him vtteringe greate, and preſumptuous
maters. For in déede, notwithſtandinge al this glorious glitteringe of painted
Authoritie,
                     
                     Iohan. Andreas. De Iudicijs. Cum veniſſent. 
                     yet one of the Popes owne menne ſaithe, Papa non poteſt facere
de quadrato rotundum: The Pope cānot make a ſquare thing, roūde. S.
                      Bernarde ſaith,
An Regula non concordat cum Euangelio, vel Apoſtolo? Alioqui Regularam non eſt
Regula:Bernar. in Apologia ad Guliel. Abbatem. quia non eſt recta: Dooth not the Rule agree with the Goſpel, or with the Apoſtle?
Otherwiſe that Rule is no Rule at al: for it is crooked, it is not ſtreight.
                  
                  
                     And therefore Pope Zoſimus in more ſober wiſe ſaithe thus, Contra Statuta
Patrum condere aliquid,Inter Decr
                           •
                        ta Zoſimi. vel mutare, ne huius quidem Sedis Authoritas poteſt: The
Authoritie of this See cannot order, or change any thinge contrarie to the orders of our Fathers.
                  
                  Iſidorus ſaithe, Is qui praeeſt, ſi praeter voluntatem, vel praeter quod in Scripturis
Sanctis euidenter Praecipitur,11. q. 3. Si is qui. vel dicitaliquid, vel imperat, tanquam Falſus Teſtis Dei, &
Sacrilegus habeatur: He that is in Authoritie, if he ſpeake, or Commaunde any thinge, beſides
the wil, or meaninge of Goddes Woorde, or otherwiſe, then is expreſſely commaunded
in the Scriptures, let him be taken as a Churcherobber, and as a falſe vvitneſſe againſt
God.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 3.
               Wee, for our parte, haue learned theſe thinges of Chriſte, of the Apoſtles,
of the Deuoute Fathers: and doo ſincerely with good faithe

teache the people of God the ſame. Whiche thinge is the onely cauſe
why wee at this daie are called Heretiques of the chiefe Prelate (no
doubte) of Religion. O immortal God, hath Chriſte him ſelfe then,
the Apoſtles, & ſo many Fathers, al at once gonne aſtraie? Were then
Origene, Ambroſe, Auguſtine, Chryſoſtome, Gelaſius, Theodoretus,
foreſakers of the Catholique Faithe? Was ſo notable a conſent
of ſo many Auncient Biſhoppes, and Learned menne, nothinge els,
but a conſpiracie of Heretiques? Or, is that nowe condemned in vs,
whiche was then commended in them? Or, is the thing now, by alteration
onely of mennes affectiōs, ſodainely becomme ſchiſmatique,
whiche in them was coumpted Catholique? Or, ſhal that, whiche in
times paſte was vndoubtedly true, now by and by, bicauſe it liketh
not theſe menne, be Iudged falſe? Let them then bringe foorth an other
Goſpel, & let them ſhewe the cauſes, why theſe thinges, whiche
ſo longe haue openly benne obſerued, & wel allowed in the Churche
of God, ought nowe in the ende to be called in againe. Wee know wel
yenough, the
                     •
                   the ſame Woorde, whiche was opened by Chriſte, and
ſpreadde abroade by the Apoiſtles, is ſufficiente, bothe to our Saluation,
& alſo to vphold, & mainteine al Truthe, & to confound al māner
of Hereſie. By that Woorde onely doo wee condemne al ſortes of the
Olde Heretiques, whom theſe menne ſaie, wee haue called out of
Hel againe. As for the Arians, the Eutychiās, the Marcionites, the
Ebionites, the Valentinians, the Carpocratians, the Tatians, the
Nouatians, and ſhortely al them, whiche haue a wicked opinion either
of God the Father, or of Chriſte, or of y• 
                  Holy Ghoſt, or of any
other pointe of Chriſtian Religion, for ſo mutche as they be confuted
by the Goſpel of Chriſte, wee plainely pronounce them for deſtable, &
damned Perſonnes, and defie them euen vnto the Diuel. Neither
doo wee leaue them ſo, but wee alſo ſeuerely, and ſtreitely hold them
in by lawful, and politique pouniſhementes, if they fortune to breake
out any where, and bewraie them ſelues.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVe for our parte knowe, as nowe we haue proued, that ye haue not learned theſe thinges of
Chriſte, nor of the Apoſtles, nor of the Fathers: but of Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Caluine, Peter
Martyr, Bucer, and ſutche other Apoſtates: and that ye do moſte falſely, and wickedly leade the people
into the Pitte with you. And therefore ye are iuſtly condemned by the Churche, and demed Heretikes,
&c.
                  How condemne ye the Donatiſtes, ſeinge with them ye breake, and throwe down the Holy Aulters
of God, on whiche (as Optatus writeth) the Body, and Bloude of Chriſte was wonte to be laid? &c.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Hereto, M. Hardinge, the whole groſſe ſumme of your Anſweare in effecte is
this: Ye Falſely, and wickedly leade the people: ye are Apoſtates: ye are Heretiques: ye are Impupudente,
and rebellious Children: ye are Deſpiſers of God: Mockers of your Mother: and peruerters of
the Apoſtles: ye vtter Lies: ye ſpeake blaſphemies. At the laſte ye ſaie, The Diuel dwelleth in our
hartes, as in his ſhoppe. This is a haſty kinde of Logique, M. Harding: He muſte needes
be harde harted, that wil not yelde to ſutche Argumentes.
                  
                     
To leaue other your waſte woordes,Auttars. of Vigilantius, Iouinian, Manichee,
Aërius, and ſutche others, in the ende ye pronounce your Definitiue Sentence, as
a Iudge, and condemne vs for Heretiques, for that wée haue taken downe your
Shoppes, and gaineful Boothes, whiche ye cal the Holy Aultars of God. Verily,
this muſte néedes be thought, either extreme rigoure, or greate folie, of the remoninge
of a ſtone to make an Hereſie. Sutche Hereſies, I trowe, S. Auguſtine,
S. Ambroſe, Optatus, and other Learned Fathers knewe but fewe.
                  Neither is there any good ſufficiente reaſon to be ſhewed, wherefore it ſhould
more be Hereſie in vs, to take downe your néedeleſſe, and Superſtitious Walles,
whiche ye had erected of your ſelues, without Commiſſion, then it was lately in
you, to teare in ſunder, and to burne our Communion Tables: in the erection, and
vſe whereof wée had the vndoubted example, bothe of Chriſte him ſelfe, and alſo of
the Aunciente Catholique Fathers. I ſaie nothinge of your Crueltie in burninge
ſo many Bibles, and Bookes of Goddes Holy Woorde: ſo many of your Bretherns
Bodies: ſo many Temples of the Holy Ghoſte.
                  As for the Aultars, whiche, Optatus ſaithe, the Donatiſtes brake downe,
they were certainely Tables of VVood, ſutche as wée haue: and not Heapes of
ſtones,
                     Artic. 3. Diui 20. Auguſt. Epiſt. 50. Ad Bonifacium. Athanaſi. in Epiſt. ad Solitariā Vitam agentes. ſutche as ye haue as in my Former Replie, made vnto you, it maie better
appeare. S. Auguſtine reportinge the ſame ſtorie ſaithe, the Donatiſtes in theire
furie brake downe the Aultare Bourdes: His woordes be theſe, Lignis eiuſdem
Altaris effractis. Likewiſe ſaithe Athanaſius of the like furie of the Arians:
Subſellia, Thronum, Menſam Ligneam, & Tabulas Eccleſiae, & coetera, quae poterant,
foras elata combuſſerunt: They carried foorthe, and burnte the Seates, the Pulpite, the
VVoodden Bourde, the Churche Tables, and ſutche other thinges, as they coulde g
                              •
                           ate.
                     
                  
                  
                     Touchinge your Stone Aultars, Beatus Rhenanus ſaithe,
                     B. Rhenan. in Epiſtola praefixa
                           •
                         Liturgiae Chryſoſtom. In noſtris Baſilicis
Ararum Superaddititia ſtructura nouitatem prae ſe ſert: In our Churches the buildinge
vp of Aultars, added to the reſte, declareth a noueltie.
                  
                  Wée haue ſutche Aultars, M. Hardinge, as Chriſte, his Apoſtles, S. Auguſtine,
Optatus, and other Catholique, and Holy Fathers had, and vſed: whoes examples
to folowe, wée neuer thought it to be ſutche Hereſie.
                  But Optatus ſaithe, The Body, and Bloude of Chriſte was woonte to be laide vpon
the Aultare:
                      and with theſe woordes ye would faine affonne your ſimple Reader,
as if Chriſtes Body laie there Really, Fleaſhely, Verily, and in déede. But ye
ſhouldAugu. ad Bonifaci. Epiſtiol. 23. remember, that S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Sacramentum Corporis Chriſti ſecundum
quendam modum Corpus Chriſti eſt: Et Sacramentum Sanguinis Chriſti ſecundum
quendam modum Sanguis Chriſti eſt: The Sacramente of Chriſtes Body
                      (not verily,
and in deede, but) after a certaine manner of ſpeache is Chriſtes Body: and the Sacramente
of Chriſtes Bloude, after a certaine manner of ſpeache is the Bloude of
Chriſte.
                     De Conſe. Diſt. 2. Hoc eſt, quod. in Gloſſa. This manner of Speache your owne Gloſe thus expoundethe, Vocatur
Corpus Chriſti, id eſt, Significat Corpus Chriſte: It is called the 
                              •
                           ody of Chriſte, that
is to ſaie, It Signifieth the Body of Chriſte. And, as Optatus ſaith, Chriſtes
Body and Bloude were laide vpon the Aultare, or Communion Table, euen to
S. Aug
                           •
                        ſtine ſaithe, The whole people was in the Communion Cuppe, and laide
vpon the Holy Table.Auguſt. ad Infantes. Citatur à Beda in 1. Cor. 10. Theſe be his woordes, Vos eſtis in Menſa: Vos eſtis in
Calice: You are vpon the Table: You are in the Cuppe. As the people is vpon
the Table, ſo is Chriſtes Body vpon the Table. The People is not laide,
there verily, and in deede, but onely in a Myſterie: Euen ſo the Body of Chriſte,
as Op
                           ••
                        us ſaith, is laide there, not verily, and in déede, nor in Real, and Fleaſhly
Preſence, but in a Myſterie.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 1.
               In deede wee graunte, that certaine new and very ſtrange ſectes,
as the Anabaptiſtes, Libertines, Menonians, and Zvvenckfeldians
haue benne ſtirringe in the World, euer ſithence the Goſpel did
firſte ſpringe. But the Worlde ſeeth nowe right wel, thankes be
geeuen to our God, that wee haue neither breadde, nor taught, nor
keapte vp theſe Monſters. In good folowſhip, I praie thee, who
ſo euer thou be, reade our Bookes, they are to be ſolde in euery place.
What hath there euer benne written by any of our companie, that
might plainely beare with the madneſſe of any of thoſe Heretiques?
Naie, I ſaie vnto you, there is no Countrie this daie ſo free from
theire Peſtilent infections, as theſe be, wherein the Goſpel is freely, &
commonly preached. So that, if they weigh the very mater with
earneſt, and vpright aduiſemente, this thinge is a greate Argument,
that this ſame Doctrine, whiche wee teache, is the very Truthe of
the Goſpel of Chriſte. For lightly neither is cockle woont to growe
without the wheate, nor yet the chaffe without the Corne. For
from the very Apoſtles times, who knoweth not, howe many Hereſies
did riſe vp euen togeather, ſo ſoone as the Goſpel was firſte
ſpreadde abroade? Who euer had hearde tel of Simon, Menander,
Saturninus, Baſilides, Carpocrates, Cherinthus, Ebion, Valētinus▪
Secundus, Marcoſius; Colorbaſius, Heracleo, Lucianus, Seuerus,
and other like, before the Apoſtles were ſent abroade? But why
ſtande wee reckeninge vp theſe? Epiphanius rehearſeth vp foure
ſcore ſundrie Hereſies: and Auguſtine many moe, whiche did ſpringe
vp euen togeather with the Goſpel. What then? Was the Goſpel
therefore not the Goſpel, bicauſe Hereſies ſprange vp withal? Or
was Chriſte therefore not Chriſte?
               And yet, as wee ſaide, dothe not this greate croppe, and heape of
Hereſies growe vp emongeſt vs, whiche doo openly, abroade, and
frankely teache the Goſpel. Theſe poiſonnes take theire beginninges,
theire encreaſinges, and ſtrength emongeſt Our Adnerſaries,
in blindeneſſe and in darkeneſſe, emongeſt whom Truthe
is with tyrannie, and cruelty keapte vnder, and cannot be hearde,
but in Corners, and ſecrete meetinges. But let them make a proufe:
Let them geeue the Goſpel free paſſage: Let the Truthe of Ieſus
Chriſte geue his cleare light, and ſtretche foorthe his bright beames
into al partes: and then ſhal they foorthwith ſee, howe al theſe ſhadowes
ſtreight wil vaniſhe, and paſſe awaie at the light of the Goſpel,
euen as the thicke Miſte of the night conſumeth at the ſight
of the Sonne. For whileſt theſe menne ſitte ſtil, and make mery,
and doo nothinge, wee continually repreſſe, and put backe al
thoſe Hereſies, whiche they falſely charge vs to nurriſhe, and
mainteine.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As for Libertines, what other Subſtance hath your Goſpel,Libertie. biſides carnal libertie, and licentious
liuinge?Libertines. The Doctrine of the Libertines Goſpel. To breake the vowe of chaſtitie ſolemly made to God, by whoſe grace, and your endeuoure
it might wel haue benne kepte, and to breake it for wantonneſſe, and to ſatisfie luſte: is not that proper
to Libertines? To geue ouer faſtinge, watchinge in prayer, and ConfeſSion of Sinnes, whiche
ſhoulde be made to a Prieſte, byMoſte Vaine Vntruthe. See the Anſvveare. whom onely (excepte in caſe of neceſsitie) God promiſeth forgeuenes:
To regarde no Tradition, though it came from the Apoſtles: briefly, to teache that al kinde of outwarde
Godlines is ſuperſtitious, and Phariſaical, and that euery mā muſt without ſtaggaring, or doubting beleue,
that him ſelfe ſhalbe ſaued, if he haue Faith,Vntruthe, ioined vvith vile ſclaunder. doo he what him liſte, is this no pointe of libertie?
VVhat made ſo many malepert Prentiſes, pleaſante Courtiers, diſcourſinge Parlamente Machiauelliſtes,
and al other what ſo euer fleaſh wormes, Merchātes, idle artificers, to embrace your Goſpel, rather
then the grauer and deuouter ſorte of men, whiche be weaned from the pleaſure of this life: but that
it was plauſible to the VVorlde, and pleaſant to the Fleaſhe, from whiche that kinde of men are moſte
hardly drawen? And yet foreſoothe doo not ye foſter vp Libertines.
                  VVho can recken the ſectes that be in Germany,Bemelande. Sileſia. Morauia. beingFoure greate Vntruthes al togeather. ſixteene or moe profeſſed in ſome one towne?
Bemelande is almoſte as ful of Hereſies, as of Houſes. Sileſia is as bad, and Morauia a Countrie
there adIoininge is neuer a whit better. And yet do not theſe Sectes bud, where your Goſpel is freely,
and openly preached?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Harding, I haue purpoſely leafte out a greate heape of your talke, not
thinkinge it needeful, to anſweare al your voide woordes. Hauing nomore regarde,
what ye ſaie, it was no harde mater for you to cal vs Libertines, and to ſaie, The
Goſpel, that wee Preache, hathe none other Subſtance, but Carnal Libertie, and Licenceous Liuinge.
If ye had remembred, either y• Cittie of Rome, where ye haue benne, or the Towne
of Anwarpe, or Louaine, where ye nowe dwelle, ye coulde not wel, without bluſſhinge,
haue charged vs with Carnal Libertie.
                  Our VVantons, and Fleaſhevvoormes, for ſo it liketh you to cal them, haue
benne contented to forſake Fathers, Mothers, Wiues, Children, goodes, and Liuinges,
& méekely to ſubmit them ſelues to the extreme terroure of al your Cruelties,
and to yelde theire bodies vnto the Deathe: to be ſterued for hunger: and to be
burnte in Fiere: Onely for the name, and Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſte. Ye wil ſaie,
as your woonte is, when ye haue nothinge els to ſaie, They died ſtubbernly in wilful
erroure. Yet, I recken, yée wil not ſaie, They died in greate pleaſance, or Carnal
Libertie.
                      It is a ſtrāge kinde of Fleaſhely VVantonneſſe, for a man to denie him
ſelfe, and to take vp his Croſſe, and to folowe Chriſte. And yet is this the vvhole
Subſtance of our Goſpel.
                  
                  
                     Iuſtinus the Martyr, notwithſtandinge he was an Heathen, and thought
then, euen as you doo nowe, that the Profeſſours of the Name of Chriſte, were nothinge
els, but a ſorte of VVanton, and vvilful people, yet when he ſawe, howe
Conſtantely they died, and howe patiently they ſuffred, what ſo euer was laied vpon
them, he was at length conuerted him ſelfe, and by theire example became a
Chriſtian:Euſeb. Li. 4. ca. 8. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        Sozom. Li 1 Ca 1. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      Thus Euſebius reporteth his woordes, Ego ipſe Platonis Diſciplinis
delectatus, &c. 
                           
                              •
                            mee ſelfe takinge pleaſure in Platoes Doctrine, and hearinge the Chriſtians
iſ ſpoken of, and ſeeinge them to goe courrageouſly, and boldely to theire Deathe, and to ſuffer
al ſutche thinges, as were thought moſte terrible, I thought it a thinge impoſsible, that
ſutche menne ſhoulde liue wickedly, or in Wantonneſſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     So likewiſe writeth Sozomenus touchinge the ſame, The Chriſtians beinge
ſpoiled of theire goodes, and regardinge nothinge, that they hadde, beinge h
                        •
                     nged on gibbett
                        •
                     s,
and ſuffering al manner tormentes ſo without care, or ſenſe, as if theire bodies had not

benne theire owne,one Head. one Iudge neither allured with flatterie, nor amazed with threates, they gaue al
menne hereby to vnderſtande,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Pſal. 119. that they ſuffered theſe thinges (not of Wantonneſſe, but)
for ſomme greate rewarde.
                  
                     The Prophete Dauid ſaithe, In quo corriget adoleſcens viam ſuam? In cuſtodiendo
Sermones tuos: Whereby ſhal a yonge man (not grow to be a Fleaſhely wanton,
but) amende his life, and correcte his waie? He anſweareth: (O Lorde)
                      by the keepinge
of thy woordes.
                  
                     Therefore wée maie iuſtly ſaie to you,
                     Cyrill. Contra Iulian. Lib. 7. Pag. 162. 
                     as Cyrillus ſaide ſommetime to Iulianus
the Renegate in like caſe, Etiam pueri in Sacris Literis enutriti, ſtatim fiunt religioſiſsimi,
etiamſi minùs eloquentes:
                      Euen our Children beeing brought vp in the Holy Scriptures,
ſtreight waie becomme moſte Godly: although not ſo eloquente, or welſpoken.
                  If there be any ſutche Fleaſhe vvoormes, and VVantons this daie, they be
not the Goſpellers, whiche woorde ſo mutche offendeth you: they be of you, and of
yours, M. Hardinge, that is, not the profeſſours, but the Mockers, & wilful deſpiſers
of the Goſpel.
                  Ye ſaie, Cōfeſſion ſhould be made vnto the Prieſte, By whom Onely (ye ſaie) God hath
promiſed forgeueneſſe of Sinne. I beſeche you, where finde you this Promiſſe? Shewe the
woordes: Allege the Place: Regarde your Credite. Otherwiſe, ye wil be noted of
Vntruthe. Where did God, or Chriſte, euer ſaie, Forgeeueneſſe of Sinne is
geeuen onely by the Prieſte? If it be ſo in déede, then why doothe Chryſoſtome
ſaie,Chryſoſt. De Poeniten▪ & Confeſsion. 
                     Nunc neceſſarium non eſt, Praeſentibus Teſtibus confiteri? Solus Deus te confitentem
videat: Nowe it is not needeful, to make Confeſsion in the Preſence of vvitneſſes.
Let God Onely See thee makinge thy Confeſsion.
                      Why dooth S. Hierome
ſaie,Hieron. in Matthae. Cap. 16. 
                     Apud Deum, non Sententia Sacerdotum, ſed reorum vita quaeritur: It is not
the Sentence, or Abſolution of the Prieſte, but the Life of the Sinner, that is regarded
before God.
                      How be it, hereof wée haue ſufficiently ſaide before.
                  
                     Luther, ye ſaie, Firſte procured, that menne ſhould acknowledge no One Head, and Iudge: Whom,
as by your reporte, S.
                      Cyprian ſaithe, they might obeie, as the
                      Vicare of Chriſte. Of
this One Heade, & One Iudge, neither Chriſte, nor his Apoſtles euer told vs. S.
Cyprian,Cypria. De Sim Praelatorum. Chryſoſtom in Matthae. Hom. 35▪
                      
                     as it is ſaide before, ſaithe thus, Chriſtus Parem dedit Apoſtolis omnibus
poteſtatem: Chriſte gaue vnto al his Apoſtles Equal Povver. And S. Chryſoſtome
ſaithe, Quicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      deſiderat Primatum in Terra, inueniet in Caelo confuſionem:
VVho ſo euer ſeeketh the Primacie in Earthe, he in Heauen ſhal finde Confuſion.
                  The place of S. Cyprian, touching One Heade, and One Iudge, is wel alleged
by you, M. Hardinge: but il applied. It is true, that S. Cyprian ſaithe, The
People ought to obeie One Iudge, or One Heade, as the Vicare of Chriſte. But
that by the ſame One Heade, or Iudge, he meante either the Byſhop of Rome, or
any one other certaine ſeueral Biſhop, it is moſte vntrue. S. Cyprians meanynge
is,In the Former Replie, Artic. 4. Diui. 5. as I haue otherwhere more largely declared, that in euery Dioceſe the People
ought to knowe One Biſhop, as Head, and Iudge, and him to obeie, as the Vicare
of Chriſt. One Head, or Iudge, I ſaie, in euery Dioceſe: not One Vniuerſal
Heade ouer al the Worlde.
                      For proufe whereof, M. Harding, reade S. Cyprians
Epiſtle vnto Florentinus Pupianus: and ye ſhal finde, that he vſeth the ſelfe ſame
woordes of him ſelfe, and not of the Pope: & I doubte not, but ye wil mutche marueile,
and miſlike your owne errour. His woordes be theſe, Vnde Schiſmata, & Haereſes
obortae ſunt,
                     Cyprian. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 9. 
                     & oriuntur, niſi dum Epiſcopus, qui Vnus eſt, & Eccleſiae praeeſt. Superba
quorundam praeſumptione contemnitur? Where hence haue Schiſmes, and Hereſies
ſpronge vp, or wherehence doo they ſpringe, onleſſe it be, that the Biſhop, whiche
is One, and 
                           •
                        uleth the Churche, by the prowde preſumption of certaine is deſpiſed?
                  
                  Here S. Cyprian calleth him ſelfe that One Biſhop, and that One Heade, and

                     Iudge of the Churche.
                     Diſſenſions emōg the Fathers. Yet was he onely the Biſhop of Carthage in Aphrica:
and not the Pope, or Biſhop of Rome. Hereof I haue ſpoken more at large in my
Former Replie.
                  
                     Touching the Pope,
                     Artic. 4. Diui. 5. 
                     wherein he maie be knowen for Chriſtes Vicare, it were
harde to ſaie: Onleſſe it be for that, where ſo euer ye Pope is preſente, there Chriſte
is awaie.
                     Chryſoſt in Matthae. Homil. 6. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Qui vanam gloriam non deſiderat, ille debet Chriſti
Vicarius factus, Chriſti Iuſtitiam praedicare: He, that deſireth not vaine glorie, beinge
made Chriſtes Vicare, ought to preache the Juſtice of Chriſte.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 1.
               Where they ſaie, that wee haue fallen into ſundrie Sectes, and
would be called, ſomme of vs Lutherans, & ſomme of vs Zuinglians,
& cānot yet wel agree emōg our ſelues, touching the whole Subſtāce
of our Doctrine, what would theſe mēne haue ſaide, if thei had benne
in the firſte times of the Apoſtles, and Holy Fathers: when one ſaide,
I holde of Paule: and other, I holde of Cephas: an other, I holde of
Apollo? When Paule did ſo ſharpely rebuke Peter? When vpon a fallinge
out, Barnabas departed frō 
                  Paule? When, as Origen mentioneth,
the Chriſtians were diuided into ſo many factions, as that thei
keapte nomore, but the name of Chriſtians in common emong them,
being in no manner of thing els like to Chriſtians? When, as Socrates
ſaith, for theire diſſenſions, & ſundrie Sectes, they were laughed, &
ieſted at openly of the people in theire ſtages, & common gameplaies?
When, as Conſtantine the Emperour affirmeth, there were ſutch a
number of Variances, & braulinges in the Churche, yt it might iuſtly
ſeeme a miſerie farre paſſing al y• former miſeries? Whē alſo Theophilus,
Epiphanius, Chryſoſtome, Auguſtine, Ruffine, Hierome, being
al Chriſtiās, being al Fathers, being al Catholiques, quarrelled one
againſt an other, with moſte bitter, and moſt remedileſſe contentions
without ende? When, as ſaithe Nazianzene, the partes of one Body
were conſumed and waſted one of an other? When the whole Eaſte
parte of the Churche was diuided frō the Weaſt, onely about leauened
Breade, and onely for the keepinge of Eaſter daie: whiche were in
deede no greate maters to be ſtriued for? And when in al Councelles
Newe Creedes, and Newe Decrees continually were diuiſed?
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The ſumme of M. Hardinges anſweare hereto is this, that the bitter diſſenſions,
that in Olde times fel out emongeſt the Learned, and Godly Fathers, ſtoode
ratherA manifeſte Vntruthe of M. Hardinges. in maters of manners, and other ſmal quarrels, then in caſes, and queſtions
of the Faithe. For trial of the truethe herein, it maie pleaſe you to conſider
wel theſe fewe.
                  
                     Papias,
                     Hieronym. in Hierem. Lib. 4. Irenae. li. 4. ca. 73. Clemens Stromat. Lib. 3. & 5. Iuſtinus in Apologia. 
                     Apollinarius, Victorinus, Tertullianus, Irenaeus, Lactantius, & others,
deſended the Hereſie of the Chiliaſtae, that ſaide, Chriſte after the General
Iudgemente ſhoulde dwel here a thouſande yeeres togeather vpon the Earthe.
Irenae us helde, that Man at the beginninge, when he was firſte created, was vnperfite.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Iuſtinus helde, That the Angels fel,
and effended God, in that they deſired the companie of Woemen. But it ſhalbe

in vaine to ſtande longe herein.Diſſenſions emōg the Fathers. For of ſutche examples there is greate ſtoare.
                  
                     To comme neare the purpoſe, Theophilus calleth Epiphanius Haereſiarcham,
that is, The Grande Captaine, and Father of Heretiques:
                      Gennadius ſaith, S. Auguſtine
was not far of from being an Heretique. S. Hierome,Eraſm in Vita Chryſoſtomi. 
                     writinge vnto S. Auguſtine,
ſaith thus. In Epiſtola tua quaedam Haeretica eſſe iudicaui: I iudged, that
there were certaine Heretical errours in your Epiſtle.
                     Gennadius De Eccleſiaſt. Scriptoribus. 
                     Pope Bonifacius 2. ſaide, that
Aurelius the Biſhop of Carthage, and S. Auguſtine, and other Godly, and Learned
Fathers in the Councel of Aphrica, were prickte on, and inſpired by the
Diuel. S. Auguſtine willeth S. Hierome to acknowledge his erroure,
                     Hieronym in Epiſtola ad Augu. Bonifac. 2. in Epiſt. ad Eulaltū. Auguſt. ad Hieronym Epiſt. 9. 
                     and to recante.
Thus be ſaithe, Accipe Seueritatem Chriſtianam ad illud opus corrigendum, atque
emendandum: & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      vt, dicitur, Cane: Take vnto you Chriſtian Seueritie,
to correcte and amende that Booke (of yours):
                      and recante your Erroure.
                  Thus mutche I thought good briefely to touche: not meaninge thereby to
deface the Authoritie of the Aunciente Fathers: but ſommewhat to open the
truthe of M. Hardinges tale, and to ſhewe, that theſe, and other like Biſhoppes,
and Fathers, notwithſtandinge they were Learned, and Godly, and woorthy
Members of the Churche of God, yet were they not voide of theire infirmities.
                  
                     Eraſmus,
                     Eraſm. in Praef. in Tom. 2. Hieronymi. Ibidem. 
                     a man of greate Iudgemente, ſaith thus, Illis temporibus ingenioſa res
fuit, eſſe Chriſtianum:
                      In thoſe daies it was a greate pointe of Wiſedome, to knowe, how
to be a Chriſtian Man.
                  
                     And againe, Illa aetate in Chartis erat Fides potiùs, quàm in animo: ac penè tot erant
Symbola, quot Profeſsores: At that time (of the Auncient Fathers) the Faith
was in Bookes rather, then in the Harte. And in a manner there were as many ſundrie
Creedes, as there vvere Profeſsours of the Faith.
                  
                     Therefore Clemens Alexandrinus ſaithe, the Heathens thus vpbraided the
Chriſtians,
                     Clemens, Stromat. Lib. 7. 
                     for the ſtriues, and diſſenſions, that were emong them: Vos Chriſtiani
diſsidetis inter vos, & tot Sectas habetis: quae licet omnes Chriſtianiſmi titulum ſibi vendicent,
tamen alia aliam execratur, & condemnat. Quare veſtra Religio vera non eſt:
nec à Deo originem ducit: Yee Chriſtians diſſente emonge your ſelues: and mainteine ſo many
Sectes. Whiche Sectes, notwithſtandinge they al Claime the title of Chriſtian Religion,
Yet one of them curſeth, and condemneth an other. Therefore your Religion is
not true, nor hath her beginninge, or grounde from God.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 1.
               What woulde theſe menne (trowe ye) haue ſaide in thoſe daies?
Whiche ſide would they ſpecially then haue takē? And whiche would
they then haue foreſaken? Whiche Goſpel would they haue beleeued?
Whom would they haue accoumpted for Heretiques, and whom for
Catholiques? And yet, what a ſtirre, and reuel keepe they this daie,
onely vpon the twoo poore Names of Luther, and Zvvinglius? Bicauſe
theſe twoo menne are not yet fully reſolued vpon ſomme one
certaine pointe of Doctrine, therefore would they needes haue vs
thinke, that bothe of thē were deceiued: that neither of them had the
Goſpel: and that neither of them taught the truthe aright.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  After many thinges by theſe Defenders alleaged, for proufe of Diſſenſion to haue ben amonge
the Apoſtles, the faithful people in S. Paules time, the Biſhops and Holy Fathers of the primitiue Church,

whereby they woulde perſwade, if they coulde, that theire owne diuiſion into ſectes, and diſſenſions, is
not a marke of falſe Doctrine: at length, as though they had wonne the filde, and tried them ſelues
proper men, triūphing ouer vs, as though we had nothing to ſaie, with a great courage thei demaūde
this queſtion of vs, whiche though it be but one in effecte, yet with a kinde of brauerie they ſeme to
diuide into ſundry brāches, and thus they ſaie: VVhat would theſe men (they meane the Papiſtes) then,
trowe ye, haue ſaide in thoſe daies? VVhiche ſide woulde they then haue taken, and whiche woulde
they haue foreſaken? VVhiche Goſpel woulde they haue beleeued? VVhom woulde they haue accoumpted
for Heretikes, and whom for Catholikes?
                  Touchinge theſe foure interrogatories,A fourefold anſvveare to the foure queſtions. if we had then ben aliue, beinge of the minde we be nowe
of, we would haue requirred you with foure anſweares of the Holy and moſte Learned Father S. Hierome,
and woulde haue ſaide, as in the like ſtate of times in a Learned Epiſtle he ſaide to the Learned
Pope Damaſus, touchinge the Hereſies, whiche he founde in Syria at his firſte cominge thither from
Rome.Epiſtolarū Tomo. 2. The firſte anſvveare. Firſte, Mihi Cathedram Petri, & fidem Apoſtolico ore laudatam cenſui conſulendam:
inde nunc meae animae poſtulans cibum, vnde olim Chriſti Veſtimenta ſuſcepi.
                  
                  VVhiche woordes, taking vpon me the Perſon of al Faithful and Catholike folkes, thus I Engliſhe: In
theſe controuerſies, I haue thought good for counſel (what I ought to beleeue) to repaire to the Chaire
of Peter, and to the faithe of the Romaine Churche praiſed by Paule the Apoſtle owne Mouthe. And
from thence now require I the foode of my ſoule, from whence I receiued the garmentes of Chriſte. To
ſpeake the ſame more ſhortely, and more plainely, In the Catholike Churche I looke to haue the foode of
my ſoule to euerlaſtinge Life, in whiche I was firſte Chriſtened.
                  Secondely we woulde with him haue ſaide, one ſpeakinge for al, directinge our woordes (as he
did) to thoſe that be of the Catholike faithe,The ſecond anſvveare. whom ye cal Papiſtes: Vos eſtis lux mundi, vos ſal terrae,
vos aurea vaſa & Argentea: h
                           •
                        c teſtacea vaſa vel lignea, Virgam ferream, & Aeternum
operiuntur incendium. Ye are the Light of the VVorlde, ye are the Salte of the Earth, ye are Golden
and Siluerne Veſſels: here (emonge the Goſpellers) are the Earthen and VVoodden Veſſels, which muſt
abide the yron Rodde, and flame Euerlaſtinge.
                  Thirdly with him (one likewiſe bearing the perſon of al) we would haue ſaide to Pius the fourth
that nowe ſitteth in the Peters Chaire,The thirde anſvveare. as he then ſaide to Damaſus: Ego nullum primum niſi Chriſtum
ſequens, beatitudini tuae, id eſt, Cathedrae Petri, Communione conſocior. Super illam
Petram aedificatam Eccleſiam ſcio. Quicunque extra hanc Domum agnum comederit,
Prophanus eſt: Si quis in Arca Noë non fuerit, peribit regnante Diluuio.
Makinge none, but Chriſte firſte of al whom to folowe, I ioine in felowſhip of Communion with thy
holines, that is to ſaie, with the ſee of Peter. Vpon that Rocke I knowe the Churche is builded. VVho
ſo euer eateth the Lambe without the compaſſe of this houſe, he is Prophane. If any remaine without
the Arke of Noe, he ſhalbe loſte, when the floud raigneth.
                  Fourthly touchinge the Authours of this New Goſpel,The fourth anſvveare. with the ſame Hierome we ſaie, al vnder
the Perſon of one: Non noui Vitalem, Meletium reſpuo, ignoro Paulinum. Quicunque tecum
non colligit, ſpargit, hoc eſt, qui Chriſti non eſt, Antichriſti eſt▪ Vitalis I know not,
Meleriꝰ I refuſe, Paulinus I wote not what he is (theſe were head Heretikes in S. Hieromes time).
VVho ſo euer gathereth not togeather with thee (Holy Paſtour) he ſcattereth abroade, that is to witte,
who is not of Chriſtes ſide, he is of Antichriſtes ſide. To tranſferre this to our ſelues, the names changed,
the caſe remaininge like, for our anſweare to our Goſpel prelates, we ſaye: Luther we knowe
not: Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Latimer, Ridly, Cranmer, Hooper, we reiecte and
refuſe: Caluine, Beza, Iuel, Pilkinton, Grindal, Horne, and theire felowes, what they are, we wote
not. VVe ſee they are not gatherers withe the ſupreme Paſtor of the Catholike Churche, but ſcatterers.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     It appeareth by that hath benne already ſaide, that the Goſpel of Chriſte is
now miſliked, & doubted of you, as it was in Olde times of the Infidels, and Heathens.
                     Chryſo. in Acta. Homil. 33.
Chryſoſtome there of ſaithe thus, Venit Gentilis, & dicit, vellem fieri Chriſtianus:
Sed neſcio, cui adhaeream. Multae inter vos ſunt pugnae, Seditiones, ac

tumuitus. Neſcio,Diſſenſions emōg the Fathers. quod dogma eligam, quod praeferam. Singuli dicunt, Ego
Verum dico: The Infidel, or Heathen commeth, and ſaithe, I vvoulde be a Chriſtian
man: but I knovve not, vvhom I ſhould folovve. There is mutche ſtrife, and
diſſenſsion, and trouble emongeſt you. I cannot tel, vvhat Doctrine to chuſe,
to ſet before other. For euery one of you vvil ſaie: I ſaie the Truthe. As ye agrée
wel with them in Fourme of Woordes, ſo, I praie God, ye agree not with them in
Faith, & Sprite, & contempte of God. The ſame Chryſoſtome ſpeaking, not onely
of the Heretiques, but alſo of the Faithful Chriſtians, that were in his time, ſaith
thus▪
                     
                     Chryſo. in Epiſt. ad Galat. Cap. 1. Hanc ob cauſam ridiculi facti ſumus, & Gentibus, & Iudaeis: dum Eccleſia in mille
partes diſcinditur: For this cauſe wee are ſcorned, and laught at, bothe of Iewes, and
Gentiles: while as the Churche is thus rente into a thouſande partes.
                  Therefore it was not amiſſe, M. Hardinge, to demaunde you this queſtion,
whiche of theſe ſides ye woulde haue folowed: and whiche of al theſe Goſpelles ye
would haue beleeued. For it maie wel be thought, that being minded as they were,
ye woulde haue anſweared, as they did.
                  But ye ſaie, yée woulde rather haue ſaide, as S. Hierome ſommetime ſaide to
Pope Damaſus, touchinge the Hereſies, whiche he founde in Syria.
                  
                  If ye woulde vſe S. Hieromes anſweare, M. Hardinge, & ſaie vnto the Pope,
as S. Hierome ſaide, Perhaps ye ſhoulde deſerue no greate thankes for your laboure.
For S. Hierome in that ſelfe ſame place, biſide ſundrie others, vtterly denieth
the Primacie of the Biſhop of Rome.Hieronym ad Damaſum. Nullum Primū. His woordes be plaine, Ego Nullum
Primum, niſi Chriſtum, ſequens, Beatitudini tuae, id eſt, Cathedrae Petri Communione
Conſocior: I folovving no Firſt Man, (that is to ſaie, No Heade, or Chiefe) but
Onely Chriſte, am ioined as a felovve in Communion vnto thy Bleſſedneſſe, that
is to ſaie, to Peters Chaire.
                      S. Hierome telleth the Pope, He knoweth No Firſte,
No Chiefe, No Heade, no not the Pope him ſelfe, but onely Chriſte. Againe, he
ſaithe not, I am thral, and ſubiecte to thy commaundementes: But, I am ioined,Beatitudini tuae Communione Conſoctor.
as a Felovve, in Communion vnto thy Bleſſedneſſe. Felowſhip wil hardly
ſtande with that Vniuerſal power, whiche you imagine, the Pope ought to haue
ouer the whole Churche of God. Verily the Pope him ſelfe would take it in ſcorne,
if you this daie woulde folowe S. Hierome, and cal him your Felowe.
                  
                     But S. Hierome ſaithe, He agreeth in Faithe, and Religion with Damaſus.
And what greate marueile is this, that beinge a Godly Learned man, he woulde
leaue Vitalis, and Meletius, and other Heretiques, and ioine him ſelfe to that Biſhop,
whom he knewe to be Godly, & Catholique? Hereof he writeth thus him ſelfe,
Vineam Chriſti exterminant vulpes: Vt inter lacus contritos, qui aquam non habent, difficilè,Hieronym ad Damaſum.
vbi Fons Signatus, & Horrus ille Concluſus ſit, poſsit intelligi. Ideò mihi
Cathedram Petri, & Fidem Apoſtoli Ore laudatam cenſui conſulendam: The Foxes
deſtroie the Vineyarde of Chriſte: ſo that emonge theſe broken ceſternes, that haue no Water,
it is harde to vnderſtande, where is that Sealed Fountaine, and that Encloſed Orchard. Therefore
I thought it good, to herken to S. Peters Chaire, and to that Faithe, whiche was commended
by the Apoſtles mouthe.
                  
                  S. Hierome from his youthe was brought vp in Rome: He was Chriſtened
in Rome: He had benne a Studente in Rome: He had taught a Schole in Rome:
He had benne Secretarie to Damaſus the Biſhop of Rome: He was a Prieſte of
Rome: And of late they haue furniſhed him with a Cardinalles Hatte, as if he
had benne a Cardinal of Rome:
                     In Vita Hieron. And as it is thought by ſomme, ſauinge for
ſomme diſpleaſure, that certaine of the Cleregie had conceiued againſt him, he was
like to be choſen the Biſhop of Rome. What greate maruelle therefore is it, if he
had ſomme ſpecial affection to the See of Rome? Alphonſus de Caſtro ſa
                        •
                     the,

That the Franciſcane Freers be ſworne to Duns:
                     Recourſe to Peters. Chaire. and that he hearde a Dominicane
Freere ſaie openly in his Sermon, that he was to be ſuſpected, as an Heretique,Alphonſus Aduerſ. Haereſ. Li. 1. Cap. 7.
that in any thinge diſſented from Thomas of Aquine. There is noman
lightly, but hathe a ſpecial credite in ſomme One man before al others.
                  But how holdeth this Argumente, M. Hardinge: S. Hierome ioined with a
Godly Biſhop: Ergo, Wée muſte ioine with a wicked Biſhop? Or, S. Hierome agréed
in Faithe, and Religion with Damaſus: Ergo, wée muſte agrée with one,
that doothe al thinges of pourpoſe contrarie to Damaſus. So might you ſaie,
The Godly people of the Iewes were bounde to obeie Aaron, and Moſes: Ergo,
al others, that folowed afterwarde, were likewiſe bounde to obeie Annas, and
Caiphas.
                  
                  The Faithe of Chriſte, M. Hardinge, goeth not alwaies by Succeſſion. The
Biſhoppes of Rome haue benne Arians, Neſtorians, Monothelites, and otherwiſe
founde in horrible Hereſies: as hereafter ſhalbe ſhewed. Woulde ye in ſutche
caſes haue recourſe to him, that ſitteth in Peters Chaire? Would ye ſaie to ſutch a
one, You are the Salte of the Earthe: You are the Light of the Worlde? Woulde ye ſaie,
This is the Faithe, that was commended by the Apoſtles Mouthe?
                  
                  
                     Truely, S. Hierome him ſelfe, when he ſaw Abuſes, or Errours mainteined
in the Churche of Rome, made ſmal accoumpte of S. Peters Chaire. For thus he
ſaithe,
                     Hierony. ad Euagrium. Quid mihi profers Vnius Vrbis Conſuetudinem? Potentia Diuitiarum, &
paupertatis humilitas, vel ſublimiorem, vel inferiorem Epiſcopum non facit. Coeterùm
omnes Apoſtolorum Succeſſores ſunt. VVhat telleſte thou me of the Cuſtome of
that One Cittie (of Rome?) The Power of Richeſſe, and the humilitie of Pouertie, cannot
make a Biſhop either Higher, or Lower. Al Biſhoppes are the Succeſſours of the Apoſtles.
                     
                  
                  As for Luther, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, Caluine, & others, ye ſaie, ye know
them not. Neither dooth it ſo greatly force, whom you liſte to knowe. God geeue
you Grace to knowe your ſel
                        ••
                     s.2. Tim. 2. The Lorde is hable to knowe his owne.
                  Touching the diſſenſions in Religion, which ye imagine to be emongeſt vs, I
wil ſaie nothinge. It gréeueth you ful ſoare, to ſée, that in al the Articles of the
Faithe, and in the whole Subſtance of Doctrine, wée doo ſo quietly ioine togeather.
The Ancient Father Leo,
                     Leo in Epiphania, Sermo. 6. of the like caſe, ſaith thus▪ 
                     Diabolus Gentium vocatione
Cruciatur, & quotidiana poteſtatis ſuae deſtructione torquetur: dolens vtique ſe deſeri, &
Verum Regem in locis omnibus adorari. Parat fraudes: Fingit diſsenſiones: The
Diuel is ſoare greeued with the callinge of the Heathens
                      (to the Faithe) and with the daily
decreaſinge of his power: ſorowing to ſee him ſelfe foreſaken, and (Chriſte) the True Kinge
to be woorſhipped in al places. Therefore he diuiſeth guiles: and imagineth diſsenſions.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 1.
               But, Good God, what manner of felowes be theſe, whiche blame
vs for diſagreeing? And doo al they thē ſelues, weene you, agree wel
togeather? is euery one of them fully reſolued, what to folowe? Haue
there benne no ſtriues, no quarrelles, no debates emongeſt thē ſelues
at no time? Why then doo the Scotiſtes & the Thomiſtes about that
they cal Meritum Congrui, & Meritū Condigni, no better agree
togeather? Why agree they no better emonge them ſelues cōcerning
Original Sinne in the Bleſſed Virgine: Concerninge a Solemne
Vovv, and a Single Vovve? Why ſaie theire Canoniſtes that Auriculare
Confeſsion is appointed by the poſitiue Lawe of man: and
theire Scholemen contrariwiſe, that it is appointed by the Lawe of

God? Why dothe Albertus Pius diſſente from Caietanus? Why dothe
Thomas diſſente from Lombardus, Scotus from Thomas, Occamus
from Scotus, Alliacenſis from Occamus? And why doo theire
Nominalles diſagree from theire Realles? And yet ſaie I nothinge
of ſo many diuerſities of Freres and Monkes: howe ſomme of them
put a greate Holineſſe in eatinge of Fiſhe, and ſomme in eatinge of
Hearbes: ſomme in wearinge of ſhooes, and ſomme in wearinge of
Sandalles: ſomme in goeinge in a Linnen garmente, and ſomme in
woollen: ſomme of them called white, ſomme blacke: ſomme beinge
ſhauen broade, and ſomme narrowe: ſomme ſtalkinge vpon Patens,
ſomme goeinge barefooted: ſomme girte, and ſomme vngirte. They
ought yewis to remember, there be ſomme of theire owne companie,
whiche ſaie, that the Body of Chriſte is in his Supper Naturally:
Contrarie other ſomme of the ſelfe ſame companie denie it vtterly.
Againe, that there be others of them, which ſaie, the Body of Chriſte
in the Holy Communion is rente and torne vvith teethe: & ſomme
againe, that denie the ſame. Somme alſo of them there be, whiche
write, that the Body of Chriſte in the Sacramente is quantum, that
is to ſaie, hath his perfite quantitie in the Sacramente: Somme others
againe ſaie, naie. That there be others of them, whiche ſaie,
Chriſte did Conſecrate with a certaine Diuine Power: ſomme, that
he did the ſame with his Bleſſinge: ſomme againe that ſaie, he did it
with vttering Fiue Solemne choſen woordes: and ſomme, with rehearſinge
the ſame woordes afterwarde againe. Somme wil haue
it, that, when Chriſte did ſpeake thoſe Fiue woordes, the Material
wheatē Bread was pointed vnto by this Demōſtratiue Pronoune,
Hoc: Somme had rather haue, that a certaine vagum indiuiduū,
as they terme it, was meante thereby. Againe, others there be, that
ſaie, Dogges and Miſe maye truely, and in very deede eate the Body
of Chriſte: and others againe there be, that ſtedfaſtly denie it.
There be others, whiche ſaie, that the very Accidentes of Breade
and Wine maie nouriſhe: others againe there be, which ſaie, that the
Subſtance of the Breade retourneth againe by a Miracle. What
neede I ſaie more? It were ouer longe, and tedious, to recken vp
al. So vncertaine, and ful of doubtes is yet the whole Fourme of
theſe mennes Religion, and Doctrine, euen emongeſt them ſelues,
from whom it ſprange, and grewe vp firſte. For hardly at any time
doo they wel agree betweene them ſelues: except it be peraduenture,
as in times paſte, the Phariſeis, and Saduceis: or as Herode and Pilare
accorded togeather againſte Chriſte.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat ſo euer ye bringe▪
                     The diſſenſions, vvith vvhiche the Defenders charge the Catholike Churche. for ſome ſhewe of diuerſitie and diſſenſion to be founde emong the Caetholikes,
it maie be reduced to two heades. The one conteineth a diuerſitie in pointes of lerninge: the
other in trades of Life. Concerninge matters of lerninge, thanked be our Lorde, for that the very

enemies of the Catholike Churche, cānot charge the Catholikes with diſſenſion in any of the groūdes,
and Articles of our Faithe. As for ſmal matters, and queſtions diſputable on bothe ſides, they maie
therein diſſent one learned man from an other without blame, the Faithe remaininge inuiolated.
                  But, good ſir Defender, what meante you to name the Nominals and Reals? Vnderſtande you
what they be? If a man ſhoulde vpon the ſudda
                        •
                     ne demaunde of you that queſtion,A greate doubteful queſtion. Euery poore Logician maie eaſily knovve it. perhaps you
would be to ſeekinge of an anſwere. Sir if you be an Oxforde man, as I ſuppoſe you be, you maie
remember, if euer you learned your Logike after that trade it was taught in, when we reſorted
to the Paruis there, what adoo was made in daily diſputations for exerciſe of younge wittes, aboute
Genus and Species, and the reſte of the Vniuerſals: VVhether they were termini Primae,
or Secundae intentionis, whether they were entia Realia, or Rationis. VVhiche is a matter perteigninge
to Logike, not to Diuinitie. Nowe ſome Schoolemen be of the opinion, that the fiue Vniuerſals
be termini, or nomina ſecundae intentionis: And they be called thereof Nominals.
Some holde opinion, they are entia realia, and thereof they be named Reals, &c. In the behalfe
of thoſe Holy Religious menne,The Catholike Religious men put no holineſſe in outvvarde obſeruāces. we tell you, ye are to blame to belie them. For what Diſcipline
and order of Life ſo euer they haue addicted them ſelues vnto, for better oportunitie to ſerue God:
truthe is truthe, they put not greate Holineſſe (as ye ſaie) in eatinge of Fiſhe, nor of Hearbes: in
Shoes, nor in Sandals: in Linnen, nor in VVollen garmentes: in white, nor in blacke: in broade, nor in
narrowe Crownes: in goinge on Patens, nor on the bare grounde: in girdinge them ſelues, nor in
beinge Vngirded. They be not ſo ignorant, as to put Holineſſe in ſuche outwarde thinges, though
their obedience performed in the humble obſeruation of theſe outwarde thinges accordinge to their
rule,To vvhat ende be thoſe obſeruances of the Religious. Elias. be an Holy thinge. Theſe thinges they vſe for reſtrainte of their will, and for diſcipline, accordinge
to the order, and rule, vnder whiche, the better to ſerue God, they haue promiſed obediently
and humbly to liue. Neither put they more holineſſe in the thinges by you ſcoffed at, them Elias did
in his Mantell and letherne girdle, wherewith he girded his loines: then Iohn Baptiſt did in Eatinge
of Locuſtes and wilde Honie, in wearinge a garmente of Camelles heare, and in girdinge him ſelfe
aboute the loines with a ſkinne.
                  But I praie you,4. Reg. 1. Iohn Baptiſt. Sirs, who be ye? if we woulde folowe your lightnes, haue we not like matter
of diuerſitie in outwarde thinges,Matth. 3. to twite you withall: but that your diuerſitie is with breache of
due order, and Lawe, and that of religious men is accordinge to order, and rule? If ye thinke diuerſitie
in thinges of their owne Nature indifferent, as meates, apparell, ſhauinge, &c. woorthy to be
reprehended, and deduce from thence an argumente of mutuall diſſenſion: amonge your miniſtringe
Cleregie is not likewiſe diuerſitie founde? Do not ſome amonge you weare ſquare Cappes, ſome
rounde Cappes, ſome butten Cappes, ſome onely Hattes? Doo not ſome weare ſide gownes hauinge
large ſleeues, with Tippettes, whiche is not wel liked of your ſecte, ſome of more perfection Turkey
gownes, Gaberdeines, Frockes, or night gownes of the moſte laye faſhion for auoidinge of Superſtition?
The thinge is indifferent, and maye be yelded vnto, ſaithe the one ſecte: They be the Popes
ragges, and maie not be worne, ſaith thother Secte. And therefore they will rather be iuſtly put
from that whiche iuſtely they cannot keepe, then yelde one iote. Neither her Maieſties commaundement,
nor their Metropolitans decree care they for. They had rather ſeeme to the people, whome
they vſe for their Clawebackes, and to whoſe iudgement they ſtande or fall, ſtoute Champions of
their owne Goſpell, then meeke folowers of Chriſtes Goſpell. Suche mighty Samſons, ſuche conſtant
Laurences, your ioyly Goſpell breedeth.
                  Some ſaie,Chriſtes Body torne vvith teeth, hovv is it vnderſtanded? the Body of Chriſte in the Communion is torne and cruſſhed with Teethe, ſome denie it.
Yea forſothe, and bothe meane right well. The hundred and thirtene Biſhoppes aſſembled in Councell
at Rome vnder Pope Nicolaus the ſeconde, preſcribed ſuche forme of Recantation to Berengarius
the firſte Auctor of the Sacramentarie Hereſie, openly there to pronounce, acknowledge, and with
ſubſcription to ratifie, as he ſhould confeſſe the very true Body of Chriſte, not onely the Sacramente
thereof,Berengarius Recantation. ſenſibly and in veritie to be handled with the handes of the Prieſtes,This vvas a blaſphemous, and horrible erroure. to be broken and
cruſſhed with Teethe of the Faithefull. By whiche woordes theſe Fathers minde was to expreſſe a
veritie of Reall Preſence,The true Eatinge of Chriſtes Body is Spiritual: This imagined Eatinge vvith Mouthe, and Teeth, is Heathēniſhe, and Fantaſtical, and hath no truthe. a true Eatinge of Chriſtes Body in deede, and to exclude the onely ſpirituall
eatinge, ſo as the olde Fathers did Eate Chriſte in their Manna. Neither is thus Doctrine diſſonant

from the Fathers,Nominales Reales. ſpecially frō Chryſoſtome, who hath the like woordes, Homilia. 45. in Iohan.
How ſo euer our Sauiour Chriſte conſecrated,Curious queſtions not defined by Holy Churche in any Councell. with a certaine diuine power, or with his Almightie
Bleſsinge, or with vtterance of woordes, or with repetinge the ſame woordes: what ſo euer the
Pronoune (Hoc) pointeth or ſignifieth in the woordes of Conſecration: what ſo euer your Dogges,
and Miſe haue Eaten, or your ſelues haue troden vnder your wicked feete: whether the Accidentes
doo nourriſhe, or Subſtance retourne: what narrow pointes ſo euer the ſchoolemen after toſsinge of
argumentes too and fro, as their manner is, haue agreed or diſagreed vpon: the matter is ſubtile and
curious, neither determined by definitiue ſentence of the Churche in any Councell. And therefore
ſith is conteineth no Article of our Faithe, let vs not be offended with the whettinge and ſharpeninge
of their ſubtile wittes in matters neither to the Truthe of Gods woorde preiudiciall, nor to
the vnderſtandinge and iudgement of any man, hurtefull.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Touchinge your Nominalles, & Realles, M. Hardinge, if ye had benne ſo cunninge,
& ſkilful, as ye make your ſelfe, ye would not haue ſente vs backe to learne
your Firſte, and Seconde Intentions emongeſt Children. But, that ye maie vnderſtande
your owne erroure, and certainely ſee, that theſe twoo Houſes, your Nominalles,
and your Realles haue heretofore keapt a ſturre, not onely in Logique,
but alſo in your Scholaſtical maters of Diuinitie, without further ſearchinge of y•
bottome thereof, I praie you onely to conſider theſe fewe Authorities.
                  Veſelus,Veſelus. 
                     ſometime for his greate fame in Learninge, named Lux Mundi,
writeth thus, In Nominalibus ſi quid Fidei contrarium putarem, hodiè remearem,
vel ad Formales, vel ad Realles: If I thought there were any thinge in the Nominalles
contrarie to the Faith, I would preſently leaue them, and goe, either to the Formalles,
or to the Realles.Illyricus De Sectis. Pag. 80. 
                     An other ſaithe, Ex Sententiarijs, alij Terminales, aut Nominales
eſſe volunt: alij Reales: Of the Doctours of the Scholaſtical Diuinitie, ſomme
wilbe called Terminales, or Nominales, and ſomme Reales. An other ſaithe,
Citiùs è Labyrinthis temet explices,Eraſm. in Moria. quàm ex inuolucris Realium, Nominalium,
&c. in quibus omnibus tantum eſt cruditionis, vt putem Apoſtolis ipſis opus fore alio
Spiritu, ſi cogerentur iſtis de rebus cum hoc Nouo Theologorum genere conſerere
manus: Ye maie ſooner winde your ſelfe out of a Maze, then out of the ſhiftes, and Corners
of theſe Realles, and Nominalles &c. in whom there is ſutche abundance of Learninge,
y•, I thinke, the Apoſtles them ſelues ſhould haue neede of an other Sprite, if at any time they
ſhould be driuen to encounter with this Nevve kinde of Diuines: Here, M. Harding,
your Nominalles, and Realles, are called a Nevve kinde, not of Logicians, but of
Diuines.Vdal. Zaſius, De Generum obligatione. 
                     And if ye conſider wel Vdalrichus Zaſius, ye ſhal finde, that your ſaide
Nominalles, & Realles haue intruded them ſelues, not onely into Diuinitie, but alſo
into the Ciuile Lavve. Therefore it was ſomewhat out of ſeaſon, to tel vs this
tale, of your Seconde, and Firſte Intentions.
                  Concerninge apparel, ye ſaie, ye ſette not greate Holineſſe neither in ſhooes,
nor in Sandales, &c. Whereby ye would ſéeme to geeue vs to vnderſtande, that ye
ſette ſomme Holineſſe in theſe thinges, although not Greate. Neither doothe it
appeare, that the Phariſeis euer made any greate accoumpte of Holineſſe of their
garmentes. Yet notwithſtandinge vnder the coloure, and ſhadowe thereof, they
deceiued the people. And therefore Chriſte ſaithe vnto them, Woe be vnto you, ye
Scribes,
                     
                     Matthae. 23. Marc. 12. Luk. 20. Seneca. Macrobius. 
                     and Phariſeis: And vnto the people he ſaithe, Beware of them, that loue to
goe in longe Roobes. Of ſutche menne, Seneca ſaithe, Perſonam habere malunt,
quàm faciem: They wil rather weare a Viſarde, then a Natural face.
                      An other ſaithe,
Doloſi Hominis doloſae veſtes: Crafty man, Crafty Cote.
                  
                  
                     But if noman euer reckened any Holineſſe to be in your apparel, wherefore
then was this Decrée ſo longe agoe written in the Councel of Gangra, Si quis

Virorum putauerit Sancto propoſito,Obedience. id eſt continentiae, conuenire, vt pallio v
                        •
                     atur,Holineſſe in Apparel.
tanquam ex eo Iuſtitiam habiturus, &c. Anathema ſit: If any man thinke it agreeable
to his holy purpoſe,
                     Concil. Cangren. Cap. 12. Chryſoſtom. in Matthae. Homil. 43. 
                     of Continente life, to weare a Cloke, as though thereby he maie be
Iuſtified, &c. Accurſed be he. Or, wherefore doothe S.
                      Chryſoſtome crie out againſte
ſutche folie, vſed, as it maie appeare, in his time? O impietatem: Maiorem
Sanctitatem in veſtimentis ſuis volunt oſtendere, quàm in Corpore Chriſti &c.
Vt deſperans de Miſericordia Dei, confidat in veſte Hominis. O the wickedneſſe
hereof: They wil ſhewe more holineſſe in their ovvne apparel, then in the Body of
Chriſte, &c. That he, that deſpaireth in Goddes Mercie, ſhould put his truſte in the garmente
of a Man.
                  Or, wherefore doothe Thomas of Aquine tel vs ſo certainely,Thom. Aquinas. that the wearinge
of Franciſe, or Dominikes Cowle had power to remoue Sinne, as wel as
the Sacramente of Baptiſme? Or, wherefore doothe your Biſhop, in halowinge
the Prieſtes Veſtimentes,In Pontifical. In Benedic. ad Veſtimenta Sacerdotal. ſaie thus, Vt Sacerdotes tui hac Sacra Veſte induti, ab omnibus
impulſionibus, ſeu tentationibus malignorum Spirituum muniti, & defenſi
eſſe Mereantur: That thy Prieſtes wearinge this Holy veſture, maie deſerue to be
ſhielded, and defended from al aſsaultes, and tentations of the vvicked Sprites.
                  
                  Your Doctoure Durande furniſheth out your Prieſte at Maſſe in his Complete
Harneſſe,Durand. in Rationali, Lib. 3. Cap. 1. 
                     a Capo a Pie. Amictus eſt pro Galea &c. His amice,
                      ſaithe he, is his
Headpeece His Albe, is his Coate of Maile: His Gyrdle, is his Bowe: His Subcingle,
is his Quiuer: His Stole, is his Speare: His Maniple, is his Clubbe: His Chiſible, is his
Targette. And in the ende he ſaithe, Haec ſunt Arma, quibus Pontifex, vel Sacerdos
armari debet, contra Spirituales nequitias pugnaturus: Theſe be the Pieces, wherewith
the Biſhop, or Prieſte muſte be Harneſſed, that vvil fight againſte the Spiritual
vvickedneſse. Thus mutche, I trowe, he would not haue ſaide, without ſomme
opinion of ſpecial Holineſſe.
                  To be thorte, wherefore doo your Doctours kéepe ſutche hote Schooles emongeſt
them ſelues,Extra De Conſe. Eccle. vel Allaris. Quod in dubijs. whether, if the Sextine happen to mende his halowed Veſtimente
with a threede vnhalowed, the whole Veſtimente be not thereby becomme vnhalowed?
How could theſe ſo doubteful maters euer haue fallen in queſtion emongeſt
your Felowes, if ye had benne fully, and thorowly perſuaded, that there is no Holineſſe
in your apparel?Lactant. Lib. 6. Cap. 25. The Anciente Father Lactantius ſaithe, Veſtes, Gemmas,
& coetera, quae habentur in pretio, ſi quis puret Deo chara, is planè, quid Deus ſit,
neſcit: If any man thinke, that Apparel, Pretious Stones, or other like thinges, that wee haue
in eſtimation, are pleaſant, or delectable vnto God, vndoubtedly he knoweth not, what is God.
                     
                  
                  But, ye ſaie, what ſo euer your Apparel be, yet your Obedience is very Holy.
The Obedience,
                     In vita Iohannis Damaſceni. ye meane, is, to too what ſo euer your Abbate ſhal bidde you doo:
as, to carrie baſkettes from Paleſtina to Damaſco: To ſitte Seuen yéeres togeather
in ſilence, without ſpeakinge of any woorde: For y• ſpace of tweluemoonethes,
twiſe euery daie to water a deade trée: and briefely,Caſſand. Lib. 4 Cap. 27. to doo what ſo euer fonde buſineſſe
ye be commaunded: As it is written of one, that at the Commaundemente
of his Abbate, threwe out his childe into the ſtreame. This, I trowe, is that Obedience,
that ye commende to be ſo Holy.
                  
                     But S. Paule ſaithe,
                     1. Corinth. 7. Ambroſ. 1. Corinth. 7. Eſai. 1. 
                     Ye are bought with price: Make not your ſelues Sclaues vnto
Menne. And S.
                      Ambroſe ſaithe, Scrui Hominum ſunt, qui humanis ſe ſubijciunt
Superſtitionibus: They are the Sclaues of Menne, that make them ſelues ſubiecte vnto
Mennes Superſtitions. God him ſelfe ſaithe vnto you, Who required theſe thinges
at your Handes?
                     
                     Hieronym. ad Luſtochium, De virginitate ſeruanda. 
                     S. Hierome ſaithe, Viros fuge, quos videris Cathenatos: quibus
foeminei, contra Apoſtolum, ſunt crines: hircorum barba: nigrum pallium: & nudi Patientiâ
frigoris pedes. Haec omnia argumenta ſunt Diaboli: Plee thoſe menne, that
thou ſhalte ſee goe in Chaines: that, contrarie to the Apoſtles commaundemente, weare longe

heare, as Weemen:
                     Choiſe of Apparel. 
                     that are bearded like Goates: that haue vpon them a blacke Cloke: that
goe barefoote, patiently bearinge the colde. Al theſe be tokens of the Diuel. Alphonſus
de Caſtro,Alphonſus Aduer. Haereſ. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. 
                     one of your owne, ſaith, Paulus quidem iuſsit Captiuare intellectum
noſtrum, ſed in obſequium Chriſti, non autem in obſequium Hominum: In deede
Paule bath Commaunded vs to ſubmitte our vnderſtandinge, but vnto the Obedience of
Chriſte, not vnto the Obedience of Menne.
                  The Godly learned menne, at whoſe perſonnes it pleaſeth you ſo rudely to
ſcoffe, that refuſe either to goe in your Apparel, or otherwiſe to ſhewe them ſelues
like vnto you, haue age ſufficient, and can anſweare for them ſelues. Notwithſtandinge,
thus mutche I maie ſaie in their behalfe: Neither doo they commende any
manner of Apparel, as Holy: nor doo they condemne any Apparel, as Vnholy. That
is your proper, and peculiare erroure, M. Hardinge, to make ſo déepe accoumpte of
outwarde Shewes.
                  
                     They knowe,
                     Euſeb. Lib. 4. Cap. 11. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     that Euſebius ſaithe, Iuſtinus Martyr Preached the Goſpel of
Chriſte, beeinge apparelled as an Heathen Philoſopher. They know, that
                      Iohn the Euangeliſt
preached Goddes woorde at Epheſus, wearinge vpon him the Biſhoppes
Brouche, as if he had benne a Biſhop of the Iewes. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Nihil
ſané ad iſtam pertinet Ciuitatem, quo Habitu, vel more viuendi, ſi non eſt Contra
Diuina praecepta, iſtam Fidem, qua peruenitur ad Deum, quiſque Sectetur. Vnde ipſos
quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Philoſophos,Euſeb. li. 3 ca. 41. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Auguſtin. De Ciuita. Lib. 19. Cap. 19. Helar. in Pſalmum. 67. quando Chriſtiani fiunt, nō Habitum, vel conſuetudinem victus, quae
nihil impedit Religionem, ſed falſa Dogmata mutare compellit: It perteineth nothinge
vnto this Cittie (of God), in vvhat kinde of Apparel, or in vvhat order of Life, ſo
that it be not againſte God, any man folowe this Faithe, whereby wee comme vnto God.
Therefore, when Philoſophers becomme Chriſtians, y• Churche compelleth them not to change
their Apparel, or manner of Liuinge, whiche can nothinge hinder Religion, but onely
ſhee compelleth them to change their Falſe Opinions. S.
                      Hilarie ſaithe, Ad Eccleſiae decus
detracta à Diabolo Gentium ſpolia diuiduntur: The ſpoiles of the Heathens, taken
from the Diuel, are diuided to the Furniture, and Ornamente of the Churche of God.
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. Aduerſus Pelagia. Lib. 1. Epiſcopus, Preſbyter, & Diaconus, & reliquus Ordo Eccleſiaſticus
in Adminiſtratione Sacrificiorum, Candida Veſte procedit: The Biſhop, Prieſte, and
Deo
                           •
                        on, and the other Eccleſiaſtical Companie, at the Adminiſtration of the Sacrifice, comme
foorthe in vvhite Apparel. S. Chryſoſtome vnto the Prieſtes, and Deacons
ſaithe thus,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Matth. Homi. 83. Haec eſt dignitas veſtra, haec Corona: non quia, induti Tunicam candidiſsimam,
per Eccleſiam ambulatis: This is your dignitie: this is your Garlande: not that
ye walke through the Churche in vvhite Apparel.
                  Thei ſaie not therefore, that the Apparel is either Holy, or Vnholy. But they
maie truely ſaie, The ſame Apparel of your parte hath benne fowly abuſed to filthy
purpoſes. They maie iuſtly ſaie, they woulde not gladly in any appearance
ſhewe them ſelues like vnto them, that haue ſo vntruely, and ſo longe deceiued the
worlde. And herein they are not without ſundrie Authorities, and Examples of
the Godly Fathers.Auguſt. Confeſſ. Lib. 6. Cap. 2. Quòd Superſtitioni Gentilium eſſent ſuntlima. 
                           •
                        regor. Lib. 1. Epiſt. 41. S. Auguſtine ſaith, His Mother leafte bringinge of VVine,
and Cakes to the Churche, not for that it was vngodly, or vnlawful of it ſelfe ſo to
doo, but onely for that ſhée was warned, It was a reſemblance of the ſuperſtition
of the Heathens. S. Gregorie ſpeakinge of the three Sprinklinges, or Dippinges
into the Holy Fonte, ſaith thus, In Vna Fide nihil efficit Conſuetudo Eccleſiae
diuerſa. Tamen, quòd Haeretici id facerent, negant idem eſſe à Catholicis faciendum:
The Faithe beinge One, the diuerſitie of Cuſtomes hurteth nothinge. Yet for as
mutche as Heretiques haue thus donne, they ſaie, that the Catholiques maie in no
wiſe doo the ſ
                              •
                           me:
                      Not for that the thinge it ſelfe was il, but for that they would
not ſeeme to folowe Heretiques.
                  Gabriel Biel ſaith, the Churche of Rome thought it good, to vſe common Leauened

Breade at y• Miniſtration of the holy Myſteries, leſte in vſinge vnleauened
Breade,Gabriel Lectio. 38. 
                     they ſhould be thought to folowe Ebion the Heretique. Tertullian reaſoneth
vehemently,
                     Tertul. De Corona Militis. 
                     that a Chriſtian man ought not to goe with a Laurel Garlande
vpon his Heade: and that for none other cauſe, but onely for that the Heathens
vſed ſo to goe. Wherupon Beatus Rhenanus geueth this note: Non ſolùm
ab his temperandum fuit,B. Rhenan. in Librum De Corona Militis. quae manifeſtam prae ſe ferrent impietatem, ſed etiam ab illis,
quae poſsent indifferentia vocari, hoc eſt, quae eſſent, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Bona, neque Mala: partim,
ne quiſquam infirmior ex Chriſtianis offenderetur: partim, ne Ethnici in ſuis erroribus
confirmarentur, dum rectius putant eſse, quod etiam Chriſtianos obſeruare
vident: It was meete for them to refraine, not onely from ſutche thinges, as
haue a manifeſte ſhewe of wickedneſſe, but alſo from ſutche thinges, as mighte be called
indifferent, that is to ſaie, neither Good, nor il: partely, leſte any of the vveaker
Chriſtians ſhoulde be offended: partely alſo, leſte the Heathens ſhould be encourraged
in their errours, thinkinge that thinge, for that the Chriſtians them
ſelues doo it, to be the better.
                     Tertul. De Idololatria. 
                     Againe Tertullian ſaithe, De hoc primo conſiſtam,
An cum ipſis quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Nationibus Communicare in huiuſmodi Seruus Dei debeat:
ſiue habitu, ſiue victu, vel quo alio genere laetitiae eorum: Herein wil I firſte
ſtande, whether it be lawful for the Seruaunte of God, to Communicate with whole Nations
in ſutche thinges: either in Apparel, or in Diet, or in any other kinde of theire
Mirthe. And S. Baſile ſaithe, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Let needeleſſe,
                     Baſil. De Natali Chriſti. Origen. in Hieremi. Homil. 3.
                     and ſuperfluous thinges be put to Silence in the Churche of God. To be ſhorte,
                     
Origen ſaithe, Quaerendum eſt, quid hoc ſit, quod ſequitur, Non fiant ei reliquiae:
Ne aliqua, inquit, reſcindatis Chaldaeorum, aliqua reſeruetis. Ob id iubet, ne puſillum
quidem relinquatur in ea: VVee muſte examine, what is meante by this, that foloweth,
Leaue her no manner of remnante. The meaninge is this, Aboliſhe not certaine of the
Superſtitions of the Chaldees, reſeruinge certaine: Therefore he commaundeth, that nothinge
be leaſte in her, be it neuer ſo litle. How be it, I take not vpon me to enter into
the Conſcience of others:
                     Roman. 14. 
                     Let eche man abounde in his owne ſenſe.
                  
                  Yet, M. Hardinge, for as mutche as ye make ſutche a reckeninge of your Antiquitie,
as if al your Orders, and Ceremonies had vndoubtedly benne conueied
ouer vnto you from Chriſte him ſelfe, and his Apoſtles, maie it therefore pleaſe you
to vnderſtande, that at the beginninge there appeareth no ſutche diſtinction, or difference
of Apparel in the Miniſterie. Valafredus Abbas ſaithe, Veteres Communi
indumento vtentes Celebrabant Miſſas: The olde Fathers ſaide Maſſe
                      (that is to
ſaie, Miniſtred the Holy Communion) hauinge on their ovvne common Apparel.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine in his Rule to his Clerkes,
                     Auguſt. In Regula Monachor. Hieronym. ad Marcellam, vt commigret Bethleem. 
                     or Monkes, writeth thus, Ne ſit Notabilis
habitus veſter: Let not your Apparel be Notable. S.
                      Hierome, deſcribinge
the order of the Churche at Bethleem, ſaithe thus: In veſte, nulla diſcretio: nulla
admiratio: Vtcunque placuerit incedere, nec detractionis eſt, nec laudis: In Apparel,
there is no difference: there is no woonderinge. How ſo euer any man liſte to goe, it is neither
ſclandered, nor praiſed. And Pope
                      Coeleſtinus the firſte ſaithe, Diſcernendi ſumus
à plebe,Coeleſtin. I. In Epiſto. ad Epiſcopas Gallia, Ca. I. Doctrina, non Veſte: Conuerſatione, non Habitu: Mentis puritate, non
cultu. Si enim ſtudere incipiemus Nouitati, Traditum nobis à Patribus ordinem calcabimus,
vt Iocum vacuum Superſtitionibus faciamus. Docendi potiùs ſunt rudium
animi, quàm illudendi. Nec Imponendum eſt illorum oculis, ſed Mentibus infundenda
praecepta ſunt: VVee muſte be knowen from the Laie people, by our Doctrine, not by
our Coate: By our Conuerſation, not by our Apparel: By the pureneſſe of our Minde,
not by the attiere of our Body. For if wee once beginne to diuiſe Nouelties, wee ſhal
treade our Fathers Orders vnder foote, and make roome for Superſtition. The mindes of the
ignorante ought to be taught, and not to be mocked. Neither maie wee goe aboute to doſel
the
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        ies: but rather ought to powre wholeſome Doctrine into their Hartes. To conclude,
                        
it is noted in your owne Gloſe vpon the Clementines,
                     
                     Choiſe of Apparel. 
                     Clerici Saeculares non
habent certum habitum,
                     Cl
                           ••
                         p
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••
                        ct. Cap. 1. Gloſſ. vl
                        
                           ••
                        ms. 
                     cùm non fit expreſſum in iure de Colore, vel Forma: per
quae, vel quorum alterum oportet habitum diſcerni: Seculare Prieſtes haue no certaine Apparel
appointed them, for as mutche as there is no expreſſe mention made, neither of the Coloure,
nor of the Fourme: by whiche twoo differences, or by the one of them, Apparel muſte be
diſcerned.
                  Goddes name be Bleſſed. The Religion of Chriſte maie ſtande bothe with,
and without theſe thinges. But without ſutche proppes, the whole rooffe of your
Religion muſte néedes comme downe: as hauinge nothinge els, but ſhewes, and
vanities, to beare it vp.
                  
                     But leſte ye ſhould conceiue ouer greate opinion of ſo ſmal a mater, & thinke,
there can be none other Apparel méete, and comely for the Cleregie, but onely
youres, or, that without the ſame, the whole Churche of Chriſte muſt néedes goe to
waſte: maie it like you therfore to remember, what y• Ancient Father Origen hath
written of you in this behalfe:
                     Origen. in Matthae. Tracta. 25. Non ſolùm apud Iudaeos, ſed etiam apud nos, multos
eſt inuenire, peccata huiuſmodi peccantes, & glutientes Camelos, in eo, quòd maxima
delicta committunt. Et oportet huiuſmodi homines frequenter conſiderare, Quomodò
in rebus minimis Religionem ſuam oſtendant: Et bene eos Hypocritàs appellat:
Wee maie finde, not onely emongeſt the Iewes, but alſo emongeſt our ſelues, menne y• offende
in ſutche faultes, ſwalowinge downe whole Camels, in that they Commit greate offenſes.
And wee ought wel to marke ſutche manner of Menne, howe they countenance out
their Religion with ſmal maters. Very vvel, and iuſtly Chriſte calleth them Hypocrites.
                  Poſidonius,Poſidoni. in vita Auguſt 
                     writinge the life of S. Auguſtine, ſaithe thus, Veſtis eius, & calceamenta,
& lectualia ex moderato, & compe
                        •
                     enu habitu erant: nec nitida nimi
                        •
                     mx, nec
abiecta plurimùm. Quia his plerun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vel iactare ſe nimiùm homines ſolent, vel
abijcere: ex vtro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      non quae Ieſu Chriſti, ſed quae ſua ſunt, quaerentes: Auguſtines
Apparel, ſhooes, and Beddinge were of a Competente, and meane makinge: neither ouer
freaſhe, nor ouer homely. For in ſutche thinges menne vſe oftentimes, either to vaunte,
or to abaſe them ſelues aboue meaſure: in either ſide ſeekinge their ovvne, and not
that perteineth to Ieſus Chriſte.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Serm
                           ••
                        . Domini in 
                           •
                        onte, Lib. 2. Ex coeteris eius operibus poteſt conijci, vtrùm hoc Cōtemptu
ſuperflui cultus, an Ambitione aliqua faciat. Quia & ſub ouina pelle cauendos Lupos
Dominus praecepit: Wee maie geather by the reſte of his woorkes, whether he doo
thus (attiere him ſelfe) in contempte of Superfluous Apparel, or els for Ambition, that he

                           •
                        aie be noted. For our Lorde hath commaunded vs to bevvare of the VVoulfe,
euen vnder the Sheepes ſkinne.Auguſt. in eodem Libro. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Illum parcum habitum, ac
neceſſarium etiam Simulatores ſaepius vſurpant, vt incautos decipiant: That homely
kinde of Apparel, ſtandinge onely in neceſſaries, Hypocrites, and diſſemblers doo for the
more parte countrefcite, to the ende they maie deceiue menne, before they bew
                           •
                        re. Thus
mutche onely by the waie, leſte yée ſhould thinke more of your Coate, then it is
woorthy.
                     
                  
                  
                     Some ſaie, The Body of Chriſte in the Sacrament is Torne, and cruſſhed with Teethe:
and ſomme denie it. Yea forſoothe, ſaie you, and bothe meane right wel. Thus would ye
not ſaie, M. Hardinge, if ye knowe, what it were to Eate the Body of Chriſte.
                  
                  S. Cyprian ſaithe,Cyprian. De Coena Domini. 
                     Eſt Cibus Mentis, non ventris
                           •
                         
                        It is the Meate of our Minde,
not of our Belly:
                      wée Eate it with the Spiritual Toothe of our Faithe, not with
the Material Toothe of our Body. Your very Gloſe, be it neuer ſo blinde, was
able to ſee, that theſe woordes, To teare, and to Cruſſhe Chriſtes Body vvith your
bodily Teethe, can hardly haue ſo Catholique, and ſo good a meaninge, as you
imagine.De conſe. Diſt. 2. Ego Berenga. in Gloſſa. The woordes thereof be theſe, Niſi ſanè intelligas verba Berengarij, in Maiorem
incides Haereſim, quàm ipſe habuit. Et ideò omnia referas ad Species ipſ
                           •
                        s:

Onleſſe thou diſcretely vnderſtande theſe woordes of Berengarius,
                     
                     Dogs, & Miſe.
                     Chriſtes Body Torne, & Cruſſhed vvith Teethe. 
                     thou ſhalte fal into a
greater Hereſie, then he had any. Therefore theſe woordes muſte haue relation to the
Fourmes, and not vnto Chriſtes very Body. It foloweth therefore that the Catholique
Conſtruction, that you geather hereof, muſte néedes be this: Chriſtes Body
is Cruſſhed, and Torne with Teethe, that is to ſaie, Chriſtes Body is not Cruſſhed, nor
Torne with Teethe. Germans lippes be not ſo farre a ſunder, but ye maie eaſily
ioine them togeather by ſutche Conſtructions.
                  But Chryſoſtome ſaith in like wiſe, Dentes inſerimus in Carnes Chriſti: Wee
thruſt our Teethe into y• Fleaſhe of Chriſte.
                      O M. Hardinge, you can not be ignorante of
Chryſoſtomes extraordinarie,Chryſoſtomus in Encaenijs. and vehement manner of ſpeache: and therefore
yée are the more to blame, thus of purpoſe, and witingly to abuſe your Reader.
For, as Chryſoſtome ſaithe, VVee thruſte our Teethe into Chriſtes Fleaſhe,
So he ſaithe likewiſe, Chriſte is ſlaine vpon the Communion Table, and his
Bloude is povvred from his ſide. Likewiſe he ſaithe vnto a ſclaunderer of
his neighboure,Chryſoſtom. Ad Roman. Homil. 21. 
                     Linguam tuam humano Sanguine rubefeciſti: Thou haſte died thy
tongue redde in Mannes Bloude.
                      So S. Hierome ſaithe, Detractores viuis Carnibus
Saturantur: Sclaunderers are filled with liue Fleaſhe.
                      So ſaithe S. Cyprian,
Cruci Haeremus:
                     Hierony. in Iobum. Cap. 19. Cyprian. De Coena Domini. 
                     Sanguinem ſugimus: & intra ipſa Redemptoris noſtri vulnera
linguam figimus: Wee Cleaue to the Croſſe: and ſucke the Bloude: and wee faſten our
Tongues within the woundes of our Redeemer.
                     
                  
                  Theſe, and other like phraſes commonly vſed in the Anciente Fathers, maie
not be racked to the extremitie of the woordes: but rather ought fauourably to be
applied to the meaninge: whiche was, by the Material Toothe, and Tongue of
the Body, to expreſſe the Spiritual, and inwarde Eatinge, and ſuckinge of the
Minde.Auguſt. De Doctrin. Chriſtian. Lib. 3. Cap. 16. So S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Figura ergo eſt, praecipiens Paſsioni Domini
communicandum, & ſuauiter, atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria, quòd Caro
Chriſti Crucifixa pro nobis, & vulnerata ſit: Therefore it is a Figure, or a Figuratiue
phraſe of ſpeache: commaundinge vs to be Partakers of Chriſtes Paſsion, and comfortably,
and profitably to laie vp in our Hartes, that his Fleaſhe was Crucified, and wounded
for our ſakes.
                     
                  
                  As for your Conſecration, Corpus quantum, Non quantum, Non per modum
quanti, Indiuiduum Vagum, &c. whiche lately were the Subſtantialleſt
pointes of al your Doctrine, it is ſufficient for you now to ſaie, They are
no Articles of your Faithe. Sutche Grace haue you, for aduantage, to make your
Faithe more, or leſſe, at your pleaſure. Touchinge your Dogges, and Miſe,
whether they Eate the very Body of Chriſte, or no, and that Subſtantially, Uerily,
and in Déede, ye ſéeme ſtil to ſtaie in doubte, as not yet beinge wel aſſured of
this Article of your Faithe. But this is a moſte certaine, and vndoubted Article
of our Faithe, that no Creature can Eatè the Body of Chriſte, but he, that is
a Member of Chriſtes Body. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Hoc eſt manducare illam eſcam,
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 26.
                     & illum potum Bibere, in Chriſto manere, & Chriſtum Manentem in ſe habere:
This is the Eatinge of that meate, and the Drinkinge of that Drinke: for a Man to dwel
in Chriſte, and to haue Chriſte dwellinge within him.
                      And therefore wée ſaie, Who ſo
euer wil holde, that a Dogge, or a Mouſe maie Eate the very Body of Chriſte,
and that Really, and in deede, or who ſo ſtaggereth, or doubteth, whether it maie
be ſo, or no, Accurſed be he.
                  You ſaie, your Contentions bitwene your twoo contrarie Armies, the Thomiſtes,
& the Scotiſtes, & other Schoolemenne, ſtande onely in certaine termes Metaphyſical:
As, vtrùm Ens, & Vnum differant ratione, an reipſa: The Truthe whereof
is very agreeable to the reſte of your Doctrine. For, to leaue a whole worlde of the
endleſſe contentions that are emong you, Alphonſus, one of your owne Doctours,

ſaithe,Thomiſtes. Scotiſtes. that one of your Thomiſtes doubted not to pronounce openly in the behouſe
of his Maiſter, Quiſquis à B. Thomae ſententia diſceſſerit, ſuſpectus de Haereſi
eſt cenſendus:
                     Alphonſ. De Haereſib. Li. 1. Ca. 7. 
                     Who ſo euer foreſaketh the iudgement of Thomas of Aquine, muſte
be taken, as ſuſpected of Hereſie. I thinke, ye vſe not to place your Hereſies in
Termes Metaphyſical.
                  
                  Eraſmus, that liued in that age, and vnderſtoode of the furies of your Schooles,
ſaithe thus,
                     Eraſmus contra Latomum. Qui Thomam ſequuntur, & à Scoto, & à Gerſone diſſentiunt, eos pené
habent pro Haereticis: They that folowe Thomas, and diſſente from Duns, and Gerſon,
accompte them in a manner as good as Heretiques.
                  
                     Petrus à Soto, and Catharinus, were bothe Learned menne: bothe of your ſide:
bothe ſworne to the Pope: bothe preſente at your late Chapter at Tridente. Yet
thus doothe the one of them gréete the other:Petrus à Soto Contra Catharinum. 
                     Tu permanes in ſenſu damnato per
Synodum: Thou remaineſt ſtil in a ſenſe condemned by the Councel. Catharinus condemneth
Cardinal Caietan for twoo hundred ſundrie errours, & ſomme of them he calleth
vvicked, and Antichriſtian. Theſe Termes muſt néedes be very Metaphyſical,
M. Hardinge, that can yelde you ſutche Heretical, & Antichriſtian errours.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 1.
               They were beſte therfore to goe, and ſette peace at home rather amonge
them ſelues. Of a truthe, Vnitie, and Concorde doothe
beſt becomme Religion: Yet is not Vnitie the ſure & certaine marke,
whereby to know the Churche of God. For there was the greateſt
Vnitie, that might bee, amongeſt them, that woorſhipped the Golden
Calfe, and amonge them, whiche with one voice iointly cried againſt
our Saueour Ieſus Chriſte, Crucifie him. Neither, bicauſe
the Corinthians were vnquieted with priuate diſſenſions: or bicauſe
Paule did ſquare with Peter, or Barnabas with Paule: or bicauſe the
Chriſtians vpon the very beginninge of the Goſpel, were at mutual
diſcorde, touchinge ſome one mater, may wee therefore thinke, there
was no Churche of God amongeſt them. And, as for thoſe perſonnes,
whome they vpon ſpite cal Zuinglians, & Lutherans, in very deede
they of bothe ſides be Chriſtians, good Frendes, & Brethren. They
varie not bitwixte them ſelues vpon the Principles, & Fundations
of oure Religion, nor as touchinge God, or Chriſte, or the Holy
Ghoſte, or the meanes of Iuſtification, or of euerlaſtinge life, but
vpon one onely queſtion, whiche is neither weighty, nor greate: neither
miſtruſte wee, or make doubte at al, but they wil ſhortely be agreed.
And if there bee any of them, whiche haue other opinion, than
is meete, we doubte not, but ere it bee longe, they wil put aparte al affections,
and names of parties, & that God wil reuele the truthe vnto
them: ſo that by better conſideringe, and ſearchinge out of the matter,
as once it came to paſſe in the Councel of Chalcedon, al cauſes,
and ſeedes of diſſenſion ſhal bee throughly plucte vp by the roote, and
be buried, and quite foregotten for euer. Whiche God graunte.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Theſe Defenders be like in conditions to ſuche honeſt women, as commonly we call Scoldes.

Becauſe vnitie pleaſeth you not, as beinge that through lacke whereof your newe Churche is of al
good men deteſted, and of the meaneſt very muche ſuſpected, ye ſaie it is not a ſure and a certaine
marke, whereby to know the Churche of God. Yeas, Maiſters, amonge other notes and markes of the
true Churche, Vnitie is one. Not euery Vnitie, but Vnitie in the Holy Ghoſt, whiche geueth life to that
one Body the Churche, whereof euery faithful is a member, and Chriſte the Head, and powring Charitie
abroade in our Hartes, ſo linketh al right beleeuers togeather in the bonde of peace, as they al ſaie
one thing, thinke one thing, ſauer one thing. The Vnitie, that 
                        •
                     s the note and marke of the true Church,
whereof wee ſpeake, is that, for whiche the Churche is called one▪ and beinge gathered and knitte togeather,
profeſſeth Vnitie of Faithe, of good wil and mutual love togeather, and of Sacramentes. The
Vnitie of them who worſhipped the Golden Calfe, and with one conſent againſte our Sauiour cried,
Crucifige, was farre diſtant from the Vnitie, whiche is a note of the Churche, and is the woorke of
the Holy Ghoſt. Suche is the Vnitie of the Deuils, who conſpire againſt Chriſt and al his with one conſente.
Such Vnitie is oftentimes in Theeues: ſuch Vnitie is founde in you, and all your ſectes. For be
ye neuer ſo diuerſe and at variaunce within your ſelues, yet ye io
                        •
                     ne togeather in wicked amitie and
Vnitie againſt the Church of Chriſt. And therefore S. Auguſtine compareth you, and all ſuch as ye be, to
Samſons foxe
                        •
                     , that were ſundred by the heads, and tied togeather by the tayles.
                  Neither ſaie we that amonge them, who vary in ſmall pointes, and thinges not perteininge to the
groundes of Faithe,1. Corin. 1. Gal. 2. Act. 15. there is no Churche. For all that certaine of the Corinthians in the Primitiue
Churche were at ſquare, howe ſo euer Paule tolde Peter that he thought good, though Barnabas and
Paule agreed not about Iohn Marke, yet were they of Chriſtes Churche: what els? But where ye bringe
this for excuſe of the Luth
                        •
                     rans and the zwinglians, and other ſectes ſpronge out of them, the cauſe
is not like pardye. For ſaie on what ye liſte, and lie ſo longe as ye liſte, their diſſenſions can not be
deſſembled: muche leſſe can they be accorded, &c.
                  Yet leſt they, whoſe fortune is not to ſee ought thereof written els where, ſhould miſtruſt my reporte,
as all do eſpie your lyinge: the woordes of Nicolaus Gallus your owne Doctor of Luthers ſcoole,
here I will rehearſe:In Theſibus & Hypotypoſibus, fol. vlt. 
                     Non ſunt leues inter nos concertationes de rebus leuibus, ſed de ſublimibus
doctrinae Chriſtianae articulis, de lege, & euangelio, de iuſtificatione, & bonis operibus,
de Sacramentis. &c. The ſtrifes (ſateth he) that be amongeſt vs, be not light, nor of light
matters, but of the highe Articles of Chriſtian 
                        •
                     octrine, namely of the lawe and of the Goſpel, of iuſtification,
and of good woorkes, of the Sacramentes, &c. Here, as ye ſee, he rekeneth vp a greate many
of the weightieſt pointes of our Religion, whereof they d
                        •
                     ſſent amonge themſelues. But I doubte,
what I maye call weighty and great, ſeinge theſe good felowes call the controuerſie, whiche is betwixte
the Lutherans and the zwinglians, concerninge the Body of our Saucour Chriſte, neither
weighty nor greate. But as they make a foule lie therein, ſo do they alſo in ſayinge, they vary not betwixte
them ſelues, but vpon one onely queſtion. Of the diſſenſion that is betweene the Lutherans,
and Zwinglians, thus pittifully complaineth Nicolaus Amſdorffius in his Booke entituled Publica
confeſsio purae Doctrinae, him ſelfe beinge an earneſt Lutheran: The worlde goeth with vs worſe
and worſe dayly. All thinges doo prognoſticase the vtter ruine of the Goſpell, and that in place of
the Goſpell, we ſhall haue nothinge but mere errours, and the ſame very notable. (Then after a fewe
woordes) nowe Brenttus (ſaithe he) and the Adiaphoriſtes (they be a ſpeciall ſecte of the Lutherans)
beinge at the Communication or conference at VVormes, would not condemne zwinglius and Oſiander,
becauſe they were 
                        •
                     rimme men in the tongues, and well ſeene in Humanitie. And as for vs and
our ſide, becauſe we refuſed to agree vnto that communication onleſſe they were condemned, they
dreſſed vs vily with theire ſcoffes and railinges, thruſt vs out of the communication, and compelled
vs to goe awaie, &c. Item after a fewe:
                  There be that ſaie, they condemne zuinglianiſme, but the preface of Brentius to Maiſter Iames
the miniſter of Goppingen his booke, witneſſeth farre otherwiſe. For there they goe about (a Gods
name) to conciliat good father Luther and Zuinglius, and make them friendes one with an other.
Quod planè impoſsibile eſt. Quis enim vnquam audiuit contradictoria poſſe redigi in
concordiam? VVhiche is impoſsible: for who euer hearde, that contradictions maye be accorded?
(But the Maiſters of the Apologie make no doubte at all, but they wil ſhortly be aggreed.) Suche

childiſhe and impoſsible thinges they ſticke not to ſet foorthe,Vnitie. who would be compted the teachers of
the worlde, as though we were but blockes and Aſſes. But as for the hereſies and errours of Zuinglius
and Oſiander, with a quiet conſcience we can not embrace. Neither can we ſubſcribe and
yelde to their departinge away, and newe guegawes, whiche haue diuided them ſelues from Luther.
Thus far Amſdorffius, and muche more there to the ſame purpoſe, which here I leaue to blot the paper
withall. To conclude, thus all men may plainely ſee, how the maiſters of this defence be conuinced
of foule lyinge by their owne Doctours and ſcholefelowes, beſide the thinge it ſelfe, that geueth
manifeſt euidence againſte them. But ſuch ſtuffe in their writinges and Preachinges is not geaſon.
Leauinge others, I reporte me to M. Iuelles late ſermon made at Paules Croſſe on the Sondaie before
Aſcenſion daye laſte, in whiche (if vniforme reporte made by ſundry there preſent be true) he abuſed
certaine Honorable, and woorſhipfull perſonages, and of common people a greate multitude, with
lies woorthy rather to be chaſtiſed by lawes, then to be confuted with woordes. But be it as it is
written,Apocal. 22. 
                     Qui in ſordibus eſt, ſordeſcat adhuc.
                  
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It pitieth me, M. Hardinge, to ſee your trifling
                        •
                     e. If ye thought it ſo good ſkil,
for aduantage of your cauſe, to compare vs to ſcoldes, wherefore then did not you,
although not through your whole Booke, yet at leaſte in this ſelfe ſame place,
where ye ſo deepely charge vs with ſcoldinge, refraine better from ſutche wilde
ſpeaches, as might ſeeme to proue your ſelfe a ſcolde? For, I beſeche you, cal your
woordes a litle to remembrance: and conſider indifferently, what weemen they be,
that commonly vſe the like. Thus ye ſaie, Euen ſo, good Sirs: proudely, wickedly, and
fondely yee obiecte: yee ſhewe your Clerkely prowes: yee Bragge: yee boaſte: Now haue you tolde
your ſcoldinge tale: Yee ioine in wicked amitie againſte the Churche of Chriſte: The founders of
your Churche: The Apoſtles of your Goſpel: Yee are conuinced of foule lieinge: Al menne doo eſpie
your lieinge: lie on ſo longe, as yee liſte: He that is filthy, let him be filthy ſtil. Theſe be your
woordes, M. Hardinge, altogeather in one place. If you can finde ſo many the like
in al our whole Apologie, condemne vs hardly, and cal vs Scoldes.
                  
                  
                     Vnitie wée loue, & Honoure it, as the greateſt comforte of Chriſtian hartes.
But if Vnitie be the onely, and vndoubted token of the Churche of God, woe then
be to you, and to your felowes. For by that token, agreeinge ſo il emongeſt your
ſelues, yee ſhoulde ſeeme to haue no Churche.
                  But, as wee haue ſaide, Al thei, that agree togeather, are not therefore euermore
of the Churche.Luk. 23. Pſalm. 2. 
                     Herode, and Pilate were made frendes, and agreed togeather.
Dauid ſaithe, The Kinges and Princes of the earthe haue mette, & agreed
togeather againſte the Lorde, and againſte his Chriſte. S. Iohn ſaithe of the
frendes,Apocalyp. 17. and fauourers of Antichriſte, Hi vnum Conſilium habent, & vires, ac poteſtatem
ſuam tradent Beſtiae: hi pugnabunt cum Agno: Theſe ſhal haue al one Counſel
(and one Minde): and ſhal deliuer ouer their ſtrength, and their power vnto the Beaſte:
and ſhal fight againſt the Lambe.
                     
                  
                  Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Matthae. Homil. 29. Expedit & ipſis Daemonibus, obaudire ſibi inuicem in
Schiſmate: It is good euen for the Diuels them ſelues, to be obediente one of them vnto an
other in their Diuiſion. Symmachus, and other like maineteiners of the Heatheniſhe
Idolatrie,
                     Ambroſ. Lib. 5. Epiſt. 30. 
                     ſaide, Aequum eſt, quicquid omnes colunt, vnum putari: It is
meete, that, what ſo euer al menne woorſhip, be counted One. And thus woulde
they ſeeme to holde by Vnitie.
                  If your Vnitie, M. Hardinge, be ſo ſounde, and ſo certaine, as ye woulde ſéeme
to make it, why then doo you condemne your ſelues, one an other, of Hereſie? Certainely
Hereſie importeth Diuiſion, and no greate Vnitie. The whole ſhewe,
and Subſtance of your Vnitie ſtandeth in this, To geeue eare to your ſelues, & to
put Chriſte to ſilence. But the true, and Chriſtian vnitie is this, That the whole

Flocke of Chriſte,Iohn. 10. heare the voice of the onely Shephearde, and folowe him. The
bande of Vnitie, is ſimple Veritie: Whiche, M. Hardinge, for as mutche as yee
haue forſaken, ye haue no greate cauſe to talke mutche of Vnitie.
                  
                  As for Sampſons Foxetailes, it ſeemeth, ye lackte ſomewhat, to plaie withal.
Otherwiſe they ſerue you here to no greate purpoſe. For if there be any diſſenſion
emongeſt vs, it is not in any Article of the Faithe, but onely in ſomme
particulare pointe of learninge: The like whereof hath benne bitwéene S. Auguſtine,
and S. Hierome, and others the Learned, Godly, and Catholique Fathers
of the Churche. And thus, contrarie to Sampſons Foxes, notwithſtandinge one,
or other haue benne diuided in ſomme certaine Concluſion, as it were in the
tailes, yet wée ioine thorowly al togeather in one Heade, in one Goſpel, in one
waie of Saluation, and in one ſumme of Religion: and al togeather with one
Mouthe, and one Sprite glorifie God, the Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte.
                  Concerninge the diſagreemente, that is bitwéene the Lutherans, & the Zuinglians,
touchinge the Beeinge of the Body of Chriſte in one onely place, or in many,
wée ſaie, that in reſpecte either of Saluation, or of other Article, of God the Father,
or of the Sonne, or of the Holy Ghoſte, or of any other the Groundes, & Principles
of the Chriſtian Faithe, it is not weighty. In that reſpecte wee ſpeake it
onely. Otherwiſe wee ſaie, the erroure is weighty. Sutche errours in ſundrie
the Anciente Fathers haue benne diſſembled, and paſte in ſilence. S. Hilarie ſéemeth
to ſaie,Hilar. De Trinita. Lib. 10 Hominis habitus eſt: Origo non Hominis. that Chriſte receiued not Fleaſhe of the Bleſſed Virgin: And, that
the ſame Fleaſhe of Chriſte was impaſſible, and coulde feele no griefe.
                  
                     Origen ſaithe, Quidam putant, Chriſtū in Futuro Saeculo iterum pati oportere,
&c. Somme menne thinke, that in the worlde to comme Chriſte muſte ſuffer in his
Body, or be Crucified againe.
                     Naturam non habens ad dole
                           •
                        dum. 
                     Brentius ſeemeth to holde, that Chriſtes Body
is infinite, and in al places, as is the Godhedde: whiche erroure, it ſeemeth, was
defended by ſomme in S. Auguſtines time. And therefore he ſaithe, Cauendum
eſt,
                     Origen. ad Roman. Ca. 6. Li. 5. Brentius. 
                     ne ita Diuinitatem aſtruamus Hominis, vt Veritatē Corporis auferamus: We
muſt take heede, wee doo not ſo maineteine y• Diuine Nature of Chriſte beinge man, that vvee
take avvaie the Truthe of his Body. Theſe errours, notwithſtandinge they
were greate in them ſelues, yet in reſpecte of other greater errours, haue benne
diſſembled.Auguſtin. Epiſt. 57. Ad Dardan. Iacob. Andreae De Authori
                           •
                        a. Scripturae, Pag. 178. And therefore Iacobus Andreas, al be it he coulde not be ignorant
of this diſſenſion, beinge him ſelfe a partie, yet he ſaithe, Qu
                           •
                        d vociferantur, noſtros
de ſumma Euangelij nondum conſentire, mendacium eſt: Whereas they crie out,
that wee cannot agree emonge our ſelues, aboute the Subſtance of the Goſpel, it is a very
greate Vntruthe.
                     
                  
                  But you ſaie, The Maiſters of the Apologie telle vs, They doubte not, but theſe parties wilbe
reconciled. And yet Nicolaus Amſdorfius
                      (with whoſe woordes ye are aſhamed to
blotte your paper) taketh the matter to be impoſsible. And here, ye thinke, ye haue
driuen vs neare the wal, ſpecially findinge vs ſo far diſagreeinge in Iudgemente
from a Doctoure, as you cal him, of our owne.
                  But▪ M. Hardinge, ye might better haue conſidered, that Amſdorfius, and wee
ſpeake of ſundrie maters, and therefore our ſaieinges maie wel ſtande togeather.
                  
                     Amſdorfius ſaithe, the Doctrine, and Termes ſtandinge ſtil, as they doo, it is
not poſſible by any manner of Conſtruction, to make the parties agree. But our
truſte in God is, that they, that are deceiued, ſhal finde their owne erroure, and
alter their Termes, and correcte their iudgementes, and ſubmit them ſelues vnto
the Truthe, and ſo ioine togeather al in one.
                  
                     So S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin in Secunda Diſputatione contra Fortunatum. 
                     Recte dicitur, Glacialem niuem calidam eſſe non poſſe.
Nullo enim pacto, quàm diu nix eſt, calida eſſe poteſt: It is wel ſaide, ſnowe frorne,

                        •
                     r congcled, can neuer be hote. For as longe, as it is Snowe, it is not poſsible to make it hote.
                  
                     
                     So likewiſe he ſaithe of the Heretiques named the Manichees:
                     
                     Lutherans Zuinglians. 
                     Sic delirant
Manichaei: ſed reſipiſcant, & non ſint Manichaei: Thus fonde are the Manichees:
                     Auguſt. Contra Fauſtum. Lib. 24. Cap. 2.
But let them amende their errours, and no more be Manichees.
                  
                  What is there ſo contrarie in iudgemente, as a Ievve, and a Chriſtian? Yet
God hath promiſed, that he wil turne the hartes of the Fathers (the Iewes) vnto
their Children:Malach 4. and the hartes of the Children (the Chriſtians) vnto their Fathers.
And S. Paule ſaithe,Roman. 11. 
                     Iudaei, ſi non permanſerint in incredulitate, inſerentur. Potens enim
eſt Deus iterum inſerere eos: The Iewes ſhalbe graffed into the Tree, if they abide
not in Vnbeliefe. For God is able to graffe them in againe.
                      What is there ſo contrarie,
as Light,
                     Pſalm. 17. and Darkeneſſe? Yet the Prophete ſaithe, Illumina tenebras meas: O
Lorde, ſighten thou my darkeneſſe.
                      To conclude, what is ſo contrarie, as the Kingedome
of the Pope, and the Kingedome of Chriſte? And yet, wée truſte, it is not
impoſſible, but the Pope him ſelfe maie once turne to God, & confeſſe his errours,
and profeſſe the Goſpel of Chriſte, that he nowe oppreſſeth.
                  Theſe thinges conſidered, M. Hardinge, it was no deadly Sinne, to ſaie, wée
truſte, that theſe maters of variance bitweene the Lutherans, and the Zuinglians,
wil once be accorded: and that al cauſes, and ſéedes of diſſenſion ſhalbe
thorowly pulled vp by the rootes, and be buried, and quite foregotten for euer.
This change God hath already begonne to woorke, not onely in ſundrie learned
menne, but alſo in greate Citties, in good Vniuerſities, and in whole Countries.
Therefore, wee truſte, our hope is not in Vaine.
                  As for the Lies, whiche, it liketh you wel to ſaie, M. Ievvel made openly
at Poules Croſſe, I doubte not of your modeſtie, but ye woulde haue blaſed them
better, if ye had thought them woorthe your colours. Sutche general, and ſo
greate exclamations, vpon ſo ſimple reportes, ſtande not alwaies with greateſt
wiſedome. He is to raſſhe to be a Iudge, that pronounceth before he knowe the
cauſe. What I ſaide there, for as mutche as ye touche nothinge in particulare,
it is néedeleſſe to make rehearſal. But wel I remember, I might truely haue
ſaide, M. Hardinge commonly Miſallegeth, miſreporteth, miſconſtrueth, corrupteth,
vvreaſteth, and Falſifieth the Anciente Councels, and Holy Fathers.
I coulde haue ſaide, M. Hardinge is oftentimes directely contrarie to him ſelfe.
I coulde haue ſaide, M. Hardinge in one Booke hath vttered twoo hundred fiue
and fiftie greate Vntruthes. Theſe, M. Hardinge, your Conſcience knoweth,
had benne no Lies: and therefore not méete to be chaſtifed by an Lawes.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 1. & 2.
               But this is the heauieſt, and moſte greeuous parte of their ſclaunders,
that they cal vs wicked and vngodly men, and ſaie wee haue
throwne awaie al care of Religion. Though this ought not to
trouble vs mutche, whiles they them ſelues that thus haue charged
vs, knowe ful wel, howe ſpiteful, and vntrue theire ſclaunder is.
Iuſtine the Martyr is a witneſſe, that al Chriſtians were called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
that is Godleſſe, as ſoone as the Goſpel firſte beganne to bee publiſhed,
and the name of Chriſte to be openly declared. And, when Polycarpus
ſtoode to be iudged, the people ſtirred vp the Preſident to ſlea,
& murder al them, whiche profeſſed the Goſpel, with theſe woordes,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , That is to ſaie, Ridde out of the waie theſe wicked and
Godleſſe creatures. And this was, not bicauſe it was true, that the
Chriſtians were Godleſſe in deede, but bicauſe they woulde not worſhip

 ſtones and ſtockes, whiche were then honoured as God. The
whole worlde ſeeth plainely yenough already, what wee and oures
haue endured at theſe mennes handes for Religion, and our onely
Goddes cauſe. They haue throwne vs into Priſon, into Water, into
Fier, and haue embrued them ſelues in our bloude: not bicauſe wee
were either adulterers, or Robbers, or Murtherers, but onely for
that we confeſſed the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſte, and put our confidence
in the liuinge God: And for that wee complained too iuſtly, and truely
(Lorde thou knoweſt) that they did breake the Lawe of God for
theire owne moſt vaine Traditions: And that our aduerſaries were
the very foes to the Goſpel, and enimies to Chriſtes Croſſe, ſo witingly,
and willingly, and obſtinately deſpiſinge Goddes Commaundementes.
               Wherefore, when theſe menne ſawe they coulde not rightly finde
faulte with our Doctrine, they woulde needes pike a quarrel, and
inueigh and raile againſt our manners, ſurmiſing, that wee doo condemne
al wel doinges: that wee ſettte open the doore to al licentiouſneſſe
and luſte, and leade awaie the people from al loue of vertue. And
in very deede, the life of al men, euen of the deuouteſt, and moſte Chriſtian,
bothe is, and euermore hath been ſutche, as one maie alwaies
finde ſomme lacke, euen in the very beſte, and pureſt conuerſation.
And ſutche is the inclination of al creatures vnto euil, and the readineſſe
of al menne to ſuſpecte, that the thinges, whiche neither haue
been donne, nor once were meant to be donne, yet maie be eaſily bothe
hearde, and credited to be true. And like as a ſmal ſpotte is ſoone
eſpied in the neateſt, and whiteſt garmente, euen ſo the leaſte ſtaine of
diſhoneſtie is eaſily founde out in the pureſt, and ſincereſt life. Neither
take we al them, which haue at this daie embraced the Doctrine
of the Goſpel, to be Angels, and to liue clearely without any more, or
wrinkle: nor yet thinke wee theſe menne neither ſo blinde, that if any
thinge maie be noted in vs, they are not able to perceiue the ſame, euen
through the leaſte creuie: nor ſo frendly, that they wil conſtrue
ought to the beſte: nor yet ſo honeſte of nature, or courteous, that thei
wil looke backe vpon them ſelues, & weigh our liues by theire owne.
Yf ſo be wee liſte to ſearche this matter from the bottome, we know,
yt in the very Apoſtles times there were Chriſtians, through whom
the name of the Lorde was blaſphemed, and euil ſpoken of emonge
the Gentiles. Conſtantius the Emperoure bewaileth, as it is written
in Sozomenus, that many waxed woorſe after they had fallen to
the Religion of Chriſte. And Cyprian in a lamentable oration ſetteth
out ye corrupt manners of his time: The vvholſome Diſcipline,
ſaithe he, vvhiche the Apoſtles leafte vnto vs, hath idleneſſe, and
longe reſte novv vtterly marred: euery one ſtudied to encreaſe his
liuely hode: And cleane forgeatinge, either vvhat they had donne
before, vvhiles thei vvere vnder the Apoſtles, or vvhat thei ought
continually to doo hauinge receiued the Faithe: thei earneſtly laboured

to make greate theire ovvne vvealth vvith an vnſatiable
deſire of coue
                        •
                     ouſneſſe. There is no deuoute Religion, ſaith hee,
in Prieſtes, no ſounde Faithe in Miniſters, no charitie ſhevved in
good vvoorkes, no fourme of Godlineſſe in theire conditions:
menne are becōme effeminate, and vveemens bevvtie is countrefeited.
And, without recitinge of many moe writers, Gregorie Naziāzene
ſpeaketh thus of the pitieful ſtate of his owne time: VVee,
ſaith he, are in hatred emonge the Heathen for our ovvne vices
ſake, vve are alſo becomme novve a vvoonder, not onely to Angels,
and menne, but euen to al the vngodly. In this caſe was the
Churche of God, when the Goſpel firſte beganne to ſhine, and when
the furie of Tyrannes was not as yet cooled, nor the ſwerde taken of
from the Chriſtians neckes. Surely it is no new thinge, that menne
bee but menne, although thei bee called by the name of Chriſtians.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Loe, a greeuous, and a heauy caſe, that the worlde calleth you wicked, and vngodly menne. Twis
they be to blame for it. And ſo be they, that cal them theeues, whiche come to be promoted to Tiborne.

                        ••
                     r, God knoweth, litle haue you deſerued ſo to be called, &c.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Al this, with the reſte, is onely Hicke Scorners eloquence, not woorthy of anſweare.
               
            
            Here endeth the Thirde
Parte.
         
         
            
            The Fourth Parte.
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 1.
               -BVT wil theſe men, I praie you, thinke nothing
at al of them ſelues, whiles they accuſe
vs ſo maliciouſly? And hauinge leaſure to beholde
ſo farre of, & to ſee, what is donne bothe
in Germanie, and in Englande, haue they either
foregotten, or can they not ſee, what is
donne at Rome? Or wil thei accuſe vs, theire
owne life beinge ſutch, as no man is hable to
make mention thereof but with ſhame? Our
pourpoſe here is, not to take in hande at this
preſente, to bringe to lighte, and open to the worlde thoſe thinges,
which were meete rather to be hidde and buried with the woorkers
of them. It beſeemeth neither our Religion, nor our modeſtie, nor
our ſhamefaſteneſſe. But yet he, whiche geeueth commaundemente,
that he ſhoulde be called the Vicare of Chriſte, and the Heade of the
Churche, who alſo heareth, that ſutche thinges be donne in Rome,
who ſeeth them, who ſuffereth them, (for wee wil goe no further)
maie eaſily conſider with him ſelfe, what manner of thinges they be.
Let him in Goddes Name cal to minde, and let him remembre, that
they be of his owne Canoniſtes, whiche haue taught the people,
that Fornication bitweene ſingle folke is no ſinne: (as though they
had fette that Doctrine from Mitio in Terence) whoſe wordes be:
It is no ſinne (beleeue me) for a yonge man to haunte harlottes.
Let him remembre, they be of his owne, whiche haue decreed, that a
Prieſte oughte not to be put out of his cure for Fornication. Let
him remembre alſo, how Cardinal Campegius, Albertus Pighius,
and others many moe of his owne haue taughte, that the Prieſte,
whiche keepeth a Concubine, dooth liue more holily, and chaſtely,
then he, whiche hath a wife in Matrimonie. I truſte, he hathe not
yet forgotten, that there be many thouſandes of common harlottes
in Rome: and that he him ſelf dooth geather yeerely of the ſame harlottes
aboute thirtie thouſande Ducates, by the waie of an annual
penſion. Neither can he foregeate, that he him ſelfe dooth mainteine
openly brothel houſes, and by a moſte filthy lucre dooth filthily and
lewdly ſerue his owne luſte. Were al thinges then pure, and holy
in Rome, when Iohane a VVoman, rather of perfite age, then of
perfite life, was Pope there, and bare her ſelfe as the Heade of the
Churche: And after that, for twoo whole yeres, in that holy See ſhe
had plaide the naughty packe, at laſte going in Proceſſion aboute the
Cittie, in the ſight of al her Cardinals, and Biſhoppes fel in trauaile
openly in the ſtretes?
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Firſte who ſeeth notBy the anſvveare it vvil appeare, that this Lie is plaine Truthe. what a notorius lye they make in the preface and entrie to the matter?
Saie they not, they take not vpon them, at this time to bringe to light and to the ſhewe of the world
thoſe doinges, whiche ought rather togeather with the Auctours of them to be buried? And that ſo
to doo, theire Religion, theire ſhamefaſtnes, theire bluſshinge dooth not beare it? VVhat is a lie, if
this be not? Doo they not in deede, that they denie in woorde? Yea, ſaie they not that thinge, whiche
they affirme they ſaie not?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  I doubte not, good Reader, but peruſinge theſe fewe folowinge, thou ſhalte
plainely ſée, that the Authours of this Apologie ſpake not al, that they might
wel haue ſpoken. But, if thou happen to reade Dantes, Petrarcha, Boccaſe, Mantuan,
Valla, and others like, thou wilte certainely ſaie, that euen now, beinge thus
chalenged, and called foorth, and required to ſpeake, yet wée haue rather geeuen an
inklinge hereof, then opened the particulare ſecretes of the mater. For thereof
S.Bernard ad Clerum in Synodo Rhemen. Po
                           •
                        em loco. Fran. Petrar. Epiſt. 20. 
                     Bernarde ſaithe thus, Quae in occulto fiunt ab Epiſcopis, turpe eſt vel dicere: It is
ſhame to vtter the thinges, that Biſhoppes doo in theire ſecretes.
                      And therefore he ſaithe
further, euen as did the writer of the Apologie, Melius itaque arbitror ſuper hoc diſſimulate:
Touchinge ſutche matters, I thinke it better to diſſemble. Franciſcus Petrarcha
calleth Rome the VVhoore of Babylon, the Mother of al Idolatrie, and
Fornication:
                     Fran. Petrar. Cantilena 92. Onde jugita ogni vergogno. Baptij. Mantuanus. and ſaithe, that al ſhame, and reuerence is quite departed thence.
Baptiſta Mantuanus ſaithe:
                  
                     Viuere qui Sanctè cupitis, diſcedite Roma:
                     Omnia cùm liceant, non licet eſſe bonum.
                  
                  Al ye, that woulde liue godly, be packinge from Rome. For there al thinges els are lawful:
but to be good, it is not lawful. And againe, as it is alleaged once before,
                  
                  
                     Sanctus ager ſcurris, venerabilis Ara Cynaedis
                     Seruit, honorandae Diuûm Ganymedibus Aedes.
                  
                  Hereby, M. Hardinge, ye maie eaſily ſée, that wée of pourpoſe diſſembled, and
couered your ſhame, and ſpake mutche leſſe, and far otherwiſe of you, then wée
might haue ſpoken.
                  
                     Eraſmus, writing of S. Auguſtines dealinge againſte the Manichees, ſaith
thus, Obſcoena Myſteria Manichaeorum protraxit in lucem. Nam haec prodidiſſe, erat
viciſſe:
                     Eraſmus in vita Auguſtini. 
                     He opened, and publiſhed the filthy Myſteries of the Manichees. For the
very openinge thereof was ſufficiente to ouerthrowe them. But happy are they,
that liue in ſutche ſorte, that no man maie wel reuele theire life without bluſſhinge.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, yée charge vs pleintiefully with Fables, and Sclaunders,
and heapes of Lies, greate, fowle, lewde, and ſhameful, in one companie, al togeather.
Wherein it was no greate Maiſterie for you to be ſo liberal: for that hereof
ye want no ſtoare.
                  But if wee ſhalbe hable clearely, and plainely to anouche, and iuſtifie eche
thinge, that wee haue ſpoken, then wee doubte not, but ye wil take al theſe Lies
home againe, and beſtowe them fréely emongeſt your fellowes.
               
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  They be the Popes Canoniſtes (ſaie they) that haue taught the people,Crimes laid to the Popes charge by the Defenders. that ſimple fornication is no
ſinne. A greuous offence, and woorthy to be puniſhed. And verily if any Pope euer knewe, that his
learned men in the Canon lawe haue taught the people ſutche heatheniſh, and deuiliſhe Doctrine,
Vntruthe. For the Canoniſtes them ſelues cō
                        feſſe, that the Councel maie iudge, and depoſe the Pope. though no man in Earthe be his iudge, yet he maie be thought vn woorthy the roome of ſo greate
charge. But if the Pope neuer knewe ſutche Doctrine preached by the Canoniſtes, and if at no time
there haue ben any ſutche, then is he cleare, and ye are proued ſlaunderers, and falſe backebyters. VVe
denie it vtterly. How proue ye it? Mary Sir, ſaie ye, looke in the margent of our Apologie, and there
ſhal ye finde one Iohn de Magiſtris, noted for an offender in that behalfe. VVel, if it were ſo, he was
but one man. Ye ſpeake of Canoniſtes, whiche worde ſignifieth a number. And howe proue ye that
he the ſaide Iohn de Magiſtris (for nowe I wil ſpare you, and wil not ſaie they) taught the people that
ſimple fornication was no ſinne? &c.
                  Nowe we tel you,Ioannes de Magiſtris blamed by the Defenders, for Martinus de Magiſtris that we cannot finde, where euer Iohannes de Magiſtris wrote ſo impiouſly, as
ye reporte. Is it not Martinus de Magiſtris, that ye meane? It is a greate raſheneſſe, if ye haue not
reade it your ſelues, to beliue ſutcheThis Peltinge vvriter is Alphō
                        ſus de Caſtro, one of M. Hardinges greatieſt Doctoures. pelting writers, that be of your ſectes, as ye do, by whom ye ſeme
to be mooſte ſhamefully and moſte dangerouſly deceiued. &c. VVhat wil be thought and ſaide of
you, if we ſhewe plainely, that ye haue forged a fowle lie, and a moſte falſe ſlaunder vpon Martinus
de Magiſtris? For ſo wil we cal him, vntil ye proue it of Iohannes.
                  This Martinus de Magiſtris was no Canoniſte,A fovvle ſlaunderoꝰ lie made by the Defenders. as ye ſaye, but a Doctour of diuinitie, wel learned
for his time and order of ſtudie, as a ſchooleman. In a treatiſe, that he made, De temperantia & de
luxuria, he diſputeth after ſutche manner, as the ſcholaſtical doctours commonly vſe. VVherefore
he that ſaieth that he taught the people, ſought by vntruthe, how to make the matter more deteſtable.
He that teacheth aī Scholes, is a Teacher of Teachers. For disputinge in Schooles, and teachinge the people, be farre aſunder. Saithe this doctour Martin
after the guiſe of Schooles, Quaeritur vtrum ſimplex fornicatio ſit Peccatum mortale,
that to ſaie, It is a queſtion, whether ſimple fornication be mortal Sinne.Note by the vvaie, that by M. Hardinges ſecrete concluſion, Fornicatiō is not a Mortal, but a Venial ſinne. This Defender knewe,
what he did, when he lefte out the woorde mortal. For beinge diſpoſed to lie, he thought beſte, to
lye for a vantage.The māner of the Schole Doctours. Nowe this is to be vnderſtanded, howe the manner of the ſcholaſtical Doctours
is, firſte to propounde a queſtion: Nexte to argue, obiecte, and reaſon againſte the Truthe of the
queſtion: Then to auouche and proue the Truthe: After that to ſoile the obiections brought againſte
the Truthe: Laſtly to bringe concluſions for confirmation of the Truthe. Then in proſecutinge
his queſtion, arguitur quòd non, I reaſon againſte it, ſaithe he, and argue it is not ſo. And
there after the Schoole manner, he maketh an argumente againſte the Truthe. VVhiche argumente
who ſo euer taketh for his purpoſe, and alloweth it, admitteth that the Doctor goeth againſte and diſproueth.
After this he commeth to proue the Truthe.Martinus de Magiſtris cleared of the crime by the Defenders obiected. And there it foloweth. In oppoſitum.
ſimplex fornicatio excludit, &c. To the contrary (ſaith he) Simple fornication excludeth from
the Kingdome of God, Ergo, it is mortal ſinne. Then he ſaithe further. It is to be noted, that the
Ergo, by likelihoode the opinion of others vvas othervviſe. opinion of Thomas is, that ſimple fornication vndoubtedly is mortal ſinne. VVho ſo euer readeth further
in Martinus, he ſhal find, after he hath wel diſputed pro and con, as they terme it in Scholes, that
is to ſaie, for, and againſte the Truthe, that he putteth ſix concluſions, of whiche the fourthe beginneth
thus, ideo, &c. Therefore Simple fornication is mortal ſinne, bicauſe it is forbidden by Gods Lawe,
&c. And in the ende of the ſixthe, he ſaithe: Hereof the falſehed of theire opinion is made euident,
who ſaie that ſimple fornication is not mortal ſinne. VVhiche opinion is condemned in the articles
of them of Paris, errore. CLXXXVI. Then he ſaith further. Guido the Carmelite ſaithe in a Chapter
contra Errores Graecorum, that the Errour of the Grekes, ſaieing ſimple fornication betwene
a ſingle man and a ſingle woman not to be mortal ſinne, openly conteineth Hereſie againſte the Holy
Scripture, and that he proueth by foure reaſons, &c.
                  By this, and mutche more there expreſſed, it is ſufficiently proued, that Martinus de Magiſtris in
his ſcholaſtical diſputations in the ſaide treatiſe,For trial of this Concluſion, ſee the anſvveare. ſaithe not that ſimple fornication is no ſinne: mutche
leſſe cā it be reaſonably, or with any coloure of honeſtie ſaide, that ſo he taught the people. And therefore
it is falſely and ſlaunderouſly imputed vnto him.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here ye ſaye,Simple Fornication. Wée lie: wée backebite: wée ſclaunder, &c. For anſweare whereunto,
firſt wée ſaie, It is no new diuiſe, to make light and ſimple accoumpt of your
Simple Fornication.
                     Epiphan. Lib. 3. Haereſi. 56. For Aëtius y• olde Heretique vſed thus to ſaie, Dormire cum
muliere extra Coniungium, non magis eſt peccatum, quàm aurem ſcalpere: To haue the
companie of a Wooman out of Marriage, is no more a ſinne, then it is for a man to clawe his
care.
                     
                     Clemens Stromat. Lib. 3. Likewiſe the Heretique Prodicus ſaide, Licet palàm, & apertè Fornicari:
It is lavvful to commit open Fornication.
                      Likewiſe not longe ſithence wrote
Laurentius Valla, in earneſte, or in game, I cannot tel: but thus he wrote: and he
wrote it in Rome,Laurent. Valla, De Voluptate, Lib. 1. Cap. 38. Richar. de Sancto Victore, Par. 2. Fol. 73. beinge him ſelfe one of the Canons there: Omninò nihil intereſt,
vtrùm cum Marito coeat Mulier, an cum Amatore: Vndoubtedly there is no difference,
whether a Wooman keepe companie with her Huſbande, or with her Louer. Richardus de
Sancto Victore ſaith, Paulus praeuidebat, multos fore, qui Fornicationis malum non
adeò damnabile putarent: S. Paule foreſawe, there ſhoulde be many, that would thinke,
the il of Fornication not to be ſo damnable a mater. To like purpoſe Socrates
writeth of the corrupte iudgemente of ſundrie of his time:Socrat. li. 5. ca. 22 
                     Scortationem indifferentem
eſſe putant: De Feſtis verò diebus, perinde atque pro animabus ſuis dimicant,
inuertentes Mandata Dei, &c. They take Fornication, or vvhooredome to be a
thinge indifferente, (that is to ſaie, neither good, nor il, but leafte at libertie): But
they fight for the keepinge of theire Holydaies, as for theire ſoules. From theſe Fathers,
as it appeareth, iſſued out the Pope, and his Romaine Cleregie: who haue learned
ſo readily to ſwalowe a Camel, and ſo nicely, and ſolemnely to ſtraine a gnatte.
                  But, ye wil ſaie, al this hitherto perteineth nothinge vnto the Canoniſtes,
ſpecially in the plural number.
                  Let vs therefore ſee the practiſe of the Churche of Rome: whiche is the Life,
and ſoule of al the Canoniſtes.
                     Diſt. 34. Is qui. Thus therefore it is noted in the Decrées, Qui
non habet Vxorem,
                     Pariſijs, an. 1505. 
                     loco illius Concubinam debet habere: He that hath not a Wife,
in ſteede of her muſte haue a Concubine. Ye wil ſaie, there is erroure in the printe.
Be it ſo. Yet thus is it extant in many Copies, and it is wel agreable to your common
practiſe.Concil. Toletan. 1. Cap. 17. For y• beſte, y• you can make of the ſame place, is this: Is qui non habet
Vxorem, & pro Vxore Concubinam habet, à Communione non repellatur: He
that hath no Wife, and in ſteede of a VVife hathe a Concubine, let him not be remoued
from the Communion.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe it is noted in the Gloſe vpon the Conſtitutions of Otho Bonus:Conſtit. Othonis Boni de Concubinis Clericor. remouēdis. Licet ad profagandū. In Gloſſa. In eadē Gloſſa. Extra. De Immunit a. Eccleſia. Petr. Rauennas.
Videtur quòd Crimen Meretricij Eccleſia ſub diſsimulatione tranſire debeat: It
ſeemeth, that the Churche ought to paſſe ouer the Crime of vvhooredome vnder
diſsimulation (and not to ſee it). In whiche Gloſe, ye ſhal finde theſe woordes,
Si non caſtè, tamen cautè: If ye doo it not chaſtely, yet doo it charily. Likewiſe
ſaith Petrus Rauennâs, one of your notable Canoniſtes, vpon y• Decretalles:
Quamuis tactus, & oſcula ſint praeludia incontinentiae in Laicis, ſecùs tamen eſt in Clericis.
Nam Clericus praeſumitur iſta facere pro charitate, & bono zelo: Notwithſtanding,
handeling, and kiſsing in Laie Perſonnes be the occaſions, or beginninges of
incontinente behaueoure, yet in Prieſtes it is far otherwiſe. For a Prieſte is preſumed
to doo theſe thinges of charitie, and of good Zele.
                  
                     Likewiſe it is noted in your Gloſe,11 quae. 3. Abſit. In Gloſſa. Si Clericus amplectitur Mulierem, (Laicus)
interpretabitur, quòd cauſa benedicendi eam hoc faciat: If a Prieſte embrace a Wooman, a
Laie man muſte iudge of it thus, that he dooth it to thintente to bleſſe her. Where alſo
ye ſhal finde this ſpecial note ſette out in the margine for the pourpoſe,
                      Clericus
amplectens Mulierem praeſumitur bene agere:Ibidem, In Margine. A Prieſte embracinge a VVooman
is preſumed to doo vvel.
                  
                     
Theſe be your Canoniſtes:
                     Simple Fornication. theſe be your Scholemaiſters: theſe be your Doctoures,
M. Hardinge: thus they write, not onely in the Singulare, but alſo in
the Dual, and Plural number. They would neuer ſo lightly haue iudged hereof,
if they had thought, your Simple Fornication had benne Sinne.
                  
                     S.
                     Auguſtin. in En. chiridio ad Lauren. ca. 80. 
                     Auguſtine ſaithe, Clamor Sodomorum, & Gomorrhaeorum multiplicatus
eſt: Quia non ſolùm iam apud eos non punicbantur illa flagitia, verùm etiam publicè,
velut lege, frequentabantur: The Crie of Sodome, and Gomorrha is multiplied: For that
ſutche vices then, not onely were not puniſhed, but alſo were openly vſed, as it had benne by
the aide, and Authoritie of the Lawe.
                  
                     Sommewhat it muſte needes be,
                     Concil. Baſil. Seſsion. 20. Eraſmus in Enchirid. mili. chriſtiani, Ca. 14. 
                     that in your Late Councel of Baſile, enforced
the Biſhoppes there to Decrée, that Fornication ſhould be Sinne. Eraſmus,
a man of Singulare Learning, and Iudgemente ſaithe,
                     He meaneth ſomme of the beſte of the Romaine Cleregie. Iacobus de Valentia in Pſal. 118. Antoninus in Sum. par. 4. titu. 12. ca. 2. §. 3. Alexander Halenſis, par. 3. quae. 35. Mem. 5. Ambroſius. 1. Timoth. 4. Auguſti. in quae. in Exod. quae. 20. Bona pars eorum, quos
vulgus integros, & incorruptos appellat, Simplicem Fornicationem, & moderatū
voluptatis vſum, vt leue commiſſum, neutiquam refugiunt: * A greate many of them, whom
the common ſorte taketh for good, and godly Menne, not a white abhorre Simple Fornication,
and a ſober vſe of pleaſure, reckeninge it to be but a litle petite faulte. So ſaithe
                     
Iacobus De Valentia, Tam Iudaei, quàm Saraceni, & mali Chriſtiani, vt deteſtabilem
vitam ſuam excuſent, & defendant, aſſerunt, Fornicationem Simplicem eſſe licitam:
As wel Jewes, and Saracenes, as alſo il Chriſtian Menne, to the intent to excuſe, and
defende theire wicked life, ſaie, that Simple Fornication maie be Lavvefully vſed.
                  
                     So ſaithe Antoninus the Archebiſhop of Florence, Confutatur error dicentium,
Simplicem Fornicationem non eſſe peccatum: Hereby is reproued the errour
of them, that ſaie, Simple Fornication is no Sinne. Alexander of Hales,
by waie of diſputation doubtethe not to allege the woordes of S. Ambroſe, to this
pourpoſe: Etiàmſi aliquis lubricum carnis patiatur, ſine dubio vapulabit: ſed non peribit:
If a man ſuffer the Frailtie of the Fleaſhe, without doubte he ſhalbe pouniſhed: but
periſhe he ſhal not: And likewiſe theſe of S. Auguſtine, Illa Fornicatio,
quam faciunt, qui Vxores non habent, cum foeminis, quae viros non habent, an prohibita
inueniri poſſit, ignoro: That kinde of Fornication, whiche Single Menne committe
with Single Womenne, vvhether it be forbidden, or no, I cannot tel.
                  Thus haue you, M. Hardinge, not onely what your Canoniſtes, but alſo
what your Schole Doctoures haue taught, and thought of Simple Fornication.
                  
                  But there is noted in the Margine of the Apologie, Iohannes de Magiſtris, in
ſteede of Martinus.
                     M. Har. pag. 46. ae Reade the B. of VVincheſter vnto M. Fecknam. Pag. 121. And hereof haue ye made your ſelfe a pleaſaunte Conqueſte.
Wee reade not theſe Bookes our ſelues: wee beléeue ſutche peltinge writers of our
ſectes: wee are ſhamefully, and daungerouſely deceiued. How be it, M. Hardinge, I
require but your Indifferent Iudgement: Speake vprightly. Wherfore is it more
dradely ſin for vs, to name Iohannes, in ſtéede of Martinus, then it was for you in
this ſelfe ſame Booke,vint. con. cantur. li. 3. de Euchar to name Captaine Ioſue, in ſtéede of y• 
                     Prophete Oſee. Or,
for one of your Brethren, to allege Hoſius, for Athanaſius? Or, for D. Sreuin
Gardiner, in ſtede of Theophylactus, to allege Theophilus? Cicero allegeth Aiax
in ſteede of Hector:
                     M. Har. pag. 93. Chryſoſtome ad Romanos. 1. Chryſoſt ad Gala. 4. 
                     Agamemnon, in ſteede of Vlyſſes: Eupolis, in ſtede of Ariſtophanes.
Ariſtotle allegeth Calypſo, in ſteede of Circe. Your Gratian allegeth Aniceus,
for Anicetus: Ambroſius, for Auguſtinus: & by your owne Confeſſion, Calixtus,
for Anacletus. S. Chryſoſtome nameth Abacuk, for Sophonias: and Agar,
in ſteede of Sara. S. Marke allegeth Abiathar, for Abimelech. S. Mathevv
nameth Hieremias,
                     Hieronym. in Marcum, ca 2. Matthae 27. De Reſcriptis, Significante. Abb. for Zacharias.
                  
                  It had benne no great preiudice vnto your cauſe, to haue diſſembled ſo ſmal
a mater, ſpecially findinge your ſelfe ſo often guilty in the ſame. Your owne
Doctours ſaie, Error in Nomine non habet vitiare, modò conſtet de Corpore: Errour
in name marreth not the mater, ſo the Body, or partie be knowen.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     But this ſame Martinus,Simple Fornication. 
                     ye ſaie, neuer denied Fornication to be deadly
Sinne: but by expreſſe woordes affirmeth the contrarie. For trial hereof, it maie
pleaſe you to geue ſome credite to Alphonſus dè Caſtro your owne Doctoure.
                     Alphonſus Contrae Haereſ. Li. 5. Coltus. 
                     His
woordes be theſe, Graeci, vt Guido illis impingit, dicunt, Simplicem Fornicationem
non eſſe peccatum. Martinus de Magiſtris in ſuo libro, De Temperantia, quaeſtione
ſecunda de Luxuria, dicit, ſe fateri, Fornicationem Simplicem eſſe Peccatum
Mortale. Tamen dicit inſuper, quòd oppoſitum credere, non ſit Haereticum:
quia, vt dicit, Teſtimonia Scripturae Sacrae non ſunt expreſſa: The Greekes, as Guido
chargeth them, ſaie, that Simple Fornication is no Sinne. Martinus de Magiſtris in
his Booke, Of Temperance, and in the ſeconde queſtion, diſputinge of Lecherie, graunteth in
deede, that Simple Fornication is deadly Sinne. And yet he ſaithe, It is no Hereſie
to beleeue the contrarie: for that, as he ſaithe, the Teſtimonies of the Scriptures (touching
this mater) are not plaine. Here, M. Hardinge, ye haue your owne
                      Doctours minde.
Martinus ſaithe, It is no Hereſie, to beleeue, that Simple Fornication is no
Sinne: And this he ſaithe euen in the very ſame Booke that he hath written, De
Temperantia. So daungerouſly, M. Hardinge, and ſo ſhamefully are we deceiued,
in alleginge your Peltinge Doctours.
                  
                     And therefore Alphonſus concludeth thus, Sed cum pace illius dixerim, ego
credo, Martinum, alioqui virum Doctum, in hac parte erraſſe: But, to ſpeake with his fauour,
I beleeue, that Martinus de Magiſtris in this behalfe was mutche deceiued.
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  After this fowle lye foloweth anVntruthe. For this he vvil ſone be founde a Truthe. other. Let him remember (ſay theſe Defenders) that they
be his men that haue decreed, that a prieſt for fornication ought not to be remoued from his cure.
To this we may ſaye, that although he be not depriued of his cure, yet he may be puniſhed other wiſe.
But let vs ſee, how they would proue that they ſaye.VVho beſtovved theſe quotations in the Margine, I cannot tel. But the lav
                           •
                        es are plaine: as it ſhal appeare. By their note in their margent they ſend vs for
proufe to the canon lawe. 3. quaeſt. 7. Lata. Extra de bigamis. Quia circa. As touching the chapter
Lata, in the decrees we finde none ſuche And, in Cauſa. 3. quaſt. 7. there is nothinge to this purpoſe. The
paragraphe Quia circa. Extra. is vnderſtanded of them, who being in the ſtate of bigamie, are not to
be promoted to holy orders, and not of one who is already made prieſt, that he be not for Fornication
remoued. But, to vnderſtande, what was donne to a prieſt, that had committed fornication, by order
of lawe.This vvas in olde times Novv it is quite foregotten. in caſe any Biſhop, or prieſt, or deacon, after degree of deaconſhip taken, had benne conuict
of fornication, or aducutrie, he was depoſed, and caſtout of the Churche, and enioined to doo
penaunce amonge the lartie. VVhiche thinge S. Sylueſter at length mercifully changed, enioininge
An hypocritical folie. For he maie redeeme al this vvhole tenne yers faſte, by pa
                           •
                        einge of a penny Reade the Anſvveare. ten yeres penaunce after a preſcript forme, whiche to oure newe cleregie woulde ſeeme very harde,
and ſtraite.
                  Yea further the lawe of the Churche in this caſe ſo litle beareth with the ſinnefull life of
Clerkes, that,Vntruthe manifeſt, and a Canon of M. Hardinges ovvne makinge. if any Biſhop in his Dioces had conſented and borne with the fornication of Prieſtes,
or Deacons, or with the crime of inceſt, for money, or praier, or had not by Auctoritie of his Biſhoply
Office duly puniſhed ſutche faultes committed: the ſame ſhoulde be ſuſpended from his Office. And
this muche wee haue ſhewed touchinge the remouinge of a Prieſte, not onely from his benefice, but alſo
from his office, for cauſe of fornication: wherein theſe menne moſte falſely haue ſlaundered the
Churche, as now to any man it mayFal clearely, God vvote. See the Anſvveare. Diſ. 82. Preſbyter. appeere.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, ye ſhewe your ſelfe to be mutche vnſkilful in your owne
Canons. The ſimpleſte Proctour in your Courtes coulde ſoone haue tolde
you, that yee are ouer farre deceiued. For thus it is written by expreſſe woordes
in your owne Gloſe vpon the Decrees: Dicunt, neminem hodiè propter Fornicationem
eſſe deponendum, niſi in ea perdurat: They ſaie, that for Fornication, noman ought

this daie to be depoſed,
                     
                     Not depoſed for Fornication. 
                     onleſſe he continewe in the ſame. And, leſte ye ſhoulde in any
wiſe miſtruſt, or doubte your Gloſe, it is alſo thus noted of pourpoſe in faire great
letters in the Margine, Fornicationis cauſa hodiè nemo eſt deponendus: Novv
a daies noman maie be depoſed for Fornication. Were there nothinge els to
be ſaide, yet this thinge onely were ſufficiente.
                  
                     But Panormitane alſo your greateſte Canoniſte like wiſe ſaithe,
                     Extra. de ſanguinita. & affinita. Non debet. Abb. Diſt. 81 Maximianus Cloſ. Ad varietatē
temporū debent mutari ſtatuta humana: Ideò hodie ex Simplici
Fornicatione Clericus
non deponitur: The Lawes of Menne ought to be altered accordinge to the
change of times: And therefore nowe a daies for Simple Fornication no Prieſte is depoſed
from his benefice. Likewiſe ye haue it noted vpon your Decrees,
Communiter dicitur, quod pro Simplici Fornicatione Clericus deponi non debet:
Quia pauci ſine illo vitio inueniuntur: It is commonly ſaide, that for Simple Fornication
no Prieſte ought to be depriued: For that fevve Prieſtes are founde
vvithout that faulte.
                  
                     Againe Panormitane ſaithe to like effecte,
                     Extra. De Cohabita. clericor. & Mulier. Si autem. Abb. 
                     Clericus Concubinarius in officijs
vitandus non eſt, niſi ſit notorius: A Prieſte, that keepeth a Concubine, onleſſe
he be notorious, maie not be refuſed in his Seruice.
                  Sundrie other ſutche like Authorities your pooreſte Proctoure coulde haue
brought you.
                  Howe be it, you ſaie, S. Sylueſter in ſutche caſes enioineth tenne yeeres penance.
This was true in deede, M. Hardinge. But it was true in Olde forne
yeeres, aboute twelue hundred yeeres agoe. Nowe Sylueſter is paſte quite out of
minde, and his Lawe with him. Your owne folke nowe can ſaie, Nunc aliud
tempus, alij pro tempore mores.
                  
                  
                     Martinus Poenitentiarius ſaith,
                     
                     Martinus Poeniten. in Dictionario. 
                     Eccleſia multos huiuſmodi Canones exufflauit:
quia oneroſi ſunt: The Churche hathe blowen awaie many ſutche Canons, for that thei
be too burthenous. Looke better on your Bookes, M. Hardinge. Your owne Lawe
ſaithe, Fornicationis cauſa nemo hodiè deponendus eſt: Quia corpora hodiè
ſunt fragiliora:
                     
                     Di. 82. Prebyter. In Gloſſa. Noman nowe a daies ought to be depriued for Fornication: and that,
bicauſe our bodies are frailer, then they were woonte to be. And therefore, touchinge
that cruel tenne yeeres Faſte, appointed by Sylueſters Conſtitution, the Gloſe
there ſaithe thus, Poteſt ieiunare per alium: vel, poteſt dare numum pro Ieiunio:
                     
Hee maie Paſte by ſomme other man: or els, He mai geeue a good Penny, and ſo redeeme
his whole tenne yeeres Faſte. But there is graciouſely added a ſpecial prouiſo
In the behalfe of him, that ſhal receiue this Penny: Sed debet iſte Donarius eſſe talis,
quòd non euincatur ab illo, cui donatur. Alias non contingeret liberatio:
                      But it muſte
be ſutche a Penny, that it be neuer euicted againe by Lawe from him, that receiued it. Otherwiſe
he ſhoulde not be diſcharged of his penance.
                  
                     In like manner ſaithe Pope Pelagius, Defectus noſtri temporis, quibus corpora
ipſa hominum defecerunt,
                     
                     Diſ. 34. Fraternitatis. 
                     diſtrictionis illius non patitur manere cenſuram:
The weakeneſſe of our time, by meane whereof the very bodies of menne are decaied, doothe
not ſuffer the rigoure of that Lawe to continewe.
                  Otho Bonus in his Conſtitution Legantine ſaithe,
                     De Concubinis Clericor. remouendis. Licet ad profugandum. Remoueant ipſas intra
Menſem: vel ipſas, vel alias de coetero nullatenus detenturi: Let Prieſtes put awaie their
Concubines within a Monethes ieſpite: afterward to holde neither them, nor any others in any
wiſe. Wherevpon the
                      Gloſe, with great conſcience, and ful diſcretely, ſaithe thus,
Detenturi, ſcilicet, per menſem. Alioqui diceremus, quòd propter quancun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
momentaneam poſſeſsionis detentionem ſequentem, hanc grauem poenam incurreret.
Quod nimis eſſet rigoroſum, attenta fragilitate noſtri temporis:
They maie not afterward holde (neither the ſame Concubines, nor any other). Whiche
woordes you muſte thus vnderſtand: That by the ſpace of a whole Mooneth togeather he maie

not holde them.
                     Not depoſed for Fornication. 
                     Otherwiſe wee ſhoulde ſaie, that a Prieſte ſhoulde renne into this grèeuous
pouniſhemente for any ſhorte holdinge of his Concubine in poſſeſſion folowinge afterwarde.
VVhiche thing in deede were marueilous rigorous, ſpecially conſideringe the frailtie of our time.
                  
                  
                     Againe the ſame Otho ſaithe,
                     In eodem Titulo. Ordinamus, vt, ſi contra hoc praeſumpſerint venire,
ab officio, & beneficio ſint ſuſpenſi: VVee ordaine, that, if any Prieſte doo contrarie
hereunto (liuinge incontinently, contrarie to this Conſtitution) that then he be ſuſpended,
as wel from his Benefice, as from his Office. Hereunto your
                      Gloſe addethe,
Rigoroſa quoque eſſet haec poena, niſi eſſet pro Adulterio, vel inceſtu: Etiamſi
Epiſcopus eſſet huiuſmodi labens: And this pouniſhemente alſo were ouer rigorous,
onleſſe it were for Aduoutrie, or Inceſte: (For he maie not ſo be pouniſhed for
                      Fornication)
Yea although the partie ſo fallinge were a Biſhop. And againe in the ſame
                      Gloſe,
Propter ſolam Simplicem Fornicationem, de benignitate Canonica, non debet
Clericus deponi, vel priuari: Licet ſecùs fortè de Canonis rigore: By the Courteſie
of the Canons, onely for Simple Fornication, a Prieſt maie not be depoſed from his Office,
or depruied from his Benefice: Al be it, perhaps by the rigoure, or extremitie of the Canons,
it woulde be otherwiſe.
                     Extra De purgatione canonica. Accepimus: In Gloſſa. 
                     The very true cauſe hereof is more plainely expreſſed in
your owne Gloſe vpon the Decretalles: Quia pauci ſine vitio carnis inueniuntur:
For without the vice of the fleaſhe there are but fewe (Prieſtes) to be founde.
                  
                  Al this notwithſtandinge, ye ſaie, If the Biſhop winke, and diſſemble, and beare with
the wickedneſſe of the Prieſte in this behalfe, that then he him ſelfe ought to be pouniſhed by Suſpenſion
from his Office. This, M. Hardinge, is a Canon of your owne makinge: for
other Authoritie ye allege none. But howe maie it ſeeme likely, that ye ſo cruelly
pouniſhe your Biſhoppes, for fauourable dealinge herein, ſeeinge your Highe,
and alonely Biſhop, and the Biſhop of al Biſhoppes, is ſo wel contente,
vpon agreemente for monie, to licence bothe Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes to keepe
Concubines?
                  
                  
                     If ye miſtruſte the truthe hereof,
                     Extra De Iudicijs. Ca. 4. §. De Adulterijs. 
                     biſides your Common practiſe, as you
knowe, your owne Pope Gregorie him ſelfe wil ſoone tel you, De Adulterio,
& alijs Minoribus Criminibus, Epiſcopus poteſt cum Clericis poſt poenitentiam
diſpenſare: Touchinge Aduoutrie, and other ſmal Faultes, the Biſhop after
Penance donne, maie diſpenſe with a Prieſte. Where alſo it is to be noted, that
                      Aduoutrie
in your Diuinitie is reckened emonge the petite Sinnes. Likewiſe againe
it is to be noted in your Gloſe,Extra. De Bigamis. Quia Circa: In Gloſſa. Authen. De Trien. & Semiſs. Colla. 3. Extra. De Bigamis: Quia circa. In Gloſſa. Cum preſbyteris habentibus plures Concubinas,
Epiſcopus poteſt Diſpenſare, vt ſuum officium exequantur: VVith Prieſtes hauinge
ſundrie Concubines, the Biſhop maie diſpenſe, that they maie neuertheleſſe do theire
Office. Wherein ye ſeeme ſommewhat to ouerreache the
                      Emperours Courteſte
touchinge the ſame: For thus he writeth, Vnam Concubinam qui habet, non
plures, caſtè viuit: Hee that keepeth one Concubine onely, and no moe, liueth chaſtely.
And in the ſaide former
                      Gloſe, ye ſhal finde an other ſpecial note of your owne,
wel woorthy to be written in the Popes priuie Galerie in letters of Golde: Nota,
quòd plures concubinas habens non incurrit irregularitatem: Marke wel,
that he, that keepeth ſundrie Concubines, is not thereby made irregulare. And againe,
                     
Nota Mirabile:In eadē Gloſſa. quòd cum eo, qui peccat, diſpenſatur: & cum eo, qui nō peccat,
non diſpenſatur: Marke wel: Here is a marueilous ſtrange reckeninge: The Biſhop diſpenſeth
with him that offendeth (hauinge ſundrie Concubines): but with him, that offendeth
not (hauinge married two wiues) he diſpenſeth not. And further he ſaithe,
                      Plus
habet hîc Luxuria,In eadem. Gloſſ. quàm Caſtitas: Here Lecherie hath more priuilege, then
Chaſtitie.
                  
                  
                     Againe in your Decrees it is written thus,
                     Diſt. 81. Quidam Clerici. In Gloſſ. Quaecunque Clericis taliter coniunctae
ſunt, auferantur ab Epiſcopo, & Venundentur: VVhat ſo euer weemen haue ſutche
Companie with Prieſtes, let them be remoued by the Biſhop, and ſolde, and made ſlaues. Vnto

this Lawe beinge in it ſelfe ouer rigorous,
                     
                     Not depoſed 
                           •
                        or Fornication. 
                     the Gloſe addeth this fauourable Conſtruction:
Venundentur: verum eſt, ſi contrahunt cum illis, tanquam cum vxoribus.
Aliàs non concedo, poſſe vendi propter ſimplicem Fornicationem: Let
them be ſolde, and made ſlaues. This is true, if the Prieſtes marrie vvith them, as
vvith theire vviues. Otherwiſe I graunte not, that for Simple Fornication they
maie be ſolde.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe againe it is noted in your Gloſe,
                     
                     Diſt. 23. His igitur. In Gloſſa. 
                     Nota, Frequentationem tantùm
Viduarum, & virginum prohiberi: Marke wel, that it is not y• comminge to widowes,
or Maides, but the often hauntinge vnto them, that is forebidden. Otho in his Legantines
ſaithe thus, Qui detinet publicè Concubinas, &c. The prieſte, that Openly
keepeth Concubines,Conſtitu. Ochonis, De Concubini, Clericor. remouendis: Licet ad profugandum. let him be depoſed: Hereupon your Gloſe ſaithe thus, Tu dic. Publicè,
quando Multitudini ſe patere non expauet. Secus ergo, ſi ſecretè intra
domum propriam, vel altenam detineat hanc Concubinam. Nam tunc poenam
huius Conſtitutionis non incurret. Domus enim rem ſecretam, non autem
publicam denotat. Dic ergo, publicè, id eſt, Communiter, & coram multis.
Non ergo ſufficit, quòd ſemel, vel bis talis publicè videatur: He that Openly
keepeth Concubines, &c.
                      Vnderſtande thou by this woorde, Openly if he be
not afraide, though he appeare vnto the people. It is otherwiſe, If he keepe his Concubine ſecretely,
whether it be in an other mans houſe, or in his owne. For ſo he commeth not within
the danger of this Lawe. For a houſe betokeneth, not 
                        •
                     n Open m
                        •
                     ter, but a Secrete. Thus
therefore expounde thou this Conſtitution: If hee keepe his Concubine Openly, that is to
ſaie, If he keepe her Commonly, and in the ſight of many. Therefore, if ſutche a Concubine
                        •
                     
wiſe, or thriſe be ſeene Openly, it is not ſufficiente. In the ſame 
                           
                              •
                           loſe of yours,
ye haue theſe woordes, that I haue alleged before, Si non Caſtè, tamen Cauté.
                     
                  
                  
                     And, whereas you ſaie, If a Biſhop ſhewe fauoure herein, hee him ſelfe ſhalbe ſuſpended,
Your owne Doctoure Abbate Panormitane woulde haue tolde you the contrarie:
                     De Cohabitae. Cleruorum. & Mulier. 
                           ••
                        autem, Abb.
                     Epiſcopus non tenetur deponere Clericum Concubinarium: The Biſhop
is not bounde to depriue a Prieſte, that keepeth a Concubine.
                  To make ſhorte, ye haue alſo of great prouidence, diuiſed a ſpecial Premunire,
to embolden your Prieſtes in Fornication, and to warrante them free from
al daunger of any your Lawes,2. Quae. 7. Laici. made in that behalfe. For thus you ſaie, Si Laicus,
inſtigante Diabolo, accuſet Clericum incontinentiae, ſtatim repellitur. Laici in accuſatione
Epiſcopi audiendi non ſunt: If a Laieman, by the inſtigation of the Diuel, accuſe a
Prieſte of incontinent life, ſtreight waie he is thruſte backe, and put to ſilence. The Late ſorte
maie not be hearde in the accuſation of a Biſhop.
                      And againe, Laicus non poteſt Clericum
de Fornicatione accuſare:
                     Diſt. 81. Maximianus. In Gloſſa. 
                     A Laieman maie not accuſe a Prieſte of Fornication. This
i
                        •
                      that extremitie, and vnmerciful rigoure, M. Hardinge, that ye ſhewe your
Prieſtes in theſe caſes. No Laieman maie accuſe them: No Biſhop maie depriue
them: No Lavve maie touche them.
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The thirde lye is, that Cardinal Campegius, Albertus Pighius, and certaine others haue
taught, that a Prieſte liueth more Holily and more Chaſtely, that keepeth a Concubine, then he that
hathe taken a wife in Matrimonie. VVhy doo ye not tell vs, where they haue taught ſo? VVill ye
that wee beleeue your bare woorde? Howe can wee, hauinge taken you tardy in ſo many and ſo
manifeſtlye
                        •
                     ? Ariſtotel once aſked▪ what a common lyer gained by his lyeinge,This Anſvveare mutche toucheth M Hardinge him ſelfe. that (quoth hee)
when he telleth truthe, no man will beleeue him. VViſedome woulde ſyrs▪ yee tooke good heede,
that yee proue not ſuche gayners. Nowe wee require you to bringe foorthe proufe of that ye charge
theſe learned menne withal. VVee are ſure ye cannot.
                  The woordes of Pighius be theſe: But put caſe (ſaithe hee) they, whiche haue vowed chaſtitie,

all doo not that they maie and ought to doo,Fornication better then Mariage. to atteine the grace of continencie: and therefore they be
not onely tempted, but alſo ouercome with temptation for the more parte. VVhat then? Shall it be
a leſſe euill for them to marie? For to ſaie it is better, thou maieſt not, whiche the Apoſtle imputeth
to damnation, if they breake their firſte Faithe. For theſe (I ſaie) ſhall it be leſſe euill, and leſſe damnable
to marie, then to be ouercome with luſtes?
                  Therefore where ye impute vnto him that he maketh the kepinge of a Concubine to be a more
Holy and a more chaſte life in a Prieſte, then takinge of a wife in Matrimonie, it is a fowle lie, and a
falſe ſlaunder. Neither is there in that Doctrine any filthineſſe at al, whiche Philip Melanchthon,
whom here ye folow, chargeth him withall.
                  Touchinge that pointe of doctrine it ſelfe, S. Paule confirmeth it, to whom the Mariage of thoſe
that be bounde to vowe of continencie, ſeemed ſo wicked and hainous a Sinne, that he pronounceth
the will to marie to be damnable. Now your coniunctions with your yokefellowes (we meane onely
ſo many of you as haue vowed Chaſtitie)
                        Vntruthe. For S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Qui dicunt, talium. Nuptias non eſſe Nuptias. ſed potiùs Adulieria, mihi non videntur ſatis acutè, ac diligenter conſiderare, quid dicant. De Bono Viduita. Cap. 10. are not in deede VVedlockes, but Inceſtuous Aduoutries.
And righte ſo we finde them named by Cyprian, Baſil, Chryſoſtome, Ambroſe, Hierome, Photius, and
other Holy and learned Fathers.
                  But perhaps ye ſaie, bothe are Aduoutries, whether a vowed perſon Marie, or committe Fornication.
Let it be ſo.O Sage confiderations. Yet is not that ſinne more greeuous which a man committeth of ſet and determined
purpoſe, then that which he falleth into by humaine frailtie? And that euill which contineweth,
is it not muche worſe, then that which hath intermiſsion (and no ende?)
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The Apologie ſaithe, that Campegius, Pighius, and others moe of your ſide,
haue tolde vs, that a Prieſte, kéepinge a Concubine, liueth more Holily, and more
Chaſtely, then a Prieſte, that hath a wife, and liueth in Matrimonie. Here ye
crie out, as your woonte is, Sclaunders, Lies, foule lies, and I knowe not what
For thus onely they ſaie, ſaie you, That Fornication in this caſe is leſſe il, then Màtris
monie. How be it, M. Hardinge, laieinge al Cauilles, and ſhiftes aſide, the leſſe
il, in vſe of ſpeache is commonly called the greatter good. And in this ſenſe it
is written,Eccle 40. Eccle. 42. 2. Petri. 2. 
                     Better it is to Die, then to wante.
                      And againe, Better is the iniquitie of
a Man, then a woman dooinge wel.
                      So Ionas ſaithe, Deathe vnto me is better
then Life. So S. Peter ſaithe, Better had it benne for them not to haue knowen
the waie of righteouſneſſe, then knowinge the ſame, to be turned backe from the Holy Commaundemente,
that is geuen vnto them.
                      Theſe, and other like phraſes are often vſed
in the Holy Scriptures, not for that Deathe, or Iniquitie, or Ignorance of Goddes
Iuſtice, be good in deede, but for that in compariſon of other woorſe thinges, they
ſeeme to importe ſomme leſſe il.
                  
                     Fornication, ye ſaie, is not better then Mariage: But Mariage is vvoorſe
then Fornication. Thus it ſeemeth you good, to ſhadowe your maters by ſhifte
of woordes, from vvoorſe to better, and from better to vvoorſe. And yet in al
plaine mennes iudgementes, If Mariage be vvoorſe then Fornication, then is
Fornication better then Mariage.
                  
                  
                     But to lette you vnderſtande,
                     Hulderichus Epiſcop. Auguſtanus. The ſame Epiſtle is founde in Anciente Recorde vnder the name of Voluſianus Epiſcopus Carthaginenſis.
                      
                     wée haue dealte ſimply, and plainely herein,
Hulderichus the Biſhop of Auguſta in Germanie, writinge vnto Pope Nicolas
againſte the reſtrainte of Prieſtes Mariage, aboue ſeuen hundred yeeres paſte, vſeth
like manner of ſpeache, as wee haue vſed. Thus he ſaithe, Huius imperij, ne
dicam, confilij, tam fatuam, tam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      turpem addunt ſuggeſtionem, vt dicant, Honeſtius
eſt, Pluribus occultè implicari, quàm apertè in hominum vultu, & conſcientia
cum vna ligari. Quod profectò non dicerent, ſi ex illo, & in illo eſſent, qui dicit,
Vae vobis Phariſaeis, qui omnia facitis propter homines: Vnto this commaundemente, I
wil not ſaie, vnto this Counſel, they ſette ſo fooliſhe and ſo ſhameful a ſuggeſtion, that they

ſaie,
                     Fornication better then Mariage. It is anAn Honeſter thinge. Honeſter thinge for a Prieſte to be entangled vvith many Concubines,
in Secrete, and priuily, then Openly, and in the light, and knovvledge
of the vvorlde, to be ioined in Mariage vvith one VVife. Whiche thinge Verit
they woulde not vtter, if they were either of him, or in him, that ſaithe, Woe be vnto you, ye
Phariſeis, that doo al thinges to pleaſe menne.
                  
                  In like ſorte the Councel of VVormes wrote ſommetime againſte Pope
Hildebrande, for that he had diuiſed greate rigoure, & tyrannie, to ſunder Prieſtes
from theire Wiues:Concil. VVormaetien. Ex Auentino. 
                     Scorta pudicis Coniugibus: Stupra, inceſtus, adulteria caſto
Connubio praefert: He pleaceth ſtrumpettes before honeſte Wiues: and Fornication, Inceſte,
Aduoutesie before chaſte Mariage.
                     
                     Hoſius in Petricouen. Confeſſ. Cap. 56. Notwithſtandinge, your Doctoure Hoſius
ſaithe, Turpis Philippo videtur haec oratio: Catholicis autem honeſtiſsima: Theſe
woordes vnto Philip Melancthon ſeeme ſhameful: but vnto the Catholiques they ſeeme
moſte Honeſte.
                     
                  
                  What néede wée many woordes in ſo cleare a caſe? The whole practiſe of
your Churche, M. Hardinge, profeſſeth the ſame. If a Prieſte marie a Wife,
ye Suſpende him: ye Excommunicate him: ye Depriue him: ye Diſquiet, and trouble
the whole Churche. But if he kéepe a Concubine, one, twoo, or moe, yée are
then contented, and ready, not onely to diſſemble it, but alſo with fauoure to excuſe
it. For ſo ye ſaie, as it is alleged before, Clericus Concubinarius in officijs vitandus
non eſt,
                     Extra. De Cohabita. Clerico & Mutier. Ca. final. Abb. 
                     niſi ſit notorius: A Prieſte, that keepeth a Concubine, onleſſe he be very
notorious, maie not be eſchewed in his Seruice.
                      Againe ye ſhal finde this leſſon ſpecially
noted in your Rubrike,
                     Diſt. 34. Is. qui. as it is ſaide before, Qui non habet Vxorem, loco
illius Concubinam debet habere: He that hath not a Wife, in ſteede of her ought to haue
a Concubine.
                      Ye wil ſaie, There is an Errour in your print: whiche thing maie eaſily
be graunted, ſpecially the whole Booke beinge otherwiſe ſo ful of errours. But
would God your errours in Life, & Doctrine were no greatter. Howe be it, it foloweth
immediatly in the ſame Decree, Is qui non habet Vxorem, & pro Vxore Concubinam
habet, à Communione non repellatur: VVho ſo hath no VVife, and in ſteede
of a VVife hath a Concubine, let him not be remoued from the Communion. In
theſe woordes, I trowe, ye wil ſaie, there is no erroure.
                  
                     Vpon the Legantine Conſtitutions of Otho Bonus, ye maie finde theſe
woordes noted in the Gloſe,Conſti Othonis. De Concubinis Clericor. remouen. Licet ad Profugandum. Auguſti. De Moribus Manichaeorum Li. 2. Ca. 18. Nunquid compelli poteſt Clericus concubinam
abiurare? Videtur, quòd non. Reſolutio, Si Clericus duxit Vxorem de facto, eo caſu
iuramentum exigitur: Whether maie a Prieſte be forced to fore ſweare his Concubine?
It ſeemeth, he maie not. The Reſolution hereof is this: If a Prieſte haue in deede
Maried a Wife, in this caſe he is forced to foreſake her by an Othe. Therefore wée
maie ſaie to you, as S.
                      Auguſtine ſaide ſommetime to the Manichees, Non Concubitum,
ſed. vt longè antè ab Apoſtolo dictum eſt, verè Nuptias prohibetis: Ye
forebidde not Copulation: but, as it was longe agoe foreſpoken by the Apoſtle, in deede ye
forebidde very Mariage.
                  
                  Nowe, for as mutche, as ye ſaie, ye are no Angels, and your infirmities
ought to be conſidered, it ſhal not be amiſſe, ſhortely to ſée, what your owne frendes
haue thought of theſe infirmities. And here, to paſſe ouer other Authorities, your
owne Doctour the Biſhop of Bitonto, beinge preſente at your Late Chapter at
Tridente, of your whole Single Life, whiche ye cal Chaſtitie, pronounceth thus:
Quibus turpitudinum monſtris,
                     Concil. Triden. Seſsion. 1. 
                     qua ſordium colluuie, qua peſte non ſunt corrupti,
non foedati in Eccleſia Sancta Dei, & Populus, & Sacerdos? A Sanctuario
Dei incipite, patres, ſi vllus iam pudor, ſi vlla pudicitia, &c. Dicūt in Corde impio,
& ore impuro, Nō eſt Deus: With what Monſters of filthineſſe, wt what villanie,
                     
                     
with what Peſtilence are they not corrupted, and defiled in the Churche of God, bothe the
People, and the Prieſte? My Lordes, beginne euen with the Sanctuarie of God: if there be
any ſhame, if there be any honeſte Life. They ſaie with wicked haste, and filthy mouthe,
There is no God.
                  
                     An other ſaithe,
                     Hermannus Riddus, De vita & honeſ. Cleri. Paralip. Vrſpergen. in Clemen. 5. Propter multitudinem luxuriae, alia vitia quaſi non peccata reputantur:
For the multitude of Lecherie (that is in Prieſtes) other faultes are taken for
no ſinne.
                  
                  
                     An other ſaithe, Defecit iam omnis Diſciplina, & Religio in Cardinalibus:
Et tres radices vitiorum, Superbia, Auaritia, Luxuria validiſsimè dominantur:
In the Cardinalles nowe al Diſcipline, and Religion is decaied: And three rootes of ſinnes,
Pride, Couetouſneſſe, and Lecherie doo mooſte mightily preuaile. S.
                      Bernarde ſaith,
Fingunt,Bernar. in Cantic. Serm. 66. ſe amore Caſtitatis iſta dicere: cùm ea magis cauſa turpitudinis fouendae, & multiplicandae
adinuenerint: They beate vs in hande, that they ſpeake theſe thinges for loue of
Chaſtitie: Whereas in deede they haue diuiſed the ſame, to the ende to nourriſhe, and to encreaſe
theire fil thineſſe. This, M. Hardinge, is your
                      infirmitie, whiche, in your
iudgemente, of Courteſie, and Charitie, wée ought to beare withal.
                  
                  The places of S. Cyprian,
                     The 2. parte, the 8. Chapter, the 
                           •
                         Diuiſion. Diſt. 27. Quidā. S. Baſile, S. Chryſoſtome, S. Ambroſe, S.
Hierome, and others, that maie ſeeme mutche to make with you in this caſe, and
to condemne this kinde of Marriage, are weighed, and anſweared before in a place
more conuen
                        •
                     ente. Verily, S. Auguſtine ſaithe, 
                        
                           •
                        rauiter peccant, qui tales diuidunt:
They ſinne greeuouſly, that diuide them, that be ſo ma
                              •
                           ried.
                     
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhere ye ſaie, there be many thouſandes of common harlottes in Rome, wee thinke there be
many there in deede. VVhether there be many thouſandes, wee doubte. VVhat number ſoeuer there
is, they be too many. Thoſe Courteghianes the Churche of Rome dootheNot nourriſhe, but tolerate. A proper excuſe & a ſoare pouniſhemente of open VVhooredome. tolerate, not nourriſhe,
truſtinge and lookinge, that by ſermons, exhortations, and other conuenient meanes, they may be called
backe to repentance, and to the waie of ſaluation.
                  That the Pope gathereth about a thirty thouſande Ducates yeerely of theſe Courteghianes by
waye of an annuall penſion, whiche theſe Defenders affirme,Vntruthe. For it is moſte true, as it ſhal appeare. it is vtterly falſe. Cornelius Agrippa,
who fauoured not the See of Rome, and was imbrued with Hereſies, that ſprange vp in his time,
was the firſte Authour of this ſlaunder. If they paye the common taxes, which be leuied to the Pope,
who onely hathe ciuil Dominion ouer that Cittie, theyVntruthe manifeſte. For onleſſe they paie, they ſhal not occupie. paie not for that they maie be ſuffered to
continewe that ſinneful trade of life, but ſo as the whole Cittie paieth by polles, for that there
they haue their abode and habitation.
                  Firſte it is common to al great Citties in thoſe hote countries, not to banniſhe from amonge
them that filthy generation of harlottes, not by waie of ſufferinge, as a thinge commendable in it
ſelfe, but for the auoidinge of a greatter miſchiefe. AsThe Pope maie diſpenſe as vvel as God. God ſuffered the harde necked Iewes to
hate their enemies, and pinche them with vſuries. Likewiſe Moiſes permitted a libell of diuorce, not
that theſe thinges were honeſte, but to thintent by that meanes yet they might the rather loue theire
Brethrene, and lende them money freely, and abſteine from murderinge their wiues. Euen ſo men
nowe adaies ſo litle applie theire endeuour to reſtraine the proneſſe whiche is in their fleaſhe to all
riot and carnall concupiſcence, that if ſome waie were not (as the leaſt concerninge outwarde and
ciuil puniſhement)This is a ioily Catholique Diui
                           ••
                        ie. wincked at, whereby the Fleaſhely men might obteine ſome parte of theire vnruly
deſire: it were more then likely, that in this greate decaie of vertue in generall, the furious
rage of that vice would leaue neither wedlocke vndefiled, nor Virginitie vnaſſaul
                        •
                     ed, nor a worſe
enterpriſe, whiche Nature abhorreth, vnattempted. VVoulde God experience had not taught many
Countries this to be too true an obſeruation.
                  S. Auguſtine hereof ſaithe.S. Auguſtine rote theſe Bookes▪ de Ordine, before he vvas Baptized. 
                     Quid ſordidius, &c. VVhat can be ſaide more vncleane, more
voide of comelineſſe, more ful of turpitude, then harlottes, baudes, and ſuche other like peſtilences?

Take harlottes from amonge men,Stevves in Rome. ye ſhal diſturbe al thinges with lecherous luſtes. Put the ſame in
the ſteede of matrones, ye ſhal diſhoneſt (all thinges) with ſpotte and ſha
                        ••
                     . And why is the Biſhop of
Rome to be blamed for that they be in Rome, more then the Frenche Kinge, the Kinge of Spaine,
or any other Prince, for ſufferinge them in their dominions?
                  It remaineth, wee ſeeke whether they haue alſo the loweſt and vileſt place in that Citie, or no:
leſt perhaps, although they be aA vile Vntruthe Thei are not neceſſarie. neceſſarie euil, yet beinge promoted aboue their degree, they make
an euil ſhewe in the body, where they reſt. Their place maie be conſidered two waies, in reſpect of
the temporal, or of the Eccleſiaſtical order or lawe. For temporal order thus they ſtande: Not to haue
free libertie of dwellinge in the moſt haunted ſtreetes, and Palaices, where them liſt, butVntruthe. For the Cardinalles them ſelues ſay, Habitant inſignes Aedes. onely to
be in ſuche corners, and bylanes, and ſmal outhouſes, as are moſt fitte ſhoppes for the vile marchandize
of ſuche occupiers. Againe they can not without a very great forfeit ride inVntruthe For the Cardinalles ſaie: Mula vehuntur. Coches, or Chariots,
as Matrones there doo, but are conſtrained either to keepe their homely homes, or to walke a
foote in the ſtreetes. And then alſo by order they muſt beVntruthe. For the Cardinalles ſaie, Incedunt vt Matronae. in ſuche apparel, that as Iewe, by theire red
cappes, ſo they by theire ſhorte vailes (a note of diſhoneſtie) be knowen to al, and be ſubiect to all
ſhrewdnes of the boies of the ſtreetes, who vſe commonly to mocke and reuile them.
                  And here I can not but miſlike with that malice whiche appeareth to be in the makers of this
Apologie. ForThis is one of the Cardinalle vertues of Rome, to take tolle of Baudrie. it is a vertue in the Prince to ſet greate burdens and paimentes vpon ſo filthy
a profeſſion, to the ende he maie feare women from it, and make them the ſoner weary of it, &c.
In good ſoothe maiſters ye are too yonge to controll the Cittie of Rome in her doinges.
                  Beſides al this, if in that ſinneful ſtate they continewe to their ende without repentance,
Vntruthe. Sea the Anſvveare. it is not lauful for them to make any teſtamente or laſt will for beſtowinge of their goodes, but as
condemned and infamous perſons, they muſt leaue al to be confiſcated and diſpoſed at the Princes pleaſure.
But on thother ſide, if they turne and repent, there are houſes called Monaſteries of the Conuertites,
and ſpeciall prouiſion and diſcipline for them, where they are taught howe to be waile their
vnchaſte life ſo ſinnefully paſt ouer.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Touchinge the number of your Courteghianes of Rome, whether they be
twentie thouſande, or more, or leſſe, wee wil not ſtriue. They be leaſed out in
ſee farme: The Popes rentes are alwaies certaine. For Fornication is fineable
in Rome, and a goode 
                        •
                     aleable kinde of ſinne. But this, you ſaie, is an other Lie, as
falſe, and as ſclounderous, as the reſte. For, ye ſaie, they paie no yeerely penſion for theire
ſufferance in that trade of Life: but onely the common taxes, whiche are likewiſe raiſed vpon
other Citizens. Whether it be ſo, or no, M. Hardinge, it is ſufficiente for you,
ſo to ſaie. Otherwiſe, he that raiſeth ſutche fines vpon baudrie, might wel bee
thought to be the baude.
                  
                     Howe be it, your owne Doctours herein wil ſoone condemne you. For thus
it is written by them in your owne Gloſe: Videtur,Conſtitu. Othonis. De Concubinis Clericor. remouendis. quod crimen Meretricij Eccleſia
ſub diſsimulatione tranſire debeat. Nam & Mareſchallus Papae de facto exigit tributū
à Meretricibus: It ſeemeth, that the Churche ought to diſſemble the fault of whooredome.
For the Popes Marſhal in deede receiueth a tribute, or penſion of VVhoores.
                  Whereas ye ſaie, Cornelius Agrippa was the firſt Authour of this ſclaunder,
it is vntrue. For your owne Gloſe laſte before alleged, auoucheth it by the
Authoritie of Iohannes Andreas,
                     Iohan. Andreas mortuus eſt an. 1348. a notable Canoniſte, that liued welneare twoo
hundred yeeres, before Agrippa was borne. And Nicolaus de Clauengijs, that
liued in the time of y• 
                     Emperour Sigiſmunde, in his Booke intituled, De Corrupto
Eccleſiae ſtatu,
                     Nicolaus De Clauengijs: In Paralipomen. Vrſpergen. Ann. 1417. hathe one ſpecial Chapter, De Exactionibus pro concubinis
tolerandis, Of Exactions for the ſufferinge of Concubines.
                     
                  
                  But al this ye wipe awaie eaſily with one woorde. For ye ſaie, The Courteghianes
in Rome paie theſe impoſitions, not as a portion of theire vnthrifty
gaiſtes, but onely as a pouniſhemente for theire wicked life. For it is not laweful

there to commit ſinne freely, without paiemente. And thus is the mater wel
defended.
                  
                     So it is noted vpon your Decrees, Quòd dicitur, Sacerdos non poteſt percipere
mercedem proſtibuli,14. quae. 5. Quod verò. In Gloſſa. Et Diſ. 90 Oblationes, in Gloſſa. poteſt dici, quòd non debet recipi Oblatio Meretricis: licet
Eleemoſyna poſsit inde fieri: Whereas it is ſaide, The Prieſte maie not receiue the
revvarde, or Oblation of the Stevves, wee maie ſaie, that the Oblation of an Harlo
                           •
                        
maie not be receiued: notwithſtandinge wee maie make an almouſe of the ſame: That
is to ſaie, A Harlottes monie maie be taken by y• waie of Almouſe, but not by the
waie of Oblation. Thus are wee taught, and it behooueth vs to beleeue, that
the Pope maie liue, not by the Oblations of the Courteghianes, but by theire
Almouſe.
                  Nowe for as mutche as M. Hardinge woulde ſo faine haue this mater to
paſſe by the name of a pouniſhemente of theſe il weémenne, I beſeeche thee, good
Reader, to conſider, howe greeuouſely, and with what extremitie, and rigoure of
Lawe they haue diuiſed,Conſtitu. prouin. Edmundi Cantuar. Archiepiſcopi. to haue them pouniſhed. In a Prouincial Councel holden
at Oxforde it is written thus, Concubinae Sacerdotum moneantur ab
Archidiacono, &c. Let Prieſtes Concubines be vvarned by the Archedeacon
&c. If they vvil not amende, then let them be forebidden to Kiſſe the Pax, and
to take Holy Breade in the Churche. With ſutche extremitie, and crueltie they
keepe the people from dooinge il.
                  It was neither for your profeſſion, M. Hardinge, nor for your grauitie, to
become a Proctoure for the Stevves. Although it might wel becomme Leontium,
an Heathen Courteghiane of lewde conditions, that wai to beſtow her witte,
and Eloquence againſte Theophraſtus, in the defence of that filthy ſtate, yet may
not the ſame likewiſe becomme a Chriſtian man, and a profeſſoure of Diuinitie.
                  Ye cal your Courteghianes a Neceſſarie Euil: but by what Authoritie of the
Scriptures, I cannot tel. That the whole trade, and life of them is il, we take it,
as your graunte: But that thei be Neceſſarie in any Chriſtian Common wealth,
I recken it very harde for you to proue. Yee allege the heate of the Countrie: as if
that weere a ſufficiente warrante for your Stewes. And yet, I trowe, the towne
of Louaine, and the Countrie of Brabante, where ye nowe inhabite, is not ſo
hote. The heates of Ievvrie are thought farre to paſſe al the heates of Italie.
Yet God ſaithe vnto the Ievves,
                     Deutero. 23. 
                     Non erit vlla Meretrix de filiabus Iſrael: nec
Scortator de filijs Iſrael: There ſhalbe no Whoore of the Daughters of Iſrael: Nor
Whoorekeeper of the Sonnes of Iſrael.
                      And euen nowe, where ſo euer the Goſpel
of Chriſte is openly, and freely receiued, notwithſtandinge the heate of the Countrie,
your Stewes, and Bordelles flee awaie, as the night clowdes before the
Sonne. But after that your Prieſtes were once forbidden laweful Marriage,
then was it needeful, that your Neceſſarie il ſhoulde comme in place. Howe be
it,Roman. 3. S. Paule ſaithe, Let vs not doo il, that good maie folowe. For iuſte is the damnation
of them, that ſo ſaie.
                  
                  But S. Auguſtine ſtandeth ful of your ſide: S. Auguſtine hath written in
the behoufe of the Stewes: S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Take Harlottes awaie from emonge
menne,
                     Auguſtin. De Ordine, Li. 2. 
                     and ye fil al the Countrie with ribaudrie, and villanie. In deede the very name
of S. Auguſtine is great, and Reuerende. But what if S. Auguſtine, when he
wrote theſe woordes, were not S. Auguſtine? What if he wrote that Booke,
De Ordine, beinge as yet a very yonge man, & but a Nouice in the Faithe: not yet
wel inſtructed: not yet Baytized in the name of Chriſte: him ſelfe as yet keepinge
a Concubine, and liuinge in whooredome? Shal ſutche a one, ſo yonge, and ſo
youthful, goe for a Saincte? Or ſhal his bare name, and vnſeaſoned fantaſies
ſtande you in ſteede, to proue your Stewes?
                  
                     
                     Verily, the ſame S. Auguſtine, beinge afterwarde fully inſtructed, and Chriſtened,
ſaith thus,
                     Auguſtin De Ciuitate. Li. 14. Cap. 18. 
                     Iſtam in vſu ſcortatorum terrena Ciuitas licitam fecit turpitudinem:
The worldly Citie (not y• Church of God) hath made this filthineſſe of harlottes to be laweful.
And Ludouicus Viues, writing vpon y• ſame, ſaithe, Satis apertè Auguſtinus

                              •
                           eſtatur,
                     
                     Ludo. Viues in Librum De Ciuitate. Lib. 14. Cap. 18. 
                     lure Ciuili veteri Romano multa eſſe permiſſa, quae ſint contra
                           •
                        ia Legibus Diuinis.
Hoc iſti volunt, qui, dum Gentilitatem coniungere, & coaptare Chriſtianiſmo
laborant, corrupto vtro
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , & alterius impatiente, nec Gentilitatem, nec Chriſtianiſmum
retinent: S. Auguſtine plainely witneſſeth, that by the olde Ciuile Romaine (and Heathen)
Lawe, many thinges were ſuffered, whiche were contrarie to the Lawes of God. This
thinge wil not theſe menne allowe, whoe while they ſtudie (as you, M. Hardinge, doo)
to ioine Heathenneſſe, and Chriſtianitie bothe togeather, bothe beinge corrupted, and the one
not ſtandinge with the other, keepe nowe neither Heathenneſſe, nor Chriſtianitie.
                  
                     Therefore wee maie mutche better exchange theſe woordes of Auguſtine,
ſpoken in his youthe, before he had wel learned to ſpeake: and ma
                           •
                        e mutche better
ſaie thus, Permitte Lupanaria: & implebis omnia libidinibus: Suffer, and allowe
the Stewes: and ye ſhal fil al the Countrie with Ribaudrie, and Villanie. And in this
ſenſe S.
                      Bernarde ſaithe▪
                     
                     Bernard. in Cantic. Sermo. 66. Tolle de Eccleſia honorabile Coniugium, & thorum immaculatum:
Nonne reples eam Concubina
                        •
                     ijs, inceſtuoſis, ſeminifluis, mollibus, maſculorū
Concubitoribus, & omni denique genere immundorum? Take once from the Churche
honourable 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and the Bedde vndefiled: and doeſte thou not fil the ſame Churche ful
of brothelles, keepinge Concubines, &c. and with al ſo
                           •
                        tes of filthy perſonnes?
                  
                  
                     Further ye ſaie, And wherefore is the Biſhop of Rome more to be blamed for mainteinance
of his Stewes, then the Frenche Kinge, or the Kinge of Spaine? This is but a ſimple
reaſon for a Doctour of Diuinitie. It is an olde ſaieinge:
                     Nil iuuat exemplum, quod litem lite reſoluit.
                  
                  Chriſte bade not his Apoſtles, to be leadde by the example of worldly Princes.
If it be il in them, it is mutche woorſe in him, that woulde be called the Vicare of
Chriſte, the Heade of the Churche, and the Holy one of Iſrael.
                  An other parte of theire pauniſhemente is, as you tel vs, that they maie
not ride ſumptuouſely in Coches, or Charettes, or dwel in the open faire ſtréetes,
and in the ſight of the Cittie: but are forced to goe a foote, and to hide them
ſelues in corners, and in out houſes, and bylanes: and that, by your deſcription,
in ſutche ſimple, and poore, and beggerly ſorte, as if they were the vileſte, and ougleſte
of al the people, and had not a good clowte to couer theire bodies. Certainely,
M. Hardinge, your Courteghianes, if they vnderſtoode hereof, woulde thinke
them ſelues litle beholden to ſutche a Proctoure.
                  Doctoure Peter Martyr, of whom I cannot ſpeake without great reuerence,
hauinge good cauſe to knowe the ſtate of Rome, as fewe menne better, hereof
wrteth thus:
                     Petrus Martyr. in Li. Iudicu
                           ••
                         Cap. 16. None, O Deus bone, quomodò Romae coercentur Meretrices? Habent
ornatiſsimas domos: vehuntur per publicum habitu principum: Sedent in equis
gradarijs: habent ſecum Torquatos, & Laruatos Comites: interdum etiam
Cardinales, praeſertim noctu: & ancillarum ſumptuoſiſsimum gregem: Nowe a daies,
O good God, howe are the Courteghianes pouniſhed in Rome? They dvvel in the faireſt
houſes: They are caried vvith honoure through the Cittie, as if they vvere
Ladies: They are mounted on amblinge palfraies: They are attended with chaines
of golde, and perſonnes diſguiſed, and ſometimes Cardinalles, and ſpecially in the night ſeaſon:
and haue a ſumptuous ſorte of Maides to waite vpon them.
                  
                  
                     If ye ſhal happen to doubte M. Martyrs reporte in this behalfe,
                     Concilium Delectorum Cardinalium. Concil. tom. 3. Pag. 823. 
                     yet I truſte
ye wil geue ſomme credite to your owne Frendes, the Cardinalles of the Churche
of Rome. Theire woordes hereof be theſe: In hac etiam Vrbe Meretrices, vt

Matronae, incedunt per Vrbem, ſeu Mula vehuntur: quas affectantur de media
die Nobiles, familiares Cardinalium, Cleric
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     . Nulla in vrbe vidimus hanc
corruptionem, praeterquam in hac omnium exemplari. Habitant etiam inſignes aedes.
In this Cittie of Rome the Courteghianes paſſe through the ſtreetes, or ride on their Mules, like
honeſte Matrones, or Ladies: and in the middeſt of the daie, Noble menne, the Cardinalles
deere frendes, and Prieſtes attend vpon them. Wee neuer ſaw ſutche corruption,
but onely in this Cittie, whiche is the example, and paterne of al others. Moreouer they
dwel in faire and notable houſes.
                     Anno. 1538. 
                     This Information was preſented vnto Pope Paule
the thirde by certaine of his graueſte Cardinalles, appointed thereto by ſpecial
Commiſſion.
                  
                  Nowe, good Chriſtian Reader, I beſeeche thée, conſider the Conformitie of
theſe tales. M. Hardinge ſaithe, The Courteghianes of Rome goe onely a foote:
Theſe Cardinalles ſaie, They ride on Mules. M. Hardinge ſaithe, They haue a
ſpecial apparel of diſhoneſtie, to be knowen by: Theſe Cardinalles ſaie, They
goe, or ride, as honeſte Matrones, or great Ladies, or Noble wemenne. M. Hardinge
ſaithe, They be deſpiſed, and reuiled of the people: Theſe Cardinalles ſaie,
They haue Prieſtes, Noble menne, and the Cardinalles frendes to attende vpon
them. M. Hardinge ſaithe, They dwel onely in out houſes, and backe lanes▪
Theſe Cardinalles ſaie, Habitant inſignes Aedes: They dwel in faire, and notable
Houſes.
                      So many Vntruthes it is no harde mater for M. Hardinge to vtter in
ſo ſhorte a tale. Nowe, beinge ſo fine Dames, and ſo richely attired, it were
great ſclaunder to ſaie, They ſerue onely for V
                        •
                     rlettes, or common raſcalles. If
the reporte be true, vpon Twelueth daie at night, in the yere of our Lorde, 1564.
there were ſeene Seuentéene Coches of Courteghianes arriuing togeather euen into
the Popes owne Palaice.Anno. 1564. If any man ſhal thinke this reporte incredible, yet Luitprandus,
                     Luitprandus, Li. 6. Cap. 6.
of y• like hereof, ſaith thus, Lateranenſe Palatium, Sanctorum quondam
hoſpitium, nunc eſt Proſtibulum Meretricum: The Popes Palaice at Laterane,
ſommetime the harbour of Holy Sainctes, is nowe becomme a ſtewe of whoores.
                     
                  
                  An other parte of theire pouniſhemente, ye ſaie, is this: That as condemned,
and infamous perſonnes, at theire ende they can make no Teſtamente, nor take order with that
they haue. If this were true, it were a good token, that the Pope is Couetous to
haue their goodes, more then deſirous to ſaue their Soules. How be it, y• beſt Learned,
and moſt notable Canoniſtes, that ye haue, affirme the contrari
                        •
                     . For prouſe
whereof reade Cynus Piſtorienſis in L. Cum te. C. De Condictione ob turpem
cauſam:
                     Cynus Piſtorien. Baldus. Bartholus. De Immunita. Eccleſiar. Ca. 14. Abb.
Reade Baldus L. 1. C. in eodem capite: Reade Bartholus in L. Idem. ff.
eodem Ca. Abbas Panormitane, after longe diſputation had touchinge this
mater, thus ſaithe his Iudgemente in the ende: Conclude ergo ex omnibus premiſſis,
quòd Meretrix turpiter non recipit dona, vel promiſsionem: & quòd poteſt de illis
ad libitum diſponere: Of al theſe premiſſes conclude you thus, That a Harlot maie receiue
rewardes, or promiſſes, without infamie, or ſhame
                      (of the Lawe): and that of the ſame ſhee
maie diſpoſe at her pleaſure. Therefore, M. Hardinge, this tale woulde haue benne
better ſtudied. For this pouniſhemente, that ye haue here imagined, by the
Iudgemente of the Learned, is no pouniſhemente.
                  In good ſoothe Sirs, ye ſaie further, Ye are to yonge to Controlle the Cittie of Rome in her
dooinges. Yet, in y• rebuking of open vice, noman ought to be thought too yonge. But
of what age then are you, M. Hardinge, that are hable thus to defende the Cittie
of Rome in open Whooredome?
                     Primaſius ad Roman. Cap. 2. Epheſ. 5. 
                     Primaſius ſaithe, Nemo periculoſiùs peccat,
quàm qui peccata defendit: Noman ſinneth with more danger, then he that ſtandeth in
defence of Sinne. S. Paule ſaithe, Let noman deceiue you with vaine woordes. For bicauſe
hereof the anger of God commeth vpon the Children of infidelitie. Be not therefore
partakers with them.
                  
                     
                     And whereas you ſaie, This policie is thought neceſſarie for the eſchewinge
of a greatter il,
                     Extra. De Celebra. Miſſ. De homine. 
                     your Lawe telleth you, Abijcienda ſunt falſa remedia, quae Veris,
& manifeſtis periculis ſunt grauiora: VVee muſte abandon vaine remedies,
that are more greeuous, then the true, and manifeſte dangers.
                  S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Non vult Deus tale lucrum compenſari tali damno. God
wil not haue ſutche a gaine to be recompenſed with ſutche a loſſe. S. Paule ſaith,
as wée haue alleged before:
                     Roman. 3. Tertullian. De Anima. Anthen. De L
                           •
                        
                        nonibus. 
                     They ſaie, Let vs doo il, that good maie folowe. But he
addeth withal, Therefore iuſte is theire Damnation. Tertullian ſaith, Lupanaria
execrabilia ſunt coram Deo: stevves are accurſed before God. And therefore,
to conclude, the Emperour Iuſtinian ſtreitely commaundeth, that Harlottes be
banniſhed out of al Townes.
                  
                  But here, good Chriſtian Reader, this one thinge I beſeeche the vprightly, and
indifferently to conſider: what thinge wil not theſe menne defende, that can thus
boldely defende confeſſed filthineſſe? Or, when wil they refourme the Churche
of God, that in ſo longe time cannot yet refourme theire open Stewes?
                  Theſe Harlottes, ye ſaie, ſommetimes repente them, and amende theire
liues. God of his mercie graunte, that you, M. Hardinge, maie once doo the
like:Hierem. 3. Matthae. 2
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      Leſte the woordes of the Prophete falle vpon you, Frons Meretricis facta eſt
tibi. God graunte, that Harlottes, and Sinners goe not before you in the Kingedome of
God.
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  That ye tel of a VVoman named Ioane, bearinge the worlde in hande, ſhe was Pope of Rome, it
is a fonde and avaine fable. VVere ye ſo wiſe, as ye be malicious, ye woulde neuer haue brought
your credite in hazard by reportinge ſutche vanitie. This I accoumpte for one of your accuſtomed
lies. By this men maie iudge, what litle ſtoare of true thinges ye haue to obiecte againſte vs.
VVho liſteth to ſee a Learned diſcourſe written hereof, him maie is pleaſe to reade the annotations of
Onuphrius is a mā yet liuing, hired of pourpoſe to face out this mater. Onuphrius Pāuinius vpō 
                     Platina, de vitis pontificum,
                     In Vita Iohan. 8. printed in Venis. And he ſhal eaſely beleue
the whole matter to be fabulous.
                  After Anaſtaſius, they that in theire writinges recite an exacterewe and order of Popes, as Ademarus,
and Annonius of Paris, Regino, Hermannus Schafnaburgenſis. Otho Friſingenſis, Abbas Vrſpergenſis,
Leo Biſhop of Hoſtia, Iohanes of Cremona, and Godfridus Vrterbienſis, of which ſome wrote
three hundred, ſome foure hundred yeeres paſte, al theſe make no mention at al of this VVoman Pope
Ioane. Againe there be in bibliotheca Palatina, at Rome, ſix or ſeuen tables of the Popes names writē
in ſundry bookes, before the time of Innocentius the fourthe. Mary in the margent of Pandulphus
this fable is put in betweene Leo the fouthe, and Benedicte the thirde, written in a hande farre
different from the olde characters of that Auncient Booke, added by ſome man of later time. VVhiche
maketh the matter to be the more ſuſpected, and taken for a fable.
                  Though men had at that time ben ſo farre bewitched, and diſtract of theire fiue wittes,Semiramis beinge a vvooman vvas of longe time taken for a man. Yet mennes eies vvere not bevvitched. as they
coulde not haue knowen a woman from a man, (whiche no wiſe man I wene beleueth), yetGod hath ſuffered others as very monſters to ſitte in that See, as euer vvas Pope Iohane. it is not
to be thought, that God him ſelfe, who appointed and ordained the Seate of Peter, whereof he woulde
the whole Churche to be directed, woulde departe ſo far from his merciful prouidence, towarde the
Churche, as to ſuffer the ſame to be polluted by a woman, whiche is not of capacitie for holy orders.
                  
                     Vntruthe. For there vvere others before him, that vvrote the ſame. The firſte Author of this fable was one Martinus Polonus, a Monke of the order of Ciſterce: VVho
wrote longe after the time that Pope Iohane is fayned to haue liued in. VVhoſe manner of writinge
if we conſider, wee ſhal finde it vaine, and nothinge like to be true. It beginneth thus, Iohannes
Anglicus natione, Maguntinus, ſedit annos duos, menſem vnum, dies quatuor, &c. Iohn
an Engliſhe man by nation, of Maguntia, ſaie (in the Romaine See) twoo yeeres, one moneth, and
foure dayes, alias, fiue monethes and three daies. VVhat a fooliſhe ſpeache is this, an Engliſh man
Maguntine, or of Maguntia? It foloweth in the fable, as the ſaide Martine telleth. This (as it is

ſaide) was a VVoman,Dame Iohane the Pope. and in the younge age of a girle, ſhe was brought to Athenes by one that was
her Louer in a mans apparel, and there profited ſo mutche in diuerſe ſciences, as none was founde to
be compared with her. To Athenes was ſhe brought, ſaithe the fable. And why? For learning.
Very wel. VVhereas at that timeVntruthes, tvvoo togeather neither any Athenes ſtoode, * neither was there any place of lerning
there any lenger: but al the countrie of Attica became Barbarous, and vtterly voide of learninge, as
we vnderſtande by the writers of that time. The authour reporteth, that from thence ſhe came to
Rome, and there profeſſed learninge openly, and had greate Doctours to her Scholers, and for opinion
of learninge and good life, by one conſente of al was made Pope. VVhiche is ſoone confuted as falſe:
Vntruthes, 2. Reade the Anſvveare. for there was no learninge at thoſe dayes openly profeſſed at Rome, as ‡the Stories declare.
                  It foloweth in the fable. Beinge in the Popedome ſhe is begotten with childe of her Seruaunt.
And not knowinge the time of her delyueraunce, as ſhe wente from S. Peters to Laterane, ſtreined
with paines betweene Coloſſeo and S. Clementes Churche, ſhe brought foorthe, and died, and
was (as they ſaie) there buried. Here is to be marked, howe theThis Diuiſer dvvelt in Rome, and liued aboue fiue hundred yeeres agoe. deuiſer of this fable bewrayeth
himſelfe, and thinketh the matter harde to be beleued. And therefore in the beginninge ſaithe, ſhe
was a VVoman (vt aſſeritur) as folkes ſaie: and nowe he ſaith, ſhe was buried, vt dicitur, as it is ſaid.
So he dothe not affirme it to be true, but referreth al to hereſaie. By whiche teſtimonie lies commonly
be ſoothed.
                  And as it is falſe, that euer there was any ſutche Pope, ſo is it not true, that ye note in the margent
of your booke touchinge the image, whiche ye ſaie is to be ſene yet in Rome, reſemblinge that woman
Pope lieinge in trauaile. The image, whiche ye meane, I haue ſene my ſelfe at Rome, grauen in
a ſtone, after the manner of a tombe ſtone, pitched vpright not farre from the Coloſſeo. It reſembleth
no ſutche thinge ye ſpeake of.
                  Neither is it of any more truthe, whiche ſome haue ignorantly written of the Popes refraininge
to go that waie, when he goeth thereby in ſolemne proceſsions: nor that whiche I haue reade in ſome
of yourVntruthe. For they liued 500. yeeres before vs: and vvere the beſte vvriters of that time. Schoolefelowes peuiſhe bookes of the ſtoole of eaſemente, that is at Laterane made of faire
porphyry ſtone, whiche they haue reported to be kepte there for an vnſemely vſe at the creation of the
Popes, for proufe of theire Humanitie. Thus, we truſte, we haue brought your great matter of Pope
Ioane to nought.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, in your Iudgemente, is an other of our fowle ſhameful accuſtomed Lies.
And that ye proue by the Authoritie of one Onuphrius, one of the Popes late
pages, ſpecially hired, and procured, to healpe out this mater. Of the Truthe, and
certainetie hereof, wée ſhal conſider further in the ende. Nowe let vs examine this
Newe Coniectural Doctour with his gheaſſes.Not Regiſtred.
                  
                  Firſte, he ſaithe, Dame Iohane is not regiſtred in the Calendare emonge the
Popes: Ergo, it is but a vaine Fable, that euer Dame Iohane was Pope in
Rome. This Coniecture, M. Hardinge, is very ſimple. For I doubte not, but
ye maie wel remember, that Biſhoppes names, as wel in Rome, as otherwheres,
haue vpon ſundrie occaſions benne oftentimes quite ſtriken out of the Calendare.
                  So was Chryſoſtomes name vpon diſpleaſure, quite ſtriken out of the Table
of the Biſhoppes of Conſtantinople,
                     In Vita Chryſo. Chryſ. Epiſt. 3. ad Cyriacum. as if he had neuer benne Biſhoppe there.
                  
                     And Chryſoſtome him ſelfe, writinge vnto Cyriacus in his owne defence,
ſaithe thus, Siquidem hoc feci, expungatur nomen meum ex albo Epiſcoporum:
& non ſcribatur in Libro Orthodoxae Fidei: If I haue thus donne, let my name be raſed out
of the Biſhoppes Calendare: and let it not be regiſtred in the Booke of the Catholike Faithe.
                  
                  And afterwarde his name beinge ſo defaced, and raſed out, was reſtoared againe
by Theodotus at the vehemente requeſte,Nicepho. Li. 14. Cap. 26. Geleſius ad Epiſcopos Dardaniae. and inſtaunce of the people. So
Acacius, y• Biſhop of Conſtantinople, raſed out y• name of Pope Foelix of Rome:
                     
So Innocentius, the Biſhop of Rome, raſed out the name of Arſacius the Biſhop
of Conſtantinople. And this is it, that S. Auguſtine meaneth, writinge to the
people of Hippo,
                     Nicephor. Li. 13. Cap. 34. 
                     Quid obeſt homini, quòd ex illa Tabula non vult eum recitari humana
Ignorantia, ſi de Libro viuorum non eum delet iniqua Conſcientia? What hurte is that
vnto a man,
                     
                     Augu. Epiſt. 137. 
                     that the Ignorante people wil not ſuffer his name to be readde out of that Table,
if wicked conſcience blotte him not out of the Booke of Life?
                     
                  
                  
                     So writeth Iohannes de Pariſijs of Pope Cyriacus:Iohan. De Pariſijs▪ De Poteſta. Regia, & Papali. Cyriacus Papa
renuntiauit officio, vt cum Vrſula, & Virginibus palmam Martyrij ſuſciperet. Sed iſte
Cyriacus in Catalogo Paparum non annumeratur: quia credebant, ipſum non
propter deuotionem, ſed propter oblectamentum virginum dimiſiſſe Epiſcopatum:
Pope Cyriacus gaue ouer his Biſhoprike, that with Vrſula, and other Maides he might receiue
the Crowne of Martyrdome. But this Cyriacus is not reckened in the Calendare
of the Popes: for that it was beleeued, he had geuen ouer his Biſhoprike, not of deuotion,
but for ſomme fantaſie towardes the maides.
                  
                  But, to comme neare the pourpoſe, and to the force of your gheaſſes, therefore
was Pope Iohanes name leafte out of the Calendare of the Biſhoppes of Rome,
not for that there neuer was any ſutche Pope there: but onely for ſhame, leſte it
ſhoulde appeare in recorde, and afterwarde be reported for euer, that a vvooman,
and ſutch a vvooman, had benne Biſhop of Rome: or, that the Biſhop of Rome
had benne vvith Childe.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe Marianus Scotus,Marian. Scotus. Huius Iohannae nomen Authores Pontificij
non ponunt, propter turpitudinem rei, & muliebrem ſexum: The Chroniclers, that write
of the Popes, leaue out the name of Pope Iohane, both for the ſhame of the mater, and alſo
for the Wooman kinde.
                     Martinus Polonus. 
                     So ſaithe Martinus, Iohanna non ponitur in Catalogo
Sanctorum Pontificum, tam propter Muliebrem ſexum, quàm propter deformitatem
facti: Pope Iohane is not reckened in the Calendare of the Holy Popes,
as wel for that ſhee was a Wooman,
                     Sabellicus Ennead. 9. Lib. 1. Pag. 469. 
                     as alſo for the ſhame of the mater. So ſaithe
                      Sabellicus,
Nullus Defunctae honor habitus. Fama tenet, ob tam foedae rei memoriam:
There was no honoure beſtowed at her burial:
                     Iohan. de Pariſijs, De Poteſta. Regia, & Papali. 
                     The reporte is, for the remembrance of her filthy
acte. So ſaithe
                      Iohannes de Pariſijs: So ſaithe Faſciculus temporum.
Therefore this firſte reaſon is but a very blinde Coniecture, and beareth no
force.
                  
                  An other of your gheaſſes is this:Knovvinge a vvoomā from a Man. 
                     Menne had benne bewitched, and diſtracted of theire
wittes,
                     Faſciculus temporum. 
                     if they could not haue knowen a VVoman from a Man. This reaſon, M. Hardinge,
beareth as greate weight, and Subſtance, as the former. For your owne
Amphilochius,
                     M. Hardinges Amphilochius. that wrote the Life of Thomas Becket, coulde haue tolde you,
that Euphroſyna, that holy Maide, dwelte ſix and thirtie yéeres in Monkes
apparel emonge Monkes, and was neuer otherwiſe taken, but for a
Monke.
                  
                  Likewiſe Vincentius,
                     Vincentius. Li. 9 Cap. 47. and Petrus de Natalibus, and others your Writers,
and Recorders of Fables, coulde haue tolde you, that Tecla ſommetime addreſſed
her ſelfe in Mannes apparel,Petr. De Natalib. Lib. 8. Ca. 110 Rauiſius Textor in Officina: Mulieres Virilem habitū mentitae. Simeon Metaph. In Eugenia. and, had ſhe not benne forebidden by S. Paule, would
haue folowed him in companie, as a Man. Rauiſius Textor writeth the like
of one Marina, that diſſemblinge, what ſhe was, liued many yéeres in an Abbie
as a Monke. The like he writeth of Laſthenia, Axiothea, and others, that
beinge Wéemen, came into the Schoole in Mannes apparel, to heare Plato.
The like writeth your owne Fabulare Simeon Metaphraſtes of Eugenia. And,
if ye lacke other Authorities of truſte, and credite, One of your owne Companions
of Louaine auoucheth the ſame of Melania, and Papula. And yet, I
thinke,Copus Dialo. 2. Pag. 236. he was not bewitched, as you ſaie, nor thorowly berefte of his wittes.
                  
                     
The quarrel, that ye pike to the Name, and Surname, is nothinge els, but
a childiſhe cauil. For ſhe was not called Iohane Engliſhe, by the name of the
Countrie,Anglicus. for that ſhe was an Engliſhe Wooman, borne in Englande, as you ful
fondely imagine, but onely by the Surname of her Father. So are there many
knowen this daie by the names of Scot, Iriſhe, Frenche, VVelſhe, VVeſtfalinge,
Norman, Gaſcoingne, Brabante, Holande: and yet not borne in any of al
theſe Countries, but onely in Englande. So Matthias Pariſienſis, as it is ſuppoſed,
notwithſtandinge his name, was borne in Bohemia.
                  
                  Therefore, whereas ye woulde haue the woordes vainely, and without ſenſe,
to be readde, and pointed thus, Iohannes Anglicus natione, Mogūtinus, &c. Iohn
an Engliſhe man by nation, of Moguntia, &c. ye plaie, and toie, and trifle vnſeemely,
and mocke your Reader. For the woordes are cleare, and plaine, and
lie thus: Iohannes Anglicus, Natione Moguntinus, &c. Iohn Engliſh, (ſo Surnamed)
borne at Mens.
                  
                  Further ye ſaie,Goddes Sufferance. God would neuer haue ſo foreſaken Peters Chaire, as to ſuffer
it to be polluted by a Wooman, whiche is not of capacitie for Holy orders. This
gheaſſe, M. Hardinge, preſumeth ouer far of Goddes Prouidence. And therefore
Antoninus the Archebiſhop of Florence, when he had opened this w
                        •
                     ole Storie
of Pope Iohane, beinge aſtonned with the ſtrangeneſſe, and admiration of the
mater,Antonin. Par. 2. Ti. 16. Ca. 1. § 7. could not refraine him ſelfe from crieinge out, O altitudo Sapientiae,
& Scientiae Dei. Quàm incredibilia ſunt iudicia eius: O the Deapthe of the
VViſedome, and knovvledge of God. Hovve vncredible be his iudgementes?
In like manner the Prophete Eſaie crieth oute,Eſai. 1. 
                     Quomodò facta eſt Meretrix
Ciuitas fidelis? Hovve is that Faithful Cittie becomme an Ha
                           ••
                        ot?
                  
                  And why might not Pope Iohane, beinge a Wooman, haue as good right, and
intereſt vnto the See of Rome,
                     In Epiſtola Othonis Imper. ad Iohan. pp. Platyn. in Iohan. 13. as afterwarde had Pope Iohn 13. who, being Pope,
had wicked companie with twoo of his owne Siſters: or others, whom for theire
horrible vices, and wickedneſſe, Platyna calleth Monſtra, & Portenta, Monſters
againſte kinde, and ilſhapen creatures? Luitprandus ſaithe, as it is before reported, Lateranenſe
Palatium nunc eſt proſtibulum Meretricum: The Popes Palaice of
Laterane in Rome,
                     Luitprand. Li. 6. Cap. 6. 
                     is novve becomme a Stevve of vvhoores.
                  
                  
                     Al this notwithſtandinge, ſaithe Antoninus, Nulli ex hoc Salutis praeiudicium
fuit.Antonin. par. 2. Ti. 16. ca. 1. §. 7. Quia nec Eccleſia tunc fuit ſine Capite, quod eſt Chriſtus, vnde percipit influxum
Gratiae: Noman had binderance of Saluation by meane hereof. For (although the
                      Pope
were a Wooman, yet) the Churche was not without a
                      Heade. For that Heade is
Chriſte: From whom ſhee receiueth influence of Grace. Yea, although
                      Antichriſte
geate him ſelfe into the See of Rome, yet ſhal the Churche of God neuertheleſſe
continewe ſtil: Although in horrible confuſion, and vnder greate perſecution.
                  
                  
                     Further ye ſaie, To Athenes was ſhe brought, ſaithe the Fable. And why? For Learninge.
Very wel. VVhereas at th
                        •
                     t time, neither any Athenes ſtoode, nor was there any place of Learninge
there any lenger: but al the Countrie of Attica became Barbarous, as wee vnderſtande by the
writers of that time.
                  The Cittie of Athenes was then ouerthrowen,Athenes. ye ſaie, and Learning there
vtterly decaied. And therefore al this is but a Fable. And good reaſon it is,
that wée beléeue you, for that youre Onuphrius hath ſo tolde you. But for your
credites ſake, M. Hardinge, leſte al menne eſpie your Vanitie, tel vs, by whom
was that Noble, & ſo Populous, and mighty Cittie of Athenes thus laide waſte?
By what Kinge? By what Captaine? By what foraine nation? At what time?
How longe agoe? Hauing not one poore Authour to allege▪ how could ye pretende
the names of ſo many without bluſſhinge?
                  
                     
The Cittie of Athenes had then continewed welneare twelue hundred yéeres:
And for knowledge in Philoſophie, & renowme of Learning, was called the Eie,
and Vniuerſitie of al Graecia.
                     Lumen. & 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Ruffinus in Apologia pro Origine: Apud Hierony. To
                           •
                        . 4. Georgius Patriar. in vita Iohannis. 
                     Origen writeth of him ſelfe, y• he was ſommetime
a Student in Athenes. Chryſoſtome beinge eightéene yéeres olde, for Learninges
ſake, was ſente to Athenes. S. Baſile, and his Brother Gregorie, afterwarde
the Biſhop of Nyſſa, were Studentes at Athenes togeather thirtéene
yéeres. Your owne Amphilochius, whoes Authoritie ye maie not in any wiſe
denie, ſaithe thus of S. Baſile, Apprehendit Matrem Literarum Athenas: He
came to Athenes, vvhiche is the Mother of Learninge. Boethius of Rome
planted him ſelfe in Athenes for Learninges ſake, about the yéere our Lorde 520.
                  In the yéere of our Lorde 680. the Biſhop of Athenes was preſente at the
Councel holden at Conſtantinople,
                     Ruffin. 
                           •
                        i 2. ca. 9. M. Hardinges Amphilo
                           ••
                        ius. Theod. vi
                           •
                        . 
                           〈◊〉
                         r. in Epiſt. ad 
                           〈◊〉
                        . called Synodus Sexta. After that, in the
yéere of our Lord 742. at the ſeconde Councel of Nice a greate number of y• Biſhoppes
of Graecia were preſente in theire perſonnes al togeather. Within fewe
yéeres after whiche time, folowed Pope Iohane, in the yéere of our Lorde 853.
                  Hitherto the whole Countrie, and Churche of Graecia continewed in ſafetie:
and the Emperours of Chriſtendome made theire cōtinual aboade in thoſe partes.
And haue you,It appeareth in the Subſcriptiōs of the 2. Nicene Conc. Anno. 742▪
                      M. Hardinge, ſo ſuddainely throwen downe al togeather, bothe
Churche, Countrie, Towne, and Caſtle, onely to keepe Pope Iohane from her
Studie?
                  Ye ſaie, The whole Countrie of Attica was then becomme Barbarous. This
tale is your owne, & hangeth onely vpon your owne credite. Yet Platyna, Sabellicus,
& others moe, that wrote this Storie, and knewe, what they wrote, were not
ſo Barbarous. But Barbarous is he, M. Harding, that wil beléeue your ſimple
woorde without warrante.
                  At that time, ye ſaie, the Cittie of Athenes vvas not ſtandinge. But Paulus
Aemylius ſaith,
                     Paulus Aemylius Lib. 6. 
                     that longe after that time, in the Reigne of Philip the Frenche
Kinge,Ann. Domi. 1220. Gottofredus one of the Houſe of Tricaſſes, was appointed, & made Dux
Athenarum, & Princeps Achaiae. The Duke of Athenes, and the Prince of Achaia.
If there had benne then no Athenes ſtandinge at that time, as you telle
vs, how then could Gottofredus haue benne made Duke of Athenes? If ye ſaye,
as ye maie doo mutche by your Coniectures, that, notwithſtandinge the Cittie of
Athenes were raſed, and made waſte, yet the dignitie, or name of honoure remained
ſtil, yet wil the ſame Aemylius once againe reproue your Erroure. For, writinge
afterwarde of certaine Pirates, that had inuaded the Countrie of Graecia, he
ſaithe thus,
                     Paulus Aemylius Lib. 8. In terram Atticam delati, Athenarum Ducem Brennae Nobilitatis
virum occiderunt, Vrbem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ceperunt: Inuadinge the Countrie of Attica, they
tooke,An. Domini. 1288 and ſlevve the Duke of Athenes, one of the houſe of Brennus, and
tooke the Cittie.
                  Theſe thinges happened, as it is eaſy to recken, welneare foure hundred, and
fiftie yéeres after the time of Pope Iohane. Nowe therefore, I beſech you, M. Hardinge,
conſider indifferently with your ſelfe: If there had benne no Cittie of Athenes
then ſtandinge, howe coulde theſe Pirates then inuade, and take the Cittie
of Athenes? Shal wee ſaie, They leuied an armie, and diſquieted the Countrie,
and troubled them ſelues, and came ſo far to catche a ſhadowe?
                  Thus hitherto it appeareth not, but if Dame Iohane woulde haue gonne to
Athenes, there was roome ſufficiente to receiue her.
                  
                     After that ſhee came to Rome, and there profeſſed Learninge openly. This,No Vniuerſitie in Rome
                     you ſaie, is ſoone confuted as falſe. For there was no Learninge at thoſe daies profeſſed at Rome,
as the Stories doo declare. This is very ſoone confuted, M. Hardinge: and ſpecially
by him, y• recketh ſo litle, what he ſaie. Leaue this Hypocriſie: diſſemble nomore:
                     
It is not manly:Dame Iohane the Pope. Tel vs in good ſoothe, what Writers, what Stories declare theſe
thinges? your credite faileth ouer mutche: your woorde is no ſufficiente warrante.
                  Ye ſaie, There was no Learninge in thoſe daies profeſſed in Rome. And
why ſo? Wil ye nowe ſaie of Rome, as ye earſte ſaide of Athenes? Wil ye
ſaie, There was no Cittie of Rome then ſtandinge? Wil ye ſaie, Learninge
there was then vtterly decaied, and the whole Countrie becomme Barbarous?
If there were no ſtudie, or place of Learninge then in Rome, where then was
there any ſtudie in al Chriſtendome? For the Vniuerſities of Pariſe, Orleance,
Tolouſe, Salerne, Padua, Bononia, Praga, Salamanca vvere erected longe aftervvarde.
And therefore ye ſéeme to ſaie, that al the whole worlde then was
Barbarous.
                  
                  
                     But that ye maie the better ſée your ouerſight, S. Hierome, writtinge of Victorinus,
and Donatus,Hierony. in Appendice Annalium Euſebij. 
                     ſaithe thus: Victorinus the Rhetorician, and Donatus
the Grammarian, my Schoolemaiſters, are accoumpted notable in Rome. And againe
he ſaithe, Victorinus natione Apher, Romae ſub Conſtantio principe Rhetoricam
docuit:Hierony. in Catalogo Scriptor. Illuſtrium. Victorinus borne in Aphrica, taught Rhetorique in Rome in the
time of the Emperoure Conſtantius.
                  Eraſmus, writtinge the Life of S. Hierome, ſaithe thus, Romam miſſus eſt,
velut ad primariam eo ſaeculo tum Religionis,Eraſmus in Vita Hieronym. tum Eruditionis Magiſtram,
Liberalibus ſtudijs erudiēdus: quod ipſe declarat enarrans 11. Caput Ezechielis: Hierome
vvas ſente to Rome, as to the Principal Schoolemaiſtreſſe in thoſe daies,
both of Religion, and alſo of Learning: as he him ſelfe declareth, expounding y• eleuenth
Chapter of Ezechiel.
                     Auguſt. Confeſſ. Lib. 5. Cap. 8. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaith, Egiſti mecum, O Deus, vt mihi perſuaderetur,
Romam pergere, & potiùs ibi docere, quod docebam Carthagine: O God, thou
mouedſt my minde to goe to Rome, and there rather, to profeſſe openly the ſame Learninge,
that I had profeſſed at Carthage. And further he ſaithe, Audiebam quietiùsſt udere
ibi adoleſcentes, & ordinatiore Diſciplinae correctione ſedari: I heard ſaie, that
yonge menne there vvente more quietly to theire bookes, and vvere keapte
in orderly obedience to theire ſtudies.
                  
                     And in the Tripartite vvoorke ioined vnto the Councel of Laterane, ye maie
finde the ſtorie hereof recorded thus:
                     In Opere Tripar. Li. 2. Ca. 10. Primò Athenis Romam tranſlatum eſt ſtudium
Philoſophicum: Deinde Roma Pariſios tempore Caroli, vt dicunt Hiſtoriae
                        •
                     
                     Firſte the ſtudie of Philoſophie was tranſlated from Athenes to Rome: and afterwarde, as
the Stories ſaie, in the time of the Emperoure Charles, it was tranſlated from Rome to
Pariſe.
                  
                     What ſhal I more ſaie? The Pope him ſelfe in his owne Decretalles ſaithe,
Rome is an Vniuerſitie.Extra. De Priuilegijs, Li. 4. Cum de diuerſis. In Sexto. 
                     Theſe be his wordes, Curia Romana habet Studium Generale,
& eius priuilegia: The Courte of Rome hath an Vniuerſal Studie, and
the Priuileges of the ſame. And againe Pope Clemens ſaithe, In Studijs Romanae
Curiae, Pariſijs, Oxonij, Bononiae, Salamancae debent eſſe Profeſſores Linguarum,
Hebraicae,Clemen Lib. 5. De Magiſtris. Chaldaicae, Arabicae: In the Vniuerſities of Rome, of Pariſe, of Oxforde, of
Bononie, and of Salamanca, there muſte be Profeſſours of the Hebrewe, Chaldee, and Arabike
tongues.
                  
                  
                     To be ſhorte, Theodoricus Niemus, ſommetime the Popes Secretarie, and
therefore hauinge good cauſe, to knowe the trueth hereof, and, for ought that I
knowe, no cauſe to diſſemble, of this whole mater writeth thus: Et nunc eſt Titulus,
Cardinalis praedictae Scholae.Theodoric. Niemus. Citatur ab Illyrico in Teſtia bus Veritatis. Et olim in ea legebantur Septem Artes Liberales,
& praecipuè Rhetorica: & etiā in ea legit quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Beatus Auguſtinus: & Iohannes,
vocatus de Anglia. Et fuit Mulier de Maguntia nata, quae ſtuduit Athenis ſub
virili habitu: & in tantum profecit in Artibus, vt tandem veniens Romam, per biennium
in eadem Schola Artes Liberales legerit: & adeò ſufficiens fuit, vt etiam Maiores, &

Nobiliores vrbis eius Lectiones frequenter audiuerint.Dame Iohane the Pope. Et poſteà in Papam eligitur, &c.
Euen nowe a Cardinal beareth the Title of the ſaide Schoole, or Vniuerſitie of Rome.
And in olde times the Seuen Liberal Sciences, and ſpecially Rhetorique were readde in the
ſame. There alſo ſometime readde. S. Auguſtine: and one, that was called Iohn of Englande.
This Iohn was a Woman, borne at Mens (in Germanie), and had ſtudied at Athenes
in the apparel of a man: and had ſo profited in the Artes, that at laſte comminge to
Rome, twoo yeeres togeather ſhe profeſſed the Liberal Sciences in the ſame Schoole. And
her gifte in teachinge was ſutche, that the Elders, and Nobles of the Cittie reſorted often
to heare her reade. Afterwarde ſhe was choſen Pope, &c.
                  
                  Thus manie waies, M. Hardinge, haue wée founde an Vniuerſitie, or Schole
in Rome: and no cauſe to the contrarie, but Dame Iohane, beinge ſo wel learned,
as it is ſaide, might wel be a Reader there.
                  But ye ſaie,The Popes time of trauaile. 
                     why keapte ſhe not her ſelfe in? Her Midwife might better anſweare
this queſtion. But what if ſhe were ſuddainely preuēted before her time, as many
be? Or what if God would haue ſutche a mater ſo openly knowen, to y• euerlaſtinge
Deteſtation, either of the Perſone, or of the Place? Certainely, Antoninus the
Archebiſhop of Florence, beinge aſtonied with the horrour hereof, as it is ſaide
before,Antomin. Par. 2. Titulo 16. Cap. 1. §. 7. crieth out, O the deapthe of the wiſedome, and Knowledge of God. O howe vnſearcheable
be his Iudgementes?
                  
                  
                     The Authour hereof,
                     Vt aſſeritur. ſaie you, durſte not to auouche the mater for an vndoubted Truthe:
but onely ſaithe, Vt aſſeritur, as it is ſaide: and ſo referreth al the whole to heareſaie.
Notwithſtandinge, M. Hardinge, many there be, that write this Storie, as a certaine
Truthe, without doubtinge, or credite of heareſaie. And Platyna, al be it
he would not ſéeme to auouche ouer mutche, for the honour of the See of Rome,
yet thus he ſaithe,Platyna in Iohan 8. 
                     Quod ferè omnes affirmant: Whiche thinge in a manner al menne
doo affirme.
                      And Rauiſius Textor ſaithe, Scitum eſt ex Chronicis, & à Maioribus
Scriptum: It is knovven by the chronicles,
                     In Officina. 
                     and written by our Elders. It is
knovven, ſaithe one: It is affirmed in a manner by al menne, ſaithe an other:
But for the ſpace of eight hundred yéeres, & more, there was no Writer, I trowe,
ſo impudente, that woulde condemne it for a Fable, as you doo, and vtterly denie
it to be true.
                  
                     Touchinge the Marble Image repreſentinge a vvoman in childe bearinge,The Marble Image.
and the Popes ſuddaine breakinge of his vvaie, in his ſolemne proceſsion, let
eche man weighe them, as him liſteth. But, where ye compare that Image to one
of the greate ragge ſtoanes at Stonage, or Longe Compton, as if it were vtterly
vnwrought, and without ſhape, ye ſeeme wilfully to auouche, as your manner is,
a greate Vntruthe.
                     Theodoricus Niemus. 
                     Verily, Theodoricus Niemus, the Popes Secretarie, ſaithe,
Et adhuc vetus Statua Marmorea illic poſita figuratiuè monſtrat (hoc factum).
Vnde Summi Pontifices, dum ad Lateranum de Baſilica Principis Apoſtolorum, &
contra vadunt, illud iter rectum non faciunt. Imò per alias vias per indirectum tranſeunt,
illud aliquantulum prolongando: Euen vnto this daie an olde Marble Image
there erected, vnder a Figure ſheweth this mater. Therefore yt Popes, when they paſſe frō
                      S.
Peters Churche to Laterane, or backewarde, they take not their iorney ſtreight foorthe:
but paſſe vndirectly by other ſtreetes, makinge their waie ſome what the longer. This therefore
is not an olde Wiues dreame, as you ſaie, but the Iudgemente of ſundrie the
wiſeſte, and beſte learned in
                      Rome, who might beſte knowe the matter.
                  
                  
                     As for the Chaire of Porphyrie ſtoane, whiche otherwheres ye cal the Chaire
of eaſe,The holovv Chaire. 
                     it is too vile to be anſweared. Sabellicus ſaithe, Spectatur adhuc in Pontificia
domo Marmorea Sella,Sabellicus Enneadis. 9. Li. 1. circa medium inanis: qua Nouus Pontifex continuò
ab eius Creatione reſidet: Vt ſedentis genitalia ab vltimo Diacono attrectentur.
                  But, let Truthe be Falſehedde: and let Stories be Fables. Yet, M. Hardinge,

it maie pleaſe you to remember,Dame Iohane the Pope. that the ſame Fable was raiſed firſte in Rome,
and from thence onely, & from no place els, was publiſhed abroade into the worlde.
But let the Popes owne Secretaries, and al the people there be deceiued: and, to
ſhadowe the ſhame of that See, let Rome it ſelfe be the Mother of lies. Let noman
know the certaine Truthe of maters, but onely Onuphrius, the Popes Paraſte,
and M. Hardinge. Yet neither woulde ſo many Chronicles haue recorded,
nor would the whole world ſo vniuerſally haue beléeued theſe thinges of the Pope,
more then of any other Biſhop, had there not benne woonderful corruption of
manners, and diſſolution of Life, and open horrour, and filthineſſe in that onely
See aboue al others.
                  How be it, good Chriſtian Reader, that thou maiſte wel, and clearely vnderſtande,
that our dealinge herein is plaine, and ſimple, and that wée haue not imagined
theſe mates, or any parcel thereof of our ſelues, maie it pleaſe thée to reade
Platyna in Iohanne 8.Teſtimonies for the proufe of Pope Iohane. 
                     Sabellicus, Enneadis 9. li. 1. Leonicus Chalcondyla a
Greeke writer, Li. 6. Marianus Scotus, that liued aboute the yéere of our Lorde
1028. Sigibertus Gemblacenſis, that liued aboute the yeere of our Lorde, 1100.
Mar
                           ••
                        us Polonus, the Popes Penitentiarie, whome M. Hardinge ſo mutche defaceth:
that liued about the yéere of our Lorde, 1320. Rauiſius Textor in Officina,
Ca. Foeminae habitum virilem mentitae: Antoninus the Archebiſhop of Florence,
par. 2. ti. 16. Volaterranus: Nauclerus: Carion: Conſtantinus Phrygio:
Chriſtianus Maſſaeus: Matthaeus Palmerius Florentinus: Supplementum
Chronicorum: Chronica Chronicarum: Faſciculus temporum, and others
moe. Of theſe ſomme liued foure hundred, ſomme fiue hundred yéeres agoe: and
haue euer benne coumpted woorthy of ſomme Authoritie: notwithſtandinge, for
your Dame Iohanes ſake, you, M. Hardinge, beginne nowe to clippe their credite.
How be it, what ſo euer they were, certaine it is, They were no Lutheranes.
                  Notwithſtandinge, ſomme of your owne Felowes of Louaine coulde haue
taught you, to haue dealte herein more diſcretely: and not ſo preciſely, and peremptorily
to haue denied the whole Storie: ſpecially beinge ſente to you from your
frendes in Rome, and confirmed by ſo many. And therefore one of your Louaniens
would ſéeme handeſomely to excuſe, & ſhifte the mater by poſſibilitie of Nature.
For thus he ſaithe in effecte, What if the Pope were Hermaphrodi as, an
Herkinalſon,
                     Hermaphroditus. that is to ſaie, a man, and a vvoman? bothe in one? Or if this healpe
wil not ſerue, he ſeemeth further to ſaie, What if the Pope, beinge firſte a man,
vvere aftervvarde changed into a vvoman? And thus, for wante of better Diuinitie,
he forceth Ouides Metamorphoſes to ſerue the turne. If yée would haue
taken this mannes aduiſe, out of doubte with ſutche a prety, VVhat if, ye might
ſoone haue put vs out of countenance.Copus Dialogo 1. Pag. 47. His woordes be theſe, Neque ego hic quicquam
dico de Hermaphroditis, & 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , de quibus veterum libri pleni ſunt.
Et ne à noſtri tempo
                           ••
                        s memoria longiùs abeam, non ignoro, monumentis literarum eſſe
traditum, Mulierem quandam nomine Acmyliam, Antonio Spenſae Ciui Ebulano
nuptam, poſt duodecimū à nuptijs annum in virum tranſijſſe. Legi etiam alteram Mulierem,
vbi puerum peperiſſet, in marem fuiſſe mutatam: I wil here ſaie nothinge of
ſutche perſonnes, as be called Hermaphroditi, and are bothe Man, and VVoman,
al in one: whereof in olde Writers wee finde mutche mention. But not to goe further,
then to the remembrance of our owne time, I knowe it is written, that a certaine woman named
Aemylia, married vnto one Antonius Spenſa a Citizen of Ebulum, tenne yeeres
after ſhee had benne married, was turned into a man. I haue likewiſe readde of an other woman,
that, when ſhe had benne brought abedde, aftervvarde became a Man. Theſe
notable Stories he allegeth, to anſweare the mater of Pope Iohane. Thus he
thinketh it a greate deale the ſafer waie, to make the Pope an Herkinalſon, or by

Miracle to turne him from a man into a vvoman, then ſimply, & plainely to confeſſe,
that euer Dame Iohane was Pope in Rome.
                  
                  If you had taken this ſame waie, then al this ſtorie had benne a Fable: and a
woman had benne a man: and wée had vtterly benne confounded.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 1.
               But what neede we rehearſe Concubines, and Bawdes? For that
is now an ordinarie, and a gaineful ſinne in Rome. For Harlottes
ſitte there nowe a daies,Geneſ. 38. not as they did in times paſte, without the
Cittie walles, and with their faces hid and couered: but they dwel in
Palaices & Faire Houſes: thei ſtray aboute in Courte, and market, &
that with bare and open face: as who would ſaie, they maie not onely
lawfully doo it, but ought alſo to be praiſed for ſo dooinge. What
ſhould we ſaie any more of this? Their vicious & abominable life is
nowe thoroughly knowen to the whole worlde. Bernarde writeth
roundely & truely of the Biſhop of Romes houſe, yea & of the Biſhop
of Rome him ſelfe. Thy Palaice, ſaithe he, taketh in good menne,
but it maketh none: naughty perſones thriue there, and the good
decaie. And, who ſo euer he were, whiche wrote the Tripartite
vvoorke, annexed to the Councel of Larerane, he ſaithe thus, So
exceſsiue at this daie is the riote, aſvvel in the Prelares and Biſhoppes,
as alſo in the Clerkes and Prieſtes, that it is horrible to
be tolde. But theſe thinges be not onely growen in vre, and ſo by
cuſtome & continuance of time wel allowed, as al the reſte of their
dooinges in manner bee, but they are nowe waxen olde, and rotten
ripe. For who hath not hearde, what a hainous acte Peter Aloiſius,
Pope Paule the thirdes Sonne committed againſte Coſmus Cherius
the Biſhop of Fanum: what Iohn Caſa, Archebiſhop of Beneuentum,
the Popes Legate at Venice, wrote in the commendation
of a moſte abominable filthineſſe: & how he ſet foorthe with moſte
lotheſome woordes, and wicked eloquence, the mater, whiche ought
not once to proceede out of any bodies mouthe? To whoſe eares hath
it not comme, that Alphonſus Diazius a Spaniarde, beinge pourpoſely
ſente from Rome into Germanie, ſo ſhamefully and Diueliſhely
murthered his owne Brother Iohn Diazius, a moſte Innocente,
and a moſte Godly man, onely bicauſe he had embraced the Eoſpel
of Ieſus Chriſte, and woulde not returne againe to Rome?
               
               But it maie chaunce, to this they wil ſaie: Theſe thinges maie
ſometime happen in the beſte gouerned Common Wealthes, yea & againſt
the Magiſtrates willes: & biſides, there be good Lawes made
to pouniſhe ſutche. I graunt, it be ſo: But by what good Lawes (I
would know) haue theſe great miſchieues benne pouniſhed emongeſt
them? Petrus Aloiſius, after he had donne that notorious Acte, that
I ſpake of, was alwaies cheariſhed in his Fathers boſome Pope
Paule the thirde, and made his very dearlinge. Diazius, after he had

murthered his owne Brother,Petrus Aloiſius the Popes Sonne. was deliuered by the Popes meanes,
to thende he might not be pouniſhed by good Lawes. Iohn Caſa the
Archebiſhop of Beneuentum is yet aliue, yea & liueth at Rome,
euen in the eie and ſighte of the moſte holy Father.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Courtiſanes wente abroade, ſo as the Matrones doo: ſome rode on Mules, ſome dwelled in goodly
houſes. VVhiche particulare diſorders,Vntruthes greate and notorious. as there they continewed not many yeeres, * ſo in theſe
daies they haue benne reformed. VVherein ye folowe the Father of your Haereſies, and ſchoolemaiſter
of your malice the Deuill,Apocal. 12. who in Scripture is called Accuſator Fratrum noſtrorum, the accuſer
of our Brethren.
                  But ſirs, how leape ye from Rome to Placentia, from the Cleregy to a Temporall Duke, whome ye
call the Popes Sonne, though he was not his Sonne beinge Pope, but by lawful Matrimonie before holy
Orders taken? For ſuche a one was Peter Aloiſius of whom ye ſpeake. Be it, that he was an euill man.
VVhat maketh that againſt the Churche?Iohan. Caſa. what for Defence of your newe Goſpell? If Iohannes Caſa
beinge yet a younge ſpring all, before he came to be a Clerke, and longe before he was either Biſhop
or Legate,O, a faire Boonegrace, to bevvtifie open and knovven vvickedneſſe. made certaine amorous Sonettes in Italian rime, foloweinge the Italian poete Petrarcha, to
whiche kinde of exerciſe the good wittes of Italy in youth are muche geuen, and without naminge
any perſone, flatteringly ſmoothed that heinous facte, rather then praiſed, wherein neuertheleſſe he
did euill, we confeſſe, and for the ſame ouerſight of his youth, was notwithſtandinge his other excellent
qualities kepte backe from the dignitie of Cardinalſhip duringe his life: all this beinge graunted
and conſidered, what hindereth it the eſtimation of Chriſtes Churche? And what furthereth it your
falſe Doctrine, your Schiſmes, and your Hereſies? Touchinge the Deathe of Iohn Diazius the Spaniarde,
ye tellVntruthe. For vvee tel no Lie. Reade the Anſvveare. many lies at once.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée leapte not ſo lightly to Placentia, M. Hardinge, but rather reaſte at Verona,
and ſaie the Truthe. For Pope Paulus, that ſhould haue pouniſhed his wicked
Sonne, and haue burnte him to deathe for his abominable outrage, remoued
not to Placentia,
                     Iohan. Sleidan. Li. 19. but remained ſtil in Rome. Iohannes Sleidanus ſaithe, that
the yonge Gentleman, the Biſhop of Fanum, vpon whome Petrus Aloiſius the
Popes Sonne had ſhewed that horrible villanie, ſhortely after died for ſhame, and
heauineſſe. Yet, he ſaithe, it is thought of ſomme, that Petrus Aloiſius, after his
wicked acte committed, gaue him poiſon, and ſo killed him, leaſte he ſhould make
complainte thereof vnto the Emperoure. He addeth further, Paulus nihil ò
ſecius impenſè amabat Filium: & ad ipſius amplificationem omne ſtudium conuertit.
Et cùm de eius flagitijs nonnunquam audiret, fertur non admodum aegrè tuliſſe: & hoc
ſolùm conſueuiſſe dicere, Haec illum vitia non ſe commonſtratore didiciſſe:
Pope Paule neuertheleſſe fauoured his Sonne aboue meaſure: and beſtowed al his
care, to encreaſe him in Honoure. And, whereas he hearde ſometime of his ſhamful actes, the
reporte is, that he was not mutche offended therewith: but vſed onely thus to ſaie, Wel,
yevv is he neuer learned theſe vices by my example. So cruel, and terrible is
the Pope in repreſſinge of Sinne.
                  But God of his Iuſtice would not ſuffer ſutche abomination to eſcape vnpouniſhed.
Certaine of the Nobles of his owne Cittie, not longe after, aroſe againſte
him, & ſlewe him in his owne Palaice, & hunge out his vile Carkeſſe in ſhameful
ſorte, by a chaine ouer the walles, & afterwarde threwe it ouer into the mote. The
people of al ſortes ranne gladly to the ſight: and ſtabbe him in on euery ſide with
theire Daggers: and trodde him filthily vnder theire feete.
                  Yée ſaie, the particulare diſorders of your Courteghianes in theſe daies at the
laſte haue benne Refourmed. And yet by very credible reporte, euen within theſe

twoo yeeres, whiche was in the yéere of our Lorde 1565.Iohannes Diazius. by a perſite viewe taken,
there were founde in Rome to the number of eight & twentie thouſande weemen
of that ſorte. If this be the Reformation of the Churche of Rome, what was it
then, before it was thus Refourmed?
                  
                  As for that moſte horrible Booke of Iohannes Caſa, ſo vile, and ſo lotheſome,
that no Heathen eares coulde abide to heare it, O howe fauourably, and howe
frendely it is excuſed? He was then, ye ſaie, but a yonge man: but a ſpringal: no Biſhop: no
Clerke: He named no perſonne: It was but a kinde of exerciſe: an ouerſighte: an Amorous Sonette:
The good wittes of Italie be muche geuen to it: He praiſed not that faulte, but onely ſmoothed it.
O M. Hardinge, what abomination is there vnder Heauen, but ye can diuiſe
waies, howe to ſmoothe it?
                  
                     But he was pouniſhed, ye ſaie, ful ſoare for his ouerſight. For he coulde neuer be made Cardinal,
duringe his Life. Yea, good M. Hardinge: And al this muſte wée beléeue, bicauſe
you ſpeake it. The Pope made him the Archebiſhop of Beneuentum, and Legate
a Latere, and thereby one of his Secrete Councel, in parte of this cruel pouniſhmente.
But, though he vpon that, or ſomme other occaſion, were keapte backe
from beinge Cardinal, yet were there others made Cardinalles, in al reſpectes as
had,Andre. Alciatus in Epiſt. praefixa Hiſtoriae Pauli Iouij. as he. Reade Andreas Alciatus, that notable Ciuilian: And ye ſhal finde,
what a minion was made Biſhop of Comum, when Paulus Iouius was put biſide.
Reade Paulus Iouius in the Life of Clemens. 7. and learne, what prety
folkes then were made Cardinalles, and for what cauſes. As for your owne Onuphrius,
he ſpeaketh Parables, and caſteth colours, and woulde ſeeme to meane
more hereof,Paulus Iouius. Onuphrius in Iulio. 3. then he durſte to vtter.
                  The Emperour Tiberius ſommetime placed Nouellius Tricongius in moſt
highe and Honorable roome, and made him Proconſul, in parte of recompenſe
of his good ſeruice,Sueton. Tranquil. in Tiberio. Tricongium vno Spiritu. for that he was able to drinke three pottles of Wine togeather
with one breathe. This was not the woorthieſt cauſe of promotinge ſutche Magiſtrates
to ſuche a roome: yet was there more honoure, and honeſtie in this cauſe
of prefermente, then hath benne thought to be in the preferringe of ſundrie Cardinalles.
                  
                  Touchinge the murtheringe of Iohannes Diazius by his owne Brother Alphonſus,
wherein, ye ſaie, wee haue tolde you ſo many lies at once, wée referre
ourſelues to the Storie thereof truely written by Iohannes Sleidanus:
                     Iohan. Sleidan Lib. 17. the effecte
whereof in ſhorte is this: One Iohannes Diazius a Spaniarde, and a Doctour of
Sorbona in Pariſe, after that God had geuen him grace to vnderſtande y• Truthe
of the Goſpel,An. 1546. departed from thence, and came into Germanie, and reaſted at Nuburge
in the Dominion of Otho Henricus Countie Palatine. His Brother Alphonſus
Diazius, beinge then in Rome, and vnderſtandinge hereof, immediately
tooke Horſes, and with al ſpeede came into Germanie, mindinge to withdrawe his
Brother from his pourpoſe. And findinge him conſtante, and ſteadfaſte, and not
likely any waies to be remoued, in the ende he fained him ſelfe, by the weight of
his reaſons, to be perſuaded to the ſame Religion: & deſired him to returne with
him into Italie, for that he ſhould doo more good there, then he could in Germanie.
But ſéeinge him for ſundrie cauſes firmely bente to ſtaie there, he tooke his leaue,
and departed thence, and exhorted him to continewe conſtante in the Truthe, and
came to Auguſta, ſixe Dutche miles from Nuburge. The nexte daie, as hauinge
foregotten ſome ſpecial mater, he had to ſaie to his Brother, he retourned backe againe
from thence to Nuburge, and by the waie bought a Carpenters axe, and entringe
into the Towne vpon the. 27. of Marche, he came to his Brothers lodginge
at the breake of the daie, and him ſelfe watchinge beneath, ſente vp his ſeruante
with the Axe to doo the deede. The ſeruante, after he had called foorthe Iohannes

Diazius, and had deliuered him a letter from his Brother Alphonſus, and ſawe
him turned towardes the lighte to reade the ſame, came ſuddainely behinde him,
and ſtrooke him in the heade with his Axe, and leauinge it ſtickinge in the wounde,
came awaie togeather with Alphonſus his Maiſter. This is the very true ſtorie
hereof, M. Hardinge, and in al theſe woordes there is no lie. Touchinge your
Courteghianes, yee ſaie, the Pope of late hathe made a general Reformation. For
now thei are bothe remoued from their faire Palaices, wherein they dwelte, & alſo
put from their Mules: As if the faulte had benne onely in their Mules, or Houſes,
and not rather in their whole trede of life. Certainely, the ſame weemen continewe
ſtil, euen in the Cittie of Rome, and that vnto the number of eight & twentie
thouſande, as it is ſaide before. Sutche is the Reformation of the Churche
of Rome.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 1. &. 2.
               They haue killed infinite numbers of our Brethrene, onely bicauſe
they beleeued truely, & ſincerely in Ieſus Chriſte. But of that great
and foule number of Harlottes, Fornicatours, Adulterers, what
one haue they at any time (I ſaie not, put to deathe) but either Excommunicate,
or once attached? Why? Volupteouſneſſe, Adulterie,
Ribaudrie, Whoredome, Murtheringe of kinne, Ineeſte, and others
more abominable partes, are not theſe coūpted Sinne at Rome? Or,
if thei be Sinne ought Chriſtes vicar, Peters Succeſſour, the moſte
holy Father, ſo lightly, & ſtiely to beare them, as though they were
no Sinne, & that in the Cittie of Rome, & in that Principal Tower
of al Holineſſe? O holy Scribes and Phariſeis, whiche neuer knewe
this kinde of Holineſſe. O what a Holineſſe, what a Catholique
Faithe is this? Peter did not thus teache at Rome: Paule did not ſo
liue at Rome: they did not practiſe brothelrie, as theſe doo openly:
they made not a yeerely reuenewe and profite of Harlottes: they
ſuffered no common Adulterours, and wicked Murtherers to goe
vnpouniſhed. They did not receiue them into theire familiaritie,
into their Councel, into their houſeholde, nor yet into the companie
of Chriſten men. Theſe menne ought not therefore ſo vnreaſonably
to triumphe againſte our liuinge. It had benne more wiſedome for
them, either firſte, to haue proued good their owne life before the
worlde, or at the leaſte, to haue cloked it a litle more cunningly. For
wee doo vſe ſtil the Olde and Auncient Lawes, & (aſmuche as men
maie doo, in the manners vſed at theſe daies, al thinges beinge ſo
wholy corrupte) we diligently, and earneſtly put in execution the Eccleſiaſtical
Diſcipline: wee haue not common Brothel houſes of
Strumpettes, nor yet flockes of Concubines, nor Heardes of Harlotte
haunters: neither doo wee preferre Adulterie before Matrimonie:
neither doo wee exerciſe beaſtly ſenſualitie: neither doo wee geather
ordinarie rentes and ſtipendes of Stewes: nor doo wee ſuffer
Inceſte, and abominable naughtineſſe, nor yet ſutche Aloiſians, Caſians,
and Diazians to eſcape vnpuniſhed. For if theſe thinges would
haue pleaſed vs, wee needed not to haue departed from theſe mennes

felowſhip, emongeſt whom ſutche enormities be in their chiefe pride
and price. Neither needed we for leauinge them, to renne into the
hatred of menne, and into moſte wilful daungers.
               
                  Paule the Fourthe, not many monethes ſithence, hadde at Rome
in priſon certaine Auguſtine Freers, many Biſhops, and a greate
nūbre of other deuoute menne, for Religions ſake. Hee racked them,
and tormented them: to make them confeſſe, hee leafte no meanes vnaſſaied.
But in the ende how many Brothels, howe many Whoremongers,
how many Adulterers, how many Inceſtuous perſones
coulde he finde of al thoſe?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  This yee denie as impudently, as ye affirmed the other matter of Diazius falſely. VVherefore
what pouniſhement is due to ſlaunderers, that ought this Defender to haue for this falſe ſlaunder.
Then commeth me your Secretarie, and praiſeth him ſelfe, and all you his holie companions,
beſides all witte and modeſtie. And ſaithe muche in commendation of your Miniſterſhippes
goodneſſe, for that ye keepe and vſe ſtill the Olde and Auncient Lawes, forſoothe, and diſcipline of
the Churche.
                  For Shame,A braue, and a luſty kinde of Eloquence. for Conſcience, for regarde of the worlde, for feare of Gods wrathe, for auoidinge
euerlaſtinge fyre, retourne to the Catholike Churche, from whence ye are broken out like the faite
Bulles Baſan, put awaie your moſte vnlawfull yokefellowes. Leaue your ſelues to be abominable,
before with ſuche ſpitefull railinge ye reprehende ourFornication, Open Stewes, and Inceſte, are M. Hardinges Infirmities. 
                     Infirmitie.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 3.
               Our God be thanked, although we be not the menne, we ought,
and profeſſe to be, yet whoſoeuer we be, compare vs with theſe
menne, and euen our owne life and Innocencie wil ſoone proue vntrue,
and condemne their maliceouſe ſurmiſes. For we exhorte the
people to al vertue and wel dooinge, not onely by Bookes and preachinges,
but alſo by our examples and behaueour. Wee alſo teache
that the Goſpel is not a boaſtinge, or bragginge of knowledge, but
that it is the Lawe of life, and that a Chriſtian man (as Tertullian
ſaithe) ought not to ſpeake honorably, but ought to liue honorably:
nor that they be the hearers of the Lavve, but the dooers of
the Lavve, vvhiche are iuſtified before God.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Nay, nay, Syrs, for that thinge ye crake ſo muche of, be not to haſtie to thanke your God. VVhat
peculiare God ye meane, we knowe not. That phraſe your ſecretarie muche vſeth, as though ye had an
other God beſide him that is God of all. Compare your ſelues with whom ye liſt, your owne life and
innocencie is ſo wel knowen, as by reprouinge your vices and horrible ſinnes, no man lightly ſhal ſeme
a ſlaunderer. In deede if your continuall aduoutrie and Inceſt were laufull Matrimonie, if your
filthy yoke fellowes were your true wedded wiues, if your robbinge, and throwinge downe of
Churches were almoſe, and buildinge of places for praier to the encreaſe of Gods Honour, if ignorant
raſheneſſe were godly diſcretion, if your woorde of the Lorde, where Gods woorde, if your pretenſed
Goſpel, were Chriſtes true Goſpel, if your biblebable and railing were holſome Preachinge, if y• Sprite
of Sathan, that is in you, the ſame alſo beinge a lyinge Sprite in your mouthes, coulde be meeke, humble,Is this the modeſtic the sprite of God▪
                     
obedient, and woulde tell Truthe, finally if euill were good, if darkeneſſe were light, if ſower were

ſweete,Our God. our Lord. if the fruites of your ſo naughty a tree were good: we would alſo ſoothe you, and vpholde your
immoderate crakes. VVee ſaie plainely of you at one woorde, whiche we will to be a watche woorde
for all Chriſten people to beware of you, your Doctrine is Hereſie, your Life is iniquitie, your endeuour
tendeth to the ſubuerſion of Soules.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It is no greate Crake, M. Hardinge, to géeue God thankes. But what vncourteous
dealinge is this of your parte? Sir Defender, and his Felovves muſte
comme to you, & learne to ſpeake. Notwithſtandinge for ought, that maie appeare,
yee are not yet very wel aduiſed, howe to ſpeake your ſelfe. Nowe, bicauſe
wée ſaie, vvee thanke our God, our Secretarie hath made him ſelfe a Seueral
God. How be it, you maie ſaie, Our Lorde, and thinke him not Catholique, that
wil ſaie otherwiſe: and yet make you not your ſelues thereby any Seueral Lorde.
God geue you Grace, ye be not ſeuered from the Lorde. But wherefore it ſhoulde
be more lawful for you, to ſaie, Our Lorde, then for vs, to ſaie, Our God, I
thinke it a highe pointe of cunninge for you to open.
                  Thus ye woulde haue vs ſommetimes to ſaie, Our Lorde: ſometimes, The
Lorde: ſommetimes neither. It were a ſkilful Cooke, that knewe your diete.
Howe be it,Pſalm. 46. The Prophete Dauid ſaithe,Pſalm. 64. 
                     Deus noſter refugium,
                     Pſalm. 113. 
                     & Vrtius:
                     Pſalm. 63. Our
God, our Refuge,
                     Pſalm. 
                     and our Strengthe?
                     Pſalm. 67. Singe Pſalmes vnto Our God:
                     1. Corinth. 1. & 14. 
                     Our God
is the God of Saluation:Philip. 1. 
                     Our God is in Heauen:
                        1. Corinth. 6. My God, ô My God, I wake
earely vnto thee:
                      Thou arte My God: I truſte in thee: My lotes are in thy handes.
                     
S. Paule ſaithe, I thanke My God alwaies: I geeue thankes vnto My God.
                      Thus
was it lawful then for the Apoſtles, and Propehtes to ſpeake without rebuke:
neither was there any M. Hardinge then ſo vncourteous, to ſaie, They made
them ſelues a peculiar God.
                  
                  
                     S. Paule ſaithe, Wee are iuſtified in the name of Ieſus Chriſte
                      our Lorde, and in
the Sprite of Our God. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Contra iſtos Mirabiliarios cautum
me fecit Deus Meus,Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 13. Auguſt. De Ci
                        
                           •
                        i. Li. Cap. 29. Chryſoſtom. in Pſalm. 96. dicens, In Nouiſsimis diebus ſurgent Falſi Prophetae: My God
hath willed me to beware of theſe Mungers of Miracles, tellinge me, that in the laſte daies
there ſhal riſe vp Falſe Prophetes. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Deus Meus vbique praeſens
eſt: Vbique totus: nuſquam incluſus: My God is euerywhere preſente: euerywhere whole:
nowhere incloſed, or ſhut vp. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Chriſto meo teſtificabantur
& Venti, & Mare: Bothe the Windes, and the Sea bare witneſſe to my Chriſte.
                  S. Hierome ſaithe,Hierony. Aduerſus error. Iohan. Hieroſoly mitan. Cyprian. De Bono Poenitentiae. Sedulius, In. 2. Corinth. 6. 
                     Ego non Patrem, non Matrem, non Germanum aduerſus Chriſtum
meum audiam: I wil not heare neither Father, nor Mother, nor Brother againſt
my Chriſte. S. Cyprian ſaithe, Hic eſt Deus noſter, id eſt, non omnium, ſed
Credentium, & Fidelium Deus: This is Our God, that is to ſaie, not the God of al, but
the God of the Beleeuers, and of the Faitheful. Sedulius ſaithe, Deus Naturâ omnium
eſt: Voluntate verò paucorum: God by Nature, is the God of al: but by wil,
he is the God of Fewe.
                      But what ſhal wée neede many Doctours, the caſe beinge
ſo cleare? You your ſelfe, M. Hardinge, in this ſelfe ſame Booke, either of
pourpoſe vpon ſomme better aduiſe, or vnwares, haue written the ſame. Conſider
wel your owne woordes:
                        M. Hard. Fol. 124. b. Galat. 2. Thus ye ſaie, There is no iniquitie in Our Lorde God.
Yet, I trowe, by theſe woordes, ye make not to your ſelfe a peculiare God.
                  
                  
                     S. Paule ſaithe, I liue in the Faithe of the Sonne of God, whiche hath loued me, and
hath geeuen him ſelfe for my ſake. Whiche woordes S. Chryſoſtome, writinge
vpon the Geneſis,Chryſoſtom. in Geneſim. Homi. 34. 
                     expoundeth thus: Qui dilexit me, &c. Vt proprium vſurpas commune
beneficium. Profectò, inquit: Nam licet pro omni hominum genere Sacrificium
oblatum ſit, tamen propter amorem in eum, id, quod factum eſt omnibus, proprium
mihi facio. Ita & Prophetis mos eſt, & facere, & dicere, Deus, Deus Meus:

quamuis totius Orbis ſit Deus. Sed peculiare hoc eſt amori, vt ex communibus propria
faciat. Qui dilexit me. Quid dicis? An te dilexit ſolum? Omnem, inquit, hominum
Naturam dilexit. Sed ego illi Gratias debeo, quaſi me Solum dilexiſſet,
& tradidiſſet ſemetipſum pro me Solo. S. Paule ſaithe, Chriſte hath loued me.
                     
O Paule, The benefite, that is common to al, thou vſeſt as peculiare to thee ſelfe. Yea verily,
ſaithe S. Paule: For al be it that Sacrifice were offered for al Mankinde, yet for the
loue, that I beare towardes him, the thinge that was donne to al, I accoumpte as proper, and
ſeueral to mee ſelfe Alone. Thus the manner of the Prophetes is to doo, and to ſaie, O
God, my God: notwithſtandinge be is the God of al the Worlde. But this is the ſpecial,
and alonely office of Loue, of thinges common to make thinges peculiare. Thou ſaiſte,
Chriſte hath Loued mee. What ſaiſtet thou? Hath Chriſte loued thee Onely, and 
                           •
                        oman els?
No, ſaithe Paule, He hath loued al Mankinde. But I ovve him thankes, as if he had
loued mee Alone, and had geuen him ſelfe Onely for me.
                  Hencefoorthe, M. Hardinge, it maie pleaſe you to géeue vs leaue to ſpeake, as
the Prophetes, the Apoſtles, the Holy Fathers, and Doctours haue ſpoken before
vs.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 1.
               Biſides al theſe maters, wherewith they charge vs, they are
woont alſo to adde this one thinge, which thei enlarge with al kinde
of ſpite: that is, that wee be menne of trouble, that we plucke the
Sworde, and Scepter out of Kinges handes: that we arme the
people: that we ouerthrowe iudgement places, deſtroie the Lawes,
make hauoke of poſſeſſions, ſeeke to make the people Princes, turne
al thinges vpſide downe: and, to be ſhorte, that we woulde haue
nothinge in good frame in a Common Wealthe. Good Lorde, how
often haue they ſet on fiere Princes hartes, with theſe woordes, to
the ende thei mighte quenche the lighte of the Goſpel in the very firſte
appearinge of it, & that menne might beginne to hate y• ſame, ere euer
they were able to knowe it, and to the ende that euery Magiſtrate
mighte thinke, he ſawe his deadly enimie, as often as he ſawe any of
vs. Surely it ſhoulde excedingly greeue vs, to be ſo malitiouſly
accuſed of moſte hainous Treaſone, onleſſe we knewe, that Chriſte
him ſelfe, the Apoſtles, and a number of good Chriſtian menne, were
in time paſte blamed, and reuiled in like ſorte. For although Chriſte
taught, they ſhoulde geeue vnto Ceſar, that whiche was Ceſars,
yet was he charged with ſedition, and was accuſed to diuiſe ſome
Conſpiracie, and to ſeeke waies to geate the Kingedome. And thereupon
they cried out with open mouthe againſte him in the place
of Iudgemente: Yf thou let this man eſcape, then thou arte not
Ceſars frende.
               
               And though the Apoſtles did likewiſe euermore, and ſtedfaſtly
teache, that Magiſtrates ought to be obeied, y• euery ſoule ought to
be ſubiect to the Higher Powers, not onely for feare of wrathe, & puniſhemente,
but euen for conſcience ſake, yet bare they the name to
diſquiet the people, and to ſtirre vp the multitude to rebelle. After
this ſorte did Haman ſpecially bringe y• Natiō of the Iewes into the

hatred of Kinge Aſſuerus, bicauſe, ſaide he, they vvere a rebellious
and ſtubborne People,
                  The Boures in Germanie. 
                  and deſpiſed the ordinaunces, and commaundementes
of Princes.
                  3. Reg. 18. Wicked Kinge Achab ſaide to Elie the
Prophete of God, It is thou, that troubleſt Iſrael. Amaſias, the
Prieſte at Bethel,
                  Amos. 7. laide a conſpiracie to the Prophete Amos charge,
before Kinge Ieroboam, ſaieinge, See, Amos hath made a conſpiracie
againſte thee, in the middeſt of the Houſe of Iſrael. To bee
briefe,Tertul. in Apologetico. 
                  Tertullian ſaithe, This was the general accuſation of al
Chriſtians, whiles he liued, that thei were Traitours, that thei were
Rebelles, and the enimies of Mankinde. Wherefore, if now adaies
the Truthe be likewiſe euil ſpoken of, and beinge the ſame Truthe, it
was then, if it be now like deſpitefully vſed, as it was in times paſte,
though it be a greuous and vnkinde dealinge, yet can it not ſeeme vnto
vs a newe, or an vnwoonted matter.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Howe farre ye haue attempted (I meane the ſectes of your Brotherhed) in ſundry Countries,
to wreaſte the Swoorde out of Princes handes, to tranſpoſe their Scepters at your pleaſure, and to alter
ſtates and ſignories, though wee holde our peace,Vntruthe, notorious, and manifeſte to al the vvorlde. the worlde Iudgeth, the Bloudde of ſo many
thouſandes ſlaine ſpeaketh, Englande repenteth, Scotlande mourneth, Germanie roareth, Fraunce
bewaileth, Sauoie weepeth, all Chriſtendome lamenteth.Theſe Boures for the greateſt parte vvere enimies vnto Luther. VVere the hundred thouſande Boures
of Germanie conſumed by the Swoorde of the Nobilitie there for their obedience? The Duke of
Saxonie, and Lantgraue of Heſſe, were they ouerthrowen in fielde and taken captiue, for ſtandinge
in Defence of their Soueraigne? VVere ſo greate multitudes of people deſtroied at Munſter for their
loyaltie? Your Sacramentarie Suitzers of Berna, who robbed the quiet Olde Duke of Sauoye of
his Townes, and Countries, from the farther ſide of the lake of Geneua vnto the Alpes, did they
this for mainetenance of his righte, and to ſet him at reſte with litle? VVhat meante ye, when
ye laide your Heades togeather, beinge at Geneua in Queene Maries daies, the FaithfullAl this greate multitude of Englande, and Scotland, ſtoode onely in tvvoo perſonnes. VVee knovve no moe. Brothers
of Englande, and Scotlande, and deuiſed a moſt Seditious and Traiterous Booke againſte the monſtrous
regiment of VVomen?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, for wante of mater, ye thought it good policie, to furniſhe
your tale with ſtoare of woordes: The VVorlde iudgeth: Bloude ſpeaketh: Englande repenteth:
Scotlande mourneth: Germanie roareth: Fraunce bewaileth: Sauoie weepeth: Chriſtendome
lamenteth. If ye had not wel ſtudied your Copia Verborum, ye coulde neuer
haue benne halte ſo copious, nor haue benne hable, ſo many waies to vtter nothinge.
Yee might happily haue ſaide, Your Cardinalles crie, and your Pope
roareth, and your Frendes ſtande aluffe, and teare their heare, and ſaie, as it is
written in the Apocalyps,Apocalyp. 18. 
                     Vae, vae Babylon, Ciuitas illa Magna: Alas, alas Babylon,
that Greate Cittie.
                     
                  
                  God be thanked, The Kingedomes, & Princehoodes of the worlde ſtande nowe
in as ſafe, & in as quiet, and floriſhinge ſtate, as euer before. Therefore this Tragical
Rhetorique might better haue ſerued you ſomme other where.
                  The Boures of Germanie, of whome ye ſpeake, for the greatteſt parte, were
Aduerſaries vnto Doctour Luther, and vnderſtoode no parte of the Goſpel: but
conſpired togeather, as they ſaide, onely againſt the crueltie, and tyrannie of their
Lordes: as they had donne twoo and twentie yéeres before in the ſame Countrie,
in the Conſpiracie,Liga Sotularia. An. 1503. called Liga Sotularia, fifteens yéeres before Doctour Luther
                     
beganne to Preache: The parteners of whiche Conſpiracie had for their watche
woorde the name of Our Lady: and in the honoure of her,Regiment of vveemen. were bounde to ſaie fiue
Aue Maries euery daie.D. Luther began to Preache, An. 1518. Certainely, touchinge theſe Later Rebelles, it is
knowen, that Luther ſharpely and vehemently wrote againſte them. And they
them ſelues beinge demaunded thereof,Iohan. Sleidan. Lib. 4. & 5. vtterly denied bothe partetakinge, & alſo
the knowledge of the Goſpel.
                  The Princes of Germanie raiſed not theire Powers, as ye ſaie, againſte the
Emperoure Charles the fifthe:Paralipomen. Vrſpergen. Anno, 1525. but beinge wrongefully, & contrarie to the Lawe
of Armes inuaded by him, they were forced, beinge frée Princes, by the Lawe of
Nature, to drawe their ſwoorde in their owne Defence.
                  The Rebelles at Mounſter were not Goſpellers,Nicola. Gerbellius Phortzenſis. as yée ſeeme to meane, but
frantique Anabaptiſtes, and Heretiques, as yee be: and therefore enimies vnto the
Goſpel.
                  The Lordes of Berna neuer were Subiectes to the Duke of Sauoie. That
they tooke certaine of his Caſtles in their Confines, then did it rightly, and by
the Lawe of Armes, beinge forced thereto by daiely inuaſions, & robberies, and
not hable otherwiſe to liue in reaſte. But in deede the ſaide poore Duke was
thorowly ſpoiled of his whole Dominion: of the one halfe, by his Brother in
Lavve the Emperour Charles. 5. of the other halfe, by his Neuevve Franciſe the
Frenche Kinge, by the counſel of Pope Clemens. 7. after their great enterviewe
at Marſiles. And thereof was diuiſed a prety Paſquil, declaringe the miſerable
caſe of the poore Duke, Diuiſerunt ſibi veſtimenta mea: & ſuper veſtem meam miſerunt
ſortem: They haue diuided my apparel emongeſt them ſelues: and they haue caſte
lotes for my Coate.
                     
                  
                  The Heades of Englande, and Scotlande, that, as ye ſaie, were laide togeather
at Geneua, touchinge the gouernemente of Wéemen, beinge wel accoumpted,
were nothinge ſo many, as ye woulde ſeeme to imagine. For if there had benne
but one leſſe, for ought, that I haue hearde, there had benne but one at al. Sutche
hoate Amplifications it liketh you to make of ſo ſmal a number. Wée wil defende
noman in his erroure. Let euery man beare his owne guilte. M. Caluine, M.
Martyr, M. Muſculus, M. Bullinger, and others, whom you cal the Faithful
Brothers of Englande, miſliked that enterpriſe, and wrote againſte it.
                  
                     Wée knowe, that God hath determined this mater longe ſithence: For thus he
ſaith,
                     Numer. 27. Si Homo moriatur abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Filio, ad Filiam eius tranſibit Haereditas: If a Man die
without a Sonne, his enheritance ſhal paſſe vnto his Daughter. And S. Auguſtine
ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Ciuita Li. 3. Ca. 21. Lata eſt Romae Lex illa Voconia, Ne quis Haeredem Foeminam faceret, nec
Vnicam Filiam. Qua Lege quid iniquis dici, aut cogitari poſsit, ignoro:
There was a Lawe made in Rome, called Lex Voconia, That noman ſhould conueie his
Enheritaunce vnto a vvoman, no not vnto his onely Daughter. Then vvhiche
Lavve I knovve not, vvhat maie be more vvickedly thought, or ſpoken.
                  But, God be thanked, that of his Mercie, hath nowe raiſed vp vnto vs a
Woman of ſutche Wiſedome, Learninge, Clemencie, Grauitie, Iudgement,
Gouernement, and other Noble, and Princely Vertues, as haue not benne ſeene
in many menne. God encreaſe her dayly with his Holy Sprite, and make her
and olde Mother in Iſrael. Amen.
                  Of your ſturdy blaſtes, and Secrete breathinges, M. Hardinge, I wil ſaie
nothinge. Yée maie yet remember, whiche of your companie it was, y• in the time
of that Noble Prince of Bleſſed Memorie Kinge Edvvarde the .6. ſaide in open
Parlamente, Woe be to that Kingedome, the Prince whereof is a Childe. And afterwarde,
ſéeinge y• 
                     Queenes Maieſtie, that nowe is, placed in her eſtate, boldely,
& openly confeſſed a greate euerſighte, and mutche folie in your former dooinges,

for that in the late time of your vnruely gouernmente ye had hewen downe the
boughes, & leafte the Stocke ſtandinge ſtil. Goddes Secrete Prouidence, M. Hardinge,
breathed againſte you, and confounded your dooinges. Power onely ye lacked:
but good wil yée lacked none.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  For anſweare to all this, ye ioine your ſelues with Chriſte and his Apoſtles, as though yee were
gilty herein no more, then they. Preſumptuouſly ſaide. But the matter is not ſo anſweared. And yet
yee runne at large in that common place, and very vainely, or rather Luciferlike, compare your
ſelues with the Apoſtles. But Sirs, ſtaie here, runne no farther. Yee are ſoone ſtopped. The caſe
is not like pardie. Theſe be but your woordes. In the Apoſtles was the Truthe in deede, ſo was
it in the Holy Prophetes, and thoſe firſte Bleſſed men of the Churche. The Truthe yee boaſte and crake
ſo muche of, is not that Truthe. Talke leſſe like Rhetoricians, and proue vs that yee haue Truthe,
like honeſt men. And then talke on: But that can ye neuer doo, ſo longe as ye remaine out of the
Churche, and ennemies to the Churche.O vaine brauerie. But what ſpende I woordes in vaine? Your hartes be hardened,
your Eies be blinded, your Eares be ſtopped.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here is profounde ſtuffe, M. Hardinge, for a Doctour of DIuinitie. To anſweare
you with your owne vaine woordes, in deede ye ſpende your woordes in
vaine.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 2.
               Fourtie yeeres agoe, and vpwarde, it was an eaſy thinge for
them to diuiſe againſt vs theſe accurſed ſpeaches, & other too, ſoarer
then theſe: when in the middeſt of the darkeneſſe of that age, firſte beganne
to ſpringe, and to geeue ſhine ſomme one glimmeringe beame
of Truthe, vnknowen at that time, and vnhearde of: when alſo
Martine Luther, and Hulderike Zvvinglius, beinge moſt excellente
menne, euen ſente of God, to geeue lighte to the whole worlde, firſte
came vnto the knowlege, and preachinge of the Goſpel: when as yet
the thinge was but newe, and the ſucceſſe thereof vncertaine: and
when mens mindes ſtoode doubtful and amaſed, and their eares open
to al ſclaunderous tales: and when there coulde bee imagined againſte
vs no facte ſo deteſtable, but the people then woulde ſoone beleeue
it, for the noueltie and ſtrangeneſſe of the matter. For ſo did
Symmachus, ſo did Celſus, ſo did Iulianus, ſo did Porphyrius the
olde foes to the Goſpel, attempte in times paſt to accuſe al Chriſtians
of Sedition and Treaſon, before that either Prince, or people were
able to knowe, who thoſe Chriſtians were, what thei profeſſed, what
they beleeued, or what was their meaninge.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As ye runne foorthe your race, and with lieinge amplification boaſte and bragge of the
Truthe of your Doctrine, and of the Innocencie of your demeanour, yee fall into a greate inconuenience
and ouerſighte. VVas the lighte extinguiſhed in all Iſraell, till that lewde Friere came,
and ZwingliusVntruthe, malicious, and ſclaunderous. For Zainglius vvas a Godly Preacher, and no Rutter. the ſwarte Rutter? Shall we now change the olde ſonge of Micheas the Prophete.
Out of Sion ſhal come the Lawe,Miche. 4. and the woorde of our Lorde from Ieruſalem, and ſinge a new Songe,
Out ofThis Blaſphemie toucheth Goddes Prouidence. For vvhy not a, vvel from VVittenberg, as from Rome? VVittenberg is come the Goſpel, and the woorde of the Lorde from Zurich, and Geneua?

If Luther and Zwinglius firſte came to the knowledge and preachinge of the Goſpel,VVittenberg. Churche Inuiſible. what meante
Chriſte to breake his promiſe, who ſaide, I wil be with you al daies til the ende of the worlde?
                  Againe howe forgate ye the olde prouerbe, a lier it behoueth to be mindeful? Remember ye not
howe this isVntruth fond, and childiſhe. contrary to al your owne Doctrine? For ſaie ye not other wheres, that God had alwaies
his number of the electe, and his inuiſible Churche? Therefore this muſte ye recante and cal backe againe,
or els ſhal ye pul al the rable of ſundry your owne ſectes vpon your ſhoulders, whoſe filthy railinges,This is M. Hardinges ſobrietie
and vile vpbraidinges poore ſoules ye ſhal neuer be able to abide.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It is not woorthe the while, to anſweare him, that ſaithe nothinge. Sion, from
whence ye ſaie, the Lawe of God iſſued firſte, was in thoſe daies, as mutche diſdeigned
of you Fathers,Origen. Contr
                           •
                         Celſum. Lib. 1. as is this daie of your Geneua, or Wittenberg. Origen
ſaith of Celſus the Heathen, Chriſtianum Dogma affirmat à Barbaris cepiſſe ortum,
hoc eſt, à Iudaeis: He ſaithe, that the Chriſtian Faith tooke her firſt beginning
from Barbarous people,
                     
                     Cicero. De Prouin. Conſul. 
                     that is to ſaie, from the Ievves. Cicero
                      ſaithe, Iudaei, &
Syri, Gentes natae ſeruituti: The Ievves, and Syrians, Nations borne to Bondage.
                     
                  
                  
                     And Chryſoſtome,Chryſoſt. Contra Gentes. 
                     ſpeaking of Iulianus the Renegate, ſaith thus, Galilaeos
nos, pro Chriſtianis, in Edictis ſuis appellauit: In his proclamatiōs, in the ſteede of Chriſtians,
he called vs ſcornefully Galileans: Notinge thereby the vileneſſe of the place,
from whence the Goſpel of Chriſte firſte proceded. But Nazianzene ſaith, Honora
paruam Bethleem,Nazianzen. De Natali Chriſti. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . quae te induxit in Paradiſum: (Deſpiſe not, but rather) Honour that
                     
litle Bethleem, that hath leadde thee into Paradiſe.
                  
                  The ſounde of this ſimple, Barbarous, deſpiſed people was hearde throughout
the whole worlde. God cauſeth his Light to ſhine out of the Darke: His Holy
Sprite breatheth, where he thinketh good: He hath no regarde of Perſonnes, or choiſe of
places,Pſal. 18.
                     3. Actor. but, as S. Peter ſaide vnto Cornelius, In euery Nation, who ſo euer feareth
him,
                     
                     Iohan. 10 
                     and woorketh righteouſneſſe, is accepted before him. God chuſeth the weake thinges of
the world, to confounde the ſtronge. Goddes Holy Name be bleſſed, that of ſo litle,
and ſo ſimple a deſpiſed Muſtard ſéede,Matth. 13. hath now raiſed vp ſo greate a trée: & triumpheth
the Goſpel of Chriſte his Sonnne in euery place throughout the worlde.
                     1. Cor. 1.
                  
                  
                     VVhat meant Chriſte, ſaie you, to breake his promiſſe? Nay, what meante you, M.
Hardinge, ſo ſhamefully to breake Chriſtes Commaundemente, and yet to charge
him with his Promiſſe? God is true in al his promiſſes, and ſhal preuaile, when
he is ſo lewdely iudged. There is no faulte in God, or his Chriſte: The faulte is
in you, that haue made of the Houſe of God, a Caue of Theeues. Chriſte neuer made
any ſutche ſpecial Promiſſe vnto the Pope, that what ſo euer it ſhould pleaſe him
to ſaie, or doo, hée ſhoulde neuer erre, or doo amiſſe. Yee preſume ouer mutche of
Goddes Promiſſes. Nay, though Antichriſte ſhould be Pope, yet ſhould Chriſtes
promiſſes be true ſtil.
                  It is true, that God hath alwaies a Churche Inuiſible, and a number of Electe,
knowen onely to him ſelfe alone. Neither is this our onely ſaieing. S. Paule
alſo ſaithe the ſame:2. Tim. 2. 
                     Firmum ſtat Fundamentum Dei, habens hoc ſigillum, Nouit Dominus,
qui ſint ſui: This Fundation ſtandeth ſounde, and firme, heuinge this Seale, The
Lorde knovveth, vvhoo be his ovvne. Elias thought, al the Godly in Iſrael
had benne ſlaine: and not one leafte aliue. But God ſaide vnto him, I haue
ſoued vnto me ſelfe ſeuen thouſand menne,
                     1. Reg. 19. 
                     that neuer bowed theire knee before Baal.
                     
                     Rom. 11.
                  
                  
                     God knewe them: but Elias knewe them not. To the iudgemente of man, they
were inuiſible.
                     
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 45. 
                     Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Secundum occultam Dei Praedeſtinationem,
plurimae ſunt foris Oues: plurimi Lupi intùs. Nouit enim, ac ſignatos habet, qui
nec eum, nec ſe norunt:
                      Accordinge to Goddes Secrete Predeſtinatiō, there be many Sheepe
without the Church: and many woolues within the Churche. For he knoweth them, and hath

them marked, that knowe neither them ſelues, nor God neither.
                  Thus the number of Goddes Electe, yea before the comminge of Chriſte, in
the time of darkeneſſe, was euermore certaine: yet afterwarde the knowledge of
the Goſpel, by the Mouthes of the Apoſtles, was abundantly carried abroade into
the endes of al the worlde.
                  Bothe theſe partes, M. Harding, maie ſtande wel togeather: and are nothinge
contrarie to our Doctrine. Be the number of the Faithful more, or leſſe, yet the
Truthe of God is one for euer.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 1.
               But now, ſithence our very enimies doo ſee, and cannot denie, but
wee euer in al our woordes, and writinges haue diligently put the
people in minde of theire deutie, to obeie theire Princes, and Magiſtrates,
yea though they be wicked, (For this dooth very trial and
experience ſufficiently teache, and al mennes eies, who ſo euer, and
where ſo euer they be, doo wel ſee, and witneſſe for vs) it was a foule
parte of them to charge vs with theſe thinges: and, ſeinge they could
finde no newe and late faultes, therefore to ſeeke to procure vs enuie
onely with ſtale & outworne lies. We geeue our Lord God thankes,
whoſe onely cauſe this is, there hathe yet at no time been any ſutche
example in al the Realmes, Dominions, & Common Weales, which
haue receiued the Goſpel. For wee haue ouerthrowen no Kingdome:
Wee haue decaied no mans Power, or right: Wee haue diſordered
no Common Wealthe. There continue in theire owne accuſtomed
ſtate, and Aunciente Dignitie, the Kinges of our countrie of England,
y• 
                  Kinges of Denmarke, the Kinges of Suecia, the Dukes of
Saxonie, the Counties Palatine, the Marqueſſes of Brandeburgh, the
Lantſgraues of Heſsia, the Common Wealthes of the Heluetians, &
Rhetians, & y• Free Citties, as Argentine, Baſile, Franckford, Vlme,
Auguſta, & Norenberg, doe al, I ſaie, abide in the ſame Authoritie,
and eſtate, wherein they haue benne heretofore: or rather in a mutche
better, for that by meanes of the Goſpel they haue theire people more
obediente vnto them. Lette them goe, I praie you, into thoſe places,
where at this preſente, through Goddes goodneſſe, and Mercie, the
Goſpel is taught. Where is there more Maieſtie? Where is there
leſſe Arrogancie and Tyrannie? Where is the Prince more honoured?
Where be the people leſſe vnruly? Where hathe there at any
time either the Commō Wealth, or the Churche benne in more quiet?
Perhaps, ye wil ſaie, from the firſte beginning of this Doctrine, the
Common ſorte euerywhere beganne to rage, and to riſe throughout
Germanie. Allow it were ſo: yet Martine Luther, the publiſher,
and ſetter forewarde of this Doctrine, didde write marueilous vehemently
and ſharpely againſte them, and reclaimed them home to
peace, and obedience.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Your impudencie of lieinge hathe no meaſure nor ende. But we wil ſaie litle here, hauinge

ſaide yenough already in reproufe of your falſehed.Ciuile Magiſtrate. VVe leaue you to the wide worlde, who ſeeth,
and almoſte feeleth your lies.
                  But I maruel not a litle, that in this place ſpecially, where ye ſpeake of the good order, that your
Goſpel breedeth, ye be not aſhamed to make mention of Martin Luther. Good God howe mutche could
we, if we were ſo dispoſed, alleage out of his ſeditious and Heretical bookes by himVntruthe malicious, and ſclaunderous. Reade the Anſvveare. writen againſt
the Power of lawful magiſtrates?In libro de Saeculari poteſtate. At this time let one place ſuffiſe for al Luthers wordes be theſe.
Inter Chriſtianos nullus neque poteſt, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         debet eſſe magiſtratus, ſed &c. Amonge Chriſten
men none can nor ought to be a magiſtrate, but eche one is to other equally ſubiecte: After the Apoſtles
ſaieinge,Luther admitteth no ciuil Magiſtrate. Thinkinge al others better then your ſelues, &c. Againe, Be ye humble al one to an other.
VVhereto Chriſte accordeth when he ſaithe, VVhen thou arte called to the mariage feaſte, goe, and
ſitte downe loweſt of al. Amonge Chriſten men, none is ſuperiour ſaue one, and onely Chriſte. And what
ſuperioritie or magiſtrate can be there, where al be equal, and haue right, power, riches, and honour
al alike? Furthermore, none coueteth to be ouer other, but al wilbe vnder one another. VVhere ſutche
men be, though one woulde, yet can he not make a magiſtrare to beare rule ouer others, ſithe that nature
ſuffereth not to haue ſuperiours, where no man wil, nor may be a ſuperiour. And where ſutche
kinde of men is, there be they not Chriſten men, after the true ſorte of Chriſten men. This farre Martin
Luther.
                  He perſuaded them to peace, when there was ſcarſly any lefte, that coulde beare a clubbe. Firſte
heNothinge els, but mere Vntruthe. For Luther called him the preacher of Satan. ſtirred vp his Diſciple, Thomas Munzer in Thuringia, who was the rebelles preacher. After that
he excuſed him of ſeditious preachinge to the Duke of Saxonie Prince Electour, truſting, if Munzer
were let alone, the matter ſhould wel goe forewarde.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  To diſſemble the reſte of your Vntruthes, and your immoderate and vnciuile
bitterneſſe, M. Hardinge, procedinge from the vnquiet, and vnſauery humoures
of your harte: where ye ſaie, Doctor Luther admitteth no Ciuile Magiſtrate, &
note the ſame ſo ſpecially in your margine, I marueile mutche, that your paper
bluſſhed not in your behalfe. Reade his Bookes throughout, and conſider the quiet
gouernement, bothe of the Common Wealthes, and alſo of the Churches of Germanie:
and ye ſhal finde, that noman euer, neither by woorde, nor by example more
auaunced the Authoritie of the Ciuile Magiſtrate. To leaue al other his notable
Sentences to this pourpoſe, againſte the Rebelles, of whom ye ſpeake, beinge
then in the fielde againſte theire Lordes, he wrote thus: God commaundeth al
menne vniuerſally to obeie the Magiſtrate with feare,
                     
                     Iohan. Sleidanus Lib. 5. 
                     and reuerence, &c. Againe, Ye take
the Swerde, and withſtande the Magiſtrate, vvhom God hath appointed. Is not this
raſhly to abuſe the Name of God?
                  But he ſaithe, Emonge Chriſtians neither maie be, nor ought to be any Magiſtrate.
                     
O M. Hardinge, nothinge coulde haue founde faulte herewith, but onely intemperate,
and mere malice. For Luther ſpeaketh not theſe woordes of the outwarde
Ciuile Gouernement, but onely of our Inwarde Bande, and Obedience towardes
God. And in this reſpecte, there is no Kinge, or Prince in déede, nor maie be any.
In this ſenſe S. Paule ſaithe, There is no levve, there is no Gentile: There is no
Lorde,
                     
                     Galat. 3. 
                     there is no Seruaunte: There is no Man, there is no VVooman:
                        Coloſſ. 3. For al you are
one in Chriſte Jeſu. S. Paule denieth not, but Ievve, Gentile, Lorde, Seruaunte,
Man, and VVooman, remaine ſtil in theire ſeueral ſtates, and kindes, as they
were before. But in Chriſte Ieſu, he ſaithe, there is no regarde of any ſutche
difference. In Ciuile Gouernmente a Kinge is a Kinge, and ſo hath God commaunded
him to be knowen. But after that wée be once comme to the reuerence,
and obedience of Goddes wil, there God onely is the Kinge: & the Kinge, be he neuer
ſo mighty, is but a Subiecte. So ſaith S. Ambroſe to the Emperoure Valenti
                           ••
                        ian,
Noli te extollere,
                     An broſ. Lib. 5. Epiſt. 33. 
                     Imperator: Sed, ſi vis diutiùs Imperare, eſto Deo ſubditus.

Scriptum eſt,
                     Ciuile Magiſtrate. 
                     Quae Dei, Deo: quae Caeſaris. Caeſari: O my Lorde, auance not your ſelfe:
But if ye wil remaine long in Empiere, be ſubiecte vnto God. It is written, Geeue to God,
that belongeth to God: Geeue to Caeſar, that belongeth to Caeſar.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe the Emperoure Valentinian the Elder of him ſelfe,
                     Sozom. li. 6. ca. 7. Ego ſum in
ſorte plebis: I am (in this reſpecte) as one of the people. To like pourpoſe Iulius
Caeſar, beinge an Heathen Prince, ſaide ſommetime of him ſelfe at Rome in the
Councel houſe,
                     Dion Lib. 43. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Sozom. li. 5. ca. 16 Equidem ad alia omnia, quae pro vobis gerenda ſunt, & Conſul
ſum, & Dictator: quod autem ad iniuriam cuiquam faciendum attinet, ſum priuatus:
Touchinge al other affaires, that ought to be taken in hande for your ſake, I am bothe your
Conſul, and your Dictator: But as touchinge any wronge to be donne to any man, I am as
a priuate man, without office. So ſaid the Heathen Renegate
                      Iulianus the Emperour,
Principes, vbi ad limen Delubri venerint, perinde ſunt, atque Priuati: When the Princes,
and Magiſtrates once comme within the entrie of the Temple, they are none other, but as
Priuate Menne. And this is al that traiterous, and horrible Iudgement, that, as
it pleaſeth you to ſaie,
                      Luther had of the Ciuile Magiſtrate.
                  
                     Where ye ſaie, he ſturred vp his Diſciple Thomas Munzer in Thuringia,
to be the preacher to the Rebelles, it is no ſtrang mater, to ſée your tonge to renne
riot. Luther him ſelfe writinge thereof vnto the Rebelles, ſaithe thus, Satanas
ſub Euangelij praetextu,Iohan. Sleidanus Lib. 5. multos hoc tempore ſeditioſos, & planè ſanguinarios Doctores
excitauit: Satan vnder the pretenſe of the Goſpel, hath ſturred vp in theſe daies many
ſeditious, and Bloudy Doctours: Meaninge thereby
                      Munzer, and other like his
companions.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 2.
               But, whereas it is woonte ſommetime to be obiected by perſonnes
wantinge ſkil, touchinge the Heluetians chaunge of ſtate, and killing
of Leopoldus the Duke of Auſtria, and reſtoringe by force theire
Countrie to libertie, al that was donne, as appeareth plainely by al
Stories, for twoo hundred and threeſcore yeeres paſte, or aboue, in
the time of Pope Boniface the Eight, when the Authoritie of the Biſhop
of Rome was in greateſt iolitie, aboute twoo hundred yeeres
before Huldericus Zuinglius, either beganne to teache the Goſpel, or
yet was borne. And euer ſithence that time, thei haue had al thinges
ſtil and quite, not onely from foreine Enimies, but alſo from al ciuile
diſſenſion. And if it were a ſinne in the Heluetians, to deliuer theire
owne Countrie from foreine gouernement, ſpecially when they were
ſo proudely and tyrannouſly oppreſſed, yet to burthen vs with other
mennes faultes, or them with the faultes of theire Forefathers, it
is againſte al right and reaſon.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Nowe your sprite is not contente withe that ye haue railed already againſte the Pope, and Holy
Churche, but it moueth you againe to raue and crie out. But whether with more malice or reaſon,
let vs indifferently conſider.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 1.
               But O immortal God, and wil the Biſhoppe of Rome accuſe vs
of Treaſone? Wil he teache the People to obeie & folowe theire Magiſtrates?
Or hath he any regarde at al of the Maieſtie of a Prince?

Why doothe hee then, as none of the olde Biſhoppes of Rome euer
didde,Auguſtin. Steuchus. ſuffer him ſelfe to bee called of his flatterers, Lord of Lordes,
as though hee woulde haue al Kinges and Princes, whoe, and what
ſo euer they be, to bee his vnderlinges? Why doothe hee vaunte him
ſelfe to bee Kinge of Kinges,
                  Antonius de Roſellis. and to haue Kingely Roialtie ouer his
Subiectes? Why compelleth he al Emperours, and Princes to
ſweare to him fealtie, and true obedience? Why dooth hee boaſte,
that the Emperours Maieſtie is a thouſandfolde inferioure to him:De Maior & Obedien. Solitae. De Maior. & obedien. Vnam Sanctā. in ſexto.
& that for this reaſon ſpecially, bicauſe God hath made two lightes
in Heauen: and bicauſe Heauen and Earth were created, not in twoo
Beginninges, but in one? Why hathe hee, and his felowes (like
Anabaptiſtes and Libertines, to the ende they might runne on more
licenceouſly and careleſſy) ſhaken of the yoke, & exempted them ſelues
from beinge vnder al Ciuil Power? Why hathe hee his Legates
(aſmutche to ſaie, as moſte ſuttle ſpies) lieinge in waite in al Kinges
Courtes, Councelles, and Priuie chambers? Why doothe he, when
he liſte, ſette the Chriſtian Princes one againſte an other, and at his
owne pleaſure trouble the whole worlde with debate and diſcorde?
Why dooth hee Excommunicate, and commaunde to be taken as a
Heathen and a Pagan, any Chriſtian Prince, that renounceth his
Authoritie? and why promiſeth he his Indulgences and his Pardons
largely to any, that wil (what waie ſo euer it be) kil any of his
enimies? Doothe hee maintaine Empires, and Kingedomes? Or
doothe hee once deſire, that common quiete ſhoulde bee prouided for?
You muſte pardonne vs, good Reader, though wee ſeeme to vtter
theſe thinges more bitterly and bitingly, then it becommeth Diuines
to doo. For bothe the ſhamefulneſſe of the matter, and alſo the
deſire of rule in the Biſhoppe of Rome is ſo excedinge, and outrageous,
that it coulde not wel be vttered with other woordes, or more
mildely.Clemens. 5. In Concil. Viennen. Leo papa. 3. For he is not aſhamed to ſaie in open aſſemblie, that al Iuriſdiction
of al Kinges dependeth of him ſelfe. And to feede his
Ambition, and greedineſſe of rule, hee hathe pulled in peeces the
Empiere of Rome, and vexed and rent whole Chriſtēdome aſunder:
Falſely and traiterouſly alſo did he releaſe the Romaines, the Italians,
and him ſelfe too, of the othe, whereby thei, and hee were ſtreitly
bounde to bee true to the Emperour of Graecia, and ſtirred vp the
ſame Emperoures Subiectes to forſake him: and callinge Carolus
Magnus out of Fraunce into Italie, made him Emperour: ſutche
a thinge,Zacharias pp. as neuer was ſeene before. He put Chilpericus the Frenche
Kinge, beinge no euil Prince, biſide his Realme, onely bicauſe he fanſied
him not, & wrongefully placed Pipine in his roume. Againe, after
he had caſt out Kinge Philip, if he could haue brought it ſo to paſſe,
he had determined and appointed the Kingedome of Fraunce to Albertus
the King of Romaines. He vtterly deſtroied the ſtate of the
moſt floriſhinge Cittie, and Common Weale of Florence, his owne
natiue Countrie,Clemens. 
                        •
                     . and brought it out of a free, & peaceable ſtate, to be

gouerned at the pleaſure of one man:Idem Clemens. hee brought to paſſe by his procurement,
that whole Sauoye on the one ſide was miſerably ſpoiled
by the Emperoure Charles the fifthe, and on the other ſide by the
Frenche Kinge, ſo that the poore vnfortunate Duke had ſcante one
Cittie leafte him, to hide his heade in.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  It is a greate eie ſore to the Miniſtres of Antichriſte, to ſee the Vicare of Chriſte aboue
Lordes and Kinges of this vvorlde: to ſee Princes and Emperours promiſe
and ſvveare obedience vnto him. But they that are the faithful ſubiectes of the Churche of
God, thinke it no abſurditie, that the Shepherd be ſet
                        •
                     , not onely aboue the Lambes and Ewes of the
Churche, but alſo aboue the VVethers and Rammes them ſelues. It is a very greate folie for them to
finde faulte with the ſuperioritie of the Biſhop of Rome, who can neuer proue, that he is not the Vicare
of Chriſte.Matth. 16. If he were not his Vicare, yet beinge a Biſhop he is aboue any temporal PrinceSo is euery Simple Prieſte. concerninge
his Prieſtly office. But ſith Chriſte ſaide to Peter, Vpon this rocke I wil build my Churche, and
hel gates ſhal not preuaile againſte it,A litle vvitte had benne better, then al this ſo greate a doo. 
                     Barke vntil your bellies breake, ye that be the
helhovvndes of Luthers and Zuinglius litour, or rather of Sathans your and
theire chiefe maiſter, ſhal not preuaile againſte the Apoſtolike ſee of Peter. It hath withſtanded
al Diuels and Heretikes a thouſande fiue hundred yeeres: and thinke ye that your ſelues be ſtronger
then Arius? It greeueth you, that the Pope is higher then the Emperour, not for any loue ye beare to the
Emperour, nor for hatred that ye haue to the Popes perſon, whom ye knowe not: but your quarrel is
againſte Chriſte, whoſe perſon the Pope beareth. Or tel vs, I praie you, dooth he cal him ſelfe any Princes
or Emperours vicegerent, and not rather theSo he calleth him ſelfe: But vvhen did Chriſt euer cal him ſo? Vicare of Chriſte alone? VVhom impugne ye then but
Chriſte in his Vicare?Luke. 10. Haue ye not readen, qui vos ſpernit, me ſpernit: he that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth
me? Ye thought the Pope had no better text for his primacie and ſupreme auctoritie, thē two lightes,
which God made in Heauen. But if malice had not blinded you, in the very ſame chapter of Innocētius
the thirde, (from whence like a ſpider ye ſucked that ye thought was worſte) ye might haue ſeene an
other reaſon goinge before,Diſtin. 96. Duo. ſunt. where he ſaide, Pontifex in Spiritualibus antecellit, quae tant
                           •
                         ſunt
temporalibus digniora, quant
                           •
                         anima praefertur corpori. The Biſhop (ſaide Innocentius) in ſpiritual
matters paſſeth (the Emperour): whiche ſpiritual thinges are ſo mutche aboue the temporal, by
howe mutche the ſoule is preferred before the bodie. Howe like ye that reaſon? VVithin a litle after
Innocentius bringeth forth an other proufe. VVhere it was ſaide to Ieremie the Prophete▪ who came
As if Hieremie had benne a Pope. of the Prieſtes race,Hierem. 1. and was a Prieſte him ſelfe,A very profounde Reaſon. Reade the Anſvveare. behold I haue ſet thee ouer natiōs and Kingdomes,
to the intente thou maieſt pul vp and ſcater, and builde, and plante.
                  Then after that Innocentius hadBy Natural Reaſon. O Natural Folie. by natural reaſon and holy Scripture proued the higheſt Biſhops
ſuperioritie aboue Princes, he commeth in the thirde place not nowe to proue, but to make his
former ſaieinge already proued more plaine, by alludinge to that is written in the beginning of Geneſis.
VVhere Moyſes declareth how God made two lightes in the Firmamente of the Heauen, a greater,
and a leſſer.
                  But this cannot ſounde in the eares of our newe preachers. They woulde not haue the guide of
heauenly thinges aboue the guide of earthly cares. They loue the Earth, the fleaſh, the worlde too wel,
to be of that minde, and therefore do aſke, why the Popes of Rome like Anabaptiſtes and Libertines
haue ſhaken of the yoke, and exempted them ſelues from al ciuile power. VVhat yoke meane ye? The
yoke of infidels and Paynimes?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée are not the Miniſters of Antichriſte, M. Hardinge, but the witneſſes
of the Truthe of Chriſte. He is Antichriſte, as S. Paule ſheweth you, that ſitteth
in the Temple of God, and auanceth him ſelfe aboue al that is called God.
And, to ſpeake more particularely of the mater, by S. Gregories Iudgement, he

is Antichriſte,
                     Pope aboue Kinges and Emperours. or the Forerenner of Antichriſte, that calleth him ſelfe, The Vniuerſal
Biſhop: And vaunteth him ſelfe, as the King of Pride: And hath an Armie
of Prieſtes prepared for him: And ſetteth him ſelfe, as Lucifer, aboue al his
Brethren. Of him Cardinal Franciſcus Zarabella ſaithe thus, Papa facit, quicquid
libet,
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 30. 
                     etiam illicita: & eſt pluſquam Deus: The Pope doothe, vvhat him
liſteth, yea though it be vnlavvful: and is more then a God. This is Antichriſte,
M. Hardinge,Grego. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 38. by the Iudgemente of the wiſe, and godly: and the ſupporters
of him, who ſo euer,Franciſ. Zarabel. and where ſo euer they be, are the Miniſters of Antichriſte.
                  
                  It is greate Arrogancie, to auance a Biſhop aboue a Kinge: Notwithſtandinge
in ſomme good meaninge it maie be true. So a Iudge, in knowledge of the Lawe:
ſo a Doctoure of Phyſique, in his profeſſion: ſo a Pilote, in knowledge of the
Sea, and guidinge of a ſhippe: ſo a Captaine, in Martial affaires is aboue any
Kinge: And it behoueth a Kinge, be he neuer ſo wiſe, or Mighty, in euery of theſe
ſeueral faculties, to be guided by them. And thus is the Kinge inferioure, not onely
to a Biſhop, as you ſaie, but alſo to euery Inferiour Prieſte.
                  
                  
                     So S. Chryſoſtome ſaith of Chriſtes Apoſtles:
                     Chryſ. in Pſal. 44 Omnem Terrarum Orbem peruaſerunt,
& omnibus principibus fuerunt magis propriè Principes, Regibus
potentiores: The Apoſtles roaued ouer the whole worlde, and were more Princelike in
deede, then the Princes them ſelues, and more puiſſante, and mighty, then the Kinges.
                  
                  
                     So ſaide the Emperoure Valentinian vnto the people of Millaine,Theodoretus, Lib. 4. Cap. 5. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Eum collocate
in Pontificali Solio, cui nos quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Moderatores Imperij, noſtra Capita ſubmittamus:
Place ye ſutche a man in the Biſhoppes Chaire, vnto whom wee our ſelues, that goueine
the Empiere, maie ſtoope our Heade.
                  For the Prince is bounde to the Obedience of Goddes VVoorde, no leſſe, then
if he were a priuate Subiecte. And if he refuſe to heare, and to reuerence the ſame,
as the declaration of Goddes Holy Wil, he is accurſed. But what is this, M. Hardinge,
to your pourpoſe? Woulde you therefore that the Kinge ſhoulde ſweare his
Obedience vnto the Biſhop?
                  
                  
                     In this reſpecte, by your owne Learninge, any Simple Prieſte maie wel be aboue
the Pope. So ſaithe your owne Doctoure Panormitane, Papa tenetur Confiteri:
& in eo actu Sacerdos eſt Maior illo: The Pope is bounde to Confeſſe him ſelfe:
And in that acte of Confeſsion,
                     Extra. De Poeniten. & remiſſ. Omnis vtriuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Abbas. the Prieſte is aboue him. And againe, Papa non poteſt
cogere Sacerdotem, vt reuelet Confeſsionem: quia in illo actu Sacerdos eſt Maior,
quàm Papa: The Pope cannot compel a Prieſte, to open that hath benne ſaide vnto him in
Confeſsion. For in that Acte, the Prieſte is greater then the Pope. Yet, I trowe,
yée woulde not therefore, the Pope ſhoulde ſweare Obedience to a Prieſte.
                  This therefore, M. Hardinge, it is, that gréeueth vs, to ſée the poore Stoole of
Humilitie, whereon S. Peter ſate, blowen vp nowe into a Mounte of Pride: and
the Pope to require Homage, and Fealtie of Kinges, and Emperours, as of his
Subiectes. It gréeueth vs to ſée you, and others your felowes, in reſpecte of the
Pope, ſo mutche, not onely to abaſe, but alſo vilely to abuſe the Maieſtie of them,
vnto whom Chriſte, and his Apoſtles were alwaies obediente. Remember,
what one of yours hath written, and publiſhed to the worlde in this behalfe.
Staniſlaus Orichonius ſaithe thus,Staniſlaus Orichonius in Chimera, Fol. 97. 
                     Tantùm Sacerdos praeſtat Regi, quantùm
homo praeſtat beſtiae: Quantùm Deus praeſtat Sacerdoti, tantùm Sacerdos
praeſtat Regi. Qui Regem anteponit Sacerdoti, is anteponit Creaturam
Creatori: A Prieſte is ſo mutche aboue a Kinge, as a Man is aboue a Beaſte: As
mutche as God is better then the Prieſte, ſo mutche is the Prieſte better, then a Kinge.
He that ſetteth the Kinge before a Prieſte, ſetteth the Creature before the Creatoure.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     It gréeueth vs,
                     Pope aboue Kinges and Emperours. 
                     to ſée S. Gregories woordes, by S. Gregories Succeſſours,
ſo proudely broken. For thus he wrote, welneare a thouſande yéeres ſithence,
vnto the Emperoure Mauritius, againſte Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople,
claiminge then the ſame Vniuerſal Authoritie, that is nowe vſurped by the
Pope:Gregor. Li. 4. Epiſt. 32. Ille coercendes eſt, qui Sanctae Vniuerſali Eccleſiae iniuriam facit: qui corde tumet:
qui gaudere de Nomine Singularitatis appetit: qui Honori quoque Imperij
veſtri ſe per priuatum vocabulum ſuperponit: Your Maieſtie muſte repreſſe him,
that do the this wronge vnto the Holy Vniuerſal Churche: that ſwelleth in harte: that
deſireth to enioie a Name of Singularitie: that alſo, by a priuate Title, (callinge
him ſelfe the Vniuerſal Biſhop) placeth him ſelfe ouer and aboue the Honoure
of your Empiere.
                  Touchinge the knowledge of Goddes woorde, and caſes of Religion, certaine
it is, the Kinge is inferiour to a Biſhop. But if the Biſhop be negligente, and
doo not his office: or, if he be wilful, and doo it not rightly: or, if he be ignorante, and
cannot doo it: Then is the Biſhop vnder the Prince, Subiecte to his checke, and
by him maie be pouniſhed. So writeth the Emperoure Conſtantinus vnto the
people of Nicomedia:
                     Theodoretus, Lib. 1. Cap. 19. 
                     Si quis Epiſcoporū in conſultè tumultuatus ſit, Miniſtri Dei,
hoc eſt, mea executione, illius audacia coercebitur: If any Biſhop vnaduiſedly
woorke trouble, his boldeneſſe ſhalbe repreſſed by the Order of Goddes Miniſter, that is to
ſaie,
                     Roma. 13. 
                     by my execution. Therefore S. Paule ſaithe, Let euery ſoule be Subiecte
to the Higher Powers. Whereunto S. Chryſoſtome addeth theſe woordes:
Etiamſi Apoſtolus ſis,
                     Chryſoſt. ad Roman. Homil. 23. 
                     etiamſi Euangeliſta, etiamſi Propheta, ſiue quiſquis tandem
fueris. Neque enim Pietatem ſubuertit iſta ſubiectio: Although thou be an Apoſtle,
although thou be an Euangeliſte, although thou be a Prophete, or what one ſo euer thou
be
                      (yet be thou Subiecte to the Higher Powers). For Godlineſſe is not hindered by
ſutche ſubiection.
                  
                  Your quarrel, ye ſaie, is againſte Chriſte: For his perſonne the Pope beareth. Haue ye not
readen, He that deſpiſeth you, despiſeth me? Tel vs, I praie you, ſaie you, doothe the Pope cal him
ſelfe any Princes or Emperours Vicegerent, and not rather the Vicare of Chriſte alone?
                  It forceth not greately, by what title the Pope liſte to claime. He cannot
lightly wante Authoritie, while he maie penne his owne Commiſſion. I trows,
wee maie ſaie of him, as Cicero ſaide ſommetime of one in Rome, Aſinius Senator
Voluntarius, Lectus ipſe àſe: Aſinius is a very vvillinge Senatour, him
ſelfe appointed and choſen by him ſelfe.
                     2. Theſſ. 2. Verily, Antichriſte ſhal ſit in the Temple
of God, euen in the place of Chriſte, and beare him ſelfe as Chriſtes Vicare.
                  
                  Howe be it, Let the Pope doo the duetie of a Biſhop: Let him Exhorte: Let him
Preache: Let him diſpenſe Goddes Myſteries: Let him fulfil his Office: Let him doo
the parte of an Euangeliſte: And wée wil loue him, and reuerence him, although
not, as Chriſtes Vicare General, yet at leaſte, as a Biſhop. Otherwiſe wee
muſte ſaie vnto him, as S. Gregorie ſaide ſommetime to Cyriacus the Biſhop of
Conſtantinople,
                     Gregor. Lib. 6. Epiſt. 28. 
                     Omnes Magnos eſſe, & Honorabiles cupio, quorum tamen Honor
Honori Omnipotentis Dei non detrahat. Nam quiſquis ſe contra Deum Honorari
appetit, mihi Honorabilis non eſt: I wiſhe that al menne ſhoulde be greate, and honorable:
ſo that theire honoure be not preiudicial to the honoure of Almighty God. For who
ſo euer ſhal deſire him ſelfe to be honoured againſte God, ſhal not be honourable vnto
mee.
                     
                  
                  
                     One highe & woorthy Reaſon wée alleged out of your Pope Innocentius the
thirde: The Sonne is higher, and greater, then the Moone: Ergo, the Pope is
higher,De Maior. & Obedien. Solita. Carion. in Inno
                        
                           •
                        en. 3. and greater, then the Emperoure. This Pope Innocentius is he, that
ſaide, Either he would loſe his Miter, or els he would pul the Emperoure Philips
Emperial Crovvne from his Heade.
                  
                  
                     
                     Malice. ye ſaie,Pope aboue Kinges and Emperours. 
                     blinded vs: otherwiſe wee might haue ſeene other his more ſubſtantial, and
better Reaſons. So were it néedeful, M. Hardinge: for certainely this Reaſon is very
ſimple. But the beſte of his Reaſons, ye can finde, is this:
                  
                     The Soule is aboue the Body,
                     Ergo, The Pope is aboue the Emperoure.
                  
                  
                     And howe like ye this Reaſon? ſaie you. Uerily, as a Reaſon without ſenſe, or
Reaſon: ſutche as be many of your makinge. By the like Reaſon you maie ſaie,
                  
                     The Cooke is alwaies aboute the Fire:
                     The Fire is the higheſt of al Elementes:
                     
                        Ergo, of al Sciences the Cookes occupation is the higheſt.
                  
                  By the ſame Reaſon ye maie proue, that the higheſt Emperoure is Subiects,
not onely to the Pope, but alſo to euery ſimple Prieſte. Yea further, of the ſame
Reaſon there muſte néedes folowe a greate inconuenience: That the Pope
him ſelfe, for as mutche as he Miniſtreth Sacramentes, Teacheth, Exhorteth, and
occupieth him ſelfe in Spiritual affaires leaſte of al others, is therefore the loweſt,
and baſeſte of al his cleregie.
                  Nowe, M. Hardinge, I beſeeche you, conſider the weight, and drifte of your
owne Reaſon.
                  The Popes Charge is Spiritual, ſaie you.
                  
                  Ergo, the Emperoure is bounde to ſv veare obedience to the Pope. By what
Reaſon maie this Reaſon be proued? Uerily by the ſame good Reaſon ye maie ſaie,
Euery Prieſtes Charge is Spiritual:
                  
                     Ergo, the kinge is bounde to ſvveare obedience to euery Prieſte. Yet by ſutche
proper Reaſons the Pope hath auanced him ſelfe aboue al the ſtates, and Princes
of the Worlde.
                  But your Holy Father Innocentius, leſte he ſhoulde ſéeme to wante Scriptures,
for proufe hereof allegeth alſo the woordes of God, ſpoken vnto the Prophete
Hieremie:
                     Hierem. 1. 
                     Beholde I haue ſet thee ouer Nations, and Kingedomes, to the intente,
that thou maiſte pulle vp, and ſcatter, and builde, and plante. Ergo,
                      ſaithe he, the Emperoure
is Subiecte vnto the Pope. Theſe proufes,
                      ye ſaye, Our Defenders coulde
not find. Further, ye ſaie, in your ſober māner, VVhen wil you forſake the Schole of Lieing?
Truely if there be any ſutch Schole, M. Hardinge, you maie claime of good right
to be the Maiſter. Wée are as far frō lieinge, as you are from ſaieing the Truthe.
                  
                     But what make theſe woordes of Hieremie for the Biſhop of Rome? Wil
ye ſaie, that the Prophete Hieremie was the Pope? Or, that the Kinge then was
ſworne to be ſubiecte, and loial vnto him? What Kinge, or Prince did Hieremie
ſubdue? What People or Countrie euer did he ouerthrowe? One of your owne Doctours
ſaithe,
                     Heruaeus de Poteſta. Papa, ca. 13 Hieremias nullum Regem depoſuit. Sed intelligitur poſitus ſupra Centes,
& Regna, quaſi habens Authoritatem ſuper ea in annuntiando, & praedicando Vera.
Nō de deſtructione Regum Mundi, ſed de deſtructione Vitiorum, & plantatione Fidei,
& morum.1. Cor. 3. Vt illud Pauli, Dei aedificatio eſtis: Dei Agricultura eſtis: Hieremie depoſed
no Kinge. But wee vnderſtande, that he was placed ouer Nations, and Kingedomes, as
hauinge Authoritie ouer the ſame, in openinge, and preachinge of the Truthe. He ſpeaketh non
of the ouerthrowinge of the Kingedomes of the World, but of the ouerthrowinge of vices,
and of the planting of Faith, and manners. In this ſenſe S. Paule ſaith to the Corinthians,
Ye are Goddes buildinge: Ye are Goddes tillage.
                  
                  
                     The very Gloſe it ſelfe ſaithe, Vt euellas Regnum Satanae: vt plantes bona: vt aedifices
Eccleſiam:
                      I haue placed thee, to roote vp (not the Kingedomes of the worlde, nor
the ſtates of Common Weales, but) the Kingedome of Satan: to plante good thinges: to
builde vp the Churche. His whole Commiſſion was limited with theſe woordes,
Poſui Verbum meum in Ore tuo:
                     
                     Hierem. 1. I haue put my Woorde in thy Mouthe.
                  
                     
                     Sutche Authoritie had Elias ouer Kinge Achab. And therefore he ſaide vnto
him,
                     Pope aboue Kinges and Emperours. It is not I, that trouble Iſrael, but thou, and thy Fathers houſe. Sutche Authoritie
had Iohn the Baptiſte ouer Kinge Herode: and therefore he ſaide vnto him, It is
not lawful for thee, to haue thy Brothers Wife.
                  
                     If it be true,
                     3. Reg. 18. 
                     that ye woulde ſeeme to ſaie, that the Popes Superioritie ſtandet
onely in thinges Spiritual, wherefore then doothe Pope Nicolas ſaie,
Chriſtus Beato Petro Terreni ſimul,Diſt. 22. Mediolanenſis. & Coeleſtis Imperij Iura commiſit? Chriſte bath geuen
to Bleſſed Peter, the Right as wel of the worldly, as alſo of the Heauenly Empiere.
Wherefore then did
                      Pope Adrian thus write vnto the Emperoure Fredericus:
Romae noſtra Sedes eſt:Auentinus in Adrian. 4. Anno. 1154. Imperatoris eſt A quis in Arduenna, quae eſt Sylua Galliae.
Imperator quod habet, totum habet à nobis. Sicut Zacharias tranſtulit Imperium à
Graecis ad Teutonicos, ita nos poſſumus illud transferre ab Alemānis ad Graecos. Ecce in
poteſtare noſtra eſt, vt demus illud, cui volumus. proptereà conſtituti ſumus à Deo
ſuper Gentes, & Regna, vt deſtruamus, & euellamus, & aedificemus, & plantemus:
My Seate is in the Cittie of Rome: The Emperours Seate is at Acon in Ardenne,
whiche is a Foreſte in Fraunce. VVhat ſo euer the Emperoure hath, he hath it of vs.
As Pope Zacharias tranſlated the Empiere from Graecia into Germanie, ſo maie wee againe
tranſlate the ſame from y• Germaines to the Greekes. Behold, it is in our power, to beſtowe the
Empiere vpon who wee liſte. Therefore are wee appointed by God ouer Nations, and Kingdomes,
to pulle downe, to roote vp, to builde, and to plante againe. This Authoritie, I
trowe, reacheth ſommewhat further, then onely to cauſes Spiritual. One of your
own Doctours ſaith,
                     
                     Heruaeus de Poteſta. Papae. ca. 12 Magis eſſet acceptum Deo, quòd per Solum pōtificem Mundus
in Omnibus regeretur: It were more acceptable vnto God, that the worlde in Al
Maters (both Spiritual, and Temporal) were gouerned onely by the Pope.
                  
                  
                     That Innocentius addeth, of the Sonne and the Moone, yée ſaye, is not a
                      Reaſon,
but a Similitude. This thinge maie eaſily be graunted. For in déede it is a Similitude
vtterly voide of either VVitte, or Reaſon. But who taught the Pope, ſo
childiſhly to plaie with Similitudes, thereby to auance him ſelfe, and to abaſe the
Empiere of the world? Who tolde him, that the Pope is the Sonne, and the Emperoure
the Moone? Or, that the Emperoure is ſo far inferioure to the Pope, as
y• Moone is inferiour to the Sonne? Iſidorus, that liued ſixe hundred yéeres before
Pope Innocentius,In Gloſſa in Gene. Cap. 1. Heruaeus de Poteſta Papae. ca. 13. 
                     ſaithe quite contrarie, Per Solem intelligitur Regnum, &
per Lunam intelligitur Sacerdotium: By the Sonne vvee vnderſtande the
Kingdome: and by the Moone vve vnderſtande the Prieſthoode: Whereby he
geueth vs to conſider, contrarie to the Iudgemente of your good Father Pope Innocentius,
that, as the Moone is inferioure to the Sonne, ſo is the Pope inferioure
to the Emperoure.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  But when Conſtantine was Baptized, he gaue place toVntruth, fond, and peeuiſhe. For Sylueſter vvas deade long before Cōſtantinus vvas Chriſtened. S. Sylueſter then Biſhop of Rome, and to
al other Succeſſours of S. Peter. O how that irketh your haries, that ſo great an Emperour, and the firſt
that openly profeſſed Chriſtianitie, ſhoulde by the ſame Holy Ghoſte, who called him to the Faithe of
Chriſte, be made toVntruthe too vaine for a Childe. VVhy ſhould M. Har. be ſo vaine? There is not one true vvorde in al this talc. departe from the Cittie, whiche ruled the worlde, and to yelde his owne Palaice
partly a Churche to our Sauiour Chriſte, partely a dwellinge houſe for the Biſhops of Rome? Aſke of
Conſtantine, why he ſubmitted his necke to S. Sylueſter. VVe haue cauſe to thinke, that Conſtantius the
heretike, ſonne of Conſtantine, was not very glad of his Fathers dooinge. And yet God ſuffered him
not to retourne and dwel at Rome but to leaue that Cittie free to the Rulers of the Churche.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Conſtantine, ye ſaie, gaue ouer the Cittie of Rome, and al the VVeaſte parte
of the Empiere to the Pope, and to his Succeſſours for euer. And this thing erye

                        ſaie,
                     
                     The Donation of Conſtantine. 
                     yrketh our hartes ful ſoare. Yea verily, M. Hardinge, it irketh vs mutche in your
behalfe, to ſée you, a man of wiſedome, and Learninge, to warrante ſutche folies
without bluſſhinge. This whole
                      Donation of Conſtantine, wherevpon ye
builde the Popes vvhole Kingdome, hath not ſhewe ſufficient to mocke a childe.
The effecte, & ſenſe thereof is this, that Conſtantinus the Emperoure, the thirde
daie after he was Chriſtened, in the honoure of S. Peter, willingly leafte al the
Weaſte parte of the Empiere, and departed to Byzantium, which is nowe called
Conſtantinople. to dwel in the Eaſte: & y• he gaue the whole Emperial, and Ciuile
Dominion, not onely of the Cittie of Rome, but alſo of Italie, France, Spaine,
Arragone, Portugal, Englande, Germanie, Scotlande, Irelande, Pole, Denmarke,
Sueden, and Hungarie, to the Pope. This doubteleſſe, being true, had ben
a toily liberal,
                     Heruaeus de Poteſta. Papae, ca. 19. 
                     and a Princely gifte. And one of your frendes ſaithe, Volunt aliqui,
quòd ratione huius Doni, Summus Pontifex Imperator eſt: & quòd poteſt inſtituere,
& deſtituere Reges, ſicut Imperator: Somme ſaie, that by meane of this gifte,
the Pope is an Emperoure, and maie ſet vp, and pulle downe Kinges, as an Emperoure.
                  
                  
                     But Pius Secundus, beinge him ſelfe afterwarde Biſhop of Rome, ſaithe,
Dicta Palea, Conſtantinus, falſa eſt: The ſaide Decree (named Conſtantinus, conteining
Conſtantine the Emperours Donation,
                     Pius in Dialog. Fol. 21. 
                     or Chartar) is vtterly falſe. So
ſaith Antoninus the Archebiſhop of Florence, Valla, Volaterrane, Hieronymus
Cathalanus, Otho Friſingenſis, and others moe. Of this Fable wee ſhal haue
occaſion to ſpeake hereafter.
                  
                  
                     Conſtantius the Heretique, ſonne vnto Conſtantinus, as you ſaie, mutche miſliked his
Fathers dooinge. Nai, M. Hardinge, if Conſtantius were aliue, he would rather finde
faulte in your diſcretion, that reporte ſutche Folies of his Fathers dooinges.
Where ye ſaie, God ſuffered him not to returne, and to dwel in Rome, it palleth
the déepthe of your Diuinitie, to ſearche vp the cauſes, and ſecretes of Goddes
ſufferance. Althoughe Conſtantius, beinge encumbred with dangerous warres, &
greate affaires, were forced to ſtaie in other Countries, and could not haue leaſure
to returne to Rome, yet he ſtil continued the Lorde of Rome, as alſo did a
greate number of other Emperours, that folovved after him. Therefore Pope
Bonifacius thus wrote vnto the Emperoure Honorius:
                     Diſt. 97. Eccleſia. 
                     Roma eſt Vrbs veſtrae
manſuetudinis: Rome is your Maieſties Cittie. Likewiſe Pope Agatho writeth
vnto the Emperoure Conſtantinus:
                     In ſexta Synodo Conſtan. Act. 4. In eadem Synodo Actione 1. 
                     Haec eſt Vrbs Seruilis Maieſtatis veſtrae:
This is your Maieſties bonde Cittie: And Conſtantinus the Emperour him ſelfe
ſaithe, Dono Archiepiſcopo Antiquae noſtrae Romae: To Donus the Arche biſhop of
our Cittie of Olde Rome.
                  
                  But what néede moe woordes? The caſe is ſo cleare, 
                        •
                      that no man of learninge
can cal it in queſtion.
                  Briefely, touchinge this fonde Fable of Conſtantines Donation, Cardinal
Cuſanus ſaithe thus,Nicol. Cuſanus de Donatione Conſtantini. 
                     Donationem diligenter expendens, reperi in ipſamet Scriptura
manifeſta argumenta Confictionis, & Falſitatis: Diligently weighinge this Donation
of Conſtantine, I haue founde in the very penninge thereof manifeſte argumentes
of for ginge and falſhedde. Theſe, M. Hardinge, be the Recordes, and Preſidentes
of moſte certaine, and moſt ancient memorie, that ye would haue publiſſhed vnto
the world. By ſutche Monumentes your Pope claimeth the right, and poſſeſſion of
the Empiere. And your frendes marueile, that ye can defende ſutche falſhedde, and
forgerie, ſo wel knowen, and ſo manifeſte, for very ſhame.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Being of the Popes Legates and Ambaſſadours in Princes Courtes, is a thing noleſſe conuenient,
then it is meete for him, that hath cure of many flockes of Shepe, to ſet his ſeruauntes, as watchmen in
euery part, where ſutcheflockes do feede.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  In what ſtéede theſe Legates ſtande the Churche of God,Legates. Pardōnes. it maie appeare by
theſe fewe vttered thereof by Camotenſis:
                     Citatur ab Agrippa de vanita. Scientiar. Nicol. Machiauel. in Hiſtoria. 
                     Legati Papae ita debacchantur in Prouincijs,
acsi, ad flagellandum Eccleſiam, Satan egreſſus eſſet à facie Domini:
The Popes Legates doo ſo rage in al Countries, as if Satan were gonne oute before the
face of god, to ſcourge the Churche.
                      And Machiauel ſaithe, There haue benne fewe
warres, or Commotions enflamed theſe many late yéeres, but by the meane, and
whiſperinge of theſe Legates. What other Doctrine they teache, or what other
good they doo, it were harde to ſaie. And therefore the Fathers in the Councel
of Aphrica refuſed vtterly, to haue any ſutche Legates ſente emongeſt them: For
thus they write vnto the Pope,
                     Concil. Aphrica. Cap. 105. 
                     Vt aliqui, tanquam à tuae Sanctitatis latere,
mittantur, nulla inuenimus Patrum Synodo conſtitutū: That any Legates ſhoulde be ſente
vnto vs, as frō your holineſſe ſide, we finde it not appointed by any Councel of our Fathers.
                     
Againe they ſaie, Executores Clericos Veſtros quibuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Pontentibus nolite mittere: ne
fumoſum ſe
                           •
                        culi typhū in Eccleſiam Chriſti videamur inducere: Send not your Clerkes
(or Cardinalles) to put maters in execution, to any Noble man, or Mighty Prince: Leſte
wee ſeeme to bringe the ſmoky pride of the vvorlde into the Churche of Chriſte.
                     
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     Vntruthe. For they depende of the deceitfulneſſe of man: & not of the povver of God. His indulgences and pardons depend vpon the power of bindinge and looſinge, whiche Chriſte
gaue to Peter and his ſucceſſours.Matth. 16. Ye muſte demaunde of Chriſte,Vntruthe. For Chriſte neuer gaue the Pope povver to deale Pardonnes. why he gaue that Power, and not
be angry with his vicare for vſinge the ſame.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  O M. Hardinge, what ſhoulde you meane with al theſe Uanities? Are ye ſo
fully bente, to graunte no kinde of erroure, neither in your Purgatories, nor in
your Pardons, nor in your Stewes? God geue you Humilitie of harte: leſte ye be
an vnfitte veſſel to receiue Goddes Pardonne.
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye finde faulte with Leo the thirde for makinge an Emperour in the VVeſt. I dare ſaie it greueth
you.Vntruthe, ioined vvith open folie. For this vvas the onely vvaie to ſtrengthen the Saracenes. For if there had benne none in the VVeſt, the Turke might haue ben our Emperour er this, and to
his Barbarous and wicked tyrannie might haue ſubdued this parte of the worlde, specially Germanie,
as he hath ſubdued Grece, Aſia, Egypte, Syria, and al the Eaſte Churche. Againſt whiche miſchefe
the Vicare of Chriſte by his maiſters merciful warninge with the Princes of the VVeſt made prouiſion▪
and at the length planted the Empire in this order, we ſee it nowe in.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  This policie, practiſed by the Pope, looſed the whole power of Chriſtendome.
For as the Empiere before, beinge vnited, and ioined in one, was ſtronge, and
mighty, ſo beinge afterwarde diuided into twoo, and the Eaſte parte beinge ſundred
for the Weaſte, it became lame, and weake, and not hable to healpe it ſelfe.
By meane whereof a gate was opened, to receiue the Turke into al theſe Chriſtiā
Dominions, whiche nowe he holdeth, without reſiſtance: who otherwiſe, the Empiere
beinge one, and whole in it ſelfe, as it was before, coulde neuer haue growen
to ſutche Power. Al this was wrought by the Practiſe, and Policie of the
Pope.
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge, the Pope him ſelfe by this bargaine loſte nothinge.
Thereof Marſilius Patauinus writeth thus:Marſilius Pataninus. 
                     Pipinus, Sonne vnto Charles the

Frenche Kinge, after he had conquered Ariſtulphus the Kinge of Lumbardie,
tooke Rauenna, and al the fiue Citties of Romandiola, togeather with the Emperours
Lieutenantes Territorie called Exarchatus, and gaue al the ſame to the
Pope. Pope Steuin findinge him ſelfe wel contented with theſe benefites, and
ſéeinge the weakeneſſe of the Greeke Emperoure, procured, that the Empiere
ſhould be tranſlated from the Greekes vnto the Frenche, hauinge vtterly forgotten
the benefites,The very true cauſe of the 
                           ••
                        uiſion of the Empiere. Platyna in Leone. 3. that he had receiued of the Emperoure: to the intente, that the
Greekes beinge vtterly oppreſſed, and the Frenche litle caringe for theſe
thinges, he alone might rule in Italie at his pleaſure.
                  
                  Touchinge Pope Leo the thirde, whoſe Prouidence, & Policie ye ſo mutche
commende, the true reporte of the Storie is this: The ſaide Leo beinge by violence
depriued of his Biſhoprike in Rome, fledde for aide to Charles the Frenche
Kinge, and by him was reſtoared. In conſideration of whiche benefite, he proclaimed
Charles the Emperoure of the VVeaſte. Sithence whiche time, the
Empiere of Chriſtendome hath benne diuided, and weakened: the Pope enriched:
and the Saracenes, and Turkes aboue al meaſure encreaſed.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If the Pope Zacharias depoſed Childerike (for ſo I finde him more commonly named) the Kinge
of Fraunce, onely vpon his owne pleaſure or diſpleaſure, as ye ſaie, and placed Pipine for him, can
ye tell that ſtorie, and not ſee what a ſtrength of auctoritie is in that See, whiche is able with a
woorde to place and diſplace the mightieſt Kinge in Europe? VVith a woorde I ſaie, For I am ſure
ye can ſhewe vs of no Armie, that he ſente to execute that his will. Is that the power of a man,
trowe ye, to appointe Kingedomes? Can the Deuill him ſelfe at his pleaſure ſet vp and depoſe Kinges?
No ſurely.
                        Vntruthe. For S. Gregorie ſaithe, Antichriſtus ipſas ſummas huius Saeculi poteſtates obtinebit. And muche leſſe can any member of his doo the ſame. Remember ye what Chriſte ſaide,
when the Iewes obiected, that he did caſte out Deuils in the name of the Prince of Deuils?A nevve Sinne againſt the Holy Ghoſte. Beware
ye Sinne not againſt the Holy Ghoſte, who confeſſe that the Pope hath pulled downe and ſet vp Kinges.
VVhiche thinge vndoubtedly he coulde not do profitably and peaceably, but by the greate Power of
God. And yet did that line of Pipine and Charles the greate, whiche the Pope did ſet vp,Vntruthe, eaſy to be ſeene. Reade the Anſvveare. floriſhe
aboue any other ſtocke, that ye can name ſence the inclination of the Romaine Empire. VVhiche in
that tranſpoſed ſtate of greate a Kingedome, maketh no obſcure argument of Heauenly approbation
and Diuine prouidence.
                  Neither did the Pope Zacharias depoſe Childerike, becauſe he fanſied him not, as ye ſlaunder, but
onely conſented to looſe his Subiectes from bonde of othe made to him, at the generall and moſte earneſt
requeſt and ſute of all the Nobilitie, and Communaltie of the whole Realme of Fraunce, findinge
him very vnprofitable, and vnmeete for the Kingedome, as one, who beinge of no witte, and therefore
commonly named Stupidus, as muche to ſaie, a dolte, was altogeather beſides like a Sardanapalus,
geuen wholly to belly chere, and to filthy loue of VVomen. Therefore in your owne woordes
ye confeſſe aA Diuine Povver in the Pope. Diuine power in the Pope, as by whome Cod directeth the willes of faithfull Princes
on the Earthe. The more ſuche examples ye bringe, the woorſe ye make your cauſe. I woulde 
                        •
                     yer
you to eaſe me of the labour of prouinge ſuche a notable facte.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Pope Zacharias depoſed Childericus, as you calle him, or, as ſomme other cal
him, Chilpericus, the Frenche Kinge. Therefore ye ſaie, wée muſte néedes acknowlege
a Diuine Power in the Pope: ſeinge him hable, by his woorde, to place,
and diſplace the mightieſt Kinge in Europe. For can the Diuel, ſaie you, at his pleaſure
ſette vp, and depoſe Kinges?
                  
                  Verily,Iohn. 12. 14. 16. M. Harding, Chriſte him ſelfe calleth the Diuel the Prince of this worlde:
& therefore woe maie imagine, he maie doo ſomewhat in y• worlde. And y• Diuel, if ye
wi
                        •
                     beleeue his woorde, when he had ſette Chriſte on highe vpō a Mounte, & ſhewed

him al the Kingedomes of the worlde,Depofinge of Kinge he ſaide vnto him, Al theſe thinges wil I geue
thee,
                     Matthae. 4. 
                     if thou wilte falle downe, and woorſhip me. This is that power, that S. Iohn
ſaithe,Apocalyp. 17. ſhoulde be geuen to Antichriſte: Reges terrae vires, & poteſtatem ſuam tradent
Beſtiac: &c. vt conſentiant, dent
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Regnum ſuum Beſtiae, donec compleantur
Verba Dei: The Kinges of the Barthe ſhal geue their ſtrength, and power vnto the Beaſte,
&c. that they maie agree togeather, and geue theire Kingedome vnto the Beaſte, vntil the
Woordes of God be fulfilled.
                     
                     In eodem Cap. Againe he ſaithe, Mulier ea, quam vidiſti, eſt vrbs
illa Magna, quae habet Regnum ſuper Reges terrae: The Woman, that thou ſaweſt, is
that Greate Cittie, that hath a Kingedome ouer the Kinges of the Worlde.
                      And againe
he ſaith,Apocalyp. 13. 
                     Data eſt illi Poteſtas in omnē Tribum, & Gentem: & adorabunt eam
(Beſtiam) omnes incolae terrae, quorum nomina non ſunt ſcripta in Libro Vitae
Agni: Power is geuen vnto that Beaſte ouer euery Tribe, and Language, and Nation:
and al the dwellers of the Earth ſhal woorſhip the ſame Beaſte,
                      (whiche is Antichriſte)
whoſe names be not written in the Lambes Booke of Life.
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 9. 
                     Quia Antichriſtus ad tantum culmen inanis gloriae venturus
creditur, tanta ei licebit facere, & in omnes homines, & in Sanctos Dei, vt nonnulli
infirmi arbitrentur, Deum res humanas negligere: For that wee beleue, that Antichriſte
ſhal comme vnto ſutche a higth of vaine Glorie, it ſhalbe lawful for him to doo ſutche
thinges, bothe towardes al menne (Princes, and others) and alſo towardes the Sainctes of
God, that many weake menne ſhal thinke, God hath foreſaken the care of the worlde.
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. in eundem. Pſalm. Ita traditur de Antichriſto, quod omnes Reges ſuperaturus
ſit, & ſolus Regnum obtenturus: Thus it is written of Antichriſte, that he ſhal
conquere al Kinges, and obteine the Kingedome him ſelfe alone.
                  
                     So ſaith S. Gregorie,Gregor. in Iob. Ca. 41. Lib. 33. Ca. 22. Antichriſtus veniens ipſas etiam ſummas huius Saeculi
Poteſtates obtinebit: Antichriſte, when he ſhal comme, ſhal conquere the higheſt
Eſtates, and Powers of this worlde.
                  
                  
                     And al this ſhal comme to paſſe, as Chryſoſtome ſaithe, by the Diſſolution of
the Empiere, whereof wee haue ſpoken before. Theſe be his woordes, Donec Imprij
illius timor fuerit,Chryſoſtom. In. 2. Theſſaloni. 2. Homil. 4. nemo Antichriſto ſtatim ſubdetur. Quando verò iſtud Imperium
deſtructum fuerit, vacantem Imperij Principatum inuadet, & tentabit
ad ſe rapere & hominum, & Dei Imperium: As longe as the Empiere ſhalbe had in
awe, noman ſhal ſtreightwaie ſubmitte him ſelfe to Antichriſte: But after that the Empiere
ſhalbe diſſolued, Antichriſte ſhal inuade the ſtate of the Empiere ſtandinge voide:
and ſhal laboure to pulle vnto him ſelfe the Empiere bothe of Man, and God.
                  
                  
                     This,
                     Clemen. Lib. 2. De Appellationib. Paſtoralis. Diſtin. 22. Omnes 
                     I trowe, it is, that the Pope proclaimeth him ſelfe the Heire Apparente
of al Kingedomes: This it is, that Pope Nicolas ſaithe, Chriſtus Beato Petro,
Aeternae vitae Clauigero, Terreni ſimul, & Coeleſtis imperij iura commiſit:
Chriſte hath committed vnto Bleſſed Peter, the Keiebearer of Euerlaſtinge life, the righte
bothe of the worldly, and alſo of the Heauenly Empiere: This is it, that ſomme are ſo
bolde to ſaie,
                     
                     In Sexto. Li. 3. Ti. 16. De Statu Regularium. Antonius de Roſellis. Auentinus in Adriano. 4. Papa totius Mundi obtinet Principatum: The Pope hath the Princehoode
of al the whole Worlde: And that ſomme others haue ſaide,
                      Papa eſt Rex
Regum, & Dominus Dominantium: The Pope is Kinge of Kinges, and Lorde of
Lordes: And that Pope
                      Adrian ſaithe of him ſelfe, as it is alleged before, Imperator,
quod habet, totum habet à nobis. Ecce in poteſtate noſtra eſt, vt demus
Imperium, cui volumus: What ſo euer the Emperoure hath, he hath it of vs. It is in our
power to beſtowe the Empiere vpon whom wee liſte. This, M. Hardinge, is that
                     
Diuine Povver, that, as you ſaie, is geuen to the Pope. But as S. Iohn, S. Auguſtine,
S. Chryſoſtome, and S. Gregorie ſaie, the ſelfe ſame Diuine Povver is
geuē alſo to Antichriſte. And therefore it is wel noted in your owne Gloſe, Papa
ſtupor Mundi:Clemen. in Pro
                        
                           •
                        mi. In Gloſſa. The Pope is the vvoondermente of the VVorlde: that is to
ſaie, the Pope maketh al the worlde Fooles.
                  
                  
                     
But if it ſéeme ſo greate a mater, for a Pope to depoſe a Kinge, I doubte not,
but ye maie wel remember, that Emperours ſommetimes haue depoſed Popes.
The Emperoure Conſtantius (an Arian,
                     Platyna in Liberio. I graunte, but yet an Emperoure) depoſed
Pope Liberius: and afterwarde, reſtoringe Liberius, depoſed Pope Foelix.
The Emperoure Otho the firſte depoſed Pope Iohn. 13. The Emperoure Iuſtinian
depoſed twoo Popes in order:2. Tomo. Conciliorum, In vita Syluerij, & Vigilij. firſte Pope Syluerius, and afterwarde Pope
Vigilius. And al this did they without leuieinge of armie, without raiſinge of
power, without diſquiet, or trouble of the people. And a Doctoure of your owne,
ſeeminge fully to determine the mater by a Booke caſe, ſaithe thus, Imperator,
requiſitus à Cardinalibus,
                     Heruaeus De poteſt. Papae. ca. 13. 
                     debet procedere contra Papam: The Emperoure,
beinge required by the Cardinalles, is bounde to procede
                      (to depriuation) againſte the Pope.
                     
An other ſaithe thus, Si quando Imperialis Legatus mitteretur à Principe, vt Romanus
Pontifex proficiſceretur Conſtantinopolim ad Imperatorem,
                     Appendix Eutropij, in Syluerio. 
                     omni neglecta
occaſione, ibat, etiamſi pro certo ſciret, ſe iturum in exilium: If at any time the
Emperours Embaſſadoure had benne ſente from his Prince, to wil the Pope to comme to
Conſtantinople to the Emperoure, al occaſions ſet aparte, he wente ſtreight waie, notwithſtandinge
he certainely knewe, he ſhoulde be banniſhed. Vrſpergenſis ſaithe, Henricus
Rex Italiam ingreſſus,
                     Vrſpergen. Anno. 1045. 
                     tres Papas indigne conſtitutos synodaliter depoſuit:
Henry the Emperoure, comminge into Italie, depoſed three Popes vnlawfully made, by
order of Synode.
                     
                  
                  Now, M. Hardinge, if you, with your Rhetorical furniture, maie crie oute, O
what a Diuine Povver had the Pope, that thus coulde depoſe a Kinge: why maie
not wée likewiſe ſaie, O what a Diuine Power had the Emperoure, that thus could
depoſe ſo many Popes?
                  
                     But, that ye maie the better ſee this woonderful Diuinitie, and Heauenly
povver, wherewith ye would ſo faine enfeaffe the Pope, a witneſſe of your owne
ſaith thus,
                     Heruaeus De Poteſt. Papae, Ca. 13. Quod dicitur, Papam depoſuiſſe Regem Francorū, & loco eius inſtituiſſe
Pipinum, Gloſa ordinaria exponit, Depoſuit, id eſt, deponentibus conſenſit.
Non enim legitur, quòd Papa Zacharias Regem Franciae depoſuerit:
Where as it is ſaide, that the Pope depoſed the Frenche Kinge, and placed Pipinus in his
roume, The Ordinarie Gloſe expoundeth it thus: He depoſed him, that is to ſaie, He conſented
to them, that did depoſe him. For wee reade not, that Pope Zacharie in deede euer
depoſed the Frenche Kinge.
                  
                  The truthe of the Storie is this, For as mutche as Chilpericus the Kinge
ſéemed voide of Princely grauitie, and had geuen him ſelfe ouer to pleaſure, and
wantonneſſe, and Pipinus his Lorde Marſhal, a man ful of Wiſedome, and actiuttie,
had the Gouernmente, and burthen of al the Realme, the Nobles of France
hauinge agreed emongeſt them ſelues, to depoſe the one, and to ſet vp the other,
ſente vnto Pope Zacharie, as vnto a wiſe man, to haue his anſweare to this queſtion,
VVhether vvere meeter to be Kinge,
                     Paulus Aemylius, Lib. 2. Gaguinus. 
                     He that carried onely the name,
and did nothinge: Or he, that bare the burthen of the vvhole. The Pope
was ſoone perſuaded, to geue ſentence with Pipinus the Lorde Marſhal, againſte
the Kinge. Whereupon the Kinge was ſhorne into an Abbie, & made a Moncke:
Pipinus auanced vnto the ſtate, gaue the Pope the Exarchate, or Princehoode of
Rauenna, in parte of recompenſe of his good wil.
                  Whether the kinge hauinge niene yéeres ruled his Realme, were afterwarde
depriued by right, or by wronge, I wil not reaſon. Faſciculus Temporum ſaithe,
The kingedome was remoued from the right Heires.
                  
                     The Line of Kinge Pipine endured, and floriſhed a longe while: And that, ye ſaie, was
no obſcure argumente of Heauenly Approbation, and Diuine Prouidence.
                      By ſutche
Approbation, and Prouidence, the Turke maie claime. For he hath bothe longer

continued, and mutche more flooriſhed, and encreaſed his eſtate, then euer did the
houſe of Pipine.
                     Plutarch. in Catone Vticen. But Cato was woonte to ſaie, Multum eſt caliginis in rebus
Diuinis: There is greate darkeneſſe in Goddes maters.
                     
                  
                  Yet leſte any man of ignorance happen herein to be deceiued, this was the very
true deſcente, and flooriſhinge Fortune of Kinge Pipines race:
                  The Firſte thereof was Charles the Greate:
                     Benuenutus Imolenſis in Auguſtali. In his time, ſaithe Benuenutus
Imolenſis, Laceratum eſt Imperium: The ſtate of the Empiere was torne in ſunder.
                     
                  
                  The Seconde was Ludouicus Pius: Againſte him his owne Sonne Lotharius
aroſe,Paulus Aemylius, Lib. 3. and cauſed him to be ſhorne as a Moncke, and to be thruſte into an
Abb
                        •
                     e, and his owne Mother the Empreſſe to be made a Nonne.
                  
                  The Thirds was Lotharius: He oppreſſed his owne Brethren by violence:
and afterwarde was depoſed, and made a Monke.
                  The Fourthe was Ludouicus. 2: He was vnfortunate in al his dooinges: and
was ſhamefully conquered by his Brother.
                  The Fifthe was Ludouicus 3:Paul. Aemylius in Chronice. Whom, for his doughty déedes, they commonly
calle Ludouicus Nihili: which is as mutche to ſaie, as Levves Nobody.
                  
                  The Sixth was Carolus 2. named Caluus: as Benuenutus ſaithe, Vir lepore
timidior: A man more feareful, and more cowardely, then a hare.
                      He was ſhortly
ſlaine with poiſon.
                  
                     The Seuenthe was Carolus
                      3: as Benuenutus ſaithe, Vir deficiens & animo,
& Corpore:
                      A man wantinge bothe ſtrength of Body, and wiſedome of Minde: that is to
ſaie, bothe a Cowarde, and a Foole.
                  
                  The Eighth was Arnulphus:
                     Benuenutus Imolen. in Auguſtali. He was eaten vp with Life.
                  The Nienthe was Ludouicus 3. by the reporte of Benuenutus, a man of no
better Fortune then his Father. In him that houſe had an ende. This is that
Noble Pipines race,Nihilo foelicior Patre. In eo defecit Imperium in Gente Carolorum. M. Hardinge, that coulde not ſo ſtande, and flooriſhe, as you
ſaie, without ſpecial Heauenly Approbation, and Diuine Prouidence.
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Concerninge that ye ſaie of Kinge Philip ſurnamed Le Bel, if we maie beleue Paulus AEmylius
the beſte writer of the Frenche Chronicles, the cauſe was ſuche betwene Pope Bonifacius, and that
Kinge, that if he did not onely excommunicate him, but alſo offered gifte of his Kingedome to Albert
the Emperour, as Platina your Authour herein writeth: he maie ſeeme therein to haue done
Not altogeather ſo euil. A proper qualification. not altogeather ſo euill, as ye pretende. For, as bothe AEmilius and Platine doo witneſſe, the cauſe
of their fallinge out was, that whereas the Pope being firſt ſued vnto by Caſſanus a Chriſtian Prince,
and a greate Conquerour in the Eaſte, to ioine with him for the recouery of the Holy lande, ſente the
Biſhop of Apamea to the Frenche Kinge for his neceſſary aide in that ſo common a quarell of al Chriſtendome:
he beinge offended, either that the ſute was not firſte made to him, either for that the ſaide
Biſhop had done his Ambaſſade with ſhe we of more Auctoritie, then the Kinge thought it became
him. or vpon ſome other priuate grudge, did not onely vtterly refuſe to ſende any healpe towarde
the voiage, but alſo contemptuouſly, beſide common order, and cruelly, committed the Popes Legate to
Priſon, and there kepte him, vntill ſuche time, as through the Popes interdict, the Kinge was compelled
to ſet him at libertie. Nowe of geuinge awaie his Kingedome, this chiefe Frenche Hiſtoriographer
maketh no mention. And if the Pope ſo did, why maie he not ſeme to haue done itA ioily vvaie, to fraie a Kinge. rather
to feare him, and to reclaime his minde from diſobedience? Verely Platina writinge it, declareth,
howe before the Pope proceded to that extremitie, the Frenche Kinge did what in him laie,By this Diuinitie, if any Kingedome refuſe to be ſubiecte, and thral to the See of Rome, the Pope maie geue the ſame avvaie at his pleaſure. to
withdrawe the people of Fraunce from the obedience of the Churche and See Apoſtolike.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, ye ſtammer in your tale, and knowe not wel, what to ſaie.
If the Pope gaue awaie the Kingedome of France from the Prince, he did it,
                      ye ſaie,

                     to the intent to feare him. A prety diuiſe,Philippus. Bonifacius. 8. to fraie a Kinge, to pulle the Crowne Emperial
from his heade.
                  
                     Firſte, this Pope Bonifacius is he, of whom it was ſaide, Intrauit, vt Vulpes:
Regnauit, vt Lupus: Mortuus eſt, vt Canis: He entred into the Popedome as
a Foxe: He reigned as a Woulfe: he died (in priſon) as a Dogge. In Solemne Proceſſion
he wente attired with the
                      Crovvne Emperial,Paralip. Vrſpergen. 
                     and Robe of Maieſtie, as an
Emperoure, and commaunded the Naked ſvverde to be borne before him. In
the Storie of his Life ioined with his owne Booke,
                     In vita Bonifacij 8. In Sexto: Idem in Platyna. 
                     named, Sextus Bonifacij. 8. it
is written thus: Moritur hoc modo Bonifacius, qui Imperatoribus, Regibus,
Principibus, Nationibus, Populis terrorem potiùs, quàm Religionem inijcere
conabatur: Thus died Pope Bonifacius, a man, that ſought more to ſtrike terroure
into Emperours, Kinges, Princes, People, and Nations, then true Religion.
                  
                  This Bonifacius,
                     Sabel. Aenead. 9. Lib. 7. ſaithe Sabellicus, ſente to the Frenche Kinge for monie, as
he pretended, towardes the recouerie of Hieruſalem. The Biſhop of Apamea, beinge
his Legate in that behalfe, vttered certaine greate woordes in the preſence of
the Kinge, and threatened him, onleſſe he woulde graunte it.
                  The Kinge, not quietly bearinge ſutche preſumptuous boldeneſſe, commaunded
the Apoſtolique Legate vnto warde. This iniurie ſo inflamed the Popes
choler, that immediately he ſente the Archebiſhop of Narbon to the Kinge, to require
him to ſet his Legate at libertie: otherwiſe to tel him, that for his wickedneſſe,
the righte of his Kingedome was fallen to the Churche of Rome. Thus Sabellicus,
in fauoure of the Pope, thought it good ſomewhat to ſhadowe the mater.
                  
                     But others thereof haue written thus:
                     Martinus Polonus. Bonifacius 8. mandat Regi, ſe eſſe Dominum
in Spiritualibus, & temporalibus in vniuerſo Mundo: Vt
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Rex recognoſcat
Regnum Franciae à ſe. Contrarium enim ſentire, & tenere, Haereticum
eſſe: Bonifacius 8. ſente vnto the Frenche Kinge, and tolde him, that he was Lorde
bothe in Spiritual, and alſo in Temporal maters throughout the worlde: and therefore, yt the
Kinge ſhoulde holde his Kingedome at his hande. For otherwiſe to thinke, and holde, he
ſaide, it was Hereſie: This is it, that in the name of the Pope is noted in your
                     
Gloſe:Diſt. 81. Si qui. In Gloſſa. Quicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      praeceptis noſtris non obedierit, peccatum Idololatriae, &
Paganitatis incurrit: Who ſo euer obeieth not our commaundementes, falleth into the
Sinne of Idolatrie,Abbas Vrſpergen. and Infidelitie. Hereof Vrſpergenſis writeth thus, Habes,
Roma, quod ſitiſti: decanta Canticum: quia per malitiam, non per Religionem orbem
viciſti: O Rome, thou haſte nowe, that thou haſte ſo longe thirſted after. Nowe
ſinge menly. For by thy malice, not by Religion, thou haſte conquered the worlde.
                  
                  The Kinge, beinge moued herewith, commaunded that none of his Cleregie
ſhoulde comme to the Popes Councel:
                     Paulus Aemyl. Platyna. Sabellicus. Nauclerus. He openly burnte the Popes vvrites: He
commaunded the Popes Legate to departe out of his Realme: He forebade that any
monie ſhoulde be made thence to the Pope: He gaue out Proclamations, that
none of his Subiectes ſhoulde goe to Rome: And in the Synode at Pariſe he charged
the Pope with Pride, Ambition, Murder, Simonie, and Hereſie.
                  
                  Thus mutche of the dealinge of the Crowne of France vnto a ſtranger: that is
to ſaie, of the Faithe, and Reuerence, that the Pope beareth to Kinges, and
Princes. Here folowed ſommewhat of the ſpoilinge of the Duke of Sauoie,
and of the alteringe of the ſtate of Florence: whiche thinges I thought it beſte to
paſſe ouer, as not woorthy of any Anſweare.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 4.
               Wee are accloied with Examples in this behalfe, and it ſhould be
very tedious, to reckē vp al the notorious practiſes of the Biſhoppes
of Rome. But of whiche ſide were they, I beſeche you, that poiſoned

                  Henrie the Emperoure,
                  Poiſon in the Sacramente. euen in the receiuinge of the Sacramente?
Whiche poiſoned Victor the Pope, euen in the receiuinge
of the Chalice? Whiche poiſoned our Kinge Iohn, Kinge of England,
in a Drinkinge Cuppe? Whoe ſo euer at leaſt they were, and of what
ſecte ſo euer, I am ſure, they were neither Lutherans, nor Zvvinglians.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Findes of Hell were not yet let looſe, that begate Lutherans, Zwinglians, and Caluiniſtes.
And hereof we vnderſtande the youthe of your Churche, whiche hauinge diuided it ſelfe from the
olde and Catholike Churche, is no other but the malignante Churche, and Synagoge of Satan.
                  To anſweare your demaundes. VVho ſo euer they were, that poiſoned theſe greate perſonages,
(if they were poiſoned at all) good men were they not, neither the doers, nor the counſailours. Henry
of Luxenburg it was, who was poiſoned by reporte. VVhome your Latine Booke printed amonge
the Huguenots calleth Henry the ſeuenth, M. Doctor Haddon in his anſweare to Oſorius, accompteth
him the fourthe, in bothe your Engliſhe tranſlations (that I haue ſeene) he is called onely Henry. As
he laide ſiege to the Citie of Florence, and had now brought the Citizens to deſpaire of their ſafetie:
when manly courage might not ſerue, they betooke them to cowardly malice. Firſte they poyſoned (as
it is ſaide) the minde of a frier Dominican with Golde, that afterwarde he ſhoulde aduentere to
poiſon the Emperours body with Venime. Paulus Aemilius ſaith, that he died of a ſickeneſſe, whiche he
fell into at Bonconuēto,Lib. 8. In ſcholij
                           •
                         in Platinā. as he iournied from Piſa thither. Onuphrius, writing of his Death, ſaith that
he died at Bonconuento a town in the territorie of Siena, and maketh no mētion of his Poiſoning. Cornelius
Cornepolita writing this ſtorie, ſemeth to geue litle credite vnto it. For he addeth an heare ſaie,
Vt aiunt,
                     In Chronographia. as they ſaie, as though it were a matter auouched by no certainetie, but by Heareſaie. Nauclerus
reporteth, that the order of thoſe religius men is ſaide to haue a teſtimoniall in writinge,
witneſsinge the foreſaide Friere to haue benne Innocent, and that the whole was but a fained tale.
                  Victor the thirde Pope is mentioned by Martinus Polonus, to haue benne poiſoned by the malicious
procurement of the Emperoure Henry the thirde, bicauſe he ſtoode in defence of Gregory the ſeuenth,
whom the Emperour ſo muche hated and perſecuted. Vincentius holdeth contrary opinion, that
he died of a dyſentery▪ as Platina reciteth.
                  Touchinge Kinge Iohn of Englande, they that write that he was poiſoned in a drinkinge cuppe
by Monkes, them ſelues make no better then a fable of it: and who ſo euer write it, referre them
ſelues to heareſaie, and to the popular fame. The Author of your Actes and Monumentes reporteth,
that many opinions are amonge the Chronicle writers of his Deathe. As ye procede in your malicious
railinge againſt the Pope, ye ſpitte out your poiſon, demaūdinge certaine queſtion, ſhorte, in Woordes▪
but full ſtuffed with falſe and cankered ſlaunders.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The Poiſoninge of that Noble Emperoure Henrie of Lucenburg,
                      in the Sacramente,
whereby it appeareth, how farre foorthe the States of the worlde ought
to truſte you, ye would haue vs to paſſe lightly ouer, as a Fable. Of your Onuphrius,
and Cornelius, and other like Paraſites, wée make no reckeninge. The
truthe of the ſtorie is reported by many.Paralipom. Vrſperg. Ann. 1313. Bapt. Egnatius. Auentinus. Carion. Supplementum Chron. 
                     Vrſpergenſis ſaithe, Quidam Religioſus
porrexit Imperatori intoxicatam Euchariſtiam &c. A certaine Religious
man miniſtred vnto the Emperoure the Sacramente poiſoned. The Emperoure hauinge
receiued it, and returninge againe vnto his place, thought that a peece of colde Iſe was paſte
alonge through his body.
                     
                  
                  Baptiſta Egnatius ſaithe, it was wrought by the policie of Robertus Kinge
of Sicilia, moued therto, as Auentinus ſaithe, by Pope Clemente. 5. The ſame ye
ſhal finde recorded in Carion,Textor in Officina: Veneno extincti. 
                     in Supplemento Chronicorum, in Rauiſius Textor,
and ſundrie others.
                  
                  
                     
The like recorde there is founde of poiſoninge of Victor. 3. in the Chalice. For
the more credite whereof it maie pleaſe you to reade Martinus Polonus the Popes
Penitentiarie, Volaterranus, Matthaeus Palmerius, the Supplie of Chronicles,
Faſciculus Temporum, Textor, and others.
                  Touchinge the deathe of Kinge Iohn, whether he were poiſoned by a Monke,
or no, I wil not ſtriue: referringe mée ſelfe therein to the credite of our Chronicles:
the common reporte whereof, togeather with the general opinion of the people,
is this, that he was deſtroied with poiſon. But what ſo euer were the cauſe
of his death,Matthias Pariſien. An. 1211. 
                     Matthias Pariſienſis ſaithe thus, Papa Innocentius ſententionaliter
definiuit &c. Pope Innocentius determined by ſentence, that Kinge Iohn ſhould be
depoſed from his eſtate. And he enioined the execution thereof to the Frenche Kinge,
for Remiſsion of his Sinnes,
                      promiſinge him alſo faithfully, that, if he ſo did, he, and
his Succeſſours ſhould enioie the Kingedome of Englande for euer. So mutche
is Englande bounde to reuerence, and obeie the Pope.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 2.
               What is he at this daie, whiche alloweth the mightieſt Kinges
and Monarches of the worlde to kiſſe his bleſſed Feete?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  It is he (ſaie we) that humbly for his owne perſone refuſeth ſuche honour, that calleth, and thinketh
him ſelfe, Seruum Seruorum Dei, the ſeruant of the ſeruantes of God. But when he ſeeth
the greate powers and Princes of the worlde humble them ſelues to Chriſte, Lorde of all Lordes, and
Kinge of all Kinges, in the perſon of him, whoſe Vicare on Earthe he is, and chiefe deputie in thoſe
thinges, that be to God warde: not vnmindefull what he is of him ſelfe, for the roomes ſake that he
beareth, and for his honour whoſe vicegerent he is, the rather alſo forA proper Schole of Humilitie. example of Humilitie and
Obedience, ſo to be taken and learned of others of inferiour degree: he ſuffereth that honour to be done,
whiche is more then a mere man can require. Neither is this the pride of Popes at theſe daies onely,
as ye obiect, but the example of ſuche humilitie in Princes we can proue to be auncient.
                  The greate Kinge Charlemaigne, who afterwarde was create Emperoure, coulde not be withholden
by the Pope Adrian the firſte,Platina in vita Adriani. but at the firſte meetinge he woulde kiſſe his feete. Many other
Emperours and Kinges haue of olde time done likewiſe. And leſt the Soueraintie of ſuche Honour
exhibited vnto him ſhoulde in his owne conceite lifte him higher then for the degree of humaine
condition,Phy forſhame. cannot the pope learne Humilitie, but by a draughte? to that purpoſe ſerueth the ſtoole of naturall eaſement at his creation, whereof your ſurmiſe
isVntruthe. For it is not ſur miſed by vs, but recorded by your ovvne vvriters. Sabellicus ſaithe, Vt ſedentis genitalia ab vltimo Diacono attrectentur.
                      very vile, to temper the highneſſe of that vocation with the baſe conſideration of humaine
infirmities and neceſsities.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     What thinge is there, either ſo vile, or ſo horrible, but by ſutche proper excuſes
maie ſoone be ſmoothed? Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Haec, etſi minima eſſe videantur, tamen
magnorum ſunt cauſae malorum.Chryſoſtom. in Matthae. Homil. 74. Nam & Ciuitates, & Eccleſias ſaepe numerò euerterunt.
Propterea nec à lachrymis abſtinere poſſum, cùm primos iſtos conſeſſus &
ſalutationes audiam, ac in mentem veniat, quot, quantá hinc mala in Eccleſia
Die orta ſint: Theſe thinges, notwithſtandinge they ſeeme ſmal, yet are they the cauſes
of greate euils. For oftentimes haue they ouerthrowen bothe Citties, and Churches. Therefore
I cannot abſteine from weepinge, when I heare of theſe Superiorities, and Salutations:
and conſider, how many, and howe greate euils haue growen thereof in the Churche
of God.
                     Hieronym. in Epiſt ad Galathas Cap. 4. 
                     S. Hierome, mutche miſlikinge the ſtate of his time, ſaithe thus,
Epiſcopi, velut in aliqua ſublimi ſpecula conſtituti, vix dignantur videre mortales, &
alloqui conſerous ſuos: The Biſhoppes, as if thei were placed in ſomme high Caſtle, ſcarce
                        
                           •
                        y
voucheſaue to looke vpon poore mortal menne, and to ſpeake vnto their felowe ſeruantes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Touchinge the Biſhop of Rome,Kiſſe the Popes foote. 
                     it is not for nought, that S. Gregorie ſaith,
Rex Superbiae in foribus eſt: The Kinge of Pride is euen at hande. In the
                      Popes
ovvne Booke of the Ceremonies of Rome,
                     Gregor. Lib 4. Epiſt. 38. 
                     it is written thus, Electus Imperator
cum ſuis omnibus, ſeruato ordine, per gradus aſcendit ſuggeſtum. Et vt primùm
videt Pontificem, detecto capite,Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Sectio. 5. Ca. 3. Deuotè oſculatur. illum, genu terram contingens, veneratur: &
iterum, cùm appropinquat ad gradus Sedis, genuflectit: demum, vbi ad Pontificis
pedes peruenit, illos in reuerentiam Saluatoris Deuotè oſculatur: The Emperoure
Electe goeinge in arraie with al his traine, paſſeth vp the ſtaires into the Scaffolde.
And as ſoone, as he ſeethe the Pope, he woorſhippeth him with bare heade, touchinge the
grounde with his knee: Againe, when he commeth to the foote of the Popes throne, he
kneeleth downe. Laſte of al, when he commeth vnto the Popes Feete, he kiſſeth them deuoutely
in the reuerence of our saueour. This is ordered, as a ſpecial Ceremonie,
and appointed vnto the Emperoure, as parte of his duetie.
                     
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe it is written of the Empreſſe, as concerninge her duetie: Imperatrix
Coronata,Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Sectio. 5. Ca. 6. Ceremoniarium. Lib. 3. Cap. 2. mox oſculatur Pedem Pontificis: The Empreſſe beinge Crowned
immediately kiſſeth the Popes foote.
                  
                     Againe of the Pope him ſelfe it is written thus: Papa nemini omninò mortalium
reuerentiam facit, aſſurgendo manifeſtè, aut Caput inclinando, ſeu detegendo:
The Pope him ſelfe geeueth no manner of reuerence to any man aliue, either openly
by ſtandinge vp, or by bowinge downe, or by vncoueringe his Heade.
                  
                  But the Pope, ſaie you, humbly, for his owne perſonne, refuſeth ſutche honoure,
and hereby teacheth Kinges, and Emperours, and al their Subiectes to be
humble. A ſtrange caſe, to teache Humilitie in the Schole of Pride. Sutche
Humilitie taught Iulius Caeſar, Diocletian, and Maximinus. Iulius Caeſar
raughte oute his foote for Pompeius Poenus to kiſſe, that folkes might ſée
his Golden Slipper ſette with ſtoanes.Seneca. Pomponius Laetus in Diocletiano. 
                     Pomponius Laetus ſaithe, Diocletianus
edicto ſanxit &c. Diocletian commaunded by Proclamation, that al menne
ſhoulde fal downe, and kiſſe his Feete: whereunto alſo be added a certaine reuerence, adourninge
his ſhoes with Golde,
                     
                     Alexander ab Alexandro. 2. Theſſalon. 2. 
                     and Diamondes. Maximinus
                      alſo afterwarde did
the like.
                  Sutche Humilitie ſhal Antichriſte teache, auancinge him ſelfe aboue al that
is woorſhipped, or called God.
                  Sutche Humilitie y• Diuel tooke vpon him to teache, when he ſaide to Chriſte,
I wil geue thee al theſe thinges,
                     Matthae. 4. 
                     if thou wilte fal downe, and woorſhip me.
                  
                  Thus maie the Pope cal him ſelfe Lorde of Lordes: Kinge of Kinges: and
ſette his foote on Emperours neckes: and yet neuertheleſſe, if he can frame a newe
title, and ſaie, He is Seruus Seruorum Dei, The Seruante of Goddes Seruantes,
                      it
is no Pride: it is but Humilitie.
                  
                  Antoninus ſaith,
                     Antoninus in Summa, Par. 3. ti. 22. Ca. 5. §. 4. Non minor honor debetur Papae, quàm Angelis. Vnde Papa
recipit à Fidelibus Adorationes, Proſtrationes, & Oſcula pedum: quod non permiſit
Angelus à Iohanne Euangeliſta ſibi fieri: There is no leſſe honour dewe vnto
the Pope, then vnto the Angels of God. Therefore the Pope ſuffereth the Faitheful to
VVoorſhip him, to fal downe before him, and to kiſſe his Feete: whiche thinges the Angel of
God woulde not ſuffer S. Iohn the Euangeliſte to doo vnto him.
                  
                  This, M. Hardinge, is no maliceous Railinge, as yée cal it, nor Spite, nor Poiſon,
nor Vntruthe ſtuffed with falſe, and cankered ſclaunders. By the reporte of
your owne Doctours, and by your owne Confeſſion, it is the Truthe.
                  
                     The Porphyrie Stoole of eaſemente ſerueth, ye ſaie, to put the Pope in minde of his Humanitie,
                     
that is to ſaie, that he maie remember him ſelfe, in the middes of al his
glorie, to be a man. No, no, M. Hardinge, your owne Authours, and ſtories
can tel you, that ſtoole ſerueth, to put the Pope in remembrance of his Virilitie:
                     
that the worlde maie knowe, he is no woman.
                  But let your imagination ſtande for true. Yet maie wée thinke, your Popes
are ſo forgeatful, or ſo dulheaded, or ſo blockiſhe, that they haue neede to be taught
by ſo vile examples, to knowe them ſelues? Certainely this is a Myſtical kinde
of Stoole of Eaſemente. Wée cannot lightly lacke Myſteries at his handes,
if ſo homely a place be ſo ful of Myſteries. Kinge Alexander the Greate vnderſtoode
him ſelfe to be a Man Mortal,Plutarch. in Alexandr
                           •
                        . for that he was ſommetimes of natural neceſſitie
forced to ſléepe. But Chriſtes Vicare: Peters Succeſſoure: The Doctoure
of al Doctoures: The Father of al Fathers: The Maiſter, and Teacher of al the
worlde, were it not for a ſtoole of caſemente, woulde quite forgeate his owne Humanitie,
and coulde neuer remember him ſelfe to be a Man.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 3.
               What is he, that commaundeth the Emperoure to goe by him at
his horſe bridle, and the Frenche Kinge to holde his ſtirope?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat he is.Vntruthes tvvoo togeather
                           •
                         Reade the Anſvveare. we knowe not, * nor you neither, Sir Defender. This we knowe, that in theſe
woordes moſte impudently you belie the Pope. For neuer was there Pope that commaunded either
Frenche Kinge, or Emperoure to doo the ſeruice you ſpeake of. Parte of that I haue readen perteininge
hereunto, I will here recite.
                  The woorthieſt and greateſt Prince that euer was in Earthe, Conſtantine the Greate, to witneſſe
openly the reuerence whiche he bare in his harte to Chriſte our Sauiour, and to S. Peter, whoſe
Succeſſoure the Pope is, as likewiſe Chriſtes Vicar in Earthe, diſdained not to honour S Sylueſter Pope
in his time, with doingeAl this is a great vntruthe, and a ſhameleſſe Fable. the office of a footeman to him, and with leadinge his Horſe by the Bridle.
VVherein he ſeemeth, as firſte of all Emperours he profeſſed the Faithe of Chriſte openly, ſo
firſte of all Princes to haue geuen to the poſteritie an example of Humilitie. That no man doubte of
it, this muche I finde recorded by an olde Father of the Greeke Churche, Matthaeus Hierom
                        •
                     nac hus,
as vttered by Conſtantine him ſelfe:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . This is Greeke euen for a Pope. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
. VVhiche 
                        •
                     n Engliſhe is
this muche. Submittinge our ſelfe to the office of a foote man, and holdinge his Horſe by the
Bridle, wee leade him foorthe out of his ſacred Palais, in the woorſhip and reuerence of S. Peter.
                  That ſithens bothe Emperoures, and Frenche Kinges of Humilitie and deuotion, and to witneſſe
their humble obedience to Chriſte in his Vicar, haue donne the like ſeruice, yea though the
Pope ſhewed him ſelfe neuer ſo vnwillinge thereto: wee finde it reported in ſundrie good recordes.
Vntruthe moſt manifeſte. For it is thus Ordred in the Popes ovvne Pontifical, and in his ovvne Booke of Ceremonies. But that he euer commaunded any ſuche ſeruice to be donne vnto him, ye can neuer ſhe we it by
any indifferente and credible witneſſe. Paulus Aemylius an Italian of Verona, in the ſeconde Booke
of his Chronicles, whiche bothe diligently and eloquently he wrote of Fraunce, deſcribeth howe
honorably Pipine that woorthy Kinge of Fraunce receiued Steuen the Pope, that ſucceded Zacharias,
when he came into his Realme. He bothe killed his feete, and wente by him at his
Horſe bridell.
                  The like honour of holdinge the Stirope would Charles the fifthe the late greate Emperoure
haue downe at B
                        •
                     non
                        •
                     a to Pope Clement the ſeuenth, had not the Pope with mutche adoo put him
from it.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  This thinge Sir Defender knoweth: notwithſtandinge you, M. Hardinge,
diſſemble it cunningely, and wil not be knowen, that ye knowe it. Neither dooth
Sir Defender, as you ſaie, by theſe woordes impudently belie the Pope.
                      For trial
hereof he referreth you to the Popes owne Booke of Holy Ceremonies: wherein

in it is particularely appointed,The Popes Bridle. and laide out in order, to auoide confuſion, what
eche eſtate ought,The Popes Stirope. and is bounde to doo.
                  
                     Thus therefore it is appointed, Cùm Papa per ſcalam aſcendit &c.
                      When the
Pope taketh his ſtaires to mounte on Horſebacke,Ceremoniarium. Lib. 1. Cap. 8. the greatteſt Prince, that is preſente,
vvhether he be Kinge, or Emperoure, holdeth his Stirope: and afterwarde leadeth
his Horſe a litle waie forewarde by the Bridle. But if there were tvvoo Kinges in
preſence, the more Honorable of them ſhoulde holde the Bridle of the Rightſide: and the
other of the leaſte. If there happen no Kinge to be preſente, then lette the woorthieſt perſonnes
leade his Horſe.Etiamſi Imperator, aut quiuts maximus Princeps adeſſet, Sellam ipſam cum Pontifice in humeris aliquantulum portare debet: Ceremoniar. Li. 1 ſectio. 5. Ca. 4. Dum Imperator haec vtilitatis Officia vult exhebere &c. Tandem cum aliquibus bonis verbis recipiēdo, permittit &c. Ceremoniarium. Lib. 1. Cap. 8. But if the Pope woulde not ride, but he borne on mennes ſhoulders
in a Chaire, then muſte foure of the woorthieſt Princes, yea the Emperoure him
ſelfe, or any other mighty Monarche, if he be preſente, beare the Chaire, Pope and
al, a litle waie forewarde vpon theire ſhoulders. Againe, Imperator, traditis Pomo,
& Sceptro &c.
                      The Emperoure deliueringe ouer his Goulden Apple, and his Sceptre
to one of his menne, commeth vnto the Popes Horſe, and in honoure of our Lorde Ieſus
Chriſte, whole perſonne in Earthe the Pope heareth, he holdeth the Stirope, vntil the
                        •
                     
                     Pope be mounted: and afterwarde he taketh the Bridle, and leadeth foorthe his Horſe.
VVhile the Emperoure doothe theſe profitable offices, the Pope ought modeſtly a
litle to refuſe the ſame: and yet afterwarde, with certaine good, and gentle woordes, takinge
that honoure as donne to Chriſte, and not vnto him ſelfe, he holdeth him ſelfe contented.
                  
                     Further it is appointed thus, Caudam pluuialis portabit Nobilior Laicus, qui
erit in Curia, etiamſi eſſet Imperator, aut Rex: The moſte Noble Laie man, that ſhal
be in the Courte, ſhal beare vp the traine of the Popes Cope, yea though it be an Emperoure,
or a Kinge. Againe,
                     Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Sectio. 3. 
                     Let the moſte Noble Laic man, whether he be
Kinge, or Emperoure, bringe water to waſſhe the Popes handes. And while the Pope
waſſheth, let al the Biſhoppes, and Laie menne kneele downe.
                  
                  
                     Againe, Pontifice ſedente &c.
                     
                     Ceremoniar. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Etiamſi Rex aut Imperator ſit. While the Pope is yet ſittinge at the Table, the
Nobleſt man within the Courte, be he Emperoure, be he Kinge, ſhalbe broughte to the
Popes Credence, to geue him Water.
                  
                     Againe,
                     Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Sectio. 3. Primum ferculum portabit Nobilior Princeps, ſiue Imperator
ſit, ſiue Rex: The firſte diſſhe the Nobleſt Prince ſhal carrie, vvhether he be Emperoure,
or Kinge. Againe,
                     Ceremonia. Li. 1. Sectio. 13. ca. 2. Rex in collatione portabit primum potum: When the
Pope is at Breakefaſte, the Kinge ſhal beare his firſte Cuppe. And againe,
Pocula portentur &c. Let the Popes Cuppes be borne by the Noble menne, or Oratours
beinge preſente: and let the Clerke of the Ceremonies beginne with the woorthieſt eſtate:
yea though he be Kinge, or Emperoure.
                  Nowe, I truſte, M. Hardinge, of your courteſte, ye wil confeſſe, that Sir Defender,
in theſe woordes, hath not ſo impudently belied the Pope. The Popes
owne Booke of Ordinances, and Ceremonies, that directeth al orders, ſaithe thus:
                  
                     The Emperoure ſhal holde the Popes Stirope:
                     
                     Let the Emperoure leade the Popes Horſe:
                     
                     The Emperoure muſte beare the Popes Chaire on his ſhoulder:
                     The Emperoure ſhal beare vp the Popes traine:
                     
                     Let the Emperoure bringe the Baſon and Evver to the Pope:
                     
                     The Emperoure ſhal geue the Pope vvater:
                     
                     The Emperoure ſhal carrie the Popes Firſte diſſhe:
                     
                     The Emperoure ſhal carrie the Popes firſte Cuppe.
                     
                  
                  For excuſe hereof, perhaps yée wil ſaie, Theſe were the Abuſes of Olde times:
But nowe al ſutche diſorders are wel refourmed. Therefore it maie pleaſe you to
remember, that the ſelfe ſame Ceremonies, touchinge Kinges and Emperours
dueties, haue benne lately renewed, and confirmed, and publiſhed abroade into the
worlde, woorde by woorde as they were before, without any manner alteration,

euen in the Popes owne Pontifical, and that euen nowe newly printed at Venice,
in the yéere of Our Lorde a thouſande fiue hundred thrée ſcoare and one,
whereby it maie appeare, yee are aſhamed of nothinge, be it neuer ſo ſhameful.
                  What truthe therefore, M. Hardinge, is in your woorde? Or, with what countenance
coulde ye ſo boldely ſaie, That the Pope euer commaunded any ſutche Seruice to be
donne vnto him by the Emperoure, yee can neuer ſhewe it by any indifferent and credible witneſſe?
I doubte not, but the Popes owne witneſſe is vnto you of ſufficiente credite: and
in his owne caſe it muſte néedes to him ſelfe ſeeme indifferente. Hereby it plainely
appeareth, that in al Offices, and Seruices, the Pope vſeth the Emperoure as
his man. Therefore Auentinus reporteth theſe twoo verſes, written ſometime
of the Emperoure Lotharius the ſeconde,
                  
                     Rex venit ad fores,Auentinus in Fredericho. 1. iurans per Ʋrbis honores:
                     Pòſt homo fit Papac, ſumit quo dante Coronam:
                  
                  The Kinge, or Emperoure commeth to the gates, and ſweareth by the honoure of
the Cittie: And afterwarde becommeth the Popes Man, at whoſe handes he receiueth the
Crowne.
                  That Pipinus ſo mutche abaſed him ſelfe to Pope Steuin, it is no marueile.
The Prouerbe is common, One hande clavveth an other. The Pope was auanced
by Pipine: and Pipine was likewiſe auanced by the Pope. But hereof we
haue ſpoken before.
                  Where ye ſaie, The Emperoure Conſtantine the Greate vvas footeman
to the Pope, I am mutche aſhamed of your vanitie, that beinge a man of wiſedome,
& learninge, ye ſhould thus ſeeke to mocke y• worlde with Childiſhe Fables.
                  Ye allege Matthaeus Hieromonachus, to proue a Fable by a Fable. If yee
woulde daſ
                        •
                     e your Readers eies, for that ye allege his woordes in Greeke, vnderſtande
you, that his peeuiſhe Greeke was taken out of your peeuiſhe Latine.
And yet is the ſame Greeke ſo fonde, & ſo ful of folie, that ye were aſhamed truely
to turne it into Engliſhe. For thus it ſtandeth, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
That is, In the woorſhip and feare of my Lorde Bleſſed
Peter.
                      Ye durſte not, to make the Emperoure Conſtantine ſo rude, to ſaie, that
Peter was his Lorde: and therefore ye thought it better, to corrupte, and alter
your Authours woordes. Yet ſutche vaine Fables, and Trifles muſte ye bringe
in, to put vs, as ye ſaie, quite oute of doubte.
                  But hereof wee ſhal ſaie more hereafter.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 4.
               Who hurled vnder his table Fraunciſe Dandalus, the Duke of
Venice, Kinge of Creta & Cypres, faſte bounde with chaines, to feede
of bones amonge his Dogges?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVere not this Defender paſſed all ſhame, he woulde not make ſo many and ſo ſhameleſſe lies.
Malice hath ſo farre blinded him, that he ſeemeth not to ſee, what becommeth a man. Though he
feare not to be accompted a lier, yet he ſhoulde be lothe to be accompted an vnhoneſt man, yea and
ſpecially a foole.In this One litle Marginal note, M. Hardinge hath vttered foure Vntruthes altogeather. Reade the Anſvveare. Let truthe and honeſtie goe, for in deede there is litle in theſe felowes: what fooliſhneſſe
is it, a man to bringe all his doctrine, and all his ſaieinges, touchinge thinges that he would
ſo fame be beleued,Sabellicus Decadis. 2. li. 1. 1220. Hiſtoriae rerum Ven
                           •
                        
                        tarū lib. 4. into ſo great and certaine diſcredite, by ſuche open and manifeſt lies? The truthe
hereof is this, as I finde it witneſſed in Sabellicus, and in the chiefeſt Chronicles the Venettars haue,
writtē by a Noble ma of Venis, named Petrus Iuſtinianus. The Citie of Venus being interdicted of the
Pope, Fraūcys Dandalus was ſente by the Duke and Lordes of the Counceil there, to ſue for Abſolution.

At that time was he neither Kinge of Creta,Franciſcus Dandalus. nor of Cypres, nor Duke of Venis, as it pleaſeth this liinge
Defender to write of him, and that in the Defence of their Engliſhe Churche written to all the
worlde. Iohannes Superantius then was Duke, and this Frauncys Dandalus wasVntruthe. For he vvas then a Senatour of very greate Honour: And at the nexte Election vvas choſen Duke. but a Priuate
man for that time, as others there were. This Ambaſſadour Frauncys Dandalus findinge the Pope
at his firſte comminge not well inclined to graunte his petition as he wiſhed, theThe offence ſtoode onely in healpinge their Neighbour, beinge a banniſhed man, into his Countrie. qualitie of the
offence deſeruinge the ſame: to moue him to clemencie and pitie, aduiſed with him ſelfe to plaie this
Pagent. He cauſed an yron chaine to be tied aboute his necke. Therewith he came to the Pope as
he ſ
                        •
                     te at dinner, put him ſelfe to crepe on all foure, and like a Dogge laide him downe vnder the
Table, ſo longe vntill the Popes diſpleaſure beinge aſſuaged, he obteined Pardone for his Countrie.
VVhereof, they ſaie, he had afterwarde the ſurname of Dogge geuen him, as Iuſtinianus writeth.
VVho deſireth to ſee the whole Storie, he ſhal finde it well written by the ſaide Petrus Iuſtinianus,
Hiſtoriae rerum Venetarum libro quarto. Nowe let vs ſee, Syr Defender, howe many lyes ye
make in one ſentence. That Frauncys Dandalus was by the Pope hurled vnder his Table, this is one
lie. That he was then Duke of Venis, Kinge of Creta and Cipres, there be two lies, beſide the Notable
lie, you ſeeme to be very ignorant of the ſtate of Venis, in that you make the Duke an Ambaſſadour,
who beinge once created Duke, goeth not out of the Citie.Yet the right, and ſtate of bothe theſe Kingedomes is in his hande. Neither is euer any of their ſtate
Kinge of Candy and Cipres. For their ſtate admitteth none to be a Kinge amonge them: how be it at
the time of Frauncys Dandalus Candy rebelled, and Cipres was not yet come to be vnder the gouernement
of the Venetians, as you might haue learned in the eloquent Hiſtorie that Petrus Bembus
wrote of Venis his Countrie. That he was faſte bounde with Chaines, there be three Lies. For he
was not faſt bounde,Al theſe maters be ful ſolemnely proued, and are vvoorthy to be publiſſhed by Proclamation. onely he had caſte a chaine aboute his owne necke, whiche he mighte haue taken
of at his pleaſure. That he was ſo throwen vnder the Table to gnawe boanes amonge the Popes
Dogges,Al theſe maters be ful ſolemnely proued, and are vvoorthy to be publiſſhed by Proclamation. there be foure lies. And that the Pope had Dogges feedinge of boanes vnder his Table,
*Al theſe maters be ful ſolemnely proued, and are vvoorthy to be publiſſhed by Proclamation. I doubte not but it is other lie. VVhether theſe fiue lies be not ynough for one litle ſentence of
three lines, I reporte me to whoſoeuer of your owne fellowes lieth for the beſt game. I thinke verely
this Defender if he be not very ſhameleſſe, wiſheth he had a thicker bearde to hide his ſlike chekes
from bluſſhinge. Suche falſe cauſes muſt be defended by lyinge proctours. If they belied ſtories onely,
and taught not alſo falſe Doctrine in the chiefe pointes of our Faith, their lying were leſſe hurtfull.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  So many lies, M. Hardinge, and, as ye ſaie, ſo farre paſte ſhame, and ſutche
hote Tragedies, and the cauſe no greatter? What ſturre woulde ye haue keapte,
if it had benne mater woorthy the hearinge? what if the Authoure of the Apologie
had benne ouerſéene in the reporte of one yeere, or twoo, or in ſomme other
like Circumſtance, the Subſtance of the Storie neuertheleſſe ſtil reſerued? If yée
had remembred ſomme of your owne often ouerſightes, ye coulde not for ſhame
haue benne ſo terrible againſte others. For it appeareth wel, by al that yee haue
hitherto ſente vs ouer, your inſighte in matters is not ſo deepe, but yee maie often,
and fouly be deceiued. You your ſelfe, M. Hardinge, bothe in this ſelfe ſame
place, and in this ſelfe ſame ſtorie, and in the reporte of one poore note, haue committed
foure, foule, and groſſe errours, with one breathe, altogeather. You your
ſelfe, I ſaie, M. Hardinge: I ſpeake of none other, but of your ſelfe. If ye thinke,
the beames of your knowledge ſhine ſo cleare, that it can neuer be ouercaſte with
clowde of erroure, then, I beſeche you, conſider wel your Note ſpecially marked in
your Margine.Folio. 186. a. Thus ye directe vs to the Authour of your Storie: Sabellicus Decadis
2. li. 1. 1220. In this one litle ſhorte note, I ſaie, ye haue ſente vs foure errours.
For firſte,Decades. euery childe knoweth, that Sabellicus neuer wrote Decades, but onely
Enneades. And therefore, if I were not better acquainted with your Learninge,
I might ſeeme to haue iuſte cauſe to ſaie, either yee neuer ſawe Sabellicus Bookes,
or els yee neuer readde them. I wil not here keepe an Audite, as you doo, nor ſaie, as
you ſaie,Seconde Decade. 
                     This is one lie. Further ye ſaie, it is written in the Seconde Decade:
                     
But Sabellicus the Authoure him ſelfe ſaith.Franciſcus Dandalus. Firſte Booke. It is writtē in the nienth Enneade.
I wil not ſaie, as you ſaie, There be tvvoo Lies. Againe you ſaie, It is in the
Firſte Booke: But Sabellicus him ſelfe ſaithe, It is in the Seuenthe Booke. Yet
wil not I folowe you, nor ſaie, There be three Lies. For a ſurpluſſage, and
more likelihoode of your tale,Anno Do. 1220. ye note alſo the yeere of our Lorde 1220. with as good
diſcretion, as the reſte. For at that time, neither Pope Clemens, nor Franciſe
Dandalus was yet borne. For this thinge happened, as it moſte plainely
appeareth by al ſtories, aboute the yéere of our Lorde 1310. Al this notwithſtandinge,
I wil not hunte ſo gréedily for aduantages, nor ſaie, as you ſaie, There is
the Foruthe Lie. Neither wil I ſaie, as you ſaie, not withſtandinge ſomme man
perhaps might happen to ſaie it, M. Hardinge the Defender hereof, is either an
Vnhoneſte man, or paſte ſhame, or a Lier, or a foole.
                  
                  Theſe woordes of yours, M. Hardinge, are neither mannerly, nor manly: notwithſtandinge
they ſéeme wel to contente your pleaſante humoure. S. Hierome
ſaithe,Hierony. Aduerſus error. Iohan. Hieroſolymit. 
                     Non aequè inimici audiunt, & amici. Qui inimicus eſt, etiam in ſcirpo nodum
quaerit: An Enimie, and a Frende heare not bothe of one ſorte. An Enimie wil
                      (cauil, and
quarrel, and) ſeeke a knotte in a ruſſhe. The Subſtance of Goddes Religion ſtandeth
not in the reportinge of a ſtorie. S. Hierome ſaithe of ſutche Captious
quarrellers: Audiant à me, non periclitari Eccleſiarum ſtatum, ſi ego celeritate dictandi
verba aliqua dimiſerim:
                     Hierony. De optimo genere interpretandi 
                     Let them vnderſtande, that al be it I in haſte of penninge haue let
eſcape a woorde, or twoo, yet that ſhal not hazarde the ſtate of the Churche of God.
                  
                  But Franciſe Dandalus, ye ſaie,
                      was not at that time Duke of Venice: He him ſelfe
tied the chaine aboute his owne necke:Not Duke. He came of his owne accorde vpon al foure, as if he had benne
a Dogge, and laie downe willingly vnder the Popes Table: He laie not there to gnawe boanes: He
founde no Dogge there to lie with him. Therefore, ye ſaie, this Defender is an Vnhoneſte
man, paſte al ſhame, a Lier, and a foole. Sutche Cholerique Concluſions,
M. Hardinge, maie wel beſeeme a Doctoure of your Diuinitie.
                     
                  
                  Howe be it, the faireſte coloure, ye can laie vpon the matter, is this, That the
Embaſſadoure of that Noble Common VVeale of Venice, laie as a Dogge, in
a chaine, vnderneathe the Popes Table, as you ſaie, and that, vvillingly, and
vvith al his harte, by ſutche Submiſſion to appeaſe the Popes 
                        •
                     ighe indignation,
and to recouer his fauoure towardes his Countrie. It ſéemeth, he was either a
very Arrogante man, or a marueilous angrie Pope, that woulde by none other
Submiſſion be reconciled.
                  
                     But Dandalus at that time was not Duke. Neither was it ſo harde a mater
to knowe that, M. Hardinge: nor was it ſo greate an Hereſie to cal him Duke,
for that ſhortely after he was made Duke.Auguſt. De Conſenſu Euangeliſt. Lib. 2. Cap. 17. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Dicimus, Apoſtolum
Paulum in Tharſo Ciliciae natum. At ille tunc iam non erat Apoſtolus. Ita
cùm audimus, Diſcipulos Chriſti inuitatos ad nuptias, non iam Diſcipulos, ſed qui
futuri erant Diſcipuli, intelligere debemus: Wee ſaie, that Paule the Apoſtle was borne at
Tharſus in Cilicia. And yet Paule at that time, when he was borne, was no Apoſtle. Euen
ſo,
                     Iohan. 2. 
                     when wee heare, that Chriſtes Diſciples were bidden to the Mariage Feaſte at Cana in
Galilee, wee muſte vnderſtande, that they were not then his Diſciples, but became afterwarde
his Diſciples.
                  
                  
                     So S. Hierome calleth Pamphilus a Martyr: and yet at that time, whereof
he meante,
                     Hierony. De Errorib Origenis. Pamphilus in deede was no Martyr. Therefore he ſaith, Concedamus,
vt Pamphili ſit, ſed nondum Martyris. Antè enim ſcripſit, quàm Martyrium
perpeteretur: Let vs graunte, it was Pamphilus Booke: but that Pamphilus as yet
was no Martyr. For he wrote his Booke firſte, and was Martyr afterwarde. Likewiſe againe
he ſaithe,
                     
                     Hierony in Ezechielem. Lib. 9. Cap. 30. Nos pro, No, Alexandriam poſuimus per Anticipationem, quae
Graecè 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      appellatur: Wee in ſteede of the Cittie, No, haue tranſlated it, the Cittie
                     
Alexandria,Franciſcus Dandalus. 
                     by a Figure called Anticipation: For that the Cittie, whiche before was
called, No, was afterwarde called Alexandria.
                  
                     So S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Genes. 35. Augu. in quaeſt. ſuper Geneſim, Quaeſt. 117. 
                     It is written in the Booke of Geneſis: Hi ſunt Filij
Iſrael, qui nati ſunt ei in Meſoporamia: cùm Beniamin longè poſteà natus ſit, cùm iam
tranſiſſent Bethel, & appropinquarent Bethleem: Theſe be the Children of Iſrael, that
were borne to him in Meſopotamia: And yet Beniamin (that there is reckened for one
of his Children) was borne (not in Meſopotamia, but) longe afterwarde, when they were
now paſte Bethel, and drew? towardes Bethleem, that is in Iewrie. Yet bath there benne
no man hitherto ſo vncourteous, that euer woulde vſe your eloquence, M. Hardinge,
and calle either Moſes, or S. Auguſtine, or S. Hierome, Fooles, or Liers.
                  If ye woulde but indifferently haue weighed the mater, ye might wel haue
thought, wée called Dandalus Duke of Venice, for that he was ſoone afterwarde
choſen Duke of Venice.
                  
                  So wée maie ſaie, Doctoure Hardinge fréely, and fully profeſſed the Goſpel, &
preached vehemently againſte the Pope. Neuertheleſſe, when he thus preached, he
was not yet knowen by the name of a Doctoure.
                  Let vs graunte, there was ſomme erroure in the reporte of this ſtorie. Yet
muſte euery man be condemned for a Foole, and a Lier, that maie be taken in like
Erroure? If ſo, then wil M. Hardinge trouble his Godfathers, and cauſe them to
geue him a newe name.
                  S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,Matth. 2. Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 2. Clemens Stromat. 1. There were tvvelue Magi, or VViſemenne, that
came to Chriſte: And yet ye holde commonly, they were but three. Clemens Alexandrinus
ſaithe, Chriſte preached but one yeere: yet others ſaie, he preached
three yeeres: others ſaie, he preached foure. Somme ſaie, Chriſte was three
and thirtie yéeres olde, ſomme ſaie, he was foure and thirtie, when he ſuffered.
Yet Tertullian ſaithe,Tertul. Contra Iud. cos. Irenaeus Lib. 2. he was Onely thirtie yeeres olde: Irenaeus ſaithe, He was
more then fourtie. Chriſte ſaithe, My Father is hable to geue me tvvelue
Legions of Angels: S. Hilarie, in the reporte thereof, a greate deale auanceth
the number,Cap. 34. & 40. Matth. 26. Hilarius in Pſalm. 54. and reckeneth duodecim Millia Legionum, tvvelue Thouſande
Legions. Your owne Bleſſed Donation of Conſtantine, whiche, ye ſaie, ſo
mutche irketh vs, commaundeth the Patriarke of Conſtantinople to be ſubiecte,
and obediente to the Biſhop of Rome: And yet at that time, when, by your imagination,
this Fable was diuiſed,Donatio Conſtantini. there was neither Patriarke, nor Churche in
Conſtantinople, nor any Cittie as yet builte, and knowen by that name. Your
Folowe Dorman allegeth ful ſolemnely the ſeuenth Booke of Theodoretus:
                     Dorman, Fol. 22. And
yet Theodoretus him ſelfe neuer wrote but onely 
                        •
                     iue. And ſo be leapte twoo
whole Bookes beyonde his Authoure.Dorman, Fol. 24. And againe he telleth vs a proper tale,
of the terrible Examples of twoo kinges, Ozias, and Oza: And yet bothe he, and
his Felowes might ſoone haue learned, that Oza was onely a poore Leuite, and
no Kinge.
                  You your ſelfe,M. Hardinge, Fol. 308. b. M. Hardinge, in this ſelfe ſame Booke ſaie, that the Councel
of Nice was keapte in the time of Pope Sylueſter: And yet Athanaſius, that then
was preſente at the ſame Councel,
                     Athanaſi. in Apolog. M. Hardinge, Fol. 309. a. ſaithe, Sylueſter at that time was not aliue:
but that the Councel was ſummoned by the Emperoure, and holden in the time of
Pope Iulius. Againe you ſaie, that at the very ſame time while the Councel
was holden at Nice, Pope Sylueſter helde likewiſe a Councel in Rome: And ſo,
by the Iudgemente of Athanaſius, ye ſaie, that Pope Sylueſter helde a Councel
after he was deade.
                  And muſte al theſe, and other your like tales, M. Hardinge, paſſe vnder the
name of Lies, and Folies?
                  
                  
                     This Gentleman,
                      ye ſaie, was not ſo faſte bounde as wee imagine: but fel down meekely,

and VVillingly of himſelfe.
                     willingly. No doubte, M. Hardinge, who ſo knoweth an Italian
courage, wil ſoone beleue that Franciſe Dandalus, a Gentleman of ſutche Nobilitie,
and the Embaſſadoure of ſo Noble a Common Wealthe, was ſoone, and
eaſily, and willingly woonne, to comme créeping with a yron chaine on his necke,
and to wallow vnder the Popes Table, as a Dogge, to his owne immortal ſhame,
and to the Euerlaſtinge diſhonoure of his Countrie. Verily he woulde neuer haue
yéelded him ſelfe to ſutche Villanie, had it not benne to auoide ſomme other greatter
villanie. For, I beſéeche you, whether is it more crueltie, for you to renne vpon
a poore man with ſwerde drawen, and to ſtrike him through, and ſo to kille him: or
els to force him to laie cruel handes vpon his owne body, and to kille him ſelfe? S.
Chryſoſtome ſaith, A poore man oftentimes is contente to woounde, or feaſter his
owne fleaſhe, to the ende, to mooue the riche man to ſomme pitie: Alij Capiti ſuo
clauos acutos infigunt: alij per ipſum gelu nudo Corpore mendicantes petunt:
                     Chryſoſtom. in 1. Corin. Homil. 21. 
                     Alij hiſce
etiam grauiora ferentes, miſerabile de ſe praebent ſpectaculum. At dices, Nos illorum Capita
non configimus. Vtinam verò tu configeres. Non enim tam grauis fuiſſet calamitas.
Nam qui alium interimit, longè leuiùs peccat, quàm is qui iubet aliquem
ſeipſum interficere: Somme there be, that ſticke nayles in theire owne heades: Somme other
goe begginge with naked bodies in the colde froſte: Somme others ſuffer other thinges
of greatter crueltie, and ſhewe them ſelues miſerable to behold. But thou wilt ſaie, we ſticke
not theſe nailes in theire heades. Woulde God, thou ſtickedſt them in. For then theire miſerie
were not ſo greeuous. For he, that with his owne hand killeth an other, committeth a greate
deale leſſe faulte, then he that forceth a man to kil him ſelfe.
                     
                  
                  So, ſaie wée, it was far greatter gréefe vnto that Noble Gentleman, ſo vilely
to diſhonoure, and abaſe him ſelfe, then if he had benne driuen thereto through the
force and violence of his enimie. In this ſorte was the Emperoure Henrie the
fourthe wel contente,Vrspergen, Sabellicus Ennead. 9. Lib. 3. willingly to waite vpon Pope Hildebrande at Canuſium,
and three daies togeather to ſtande batcheaded, and barefoote in the harde froſte at
his gate, & as one ſaith, to be a gaſtinge ſtocke bothe to menne, and Angels, before
he might haue licence to comme neare. So was the Emperoure Frederichus
Aenobarbus contented, willingely to laie his necke vnder the Popes foote: as wee
ſhal declare more hereafter.Beno Cardinalis So was the poore Gentlevvoman contente, to caſte
a halter aboute her owne Sonnes necke, and ſo to preſente him before Pope Hildebrand,
whom he had offended, by ſutche humble Subiection to craue his pardon.
In reſpecte wereof the Pope pardoned him his life: but commaunded his foote to be
ſtriken of: of whiche woounde the poore yonge Gentleman ſoone after died.
                  Ye ſaie, It is a lie, that Franciſe Dandalus, ſo Noble a Gentleman was driuen
to gnawe boanes.Gnavve boanes. I thinke it wel, M. Hardinge: and therefore we wil rather
ſaie, He laie there togeather vp the crummes, that fel from his Lordes Table.
                  But vnder y• 
                     Popes table,No Dogges vnder the Popes Table. ye ſaie, there were no Dogges. And this, ye ſaie, is an
other lie. Notwithſtanding, this Negatiue were very harde for you to proue. How
be it, hereat I wil not greatly ſtriue. And yet had it benne a more ſéemely ſight, in
my iudgemente, to ſée a Dogge lieinge there, then a man, and ſpecially a Noble
Gentleman, the Embaſſadoure of ſo Noble a Cittie.
                  To conclude, this was the ſame Pope Clemens the fifthe, that thus pronounced
of him ſelfe, and proclaimed the ſame vnto the whole worlde by a Lawe: Nos
ſuperioritatem habemus ad Imperium: Nos, vacante Imperio, Imperatori ſuccedimus:
VVee haue the Soueraintie ouer the Empiere:
                     
                     Clem. Lib. 2. De Senten. & re iudica. Cap. 2. 
                     The Empiere beinge voide, we
are heires apparente to the Emperoure.
                      The Venetians had geuen aide, to reſtoare
one Friſcus a banniſhed man vnto the Dukedome of Ferrara. Therefore Pope
Clemens interdited them, and al that they had, and further ſignified his pleaſure
vnto al the worlde, that whither ſo euer they, or any of them came, it ſhoulde be

lawful for any man, not onely to take theire bodies, and to ſelle them for ſlaues, &
to ſpoile theire goodes, but alſo to kille them, whether it were by right, or by wrōg.
For ſo Sabellicus writeth,Sabellicus Ennead. 9. Lib. 7. 
                     Vt eos fas eſſet vnicui
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , iure, & iniuria interficere.
This was the cauſe of al this greate a doo. And this highe indignation has neuer
benne ſlaked, had not ſo Noble a perſonage abaſed him ſelfe, to be tied by the necke
in a chaine, and to créepe vnder the Popes Table, vpon al foure, like a Dogge.
                  Laſte of al, where it liketh you, in the ende to refreaſhe your wittes with this
Defenders thinne chéekes, and bluſſhinge: verily, M. Hardinge, he bluſſheth in
deede, and is mutche aſhamed in your behalfe, to ſée your folies. God geue you
Grace, that you maie bluſſhe at your miſuſing of Goddes people: leſſe ye haue that
face, that the Prophete ſaith, is paſte bluſſhing. I truſt, this Defender ſhal neuer
bluſſhe to ſaie,Rom. 1. Hierony. Aduerſus Pelagianos, Lib. 1. either with S. Paule, Non pudet me Euangelij Chriſti: Eſt enim
virtus Dei ad Salutem: I am not aſhamed of the Goſpel of Chriſte: For it is the Power
of God vnto Saluation:
                      Or with S. Hierome, Non me pudet neſcire, quod neſcio:
I am not aſhamed, in that thinge, that I knowe not, to graunte mine ignorance.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 5.
               Who ſet the Emperial Crowne vpon the Emeroure Henry the
ſi
                     •
                  thes heade, not with his hande, but with his foote: and with
the ſame foote againe caſte the ſame Crowne of, ſaieinge withal,
Hee had Povver to make Emperours, and to vnmake them againe
at his pleaſure▪
                  
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVe denie, that Celeſtinus, whom you note in your bokes margent, or any other Pope did this.Vntruthe. For the ſtories be plaine. Reade the Anſvveare. It
is a varne fable deuiſed rather of malice, then witte. Ye ſhould haue done wel to ſhew vs, with which
foo
                        •
                     e the Pope did ſet on the Crowne vpon Henr
                        •
                     es heade, the rigit, or the lefte, ſtandinge, ſittinge, leninge,
or lieinge, barefooted, and vſinge the healpe of his greate toe▪ or ſhodde: whether he had ſome
iymme iamme made for him to take it vp, holde it, and put it on handſomly, or conueied it on by a
vice, or howe it was donne.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  What nimbleneſſe, or cunninge the Pope hath in his féete, more then other
menne, I haue not hearde. What other ſleightes he hath nowe, or hath had in
times paſte to woorke ſutche feates, it behoueth his Magiſter Ceremoniarum to
conſider. The ſtorie is recorded by Ranulphus, Rogerus Ceſtrenſis, and Rogerus
Houedenus, that liued at the ſame time.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 6.
               Who put in armes Henrie the Sonne againſte the Emperoure
his Father Henrie the Fourthe, and wrought ſo, that the Father
was taken priſoner of his owne Sonne, and beinge ſhorne, and ſhamefully
handeled, was thruſte into a Monaſterie, where with hunger,
and ſorowe he pined awaie to deathe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     Vntruthe, eaſily reproued by good Recordes. It was not the Pope, that armed Henry the ſeconde againſte Henry the fourthe, who by th
                        •••
                     
compte of ſome is Henry the thirde. 
                        ••
                     ories declare other cauſes of theire fallinge out, and the more
parte of the writers impute it to the iudgemente of God, for puniſhement of his greate wickednes.

After that he was ouercome with al his power by the Saxons,Henricus Impera. 4. Henricus Impera. 5. in ſeuentin daies he durſte not to appeare
abroade. In the meane time his ſonne tooke vpon him foorthwith the adminiſtration of the Empiere,
went into Italie with an armie▪ would not ſurrender the ſtate which he liked wel, his father
beinge therewith offended he tooke priſoner,Manifeſte Vntruthe. See the Anſvveare. without any motion of the Pope,Vntruthe. For this vvas not the cauſe. But the Pope vvoulde haue geuen the ſame him ſelfe. with whom he was
alſo at variance, and committed him to ſtraight cuſtody.
                  Concerninge Gregorie the ſeuenth Pope, who before was called Hildebrandus, whom that
Emperoure with endles malice perſecuted, becauſe he wouldVntruthe. For then he was at no variance with y• Pope. not ratifie his Simoniacal makinge of
Biſhops, and geuing of Eccleſiaſtical benefices, and defended the Church againſt his wicked attemptes:
biſide ſundrie writers of Hiſtories in that time, as Lambertus Schafnaburgenſis, Leo Hoſtiēſis, and afterwarde,
Otho Friſingenſis, who ſo mutche commend him for ſundrie excellent vertues: no man hath
ſo largely and ſo diligently ſet foorthe his worthines, asThis Ancient Doctour is yet aliue, and vvriteth vvoorthily for his hiere. Onuphr
                        •
                     us Panuinius, who hath written
of him fiue Bookes.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée maie eaſily beléeue you, M. Hardinge, that the Pope armed not Henrie
the Seconde, as you ſaie, againſte his Father Henrie the Fourth. It had benne
a marueilous Monſter in Nature, that the Fourth ſhould goe before the Seconde:
or that the Neuevve ſhould be borne before his Grandfather. But that the Pope
raiſed vp Henrie the Fifth againſt Henrie the Fourth, that is to ſaie, the Sonne
againſte the Father, that ye might haue eaſily founde in your owne Recordes.
                  Gregorius Heimbur
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                     thus,
                     Gregor. Heimburgen. Paſchalis Papa Principes contra Henricum
4. concitauit: imò 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     roprium Filium: quem etiam contra Patrem fecit
per multos Epiſcopos Rhem
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     egē Coronari, & vocari Henricum Quintum. Pope
Paſchalis raiſed vp the Princes of Germanie againſte Henrie the Fourthe: nai rather he
raiſed vp his ovvne Sonne: whō alſo he cauſed by many Biſhoppes adioining to the Rhiene,
to be crowned Emperoure againſte his owne Father, and to be called Henrie the Fifthe.
                  
                     The caſe beinge cleare, this one Authoritie maie ſtand in ſtéede of many. Hereof
Henrie the Father pitieouſly complaineth in his Letters written to the French
Kinge.Carion An. 1103. Carion ſaithe, Hunc Henricum Filium ſolicitarunt Epiſcopi, vt aduerſus
Patrem inſurgeret, eum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Imperio pelleret: The Biſhoppes entiſed this yonge
Gentilman, Henrie the Sonne, that he ſhoulde riſe againſt his Father, and put him from
the Empiere.
                     Vrſpergen. Anno. 1105. 
                     But theſe Biſhoppes, as Vrſpergenſis ſaithe, were Reſponſales
Paſchalis Papae, Pope Paſchalis Agentes, or dooers in thoſe Countries. And
                      Henrie the
Sonne him ſelfe, when he ſtoode in the fielde, neuer pretended any other coloure
againſte his Father, but onely the obedience of the Sée of Rome.
                  
                  And, leſte any man ſhoulde doubte of the Truthe hereof, the Pope, not longe
before, had likewiſe raiſed vp Rodolphus the Duke of Sueuia againſte the ſame
Emperoure Henrie the Fourth:
                     Vrspergen. eod. loco, Pag. 257. and, the better to encourrage his Ambitious
heade, and to traine him to his pourpoſe, had ſent him a Crowne with this Poiſée:
               
               
                  Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho.
                  Whereby he meante,Carion. that, as Chriſte had geuen the ſtate, and right of the Empiere
vnto the Pope, ſo would the Pope now beſtowe the ſame vpon Rodolphus.
Likewiſe he had written to the Princes of Germanie, as Carion ſaithe, Vt Imperatorem
alium deſignarent: That they ſhoulde procede to the Election of an other
Emperoure. Thus the Pope thought it but a plaie, to place, & diſplace the States
of the world, at his pleaſure. Of this Emperours Vertues I wil ſaie nothinge. As
he is deſpraiſed by ſomme,Auentinus. ſo by others he is mutche commended: Auentinus ſaith,
In Pauperes, Monachos, Sacerdotes munificentiſsimum, &c. His very enimies confeſſe,
that he was moſte Liberal vnto poore folkes, Monkes, and Prieſtes: that he was Conſtant
in aduerſitie: Faithful to his Priſoners: Gentle to his foes: Deuoute towardes God:
                        
vviſe and Politique in Ciuile, and Martial affaires: of a Princely Maieſtie of counenance:
wherein he excelled al others, and was moſte vvoorthy of the Empiere.
                  
                  
                     Vrſpergenſis ſaithe, He was Noble, doughty, and Venterous: & was ſéene
thrée ſcore and twoo ſundrie times in fought fielde:Vrspergen. Pag. 239. wherein he paſſed bothe Marcellus,
and Iulius Caeſar, & al other Kinges, and Emperours, that had benne before
him.
                  The greatteſte cauſe of falling out bitwéene him and the Pope was this:Carion Order
was taken before, and had ſtil benne keapte from the beginninge, that the Election
of the Pope ſhould be ratified by the Emperoure, otherwiſe not to ſtand.
And Platyna ſaith,Platyna in Seuero Papa. The Pope Elected vvithout the Emperours letters patētes
vvas no Pope. An other Aunciente order was this, that the Emperoure might
beſtowe al the Biſhoprikes, and Abbles of the Empiere, when ſo euer they ſhould
happē to be voide. Theſe Ancient Orders Pope Hildebrand preſumed to breake.
For neither would he ſuffer his owne Election to be ratified by y• 
                     Emperoure: nor
y• Emperoure to beſtow y• 
                     Biſhoprikes, or Abbies within his dominions. In theſe
attemptes y• Emperoure withſtoode him, claiminge vnto him ſelfe the ſame right
of enheritance, that al other Emperours his Predeceſſours had lawfully, and peaceably
enioied before him. Therefore the Pope Excommunicated him: interdited
his Lande:Vrspergen. Pag. 264. & called him Archepirate, Archeheretique, and Apoſtata: Therefore
he depoſed him: raiſed vp the Duke of Sueuia, and al the worlde againſte him: and
armed the Sonne againſte the Father: and wilfully diſquieted the whole State of
al Chriſtendome.Auentinus. 
                     Auentinus ſaithe, Multi tum priuatim, tum pub licè, &c. Many there
were, that bothe priuately, and openly curſed Pope Hildebrande: and ſaide, that with his
hatred, and ambition he troubled the worlde: and that vnder the coloure of Chriſte, he
wrought the ſeates of Antichriſte.
                  
                  The Emperoure tooke a longe iourney into Italie to ſubmit him ſelfe vnto the
Pope:
                     Vrſpergen. Pag. 235. Sabellicus Enneadis. 9. Lib. 3. Carion. Helmoldus. and beinge at Canuſium, as it is ſaide before, in the deapthe of winter, and
In the harde froſte, he waited patiently thrée daies togeather with bare heade, and
bare foote before the Popes gates, to winne his fauoure. In the end Pope Hildebrande
beinge ſicke, and findinge him ſelfe in caſe not to liue, ſente vnto the Emperoure,
and beſoughte him Pardonne for al his Iniuries. After that, the Popes,
that ſucceded, neuertheleſſe continewed this quarrel ſtil. And thus by the Popes
entiſemente, The Sonne raiſed a power, and depoſed his Father: The Biſhoppes
diſcobed him of his wéede of State: & pulled the Crovvne Emperial from his head.
The Auncient Reuerende Prince, hauing nowe continewed in his Empiere fiftie
whole yeeres, bare al theſe thinges quietly, and ſaide vnto them, Videat Deus, &
iudicet: Let God ſee, and Judge your dooings.
                      At the laſte, beinge leaſte naked, and
out of al, he turned him ſelfe to the Biſhop of Spira, and ſaide vnto him: Novve I
beſeeche you, for Goddes ſake, geue me a prebeude in your Churche. For I am
hable to reade,
                     Matth. Palmer. 
                     and can doo ſomme good in the quiere. But he was keapte ſtil
in cloſe priſon at Leodium, vntil he died. And beinge deade, he was keapte fiue
whole yeeres togeather aboue grounde, at the Popes Commaundemente, & might
not be buried: Sutche courteſie founde that woorthy Emperoure at the Popes
hande, onely for claiminge of his right.
                  
                     Pope Hildebrande is commended by many for ſundrie vertues. But no man,
                      ſaie you, hathe
more ſet foorth his woorthineſſe, then Onuphrius,
                      a man yet aliue, and one of al menne,
that would be right lothe in any pointe to diſpleaſe the Pope. Perhaps he thought
to winne ſomme credite, by aduenturinge his wittes in a deſperate cauſe: as
did he,Syneſius. Plato. that beſtowed ſo mutche eloquence in the praiſe of Baldeneſſe: or he, that
praiſed the Feuer quartane: or Eraſmus, that of late yeeres wrote ſo mutche in
the praiſe of Folie.
                  
                  
                     
The Heretique Ebion ſommetime praiſed Iudas aboue al the Apoſtles:
                     Pope Hildebrande. And
Libanius the Sophiſte beſtowed great praiſes vpon Iulianus the Renegate.
                     Socrat. Lib. 3. Cap. 22. Certainely
ſundrie Olde VVriters, of whom ſomme knewe Pope Hildebrande, and
liued with him,Beno Cardinalis haue not géeuen him ſutche woorthy praiſes. Beno Cardinalis
ſaith, Hildebrande, being as yet but a Cardinal, beatte Pope Alexander with his fiſt,
and keapte him priſoner: Poiſoned ſixe Popes: Was a Coniurer, and raiſed vp Diuels:
and threwe the Sacramente into the Fiere.
                     
                  
                  Auentinus,Auentinus. 
                     makinge his entrie to ſpeake of Pope Hildebrande, ſaithe thus,
Scripturus ſum Reipublicae Chriſtianae, Occidentalis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Eccleſiae, Romanique Imperij
Bella, Caedes, Homicidia, Parricidia, Simultates, Odia, Stupra, Furta, Peculatus,
Sacrilegia, Diſsidia, Seditiones pluſquam Ciuiles, &c. Nowe muſte I ſpeake
of VVarres, Slaughters, Murders, killing of Fathers, Striues, Hatreads, Fornications,
Robberies, Spoilinges of Cōmon treaſure, Spoilinges of Churches,
Debates, and Seditions more then ciuile, whiche haue happened in the Chriſtian Common
Weale, in the Weaſte Churche, and in the Empiere of Rome.
                  
                  
                     The Biſhoppes at the Councel of Brixia in Germanie,Vrspergen. 
                     touching Pope Hildebrande,
pronounce thus: Nos eundem Hildebrandum procaciſsimū, &c. The ſame
moſt Filthy and ſhameleſſe Pope Hildebrande, a mainteiner of Churchrobbinges,
and houſburninges, a defender of Murders, and Periuries, callinge in queſtion the Catholique,
and the Apoſtolique Faith of the Body and Bloude of Chriſte, an Olde Diſciple
of Berengarius the Heretique, a Manifeſte Coniurer, loden with the Sprite of
Satan, and therefore out of the trewe Faith, we Judge woorthy to be depoſed. What
ſo euer pointes of diſ
                              •
                           ant
                      Onuphrius, your Scholefelowe, hath lately learned to
plaie, this, M. Hardinge, is that Holineſſe, and Woorthineſſe, that ſundrie Olde
VVriters haue iudged to be in Pope Hildebrande.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 1.
               Who, ſo ilfauouredly, and monſtrouſly put the Emperoure
Frederikes necke vnder his feete, and, as though that were not ſufficiente,
added further this texte out of the Pſalmes: Thou ſhalt goe
vpon the Adder, and cockatrice, and ſhalt treade the Lion and
Dragon vnder thy feete? Sutche an Example of ſcorninge & contemninge
y• Maieſtie of a Prince, as neuer before y• time was hearde
telle of in any remembrance: excepte, I weene, either of Tamerlanes
the King of Scythia, a wilde and a Barbarous Creature, or els of
Sapor Kinge of the Perſians. Al theſe notwithſtanding were Popes,
al Peters Succeſſours, al moſt Holy Fathers: whoſe ſeueral wordes
wee muſte take to be as good, as ſeueral Goſples.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye aſke who put the Emperoure Frederikes necke vnder his feete, &c. Verily, who it was, I
knowe not: neither your ſelues, I beleue.
                  But what if ye bringe good authoritie for it? So farre as any man doth euil, be he Pope, be he Biſhop,
Emperour, or King, or what ſo euer he be, we defende him not. Popes them ſelues be men, and do not at
As though for the moſte parte they liued like Angelles. al times behaue them ſelues like Angels. But what is that to your purpoſe? Our matter is quaeſtio
iuris, non facti,
                     In praeſcriptio. Cōtra Haeret. once more I muſte tel it you. And if that were a faulte in the Pope, we acknoweledge
it to be as Tertullian ſaithe, Vitium conuerſationis, non predicationis: The faulte of conuerſation,
not of doctrineVVhat faulte can ye finde in the Popes preachinge? He neuer preacheth. preached.
                  
                     
Al theſe (though ye ſcoffe neuer ſo muche) were Popes,Treadinge on the Emperours necke. al were Peters ſucceſſours, and no withſtandinge
any thinge that ye can ſaie againſt them to the contrary, without makinge a lie,Vntruthe ſhameleſſe, as it ſhal appeare. al were holy
Fathers. But theire ſeueral woordes we be not bounde to eſteme for ſo good as ſeueral Goſpels. Neuer
the leſſe theire publike decrees we acknowledge and reuerence, and thinke they ought to be obeied.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     The whole ſtorie hereof is thus reported by Carion:Carion Vſus eſt Frederichus deiectione,
& ſumma humilitate, &c. The Emperour Frederike vſed al māner ſubmiſsio,
and Humilitie. For he came to Venice, and at the gates of the Churche, fallinge downe
grouelinge before the Pope, he ſuffered him ſelfe to be trodden on by the Pope with his
Feete. In the meane while the Pope cauſed Proclamation to be made by theſe woordes of the
Prophete Dauid, ſpoken of Chriſte, Thou ſhalt vvalke vpon the venemous Aſpe,
and the Baſiliſke: Thou ſhalt treade dovvne the Lion and Dragon: And ſo at
the laſte he Abſolued him.
                     Non tibi, ſed Petro. Et mihi, & Petro. 
                     The Emperoure in the meane while ſaide, he ſhewed that humilitie,
not vnto Pope Alexander, but vnto Peter. Thereunto the Pope anſweared,
Et mihi, & Petro: Bothe to me, and to Peter too: placinge him ſelfe before
Peter.
                  Thus Carion declareth the whole ſtorie with ſomme particulare Circumſtāces:
but whether of fauoure, or hatred, I wil not Iudge. Neither maie it wel be
thought, the Pope vſed the Emperoure thus of any greate fauoure. But I
thinke, that the Noble Cittie of Venice, that cauſed this whole Tragedie to be
ſet foorthe in Imagerie in S. Markes Churche there, for the Euerlaſtinge remembrance
of the facte, was not ſo carried awaie either with loue of the one ſide, or
with hatred of the other, that they woulde ſo openly haue recorded a knowen Vntruthe.
                  Thus Sapores ſommetime,Aurelius Victor. Pomponius Letus. the proude Kinge of Perſia, when he had conquered
Valerianus the Romaine Emperoure, and taken him priſoner, vſed him afterwarde
moſte villanouſly, as his footeſtocke: and made him lie downe grouelinge
vpon the grounde, that he might ſet his foote on his necke, when ſo euer it ſhoulde
pleaſe him to mounte on horſbacke.
                  So Seſoſtris the greate Kinge of Egypte, yokte Kinges,Budaeus de Aſſe. Matthias à Michouia, De Sarmatia, Cap. 12. and Princes togeather
in Chaines, and forced them by violence, to drawe his Wagon. So the
Emperour Henrie the Thirde, vpon the daie of his Coronation, cauſed Foure
Kinges of Vindelicia, beinge then his priſoners, to carrie Pannes, and Cauldrons
to his kitchin.
                  But ye ſaie, So far, as a man dooth euil, be he Pope, be he Biſhop, ye defende him not. The
Popes themſelues, ye ſaie, be menne: and doo not alwaies behaue themſelues, as Angels. Yet notwithſtandinge,
immediately after ye ſaie further, Al theſe vvere Popes, and Peters
Succeſſours, and Holy Fathers. This beinge true, it is no harde mater,
for any Pope to be Holy.
                     Platyna. Textor in Officina. Platyna. Platyna in Sylueſtro 3. Conſtantien. Concilium. 
                     Pope Iohn 12. was ſlaine in Aduouterie: Pope Benedictus
9. liued without either Lawe, or Reaſon, and defiled Peters Chaire, with al
kinde of ſhame. Sine Lege, & Ratione vixit, & Petri Sedem omnibus probris foedauit.
And in the ende he tooke mon
                        •
                     e yenoughe, and ſolde the Popedome. Platyna
ſaithe, Popes then were elected, not for theire Learninge, and Holineſſe, but in
reſpecte of Monie, and frendſhip. The Biſhoppes in the Councel of Conſtance
pronoūce thus of Pope Iohn. 23. A tēpore iuuentutis ſuae fuit homo malae indolis, inuerecūdus,
impudicus, &c. Et adhuc dicitur, tenetur, creditur, & reputatur pro tali, & vt talis:
From the time of his youth he hath euermore benne a man of il diſpoſition, vnſhamefaſte, vnchaſte,
vnhoneſte, &c. And ſtilhitherto he is named, holden, beleeued, taken, and reputed for

ſutche a one,
                     
                     The Pope is euer Holy. 
                     and as ſutche a one. Somme of them haue liued filthily with theire owne
daughters, and ſomme woorſe, and in more beaſtly diſorder. Platyna calleth them
Monſtra, & Portenta, Monſters, and ougle, and horrible, and il ſhapen Creatures.
                      Yet, ſaie
you, al theſe were Peters Succeſſours, and Holy Fathers. And ſo muſte they
néedes be coumpted, although they had benne a great deale woorſe. Dame Iohane,
I trowe, ye wil haue forepriſed out of this number. For notwithſtandinge ſhée
were a Holy Mother, yet ye maie not wel calle her the Holy Father.
                  
                  
                     In déede,
                     De Maior. & Obedien. Vnam. Sanctam. In Gloſſa. 
                     thus ye haue it prouidentely noted vpon your Decre talles: Eſt quaedam
Spiritualitas ſecundum ſtatum, quando eſt in ſtatu Sanctiſsimo, & Spiritualiſsimo: & in
hoc ſtatu eſt Solus Summus Pontifex: There is a certaine Spiritual Holineſſe according to
the ſtate moſte Holy, and moſte Spiritual: and in this ſtate is onely the Higheſt Biſhop,
that is, the Pope. And a Special Statute of premunire in the Popes behalfe
is written thus: Papa de Homicidio,Diſt 40. Non no: In Gloſſa. vel Adulterio, accuſari non poteſt. Vnde Sacrilegij
inſtar eſſet, diſputare de facto ſuo. Nam facta Papae excuſantur, vt Homicidia Samſonis,
Furta Hebraeorū, Adulteria Iacob: The Pope maie neuer be accuſed, neither of Aduouterie,
nor of Murther. Therefore it were as badde, as Churcherobbinge, to reaſon, or moue mater
of any his dooinges. For what ſo euer he doo, it is excuſed, as are the Murthers committed
by Samſon: the Robberies in Egypte by the Jewes: and y•
                      Aduouteries of Iacob.
And againe,
                     
                     Diſt. 40. Non no: In Papa ſi defint bona acquiſita per meritum, ſufficiunt quae à loci praedeceſſore
praeſtantut. In the Pope if there want good deedes gotten by his own inerites. yet
the good deedes donne by S. Peter, that was his Predeceſſoure in that place, are ſufficiente.
                  
                  
                     But S. Hierome ſaithe far otherwiſe:
                     Diff. 40. Non eſt facile. Non Sanctorum Filij ſunt, qui tenent loca
Sanctorum, Sed qui exercent opera eorum: They are not alwaies the children of Holy
menne, that fitte in the places of Holy menne: but they, that doo the woorkes of Holy
menne.
                  
                     Therefore I maie ſaie to you, M. Harding, as S. Auguſtine ſaith to Emeritus y•
Heretique: Noli Frater,Auguſtin. Epiſt. 164. ad Emeritū. noli obſecro: nō te decet, eiſi aliquē fortè deceat: ſi tamē quicquā
deceat malos: Emeritum certè non decet defendere Optatum: Doo not, my Brother,
doo not, I praie you. It be commeth you not: Although happily it maie becomme ſomme other
man: If any thing maie becomme the wicked: Yet verily it becommeth not Emeritus, to defende
Optatus (in open wickeneſſe).
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaith,
                     Hieron. in Epiſt. ad Philemonein. Si quis hominem, qui Sanctus non eſt, Sanctum eſſe crediderit, &
Dei eum iunxerit ſocierari, Chriſtum violat, cuius Corporis omnes membra ſumus.
Qui dicit, inquit, Iuſtum Iniuſtum, & Iniuſtum Iuſtum, abominabilis eſt vter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
apud Deum. Et rurſus, qui dicit, Sanctum non eſſe Sanctum: & rurſus, non Sanctum
eſſe Sanctum,Prouerb. 17. eſt abominabilis apud Deum: Who ſo beleeuèth, that man to be Holy, that
is not Holy, and ioineth the ſame man to the felowſhip of God, dooth villanie to Chriſte.
For al we are members of his Body. It is written, Bothe he that calleth a Iuſte man
Wicked, and he that calleth a Wicked man Iuſte, are bothe abominable before
God. Likewiſe who ſo ſaith, a Holy man is not Holy: or, An Vnholy man is Holy,
is abominable before God.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 2. & 3.
               Yf we be counted Traitours, whiche doo honoure our Princes,
which geue them al obedience, as mutche as is due to them by Gods
woorde, and doo praie for them: what kinde of men then bee
theſe, whiche haue not onely donne al the thinges before ſaide, but
alſo allowe the ſame for ſpecially wel donne? Doo they then either
this waie inſtructe the people, as wee doo, to reuerence theire Magiſtrate?
or can thei with honeſtie appeach vs as ſeditious perſonnes,
breakers of the common quiete, and deſpiſers of Princes Maieſtie?
               
                  
Truely we neither put of the yoke of obedience from vs, neither doo
we diſorder Realmes: nor doo we ſet vp, or pulle downe Kinges: nor
doo wee tranſlate gouernementes: nor geeue wee our Kinges poiſon
to drinke: nor yet holde foorth to them our feete to kiſſe: nor opprobriouſly
triumphe ouer thē: nor leape into theire neckes with our feete.
               This rather is our Profeſſion, this is our Doctrine, that euery
ſoule,Chryſo. in 13. ca. ad Romanos. of what callinge ſo euer it bee, bee it Monke, bee it Preacher,
be it Prophete, be it Apoſtle, ought to be Subiecte to Kinges
and Magiſtrates: yea, and that the Biſhop of Rome him ſelfe, onleſſe
he wil ſeeme greater then the Euangeliſtes, then the Prophetes,
or the Apoſtles, ought bothe to acknoweledge, and to cal the Emperour,
his Lorde, and Maiſter:
                  Gregor. ſaepè in Epiſt. as the Olde Biſhoppes of Rome,
who liued in times of more grace, euer did. Our common teachinge
alſo is, that we ought ſo to obeie Princes, as menne ſent of God: and,
that who ſo withſtandeth them, withſtandeth Goddes ordinance.
This is our Doctrine: & this is wel to be ſeene both in our Bookes,
and Preachinges, and alſo in the manners and modeſte behaueour of
our people.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Doctrine of obedience apperteineth ſpecially to ſubiectes. The Biſhop of Rome ſittinge by
due ſucceſsion in the chaire of Peter,Vntruthe Manifeſte, as it ſhal appeare. in spiritual cauſes can haue no Superiour. In temporal matters
it maie be, that in one age he hath acknowledged the Emperoure, as the Lorde of that prouince,
where he liued.Vntruthe encloſed: For they vvere ſubiecte likevviſe aftervvarde. as before Conſtantine al the Popes did liue in ſubiection: and in an other age he maie
be Lorde thereof him ſelfe. Likewiſe S. Gregorie might cal Mauritius his Lorde, either of courteſie,
or of cuſtome: and yet our Holy Father Pius the fourth ſhal not be bounde to do the like, inO Graue Conſideration. conſideration
that the cuſtome hath longe ſence ben diſcontinewed. Neither did S. Gregorie by that title
of honour preiudicate vnto him ſelfe in any spiritual iuriſdiction. For that name notwithſtandinge,
he gouerned theVntruthe euidente vnto a childe. whole Churche, and complained that Maximus was made Biſhop of Salonae a Cittie
in Illyrico, without his Auctoritie, not regarding that Mauritius the Emperoure was thought to haue
willed it ſo to be donne.Lib. 4. Epiſtol. 34. And therefore he writeth to Conſtantia the Empreſſe, that for as mutche as
neither he, nor his depute was made priuie to it, that the thinge had benne donne, whiche neuer was
donne before by any of the Princes, that were the Emperours Predeceſſours.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  What néede you to ſpeake ſo preciſely, and ſo nicely of your Cauſes Spiritual,
M. Harding? Ye knowe, that your Pope hath claimed, and yet claimeth his Souerainetie,
not onely in Spiritual Cauſes, but alſo in Tēporal: as it ſhal appeare. He
wil ſaie, ye are an il Proctoure, and doo him wronge, and goe aboute to abridge his
right, that wil ſo lightly exclude that thinge, that he ſo gréedily wil haue included.
                  You ſaie, The Pope can haue no Superioure in Spiritual Cauſes. And yet by
the Iudgement of ſundrie your Doctours, euen in Cauſes Spiritual, the Councel
is Superioure to the Pope,
                     Concil. Conſtant. Concil. Baſilien. Diſt. 19. Anaſtaſius. In Gloſſa. and maie ſummone him: and Iudge him: and geeue
Sentence againſte him: and depoſe him: As hereafter it ſhalbe declared more at
large. Thus is it noted of pourpoſe vpon your owne Decrees: Cùm agitur
de Fide, tunc Synodus Maior eſt quàm Papa: When the caſe is mooued in a mater of
Faithe,
                      (that is to ſaie, in a cauſe Spiritual) then is the Councel greater then y•
                         Pope.
                     
And your owne Panormitane ſaithe,The Pope inferioure to the Prince. as it is alleged before, Papa tenetur confiteri:
& in illo actu Sacerdos eſt Maior illo: The Pope is bound to make his Confeſſion:
and in ſo dooinge, the Prieſte is aboue the Pope. Againe he ſaithe, Papa non
poteſt cogere Sacerdotem,
                     Extra De 
                           •
                        oeniten. & Remiſſ. Omnis vtriuſque. Abb. 
                     vt reuelet Cōfeſsionem: quia in illo actu Sacerdos eſt Maior,
quàm Papa. Children knowe, that Faithe, and Confeſsion are Spiritual
Cauſes, and not Temporal. Ye ſée therefore, M. Hardinge, by the Iudgemente of
your owne Doctoures, that the Pope maie haue a Superioure, euen in Spiritual
cauſes.
                  
                  Nowe let vs weighe the greate force of your Reaſon. Thus you ſaie:
                  
                     The Pope ſitteth in Peters Chaire: Ergo, in Spiritual Cauſes he can haue no Superioure.
                  Who taught you thus to piece your Arguments? What Childe, what Sophiſter
woulde ſo reaſon? Who euer gaue ſutche Power, and Vertue to Peters Chaire?
                  
                  In Temporal maters, ye ſaie, it maie be, that in one age the Pope hath acknowledged
the Emperoure, as Lorde of that Prouince, where he liued. Graceouſly
conſidered. It was the Popes Courteſie, & Humilitie, no doubte: but not
his duetie. Now be it, Aaron the Highe Biſhop in Iſrael was contented to ſubmit
him ſelfe to Moſes, and of duetie to calle him Lorde.
                  Tertullian ſaith thus,
                     Exod 32. Tertullian. ad Scapulam. Colimus Imperatorem, vt hominem à Deo ſecundum,
& Solo Deo Minorem. Sic enim Imperator Omnibus Maior eſt, dum Solo vero
Deo Minor eſt: Wee honoure the Emperours Maieſtie, as a man nexte vnto God. For
ſo is the Emperoure greater then Al menne, while he is leaſſe then onely the True God.
                  
                  Origen ſaithe, Petrus,Origen. ad Roman. Ca. 13. li. 9. & Iohannes nihil habebant, quod Caeſari redderent. Dixit enim
Petrus, Aurum, & Argenium non habeo. Qui hoc non habet, nec Caeſari habet quod
reddat, nec vnde Sublimioribus Poteſtatibus ſubiaceat. Qui verò habet Pecuniā, aut Poſſeſsiones,
aut aliquid in hoc ſaeculo, audiat, Omnis anima Poteſtatibus Sublimioribus
ſubiaceat: Peter,
                     Actor. 3. 
                     and Iohn had nothing to geue vnto the Emperoure. For Peter ſaide,
Golde, and Siluer I haue none: whiche who ſo hath not, hath nothing to geeue to Caeſar, not
wherein he ſhoulde be ſubiecte to the Higher Powers. But who ſo euer hath, either Monie,
or Landes, or any thinge in this worlde, let him heare what S. Paule ſaith, Let euery ſoule
ſubmit it ſelfe to the Higher Powers.
                  
                  
                     And for proufe of the practiſe hereof,
                     2. q. 7. Nos ſi. Pope Leo thus ſubmitteth him ſelfe
humbly vnto Levves the Emperoure: Nos, ſi incomperenter aliquid egimus, & in
Subditis iuſtae Legis tramitem non conſeruauimus, veſtro admiſſorum noſtrorū cuncta
volumus emendare iudicio. If wee haue donne any thinge diſorderly, and ouer
our Subiectes haue not keapte the dewe trade, and courſe of Lawe, by your Maieſties Iudgemente
vve vvil redreſſe al our faultes.
                  
                     So likewiſe, long before Pope Leo, Pope Gregorie wrote vnto the Emperoure
Mauritius:Gregor. Lib. 3. Epiſ. 61. ad Mau
                           •
                         ritium Impera. Ecce per me Seruum vltimum ſuum, & veſtrum, reſpondebit
Chriſtus: Sacerdotes meos manui tuae commiſi, &c. Ego quidem veſtrae
iuſsioni ſubiectus, Legem veſtrā per diuerſas terrarum partes trāſmitti feci:
Behold, thus wil Chriſte anſweare you by me, beinge both his, and your moſt humble
Seruante: I haue committed my Prieſtes vnto thy hand. As for my parte, I, being ſubiecte
vnto youre Maieſties Commaundemente, haue cauſed your Order to be proclaimed
through diuers partes of the worlde.
                     Gregor. Lib. 3. Epiſt 64. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Chriſtus dominari Imperatorem,
non ſolùm Militibus, ſed etiam Sacerdotibus conceſsit: Chriſte hath geuen power
vnto the Emperoure, to beare rule, not onely ouer ſouldiers, but alſo ouer Prieſtes.
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Grego. ad Maurittum Impera. Et Imperatori obedientiam praebui: & pro Deo, quod ſenſi, minimè
tacni: I haue ſhewed my duetie towardes my Lorde the Emperoure: and touchinge
God, I haue not conceled, what I thought. And this is it, that S.
                      Paule ſaithe,

                           •
                        et euery ſoule be ſubiecte to the Higher Powers. Vpon whiche woordes S. Chryſoſtome

                     ſaithe,
                     The Pope inferioure to the Emperoure. Etiamſi ſis Apoſtolus, etiamſi Euangeliſta, etiamſi Propheta, fiue
quiſquis tādem fueris. Neque enim Pietatem ſubuertit iſta Subiectio: Thoughe thou be an
Apoſtle, though thou be an Euangeliſt, though thou be a Prophete, or what one ſo euer
els thou be,
                     Chryſoſt. ad Roman. Homil. 23. 
                     yet be thou ſubiecte to the Heigher Powers. For this Subiection is no hinderance
to Godlineſſe.
                  
                  
                     But afterwarde the Popes beganne to looke alofte, & bothe to ſaie them ſelues,
& alſo to cauſe others theire paraſites to ſaie,
                     Iohan. Maior. 4. Sent. q. 2. diſt. 20. Sex. Lib. 3. Ti. 16 in Gloſſa. Romanus pontifex ſupra Reges
in Temporalibus: The Biſhop of Rome is aboue Kinges, euen in thinges Temporal.
Againe, Papa totius orbis obtinet poteſtatem: The Pope hath the power of al the
worlde. Againe,
                      Solus Papa eſt verus Dominus Temporalium: Onely the Pope
is the very true Lorde of Temporal thinges.Iohan. De Pariſijs, de poteſtate Papae. 
                     And againe, Omnis poteſtes ſecularis
immediatè data eſt Papae: Al manner Temporal Povver is geuen immediately to
the Pope.
                  Ye ſaie,Heruaeus de poteſta. Pap. ca. 19. 
                     Pope Gregorie might cal the Emperoure Mauritius, his Lorde,
                      (not of
deutie, but) either of Cuſtome, or of Courteſie. Yet, (ſaie you further) our holy Father
Pope Pius the Fourth ſhal not now be bound to do the like.
                      Here, I beſeech you, M.
Hardinge, What ſtrange kinde of Spiritual Povver hath Pope Pius nowe g
                        •
                     ttē,
that was not before in Pope Gregorie? what Learninge? what Vertue? what
Woorthineſſe? what Holyneſſe? What good reaſon cā ye allege, wherefore Chriſte,
and his Apoſtles, and al other Holy Fathers, and Martyrs ſhoulde be Subiect
                        •
                     
to the Prince, and onely your late Popes, and Cardinales ſhoulde ſtande ſo
frèe?
                  
                     Ye ſaie, This Cuſtome hath longe ſithence benne diſcontinewed: And in one age the
                      Pope
maie acknowledge the Emperour, as the Lorde of the Land, where he dwelleth: and in an other
age he maie be Lorde thereof him ſelfe. That is to ſaie,
                      In one age the Pope maie be ſubiecte
to the Emperoure: and in an other age the Emperoure maie be ſubiecte to the
Pope. This is your whole, and onely reaſon. Thus, wée ſee, your obedience towardes
your Prince goeth not by Goddes VVoorde, but onely by Ages. Therefore
wée maie ſaie to you, as S. Hilarie ſommetime ſaide to y•
                      Arian Heretiques,
Fides temporum eſt,Hilarius ad Conſtantium Impera. Pſal. 116. non Euangeliorum: Your Faithe paſſeth by Ages, and not by
Goſpels. And yet it is written,
                      Veritas Domini manet in Aeternum: The Truth of
our Lorde endureth (not for one age, or other, but) for Euer. It were a highe pointe
of Learning for an Aſtronomer ſkilfully to Prognoſticate, betwéene y•
                        
                      Emperour
and the Pope, whether of them ſhoulde be Dominus Anni. How be it, here maie
I wel and iuſtly anſweare you with theſe woordes of S. Bernarde: Omnis anima
poteſtatibus ſublimioribus ſubdita ſit.Bernar. Epiſt. 42. ad Archiepiſco. Senonenſ. Si omnis, & veſtra. Quis vos excepit ab
vniuerſitate? Si quis tentat Excipere, conatur Decipere. Noli illorum acquieſcere
conſilijs: qui cùm ſint Chriſtiani, Chriſti tamen vel ſequi facta, vel obſequi dictis probro
ducunt. Ipſi ſunt, qui vobis dicere ſolent, Seruate veſtrae Sedis honorem, &c. Eſtis
vos veſtro Praedeceſſore impotentior? Si non creſcit per vos, non decreſcat
per vos Hae illi. At Chriſtus aliter iuſsit, & geſsit. Reddite, inquit, quae ſunt
Caeſaris, Caeſari: & que ſunt Dei, Deo: Let euery ſoule be ſubiecte to y• Higher Powers.
If euery ſoule, then is your ſoule ſubiecte, as wel as others. For (notwithſtanding your Dignitie)
yet who hath excepted you from this generalitie? He that would excepte you from the
Obedience of the Prince, ſeeketh to deceiue you. Geue no eare to theire Counſelles. For, notwithſtandinge
they be Chriſtians, yet they thinke it a ſhame, either to folow Chriſtes deedes,
or to obeie Chriſtes Woordes. They vſe to ſaie vnto you, ô ſir, mainteine the honoure
of your See, &c. Are not you ſo good, as youre Predeceſſoure? If your See
be not auaunced by you, yet let it not be abaſed by you. Thus ſaie they. But
Chriſte hath bothe taught, and wrought far otherwiſe. For he ſaithe, Geeue to Caeſar,
that belongeth to Caeſar: and geeue to God, that belongeth to God.
                  
                     
                     Likewiſe he ſaithe againe vnto Pope Eugenius,The Pope Limited to a parte. A te tamen Mosiſte, vel
potiùs Mors iſta non coepit? vtinam in te deſinat. Vides omnem Eccleſiaſticum
zelum feruere ſola pro Dignitate tuenda?Bernar. De Conſideratione, li. 4. Honori totum datur: Sanctitati
nihil, vel parum. Si, cauſa requirente, paulò ſubmiſsiùs agere, ac ſocialiùs te habere
teniaueris, Abſit, inquiunt: Non decet: Tempori non congruit: Maieſtati non
conuenit: Quam geras perſonam attendito: But ye wil ſaie, this Manner, or rather,
this Deathe, beganne not of you: Woulde God it mighte ende in you. Doo ye not ſee, that al
your Eccleſiaſtical zele, and care ſtandeth onely in mainteinance of Honoure? Vpon Honoure
al togeather is beſtowed: vpon Holineſſe, either nothinge, or very litle. If, vpon occaſion,
ye woulde ſommewhat ſubmit your ſelfe, and deale familiarely, O, doo not ſo, ſaie they:
It is not meete: It is not agreeable to the time: It is not conuenient for your
Maieſtie: Conſider vvel, vvhat ſtate ye beare. Sutche good Leſſons yée haue,
where with to nourture, and to traine the Pope. And if he happen of him ſelfe
to be a foole, by ſutche ſchoolinge yée are hable to make him madde.
                  
                  
                     But Gregorie,
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 34. Artic. 4. Diu. 25. 
                     ye ſaie, beinge Pope, gouerned the whole Churche of God. For he complaineth,
that
                      Maximus was made Biſhop of Salonae in Illyrico without his allowance. This Authoritie
is anſwered in my Former Replie. But how holdeth this Argument,
M. Hardinge?
                      Gregorie complaineth, that Maximus vvas made Biſhop of
Salonae in Illyrico vvithout his allovvance: Ergo, Gregorie ruled the
vvhole Churche?
                  
                     What Schole wil allowe you ſutche Concluſions? It is knowen, that in the
Nicene Councel the charge of the whole Churche was committed to thrée Principal
Patriarkes, whereof the Patriarke of Rome was the Firſte: the Seconde
of Alexandria: the Thirde of Antioche. And eche of theſe thrée was limited ſeuerally
to his owne peculiare portion.
                     Nilus De Primatu Roma. Pon. Nilus a Greeke Writer ſaithe, Cùm aliae
Regiones aſsignatae ſint Romano, aliae Alexandrino, aliae Conſtantinopolitano,
non magis hi ſub illo ſunt, quam ille ſub hiſce: For ás mutche as certaine Countries
are limited to the Biſhop of Rome: certaine to the Biſhop of Alexandria: and certaine to
the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, they are novv no more vnder him, then he vnder
them.
                  
                     As for the Churches of Illyricum, they were ſpecially appointed to the Biſhop
of Rome, as it appeareth by the Epiſtle of Pope Damaſus, written to the
Biſhoppes of Illyricum:Sozomen. Lib. 6. Cap 23. Par eſt omnes, qui ſunt in Orbe Romano, Magiſtros conſentire:
It is meete, that al the Teachers, that be within the Romaine Prouince, agree togeather.
So ſaithe
                      Athanaſius,Athanaſ ad Solitariam vitam agentes. Roma eſt Metropolis Romanae Ditionis:
Rome is the Mother Churche (not of the whole worlde, but) of the Prouince
of Rome. Nicephorus ſaithe, Iuſtinianus decreuit, vt Iuſtiniana Prima haberet
locum Sedis Apoſtolicae Romae: vt
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſſet Caput ſibi ipſi cum plena poteſtate:Nicephor. Lib. 17. Cap. 28.
Iuſtinianus the Emperoure appointed, that the Cittie called Iuſtiniatia Prima
ſhoulde haue the place of the Apoſtolique See of Rome: and that with ful power it ſhould
be Head vnto it ſelfe. Neither durſte your forged, and countrefeite
                      Anacletus, to
claime the Iuriſdiction of al the whole worlde, but onely a portion of the ſame. For
thus he ſaithe,
                     Anaclet. Epiſt. 3. Diſt. 93. Iuxta Sanctorum. Omnes Epiſcopi, qui huius Apoſtolicae Sedis ordinationi ſubiacent:
Al Biſhoppes (not through the worlde, but) that are Subiecte to the ordination
of this Apoſtolique See of Rome. So likewiſe S.
                      Gregorie in his complainte vnto the
Empreſſe, touchinge this ſame Maximus, ye Biſhop of Salonae, ſpeaketh not of al
the Biſhoppes, that were throughout the whole Churche of God, but onely of
ſutche Biſhoppes, as were limited vnto his particulare charge. For thus he maketh
his complainte,
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 34. Si Epiſcopi mei me deſpiciant &c. If mine owne Biſhoppes
(lieinge within mine owne peculiare Iuriſdiction) ſhal deſpice me.
                  
                  Therefore your Diuinitie wanted Logique, M. Hardinge, when ye framed

your Argument in this ſorte, Gregorie complained of Maximus &c. Ergo,
Gregorie gouerned the vvhole Churche.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 1. &. 2.
               But where they ſaie, we haue gonne awaie from the Vnitie of
the Catholique Churche, this is not onely a matter of malice, but biſides,
though it bee moſt vntrue, yet hath it ſomme ſhewe and appearance
of truthe. For the common people, and ignorante multitude
geeue not credite onely to thinges true, and of certainetie, but euen to
ſutche thinges alſo, if any chaunce, whiche maie ſeeme to haue but a
reſemblaunce of truthe. Therefore we ſee, that ſuttle, and crafty perſones,
when they had no truthe on their ſide, haue euer contended, &
hotely argued with things likely to be true, to the intent thei, which
were not able to eſpie the very grounde of the mater, mighte be caried
away at leaſt with ſomme pretenſe & probabilitie, or likelihoode
of the Truthe. In times paſte, whereas the firſte Chriſtians, oure
Forefathers, in makinge their Praiers to God, did turne them ſelues
towardes the Eaſte, there were that ſaide, they woorſhipped the
Sonne,Tertull. in Apologetico. & reckened the ſame as their God. Againe, where oure Forefathers
ſaide, that as touchinge Immortal & Euerlaſtinge Life, they
liued by none other meanes, but by the Fleaſhe, and Bloude of that
Lambe without ſpotte, y• is to ſaie, of oure Saueour Ieſus Chriſte,
the enuious Creatures, & Enimies of Chriſtes Croſſe, whoſe onely
care was to bringe Chriſtian Religion into ſclaunder by al manner
of waies, made the people beleeue, that they were wicked perſonnes,
that thei ſacrificed mennes Fleaſhe,Ibidem. and dronke mennes Bloude. Alſo
where oure Forefathers ſaide, that, before God, there is neither
Man, nor Woman, and that for atteininge to the true Righteouſneſſe,
there is no diſtinction at al of perſonnes: &, whereas they called one
an other indifferently by the name of Siſters, and Brothers, there
wanted not menne, whiche forged falſe tales vpon the ſame, ſaieinge
that the Chriſtians made no difference amonge them ſelues, either
of age, or of kinde: but like brute beaſtes without regarde, had to doo
one with an other.Ibidem. And, whereas, to praie, and to heare the Goſpel,
they mette often togeather in ſecrete, and byplaces, bicauſe Rebelles
ſometime were woonte to doo y• like, therefore Rumours were euery
were ſpreadde abroade, that they made priuie confederacies, & tooke
counſel togeather, either to kil the Magiſtrates, or to ſubuerte the
Common Wealthe. And, whereas in Celebratinge the Holy Myſteries
after Chriſtes Inſtitution, they tooke Breade and VVine, thei
were therefore thought of many,Auguſtin. Contra Fauſt. Lib. 27. Cap. 13. to woorſhip, not Chriſte, but Bacchus,
and Ceres: for ſomuche as thoſe vaine Goddes were woorſhipped
of the Heathen in like ſorte, after a prophane Superſtition, with
Breade & VVine. Theſe thinges were beleeued of many, not bicauſe
thei were true in deede (for what coulde be more vntrue?) but bicauſe
they were like to bee true, and through a certaine ſhadowe of truthe
mighte the more eaſily deceiue the ſimple. On this faſhon likewiſe

doo theſe menne ſclaunder vs as Heretiques, and ſaie that wee haue
leafte the Churche and Felowſhip of Chriſte: not bicauſe thei thinke
it is true, for they doo not mutche force of that, but bicauſe to ignoraunte
folke, it mighte perhaps ſomme waie appeare true.
               Wee haue in deede put oure ſelues aparte, not as Heretiques are
woonte, from the Churche of Chriſte, but as al good menne oughte
to doo, from the infection of naughty perſonnes, and Hypocrites. Neuertheleſſe
in this pointe they triumphe maruciloully, that they bee
the Churche, that their Churche is Chriſtes Spouſe, the Piller of
Truthe, the Arke of Noe: and, that without it there is no hope of
Saluation. Contrariewiſe, they ſaie, that wee bee Renegates: that
we haue torne Chriſtes ſeate: that wee are plucked quite of from the
Body of Chriſte, & haue foreſaken the Catholique Faithe. And, when
they leaue nothinge vnſpoken, that maie neuer ſo falſely and malitiouſ
                     •
                  y
be ſaide againſte vs, yet this one thinge are they neuer hable
truely to ſaie, that we haue ſwarued, either from the Woorde of God,
or from the Apoſtles of Chriſte, or from the Primitiue Churche.
Surely wee haue euer iudged the Primitiue Churche of Chriſtes
time, of the Apoſtles, and of the Holy Fathers, to be the Catholique
Churche: neither make wee doubte to name it, Noes Arke, Chriſtes
Spouſe, the Piller and vpholder of al Truthe: nor yet to fixe therein
the whole meane of oure Saluation. It is doubtleſſe an odious
mater, for one to leaue the felowſhip whereunto he hathe benne accuſtomed,
and ſpecially of thoſe menne, whoe, though, they be not, yet
at leaſte ſeeme to be, and be called Chriſtians. And, to ſaie truely, wee
doo not deſpiſe the Churche of theſe men (how ſo euer it be ordered by
them now a daies) partely for the names ſake it ſelfe, and partely for
that the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſte hath once benne therein truely, and
purely ſet 
                     •
                  oorthe. Neither had we departed therefrom, but of very
neceſſitie, and mutche againſte our willes.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVee graunt, that in olde time ſlaunders were made vpon the Faithefull. But no like ſlaunder is
made by vs vpon you in the matter, whereof ye ſpeake. For let vs graunt, that ye haue in deede put
your ſelues aparte, and are gone from the contagion of naughtie perſons and Hypocrites. This is the
very thinge, we laie to your charge. For though we were ſuche, as for a great number ye ſhall neuer
be able to prooue, yet by Chriſtes owne ſentence ye muſte doo that,The ſame Scribes, and Phariſeis commaunded the people to refuſe Chriſtes companie: Iohan. 9. & 12. And vvas the people bounde to folovve them? whiche they that ſit in the chaire
of Moſes bid you doo, although they be Hypocrites, as the Scribes and Phariſeis were, of whome Chriſte
ſpake &c. But it ſhal be inoughe for you to doo, as the Succeſſours of Peter bid you to doo, and ſo to
folowe their ſaieinges, and not their dooinges.
                  The Primitiue Churche is continewed with our time, by the Succeſſours of S. Peter. for whoſe
Faithe neuer to faile Chriſte praied, and whomeVntruthe. For Chriſte neuer gaue Peter any ſutche ſpecial Priuilege. onely he made Shepeherde to feede all his Flocke of
Sheepe and Lambes. ChriſteA ſtrange kinde of Diuinitie: ſutche as Peter, and Paul
                           •
                         neuer knevve. now requireth of you, not to obeie Peter and Paule, but to obeie him,
who ſitteth in their chaire. VVhere ye ſaie, it is an odious matter to forſake vs, and yet haue foreſaken
vs: where ye confeſſe that ye deſpiſe not the Churche, we be of, and yet graunt that ye haue departed
from it: how ſtandeth this togeather? Remember ye what ye ſaie? Knowe ye what ye doo? VVho
will regarde your woorde, whiche with one breathe ſaie, and vnſaie? If it be odious, why doo ye
it? If ye deſpiſe not the Churche, why departe ye from it?
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Chriſte ſaithe,
                     Departing from the Pope. The Scribes, and Phariſeis ſitte in Moſes Chaire: Doo that they
ſaie, but doo not, that they doo. Ergo, ſaie you,
                      Wee maie not departe awaie from
the Pope. How ſo euer it fare with your Concluſion, M. Hardinge, verily in
your premiſſes yée compare the Pope, and his Cardinalles with the Scribes,
and Phariſeis. And yet the Scribes, and Phariſeis ſate in the Chaire, and taught
the Lavve: Your Pope, and Cardinalles ſitte ſtil, and teache nothinge. Notwithſtandinge,
let vs wel allowe of this Compariſon.
                     Matth. 23. 
                     Ye maie remember, that
Chriſte alſo ſaithe, Woe be vnto you, yee Scribes, and Phariſeis, that ſhutte vp the
Kingedome of Heauen before menne: and neither doo you enter in your ſelues: nor wil you
ſuffer other, that faine woulde enter. Woe be vnto you, yee blinde Guides: Woe be
vnto you, that haue taken awaie the keie of Knovvledge. Likewiſe he ſaithe of
them vnto his Diſciples:
                      Beware of the leauen of the Scribes, and Phariſeis: Let
them goe:
                     Matth. 16. Matth. 15. 
                     Blinde they are, and the Leaders of the blinde.
                  
                  
                     To ſitte in Moſes Chaire, was, truely, and rightly to inſtructe the people,
and to open vnto them the Lawe of Moſes.Auguſt. De Sermone Domi. in Monte, Lib. 2. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Hoc ipſum,
quòd bona dicebant, & ea, quae dicebant, vtiliter audiebantur, & fiebant, non erat
ipſorum. Cathedram enim, inquit, Moſi ſedent: That they ſpake good thinges
vnto the people, and that the thinges, that they ſaide, were profitable to the hearers, and
dooers of the ſame, it was not of them ſelues. For Chriſte ſaithe, They ſitte vpon
Moſes Chaire. Againe he ſaithe, Sedendo ſuper Cathedram Moſis, legem
Dei docent.
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 46. 
                     Ergo per illos Deus docet. Sua verò illi ſi velint docere, nolite
audire: nolite facere. Certè enim tales ſua quaerunt, non quae Ieſu Chriſti:
Sittinge vpon Moſes Chaire, they teache the Lawe of God: Therefore it is God, that teacheth
by the meane of them. But if they wil teache you thinges of their owne, then heare them not:
then doo it not. For certainely ſutche menne ſeeke their owne: and not the thinges, that perteine
to Chriſte Jeſus.
                      Ye ſée therefore, M. Hardinge, wée are bounde to heare the
Pope, and his Cardinalles, and other like Scribes, and Phariſeis, not abſolutely,
or without exception, what ſo euer they liſte to ſaie: but onely ſo longe, as they
teache the Lavve of God. Further then that, S. Auguſtine ſaithe, VVee maie
neither heare them, nor folovve theire Counſel.
                  
                  
                     Hereunto ye thought it good, to adde more force, as a ſupplie, to aide youre
wantes. Chriſte ſaide vnto Peter, I haue praied for thee, that thy Faithe ſhal neuer
faile. Ergo, ſaie you, The Pope can neuer erre. This waie of reaſoninge, I trowe,
yee Learned of Peter de Palude a woorthy Doctoure of your ſide. For ſo he reaſoneth:
Ego rogaui pro te,Petrus De Palude, de Poteſtate pp. Articul. 4. Petre, vt Fides tua non deficiat. Ex quo habetur, quòd
Romana Eccleſia in Fide errare non poteſt: nec de eius Fide dubitare licet: Sed
in omnibus eſt ſequenda: Peter, I haue Praied for thee, that thy Faithe maie not faile.
By theſe woordes wee are taught, that the Churche of Rome cannot erre in Faithe. Neither
is it lawful to doubte of the Faithe of that Churche: but in al cauſes wee are bounde to
folowe it.
                     Augu. De quaeſt. Noui Teſtamen. quae. 75. 
                     But S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Nunquid pro Petro rogabat: pro Iohanne,
& Iacobo non rogabat? Vt coeteros raceam: To leaue the reſte, did
Chriſte Praie for Peter? and did he not Praie for Iohn, and Iames? Againe he
ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Verbis Domini in Euange. ſecund. Lucam. Sermo. 36. Hac nocte poſtulauit Satanas vexare vos, ficut triticum: & egorogaui Patrem
pro vobis, ne deficiat Fides Veſtra: This nighte hath Satan begged to threaſhe you, as
if it were wheate: but I haue Praied to my Father (not for
                      Peter onely, but) for you,
that your Faithe maie not faile. So ſaithe Origen, Nunquid audebimus dicere,
quòd aduerſus vnum Petrum non praeualiturae ſint portae Inferorum:
aduerſus coeteros autem Apoſtolos,Origen. in Matth. Tract. 1. ac Praefectos Eccleſiae ſint praeualiturae? An
Petro Soli dantur à Chriſto Claues Regni Coelorum? Nec alius Beatorum quiſquam

eas accepturus eſt? Omnia, quae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      priùs dicta ſunt, quae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſequuntur, Velut ad
Petrum dicta, ſunt omnium Communia: Maie wee dare to ſaie, that the gates
of Helle ſhal not preuaile Onely againſte Peter: but ſhal preuaile againſte the other Apoſtles,
and Rulers of the Churche? Were the Keies of the Kingedome of Heauen
geuen onely to Peter? And ſhal no Holy man els receiue the ſame? Nay, al the thinges,
bothe that were ſaide before, and alſo that folowe after, as ſpoken to Peter, are Common, and
belonge vnto al. Therefore, as ye ſaie of the
                      Churche of Rome, ſo maie wée ſaie likewiſe
of the Churche of Hieruſalem, where S. Iames was: and of the Churche of
Epheſus, where S. Iohn was, and of other the like Apoſtolique Churches, notwithſtandinge
they be now in the poſſeſſion of the Turke, and haue receiued the
Religion of Mahomete, yet, bicauſe Chriſte hathe once praied for them, The
Faithe of them ſhal neuer faile.
                     
                  
                  Further ye tel vs, It ſhalbe yenough for you, to doo, as the Succeſſoures of Peter bid
you to doo. Chriſte now requireth not of you to obeie Peter, and Paule: but to obeie
him, that ſitteth in their Chaire.
                      If this waie be as ſure, as it is ſhorte, then is
there no doubte, but al is wel. Though wée beléeue neither Peter, nor Paule, nor
what ſo euer is writtē in Goddes Woorde, yet, ſaie you, If vve folovve the Pope,
vvee cannot erre. For thus mutche, M. Harding, ye are hable to warrante vs by
your Goſpel, y• Chriſte requireth not vs now, to be obedient to Peter, and Paule,
but onely to the Popes Holineſſe, y• keepeth Reſidence in theire Chaire. This is
your Diuinitie: theſe are your woordes. If ye euer recante the ſame, ye marre the
flower of your Market. Wée néede not now to ſaie, Thus ſaithe the Lorde: it
ſhalbe ſufficient for vs,Galat. 1. to ſaie, Thus ſaithe the Pope. Yet S. Paule ſo far aduentureth
the Truthe, and certainetie of his Doctrine, that he doubteth not to ſaie,
If an Angel from Heauen preache vnto you any other Goſpel, then wee haue Preached, accurſed
be he.
                     Chryſoſt. in 1. Caput ad Galat. Vpon whiche woordes S. Chryſoſtome hathe noted thus: Non dixit,
Si Contraria annuntiauerint, aut totū Euangelium ſubuerterint: verùm, Si paulùm
Euangelizauerint praeter Euangelium, quod accepiſtis, etiamſi quiduis labefactauerint,
Anathema ſint: S. Paule ſaithe not, If they Preache Contrarie to the Goſpel,
or ouerthrowe the whole Goſpel: but, If they Preache any little thinge biſides the Goſpel,
that ye haue receiued: if they ouerthrovve any thinge, vvhat ſo euer it be, accurſed
be they.
                     Diſt. 36. Ca. final. Therefore S. Hierome ſaithe, Ea doceat Epiſcopus, quae à Deo
didicerit, non ex proprio Corde &c. Let the Biſhop teache thoſe thinges, that he hath
learned of God: and not of his owne harte, or fanſie.
                     
                  
                  Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. in 2. Timoth. Homi. 2. Plus aliquid dicam: Ne Paulo quidem obedire oporret,
ſi quid dixerit proprium, ſi quid humanum: ſed Apoſtolo Chriſtum in ſe
loquentem circumferenti: I wil telle you a greatter mater: Wee maie not obeie, no
not S. Paule him ſelfe, if he ſpeake any thinge of his owne, or if he ſpeake onely as a man: But
wee muſte beleeue the Apoſtle of Chriſte, carrieinge Chriſte aboute ſpeakinge within him.
                  
                  
                     And therefore Panormitane ſaithe,
                     De Electio. & Elec. poteſta. Significaſti. Abb. In concernentibus Fidem, etiam dictum
vnius priuati eſſet praeferendum dicto Papae: ſi ille moueretur melioribus
rationibus Noui, & Veteris Teſtamenti, quàm Papa: In maters concerninge
Faithe, the ſaieinge of one Priuate man were to be hearde before the ſaieinge of the Pope:
if the ſame Priuate man were moued with better reaſones of the Newe, and Olde Teſtamente,
then the Pope. But, that vvee ſhould no lenger obeie Peter, and Paule,
but geeue eare onely to him, that is cropen into theire Chaire, it is ſuche Diuinitie,
as neither Peter, nor Paule euer taught vs.
                  
                  Laſte of al, as vpon ſomme good aduauantage, ye beginne to Triumphe.
Remember yee, ſaie ye, what ye ſaie? knowe yee, what ye doo? who wil regarde youre
woorde, whiche with one breathe ſaie, and vnſaie? If it be odious to leaue our felowſhip, why

doo yee it? If yee deſpiſe not the Churche, why departe ye from it? To Saie, and Vnſaie, it is
your propertie, M. Harding: it is not oures. Yée haue Saide, & Vnſaide, & yet, were
it not for ſhame, it is thought yée woulde be contente to Saie againe. Wee deſpiſe
not the Churche: it is the Houſe of God: But we miſlike your defacinge, and diſorderinge
of the Churche. Chriſte reproued the Prieſtes, and Phariſeis, for that they
had turned the Temple of God into a caue of Theeues:
                     Matth. 21. And yet neuertheleſſe he
deſpiſed it not: but ſaide it was his Fathers houſe. To leaue the wicked felowſhip
of them, that beare a name, and ſhewe of Godlineſſe, it ſeemeth odious before
menne:2. Iohn. but before God it is not odious. S. Iohn
ſaithe, VVho ſo euer is ſutche
a one, bidde him not, God ſpeede. For who ſo ſaithe, God ſpeede vnto him, is partetaker of
his il.
                     1. Corinth. 5. Apocalyp. 18. S. Paule ſaithe, I warne you, that you receiue no meate with any ſutche. And
God him ſelfe ſaith, Comme out from her, ô my people, leſte ye be partetakers of her ſinnes,
and leſte ye receiue of her Plagues.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 3.
               But I put caſe, an Idole be ſette vp in the Churche of God,
and the ſame Deſolation, whiche Chriſte propheſied to comme, ſtoode
openly in the Holy Place? What if ſomme Theefe, or Pirate inuade,
and poſſeſſe Noes Arke? Theſe folkes, as often as they tel
vs of the Churche, meane thereby them ſelues alone, and attribute
al theſe titles to theire owne ſelues, boaſtinge, as they did in
times paſte, whiche cried, The Temple of the Lorde, The Temple
of the Lorde: or, as the Phariſeis, and Scribes did, whiche
craked, they were Abrahams Children. Thus with a gaie, and
ioly ſhewe deceiue they the ſimple, and ſeeke to choke vs with
the bare name of the Churche. Mutche like as if a Theefe, when
he hathe gotten into an other mans houſe, and by violence either
hathe thruſte out, or ſlaine the owner, ſhoulde afterwarde aſſigne
the ſame houſe to him ſelfe, caſtinge foorthe of poſſeſſion the righte
Enheritour: Or, if Antichriſte, when he had once entred into the
Temple of God, ſhould afterwarde ſaie, This houſe is mine owne,
and Chriſte hathe nothinge to doo withal. For theſe menne nowe,
after they haue leafte nothinge remaininge in the Churche of God,
that hath any likeneſſe of his Churche, yet wil thei ſeeme the Patrones,
and the valiaunte maineteiners of the Churche: Very like as
Gracchus amongeſt the Romaines ſtoode in Defence of the Treaſurie,
notwithſtandinge with his prodigalitie, and fonde expenſes, he
had vtterly waſted the whole ſtocke of the Treaſurie. And yet
was there neuer any thinge ſo wicked, or ſo farre out of reaſon, but
lightely it mighte be couered, and Defended by the name of the
Churche. For the Waſpes alſo make honycombes, as wel as Bees:
and wicked men haue companies like to the Churche of God. Yet
for al that, They be not ſtreight vvaie the people of God, vvhiche
are called the people of God: neither be they al Iſraelites, as many
as are comme of Iſrael the Father.
                  Auguſt. in Sermon. Contra Arianos, to. 6. The Arians, notwithſtanding
they were Heretiques, yet bragged they, that they alone were

the Catholiques,
                  Auguſtinus in Ep. 48 ad Vincē. Epiphani. lib. 1. Haere. 30. calling al the reſte, now Ambroſians, nowe Athanaſians,
nowe Iohannites. And Neſtorius, as ſaith Theodorete,
for al that he was an Heretique, yet couered he him ſelfe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
that is to wite,Sozomen. lib. 6. cap. 38. with a certaine cloke, & colour of the true
and Right Faith. Ebion, though he agreed in opinion with the Samaritanes,
yet, as ſaith Epiphanius, he woulde needes be called a
Chriſtian. The Mahometiſtes at this daie, for al that al Hiſtories
make plaine mention, and themſelues alſo cannot denie, but they
tooke their fiſt beginning of Agar the bonde vvoman, yet for the
very name, and ſtockes ſake, chuſe they rather to be called Saracenes,
as though they came of Sara the free vvoman, and Abrahams
true and lavvful vvife. So likewiſe the falſe Prophetes of al ages,
whiche ſtode vp againſt the Prophetes of God, and reſiſted
Eſaias, Ieremie, Chriſte, and the Apoſtles, at no time craked of any
thinge ſo mutche, as they did of the name of the Churche. And for
none other cauſe did they ſo fearcely vexe them, and cal them Renegates,
and Apoſtatas, then for that they forſooke their felowſhip,
and keapte not thordinaunces of the Elders. Wherefore, if we would
folowe the iudgementes of thoſe menne onely, who then gouerned the
Churche, and would reſpecte nothinge els, neither God, nor his
woorde, it muſt needes bee confeſſed, that the Apoſtles were rightly,
and by iuſt Lawe condemned of them to death, bicauſe they fel from
the Biſhoppes and Prieſtes, that is, you muſt thinke, frō the Catholique
Churche: and bicauſe they made newe alterations in Religion,
contrarie to the Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes willes, yea, and for al
their ſpurninge ſo earneſtly againſt it.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat a fooliſhe putcaſe, and what a fond what if is that, to ſaie, VVhat if a pirate inuade
the Arke of Noe?As though S. Paule had not vvarned vs, that Antichriſte ſhal ſitte, and ſhevve him ſelfe in the place of Chriſte. As though God ſate not at the ſterne, and had the bel
                        •
                     e in his owne hande.
                  
                     Ergo Antichriſte ſhal ſitte in the Popes chaire. 2. Theſſ. 2 Antichriſte can not ſit in the temple of God,But vvhat if Chriſtes Vicare him ſelfe be Antichriſte? vntil the vicare of Chriſte, who keepeth poſſeſſion,
be throwen out, and then wil Chriſte come with his Angels to deſtroie the wicked man with
the breath of his mouth. Ye that are the berbingers of Antichriſte, are not yet able to caſt out the
lieutenant of Chriſte.Math. 24. Ye heaue at the vnderminiſters. Your maiſter wil accompleſhe al iniquitie,
and he ſhalbe the deſolation that Chriſte ſpake of. VVe vnderſtande, what ye ſhoote at. But ye are
aſhamed to vtter plainely your blaſphemie.Vntruth, Malicious and ſclaunderous. Ye would ſaie (as it may ſeeme) if ye durſte, that
Chriſte is the deſolation, and that Antichriſt is the true God.Ergo yee belie vs, although not greatly. In effect I do not greatly belie you.
                  Neither if the Apoſtles might go from the Biſhoppes of Moſes lawe, therefore may ye departe
from the vicare of Chriſte. For the lawe of Moſes is changed, and the prieſthod of Aaron is tranſferred:
But the lawe and prieſthood of Ieſus Chriſte tarieth for euer, as Dauid ſaid, Thou art prieſt
for euer, according to the order of Melchiſedech. Ye hault too manifeſtly.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Antichriſte, ye ſaie, cannot ſit in the Temple of God, vntil the Vicare of Chriſte,
who keepeth poſſeſsion, be throwen out. So the olde Troians ſometime ſaide, Theire
Cittie coulde neuer miſcarrie, while theire Palladium remained emongeſt them.

But who tolde you theſe ſtraunge newes,To ſit in the place of Chriſte. M. Harding? Who made the Pope
Chriſtes Vicare general throughout the whole Churche?2. Theſſ 2. Or who bade him keepe
poſſeſſion in ſteede of Chriſte? Muſte wee needes thinke, that the whole ſtate of
Chriſtes Churche, hangeth onely of the Pope? Or that, if the Pope were not
the Pope, the Churche of Chriſte were not the Churche? Or, muſte youre ſimple
woorde nowe be taken for a Propheſie, that Antichriſte ſhal neuer enter into
Goddes Temple, before the Pope bee throwen oute? This Fable woulde haue
benne better furniſhed with more credite.
                  
                     Verily whereas we ſaie, vvee put caſe, an Idole be ſet vp in the Churche
of God: Or, vvhat if ſomme Theefe or Pirate inuade and poſſeſſe Noes Arke,
neither is this, vvhat if, ſo fonde as you woulde ſeeme to make it: nor this, Put
caſe, ſo impoſſible. For S. Paule ſaithe, Antichriſte ſhal ſitte in the Churche of God,
and ſhewe him ſelfe aboue al that is worſhipped, or called God: that is to ſaie, Beinge a
                     
Theefe, and a Pirate, he ſhal enter perforce into Noes Arke.
                  Nowe, M. Hardinge, If Antichriſte maie ſitte in the place of God, mutche
more maie he ſitte in the place of Peter. I wil not ſaie, the Pope is Antichriſte.
God wil reuele him in his time:Apocalyp. 13. and he ſhalbe knowen. S. Iohn ſaithe, This is the
wiſedome: who ſo hath vnderſtandinge, let him recken the number of the Beaſte. Vpon
whiche woordes,Irenaeus, li. 5. cap. vltimo. 
                     Irenaeus welneare fifteene hundred yeeres agoe, ſaithe thus:
The name of Antichriſte, expreſſed by that number ſhalbe, Latinus:
                      And he addeth
further, Hoc valdè veriſimile eſt. Quoniam veriſſimum Regnum hoc habet
vocabulum.
                  
                  
                     S.
                     Gregor. lib. 4. Epiſt 38 Sacerdotum paratus eſt exercitus. Irenae lib. 5. Cap. penulti. Ioachimus Abbas. Gregorie ſaith, He is Antichriſte, that ſhal claime to be called the Vniuerſal
Biſhop: and ſhal haue a Garde of Prieſtes to attende vpon him. Againe,
                      Irenaeus
ſaithe, Antichriſtus, cùm ſit Seruus, tamen adorari vult, vt Deus. Antichriſte,
notwithſtandinge he be but a ſlaue, yet, he wilbe woorſhipped, as if he were God. Ioachimus
Abbas ſaithe, Antichriſtus iampridem natus eſt Romae, & altiùs extolletur
in Sede Apoſtolica: Antichriſte is longe ſithence borne in Rome, and yet ſhal
be higher anaunced in the Apoſtolique See.
                  
                     Thus is he deſcribed, that ſhal ſitte in the place of Chriſte, and ſhal maineteine
poſſeſſion againſte Chriſte.
                     2. Theſſ. 2. 
                     But, Chriſte ſhal comme vvith his holy Angels,
and ſhal deſtroie him vvith the breath of his mouthe.
                  
                     That ye allege of the Prieſthoode of Melchiſedech, ſerueth you here to
ſmal pourpoſe. Wee knowe, that, not the Pope, but Chriſte alone is a Prieſte
for euer,
                     Auguſtin in lib. 83. quaeſti. quae. 61. 
                     accordinge to the Order of Melchiſedech. S. Auguſtine ſaithe: Ipſe eſt
Sacerdos noſter in aeternum, ſecundum Ordinem Melchiſedech, qui ſemetipſum
obtulit holocauſtum pro peccatis noſtris: & eius Sacrificii Similitudinem
celebrandam in ſuae Paſſionis Memoriam commendauit: Chriſte is oure Prieſte
for euer after the Order of Melchiſedech, whiche hath offered vp him ſelfe a Sacrifice for
oure ſinnes: and hath deliuered vnto vs a Similitude, or Likeneſſe of that Sacrifice, to be donne
in remembraunce of his Paſſion.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe,
                     In eadem quaeſtione. Holocauſti eius Imaginem ad Memoriam Paſſionis
ſuae in Eccleſia celebrandam dedit, vt eſſet Sacerdos in aeternum: non ſecundum
Ordinem Aaron, ſed ſecundum ordinem Melchiſedech: Chriſte hathe
geuen an Image, or Reſemblaunce of that Sacrifice, to bee keapte in the Churche in Remembraunce
of his Paſſion, that he might be a Prieſte for euer: not after the Order of Aaron, but
after the Order of Melchiſedech.
                  Howe be it,Articul. 17. Diuiſion. 15. touchinge this whole mater, I haue anſweared more at large in
my Former Replie.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 4.
               Wherefore, like as it is written, that Hercules in olde time was
forced, in ſtriuing with Antaeus that huge Giant, to lifte him quite
vp from the Earth, that was his Mother, ere he coulde conquert
him: euen ſo muſte our Aduerſaries be heaued from their Mother,
that is, from this vaine colour, and ſhadowe of the Churche, wherewith
they ſo diſguiſe, and defende them ſelues: otherwiſe they can not
bee brought to yelde vnto the Woorde of God. And therefore ſaithe
Ieremie the Prophete, Make not ſutche great boaſte, that the
Temple of the Lorde is with you. This is but a vaine confidence:
theſe are but lies. The Angel alſo ſaithe in the Apocalyps: They
ſaie, they be Ievves: but they bee the Synagog of Sathan. And
Chriſte ſaid to the Phariſeis, when they vaunted them ſelues of the
kinred,Iohn. 8. and bloude of Abraham: Ye are of your father the Diuel: For
you reſemble not your Father Abrahā: As mutche to ſaie, as, Ye are
not the menne yee would ſo faine be called: ye beguile the people with
vaine titles: and abuſe the name of the Churche, to the ouerthrowing
of the Churche.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Heaue at vs, whiles ye wil, and whiles ye may, ye ſhal neuer remoue vs. In whiche ſtedfaſtnes
we truſte to ſtande by Gods grace to the laſt breath. Heaue at vs with al the forces of your cunning, of
your malice, of your flatterie, of your policies, and with what ſo euer ingens ye haue: ye ſhal neuer
be able to ouerthrowe the houſe of our conſciences builded vpon the ſure rocke.Math. 7. Let the gourders of
raine come downe from you and al other Heretikes, let the floudes of worldly rages thruſt, let the
windes of Sathans temptations blowe their worſte, this houſe ſhal not be ouerthrowen.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  O M.Rom. 11. Hardinge, S. Paule ſaith vnto you, Noli altum Sapere, ſed time: Preſume
not of your ſelfe: but ſtande in awe.
                      Sutche woordes woulde rather haue becommed
them,Hierem. 44 that ſaid ſommetime vnto the Prophete Hieremie, Verbum, quòd locutus
es nobis in Nomine Domini, non audiemus: Sed faciendo faciemus omne verbum, quòd
egredietur de ore noſtro: Wee wil neuer heare the woorde, that thou ſpeakeſt vnto vs in
the name of the Lorde.
                     
                     Luke. 19. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     But wee wil ſurely doo, what ſo euer thing ſhal paſſe out of our owne
mouthes. Thus it is written of them, that ſaide, The Lorde ſhal not beare rule ouer,
nor maiſter vs. With like mildeneſſe of ſpirite the wilful Philoſopher ſaide, Non
perſuadebis, etiamſi perſuaſeris: Ye ſhal not make me beleue it, no though I doo beleue it.
                     
                  
                  As Conſtancie in good thinges is a vertue, ſo frowardneſſe, and wilfulneſſe
is a vice. Vowe not thus youre owne deſtruction. He that is fallen, maie riſe againe.
The Lorde is hable to raiſe you vp: and to make you a veſſel of his glorie.
Ye knowe not, to what good pourpoſe God hath appointed you. Speake not ouer
mutche of the ſtrength of your Mounte. You knowe, vpon howe light occaſions it
hath benne moued. Folowe rather S. Paules counſel, and with feare, and tremblinge
woorke youre owne Saluation.
                     Philip. 2. Hieremi. 10. Luke. 11. The waie, ye walke in, is not youre owne: Your
harte is in the hande of God. Suffer Goddes Truthe to preuaile: And vnderſtand,
that the kingedome of God is come vnto you.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 10. Diuiſion. 1.
               So that theſe mennes parte had ben,I haue praied for thee, Peter &c. firſt to haue clearely, and
truely proued, that the Romiſhe Churche is the true and right inſtructed
Churche of God: and that the ſame, as they doo order it at
this daie, doothe agree with the Primitiue Churche of Chriſte, of
the Apoſtles, and of the Holy Fathers, whiche wee doubte not, but
was in deede the True Catholique Churche.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye would vs to proue, that the Romaine Churche is the true Churche of God. Ye graunt, that
once it was the true Churche of God. And the Goſpel ſheweth, that Chriſte praied for it in S. Peter,
who made his ſucceſſours there.Luke. 22.
                     This is a very vaine hope. For Chriſte praied for the other Apoſtles no leſſe, then for Peter. VVhat followeth hereof, but that it muſt needes abide as true, as
euer it was, except Chriſtes praier were not heard? S. Paule likewiſe wttneſſeth, that the Romaine
Faithe is preached in the vniuerſal worlde,Rom. 1. Li. 4. Epi. 8. geuing a manifeſt prophecie, that the Romaine Faithe
and the Catholique Faithe ſhould be alone. S. Cyprian calleth the agreing with the Biſhop of Rome
and communicating with him, Catholicae Eccleſiae vnitatem, &c. The allowing and firme holding
of the vnitie of the Catholique Churche. And writing to Antonianus in the ſame booke, he accompteth
it for one thing, to Communicate with Cornelius the B. of Rome, and to Communicate with
the Catholique Churche. For you it is vaine to ſaie, that it hath erred,Vntruthe. For vvhere did the Holy Ghoſt euer make ſutche promiſſe? when the holy ghoſt hath
ſignified, that it can not erre.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  I wil not ſaie, Where were youre wittes, M. Hardinge, when yee wrote
theiſe thinges? But wel maie I ſaie, where was your Logique? As for Diuinitie,
it appeareth by youre reckening, ye make no greate accoumpte of it. Chriſte, ſaie
you, praied for Peter: Ergo, the Romaine Faithe can neuer faile. Fewe children
woulde willingly make ſutche Argumentes. Ye preſume very mutche of the
Simplicitie, and Ignoraunce of youre Reader. For thinke you, that Chriſte
praied onely for Peter, and for no body els? Or thinke you, that Chriſtes praiers
tooke place in none other of al the Apoſtles, but onely in Peter? Awake for
ſhame: and ſhake of theſe dreames. Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe, O Father, I praie nor
onely for theſe,
                     
                     Iohn. 17. 
                     but alſo for them, that by their woorde ſhal beleue in me. And S. Auguſtine
thus reporteth the ſame praier, as it is alleaged before: Ego rogaui Paitem
pro vobis,
                     Auguſtin. De verbis Do. in Euangelio Secun. Lucam. Serm 36. Auguſti in quae. Nou Teſtam. quae. 75. Origen. in Mat. tracta 1. Roma
                           •
                        . 1. 
                     ne deficiat Fides veſtra: I haue praied vnto my Father,
                      (not for Peter
onely, but) for you, that youre Faithe maie not faile. Againe he ſaithe, Nunquid pro
Petro rogabat: Pro Iohanne, & Iacobo non rogabat? Did Chriſte praie for Peter:
And did he not praie for Iohn, and Iames? Certainely Origen ſaithe, as likewiſe I
haue before alleged, Omnia, quae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         priùs dicta ſunt, quae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſequuntur, velut ad Petrum
dicta, ſunt omnium Communia: Al the thinges, that either paſte before, or folowe after,
as ſpoken vnto Peter, are common vnto al the Apoſtles.
                  
                  But S. Paule ſaithe vnto the Romaines, Youre Faithe is ſpoken of throughout the
worlde.
                      And S. Cyprian ſaithe, The agreeing with the Biſhop of Rome was the
Vnitie of the Catholique Churche. And yet it maie pleaſe you, to be remembred by
the waie, that the ſame S. Cyprian reproued Cornelius, and Stephanus, bothe
Biſhoppes of Rome: and tolde them, they were bothe deceiued: and therefore
woulde not agree vnto them. Neuertheleſſe, hereof ye conclude thus, Ergo the
Holy Ghoſte hath ſignified, that the Churche of Rome cannot erre. It pitieth me, M. Harding,
in youre behalfe, to ſee, into howe ſtreite, and miſerable holes ye are faine to
creepe. For, what if the Faithe, and the Conſtancie of the Romaines in olde times,
for the Nobilitie of that Empiere and Cittie, were then publiſhed throughout the

whole worlde? Yet where did the Holy Ghoſte euer tel you, that therefore the
Churche of Rome ſhoulde neuer erre? By what Woorde? By what Promiſſe?
By what Reuelation? Yee ſaie, The Faithe of the Romaines was heard of throughoute
the whole Worlde. So was the Greate capitol there: So was the bewtie
of their Princely buildinges. Whiche, notwithſtanding are nowe made ſmoothe,
and euen with the grounde.Eſai. 2. So likewiſe is it written of Hieruſalem, De Sion
exibit Lex, & Verbum Domini de Hieruſalem: The Lawe ſhal comme foorth from Sion,
and the Woorde of God from Hieruſalem. So in the Cittie of Antioche the Faithful
were firſte called Chriſtians:
                     Chryſoſtom. ad Popul. Antio. Homi. 3. Nazian. epiſt. 74. Nazian. ad Heronem. And therefore Chryſoſtome calleth the ſame Cittie
Caput totius orbis, The Head of the whole worlde.
                      Thus was Euſebius Samoſatenſis
called Regula Fidei, The Rule, and Standerde of the Faithe:
                      Thus was
Athanaſius called Orbis oculus: & Fundamentū Fidei: The Eie of the world, and
the Fundation of the Faithe.
                      Would ye hereof conclude, M. Harding, that therfore the
Faithe of theſe Churches can neuer faile? Ye knowe, that al this notwithſtandinge,
the Churches as wel of Hieruſalem, and Antioche, as alſo of Aſia, Syria,
Graecia, and of al the Eaſte, are nowe ſubiecte to the Turke, and ſcarcely a fewe
leafte there, that dare to profeſſe the name of Chriſte.
                  What a fonde Paradiſe is this, to ſaie, bicauſe ye had once the Faith of Chriſte,
therefore nowe ye can neuer erre? Sutche a fantaſtical Paradiſe had they built vnto
them ſelues,Hierem. 7. Math. 3. that cried out in olde times, euen as you do now, The Temple of
God: The Temple of God: VVee are the Children of Abraham. But who ſo
euer wel cōſidereth the ſtorie of the time, ſhal ſoone finde, y• then they cried moſte,
The Temple of God, when they had moſte ſhamefully abuſed, and defaced the
Temple of God: and, that then they claimed moſte to be called the Children of
Abraham, when they had forſaken bothe the Faithe, and life of Abraham, and,
as Chriſte ſaithe vnto them,Iohan. 8. were becomme the Children of the Diuel.
                  
                     Sutche a fantaſie had they, that ſaide, Non peribit Lex à Sacerdote: Nec conſilium
à Sapiente:
                     
                     Hierem. 18. 
                     Nec Verbum à Propheta: The Lawe ſhal not departe from the Prieſte:
Nor Counſel from the Wiſe: Nor the VVoorde from the Prophete. But God ſaith vnto
them, Obſtupeſcent Sacerdotes, & Prophetae terrebuntur. Lex peribit à Sacerdote,
& Conſilium à Senioribus. Nox vobis erit pro Viſione: & tenebrae pro Diuinatione:
                     
Youre Prieſtes ſhalbe amaſed: and youre Prophetes ſhalbe at their wittes ende. The Lawe
ſhal periſhe from the Prieſte:Hieremi. 18. Ezechiel. 7. Miche. 6. Galat. 3. 2. Pet. 2. Eſai. 1. and Counſel ſhal wante in the Elders. Ye ſhal haue Nighte in
ſteede of a Viſion: and Darkeneſſe in ſteede of Propheſie.
                  S. Paule ſaithe vnto the Galathians, Ye beganne wel: who hathe thus bewitched you,
that yee ſhoulde not obeie the Truthe?
                      S. Peter ſaithe, As there were Falſe Prophetes
emongeſt the people in olde time, euen ſo emong you there ſhalbe Falſe Prophetes, bringing in
Sectes of Perdition. Of ſutche a chaunge the Prophete Eſaie cōplaineth, Quomodò
facta eſt Meretrix Ciuitas Fidelis? Howe is this Faithful Cittie now become an Harlot?
Deceiue not thus youre ſelfe, M. Harding, with vaine hope. Harken rather to the
voice of our Lorde. Put nothing to his Worde: take nothing from the ſame: turne
neither to the Right hande, nor to the Leafte. So ſhal ye be ſure, ye ſhal not erre.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 10. Diuiſion, 2.
               For our partes, if wee could haue iudged, Ignoraunce, Error, Superſtition,
Idolatrie, mennes Inuentions, and the ſame commonly
diſagreeing with the Holy Scriptures, either to pleaſe God, or to
be ſufficient for thobteining of Euerlaſting Saluation: or if we could
aſcertaine our ſelues, that the Woorde of God was written but for a
time onely, and afterwarde againe ought to be abrogated, and put
away: or els, that the Saienges & Cōmaundementes of God ought

to be ſubiecte to mans wil,Goddes vvoorde mutable. that, whatſoeuer God ſaithe, and commaundethe,
excepte the Biſhop of Rome wil, and Commaunde the
ſame, it muſt be taken as voide, and vnſpoken: If we coulde haue
brought our ſelues to beleue theſe thinges, we graūt, there had benne
no cauſe at al, why we ſhoulde haue leafte theſe mennes Companie.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  God forbid, that either ye, or any Chriſten man ſhoulde iudge, that ignorance, errour, superſtition,
idolatrie, mennes inuentions contrarie to the Scriptures, either pleaſed God, or to be ſufficient
to ſaluation. Bicauſe ye laie this to the catholique Churche,Vntruthe incloſed, knovvē, and vvilful: Reade the anſvveare. we can ſaie no leſſe of you, but
that ye be falſe liers, and diueliſhe ſlaunderers. AndThus partely M. Hardinges Doctours ſaie: partely M. Hardinge him ſelfe: As it ſhal appeare. who teacheth, that Gods worde was written,
but for a time onely? ‡ That his commaundementes be ſubiecte to mans wil? ‡ That Gods ſaienges
and preceptes be voide, except the Biſhop of Rome ratifie them? Here would I ſaie vnto you at leaſt,
fie for ſhame, but that I thinke, I ſhould preuaile no more, then if I ſaide to an impudent and common
Harlot,Ierem. 3. fie for ſhame. VVho maie not plainely ſee, the Scripture verified on you, Frons mulieris
Meretricis facta eſt vobis? Ye haue gotten to you the impudent face of an Harlot.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, it hath pleaſed you, to beſtowe large liueries, of youre Falſe
Liers: Diueliſhe Sclaunderers: Impudent Faces: Common Harlots: with
Fies, and shames, &c. Wherein no man may iuſtly grudge you, to be ſo liberal of
youre owne. Firſt, that by youre Doctrine Ignorance highly pleaſeth God, &
is ſufficient to Saluation, biſides the general practiſe of youre whole Churche, yee
maie ſoone cal to minde, that one of youre deareſt frendes, in moſt honourable Audience,
not long ſithence, openly publiſhed the ſame, in the name, and behoufe of al
his Brethren, as a Secrete Myſterie, and the very bottome of youre Diuinitie:
Ignorance is the Mother of Deuotion. You knowe, M. Harding, that a greate
many bothe worthy, and honourable, are hable to witneſſe, that this is, neither
falſe Lie, nor Diueliſhe Sclaunder. Concerninge Superſtition, and Idolatrie,
what neede we many wordes? The thinge it ſelfe is too wel hable to proue it ſelfe.
Who ſo but looketh into youre Churches, maie eaſily, not onely ſee it with his
eies, but alſo feele it with his fingers. That Goddes Holy VVorde, by youre
Learning, is mutable, and ſerueth onely for a time, youre owne Doctoure Cardinalis
Cuſanus woulde ſoone haue taught you: Notwithſtandinge, it maie ſcarcely
ſeeme lawful for you, beinge ſo learned a man, in the Subſtance of youre owne
Doctrine,Cardinal. Cuſanus, De Authoritate Eccle. & Concilij Supra, & Cōtra Scripturam. to pleade Ignorance. Cardinal Cuſanus woordes be theſe: Scripturae
adaptatae ſunt ad tempus, & variè intelliguntur: Ita vt vno tempore ſecundum currentem
vniuerſalem ritum exponantur: mutato ritu, iterùm Sententia mutetur: The Scriptures
are applied vnto the time, and maie haue ſundrie vnderſtandinges: So that at one time
they maie be expoūded
                      (one waie) accordinge to the vniuerſal current order (of the churche):
and that, the ſame order being broken, the meaning of the Scriptures maie be chaunged. Looke
better on your bookes, M. Hardinge: and ye ſhal ſee, that herein is neither Lie, nor
Sclaunder. That the Holy Scriptures of God, by youre Diuinitie, be not Authentical,
farther then they be ratified by the Pope, ye might haue learned of your
Sylueſter Prierias,
                     Sylueſter Prieria
                           •
                        , contra Lutherum. Maiſter of the Popes Palaice. Thus he writeth: A Doctrina
Romanae Eccleſiae, & Romani Pontificis, Sacra Scriptura robur trahit, & authoritatem.
The Holy Scripture taketh ſtrengthe, and Authoritie of the Doctrine of the
Romaine Churche, and of the Biſhop of Rome.
                      Againe he ſaithe, Indulgentiae Authoritate
Scripturae non innotuere nobis: Sed Authoritate Romanae Eccleſiae,
Romanorum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Pontificum; quae Maior eſt: Pardonnes are not knowen to vs by the
Authoritie of the Scriptures, but by the Authoritie of the Romaine Churche, and of the Biſhoppes
of Rome, whiche is greater, then the Authoritie of the Scriptures.
                     
                  
                  If ye ſaie, theſe be Lies, and Sclaunders, ye offer greate wronge to your owne

Doctours. Neuertheleſſe, if ye ſhal happen to crie out in the impatience of your
Choler, Fy for ſhame: Impudente Faces: Common Harlottes: remember, what
you your ſelfe haue written immediately before, touching the ſame. Theſe be your
owne wordes. Recante them yee maie: But denie them yee maie not. Thus you
ſaie:
                        M. H. fol 192 b. 
                     Chriſte novve requireth of you, not to obeie Peter, and Paule, (that is to
ſaie, the Worde of God) But to obe
                           •
                        e him, vvho ſitteth in theire Chaire. Wee
forge not theſe wordes, M. Hardinge: They are youre owne. Folkes wil thinke,
yee haue no Modeſte Matrones face, if ye ſpeake willingly againſt youre ſelfe.
                  Nowe, ye ſee, M. Hardinge, who teacheth you, That Goddes VVoorde vvas
vVritten onely for a time: And that Goddes Commaundementes are no further
Authentical, but as they be ratified by the Pope: Therefore hencefoorth ye maie
ſpare theſe Lies, and Sclaunders: and crie oute, Fy, and Shame, when ſomme occaſion
ſhalbe offered.Cardin. Cuſan. De Authorita. Eccle. & Concil. Supra & Contra Scripturam. In deede Cardinal Cuſanus ſaithe: Veritas adhaeret Cathedrae.
Quare Membra Cathedrae Vnita, & Pontifici Coniuncta, efficiunt Eccleſiam: The
Truthe cleaueth faſte to the Popes Chaire. Therefore the Members vnited vnto that
Chaire, and ioined vnto the Pope, make the Churche.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 1.
               As touching that we haue now donne, to departe frō that Churche,
whoes errours were proued, & made manifeſt to the worlde, whiche
Churche alſo had already euidently departed from Goddes Worde,
and yet not to depart ſo mutche from it ſelfe, as frō the errours thereof,
& not to doo this diſorderly, or wickedly, but quietly, and ſoberly,
we haue donne nothing herein againſt the doctrine, either of Chriſte,
or of his Apoſtles. For neither is the Churche of God ſutche, as it
maie not be duſked with ſomme ſpot, or aſketh not ſometime reparation.
Els, what neede there ſo many Aſſemblies, & Councelles, without
the whiche,In Concil. Lateranenſ. ſub Iulio. 2. as ſaithe Egidius, the Chriſtian Faithe is not hable
to ſtande? For looke, ſaithe he, hovve often Councelles are diſcontinued,
ſo often is the Churche deſtitute of Chriſte.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  That the Churche is pointes of our Faith neceſſarie to ſaluation erreth, we denie it: andVntruthe. Ye make youre ovvne vvarrante. For Chriſte neuer made ſutche promiſſe to the Churche of Rome. vpon
warrant of Chriſtes promiſe, we tel it you al aſſuredly, ye ſhal neuer be able to proue it.
                  Councels are kept, and Biſhoppes bee made by the ſame prouidence of God, whiche prouideth
partly by that meanes, and partly by other, that the Romaine Faithe, Chaire, and Rocke, ſhal ſtande
for euer. Ad quos (ſaithe S. Cyprian, ſpeaking of them of Rome) perfidia non poteſt habere
acceſſum:
                     Vntruthe, grounded vpon groſſe ignorance. For M. Hard. fovvly miſtaketh S. Cyprians vvhole meaning. to the whiche vnfaithfulnes can not haue acceſſe. He ſaithe not onely, ſhal not haue
acceſſe, but, can not haue acceſſe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It ſéemeth, M. Hardinge, ye haue benne brought vp vnder ſomme poore vnſkilful
Surgian. For ve applie one ſalue to euery ſoare. What ſoeuer bee alleged againſt
you, it is ſufficient for you to anſweare. The churche of Rome erreth not,
hath not erred, can not erre. And to this pourpoſe ye haue brought vs in certaine
wordes of S. Cyprian, farre biſides the Authours meaninge. Whereby it appereth,
that ſommetimes ye allege Authorities of the Fathers, not conſidering, neither
to what ende they ſpake, nor what they meante.
                  For, where as S. Cyprian ſaithe, Vnto the Romaines vnfaithfulneſſe can
haue no acceſſe, he ſpeaketh not of the Vnfaithfulneſſe of Faithe, or Doctrine,
as you by erroure haue imagined, but onely of the Vnfaithfulneſſe of reporte.
The cauſe of writinge that Epiſtle, in ſhorte, was this: Certaine lewde
felowes, refuſinge to ſtande to the iudgemente of the Biſhoppes of their owne

Countrie of Aphrica,
                     The Churche of Rome can not erre. appealed further, and fledde to Rome, with many vntrue,
and forged tales, to winne ſomme credite of their cauſe. Hereunto S. Cyprian
ſaithe, The Romaines be godly, and wiſe men: they wil ſoone be hable, to eſpie
their falſehedde. For vnfaitheful reportes, and lewde tales can haue no acceſſe vnto
them. If ye had conſidered, either the occaſion of the writting, or the whole drifte
of the letter,Cyprian. lib. 1. Epiſt. 3. or the very bare woordes, as they lie, ye mighte eaſily haue, ſeene,
that this onely was S. Cyprians meaning.
                  
                     His woordes be theſe, Poſt iſta adhuc inſuper Pſeudoepiſcopo ſibi ab Haereticis
conſtituto, nauigare audent, & ad Petri Cathedram, vnde vnitas Sacerdotalis
exorta eſt, à Schiſmaticis, & Profanis literas ferre: nec cogitare, eos eſſe Romanos,
quorum Fides, Apoſtolo praedicante, laudata eſt: ad quos Perfidia habere non poſſit acceſſum:
After this, hauing a Falſe Biſhop appointed vnto them by Heretiques, they dare to
take ſhipping, and vnto Peters Chaire, and vnto that Principal Churche, from whence the
Prieſtely vnitie grewe firſte, to carrie letters from Schiſmatiques, and lewde menne: Neither
cōſider they, that the Romaines are that people, whoſe Faith is praiſed by S. Paule the
Apoſtle: vnto vvhome Vnfaithfulneſſe (of reportes, & tales) can haue no acceſſe.
                  
                     If yee doubte of this Expoſition, reade theſe woordes, touchinge the ſame,
goeinge before in the ſame Epiſtle:
                     In eadem Epiſt. Roman cum Mendaciorum ſuorum
merce nauigarunt. Quaſi Veritas poſt eos nauigare non poſſet: quae Mendaces
linguas rei certa probatione conuinceret. They ſaile to Rome with the
Marchandiſe of their Lies: as though the Truethe coulde not ſaile after them, that by proufe
of the certaintie, might controlle their lieing tongues. This is that
                      Vnfaithfulneſſe, that
S. Cyprian ſpeaketh of: and not the Vnfaithefulneſſe of Faithe, and Doctrine.
                  
                  Nowe, touchinge this Appealinge, and fleeing to Rome, leſte yee ſhoulde
thinke, by occaſion of theſe woordes, that S. Cyprian alloweth it, or thinketh
wel of it: ye ſhal finde in the ſame Epiſtle, y• he vtterly miſliketh it, & condēneth it.
For thus he ſaithe,Cyprian in eadē Epiſt. 
                     Acquum eſt pariter, & iuſtū, vt vniuſcuiuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         cauſa illic audiatur,
vbi crimen admiſſum eſt: It is meete and right, that euery mannes cauſe be pleaded in
that Countrie, where the faulte was committed, &c.
                      Againe, Oportet eos, quibus
praeſumus, non circumcurſare: It is not meete, that they, ouer whome wee haue Juriſdiction,
ſhould renne aboute the Worlde:
                      He meaneth to Rome.
                  
                     And againe, Niſi paucis deſperatis, & perditis Minor videtur eſſe Authoritas
Epiſcoporum in Aphrica conſtitutorum, &c. Onleſſe a fewe deſperate, and
wicked menne thinke, the Authoritie of the Biſhoppes of Aphrica is leſſe, then the Authoritie
of the Biſhoppes of Rome. By theſe woordes S.
                      Cyprian maketh the Biſhop of
Rome equal in Authoritie vvith him ſelfe, and other Biſhoppes. Wherefore I
muſte conclude with other woordes of S. Cyprian in the ſame Epiſtle: Haec eſt,
Frater, vera dementia, non cogitare, quòd Mendacia non diu fallant: Noctē tam diu eſſe,
quoad illuceſcat Dies: O my Brother, this in deede is very madneſſe, not to thinke, that Lies
cannot longe deceiue: The Nighte laſteth no longer, but vntil the Daie beginne to ſpringe.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 1. &. 2.
               Or, if there be no perile, that harme maie come to the Churche,
what neede is there, to reteine to no pourpoſe the names of Biſhoppes?
For ſo it is nowe commonly vſed among them. For if there
be no Sheepe, that maie ſtraie, why bee they called Shepeheardes?
If there be no Cittie, that maie bee betraied, why bee they called
VVarchemenne? If there bee nothing, that maie renne to ruine,
why bee they called Pillers? Anon after the firſte Creation of the
Worlde, the Churche of God began to ſpreade abroade, and the ſame

was inſtructed with the Heauenly Worde, whiche God him ſelfe pronounced
with his owne Mouthe. It was alſo furniſhed with Diuine
Ceremonies. If was taught by the Sprite of God, by the Patriarches,
and Prophetes, & cōtinued ſo euen til the time, that Chriſte ſhewed
him ſelfe to vs in the fleſhe. This notwithſtanding, how often,
O good God, in the meane while, and howe horribly was the ſame
Churche darkened, and decaied?
               Where was that Churche then, when al fleaſhe vpon Earthe had
defiled his owne waie? Where was it, when amongeſt the numbre of
the VVhole VVorlde, there were onely eight perſones (& neither
they al chaſte, and good neither) whom Goddes wil was ſhoulde be
ſaued aliue from that Vniuerſal deſtruction, and Mortalitie? when
Elie the Prophete ſo lamētabldy & bitterly made his moane,3. Reg. 13. that onely
him ſelfe was leafte of al the Whole Worlde, whiche did truely and
dewly worſhip God?Eſai. 1. and when Eſaie ſaide, The Siluer of Goddes
people (that is, of the Churche) vvas become Droſſe: and that
the ſame Cittie vvhiche aforetime had ben faithful, vvas novv become
an Harlot: and that in the ſame there vvas no parte ſounde
throughout the vvhole body, from the head to the foote? Or els,
when Chriſte him ſelfe ſaide, that the Houſe of God vvas made, by
the Phariſeis and Prieſtes,
                  Math. 21. 
                  a Denne of theues? Of a truthe, the
Churche, euen as a cornefilde, except it bee eared, manured, tilled,
and trimmed, wil in ſtede of Wheate, bringe foorthe Thiſtles, Darnel,
and Nettels. For this cauſe did God ſende euer among, bothe
Prophetes, and Apoſtles, and laſte of al his own Sonne, who might
bringe home the people into the right waie, and repaire anewe the
tottering Churche after ſhe had erred.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Theſe and the like places haue ben already alleaged, of olde time, againſt the Catholiques, by the
Donatiſtes, as S. Auguſtine ſheweth: and of late yeeres by youre ſcholemaiſter Iohn Caluine of Geneua.
VVe neede not to ſtudie for newe anſweres to the argument made out of theſe and ſuche other
places, mutche fitter for this purpoſe, then theſe are, ſithe that the ſame is ſo wel anſwered by S. Auguſtine.
Oftentimes (ſaithe he) Goddes worde rebuketh the wicked ſortes of the Churche ſo,De Vnitate Eccle. ca. 12. as
though al were ſuche, and none at al remained good. For thereby we are warned, them in their
certaine number to be called al, as mutche to ſale, al the children of hel. But Sirs, what if the
Churche at the beginning of the worlde, and at the general drowning, was of ſmal number? And
what if the Synagog were ſometime quite extinguiſhed? Muſt it therefore folowe, that the church
alſo after that God hath geuen to Chriſte his Sonne the endes of the worlde to be his poſſeſsion,Pſalm. 3. maie
nowe be brought to a fewe, and to faile altogether? VVhere was the Churche (ſaie ye) when of
al the worlde there were but eight perſons, and they onely ſaued aliue from the vniuerſal deſtruction?
Forſooth they were in Noes Arke. And nowe haue weBut the ſame Arke is not the Churche of Rome. our Noes Arke alſo, in whiche who ſo euer
abideth not, the ſame is drowned.
                  Neither were the Prophetes and Apoſtles ſent, nor Chriſte came him ſelfe to repaire a newe the
Churche, whiche had in faithe wholy erred: but both they were ſent, and he came, that it ſhoulde
not wholly erre.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It is true,The Churche in fevve. that ye ſaie, In the Holy Scriptures this woorde, Al, is often vſed
in ſteede of, Many. And thus, ye ſaie, it fared with the Synagog of the Ievves:
for that then the Faithful were ſommetimes broughte vnto a ſmal number: ſommetimes
were vtterly decaied, and conſumed to nought. And in this ſenſe, ye ſaie,
Elias cōplained,3. Regum. 19. that the Prophetes of God were al ſlaine, & he onely le
                        •
                     te aliue.
                  
                     But nowe, ye ſaie, the Churche maie not be brought to a fevve. For God
hath geuen to Chriſte his Sonne the endes of the worlde to bee his poſſeſſion. Yet
                      Chriſte
him ſelfe, that beſte knewe the reache, and limites of his poſſeſſion, ſaithe thus,
When the
                      Sonne of Manne ſhal comme,
                     Luke. 21. Ambroſi. in Lucam. lib. 10. Apocalyp. 12. 
                     thinke you, he ſhal finde Faithe in the worlde?
Whereupon S.
                      Ambroſe ſaithe, Tunc Fides rara: Vt ipſe, quaſi addubitans, Dominus
iſta dixerit: Then ſhal Faithe be geaſon: So that our Lorde ſpake theſe woordes, as
doubting therof, whether there ſhould be any Faithful leaft, or no. And S.
                      Iohn in his Reuelatiōs
ſaith, Mulier fugit in ſolitudinem, vbi habet locum paratum à Deo: The wooman
(whereby is meante, not the
                      Synagog of the Ievves, but the Churche of
Chriſte) fleeth into the wilderneſſe: where ſhe hath a place prouided of God. By whiche
woordes is meante, that in time of
                      Ignorance, and Perſecution, the Churche is
without Countenaunce,
                     2. Theſſal. 2. 
                     and vnknowen. S. Paule ſaithe, Before the Daie of the
Lorde, there ſhalbe a departing from the Faithe of Chriſte. By theſe it appeareth, that
the decaie of the Churche ſhalbe vniuerſal: and that the remanentes ſhal not bee
many.
                     Vincentius Lirinenſis. 
                     Therefore Vincentius Lirinenſis putteth the caſe on this wiſe: Quid
ſi nouella aliqua contagio iam non portiunculā tantùm, ſed totam pariter Eccleſiam
commaculare conetur? Tunc item prouidebit, vt Antiquitati inhaereat: What if ſomme
newe corruption goe aboute to inuade, not onely ſomme portion of the Churche, but alſo the
whole vniuerſal Churche altogeather? Then muſt a Chriſtian man ſettle him ſelfe to cleaue to
Antiquitie: That is to ſaie, to folowe the Primitiue Churche of the Apoſtles, and
Ancient Fathers. This caſe would he neuer haue moued, onleſſe he had thought,
the
                      VVhole vniuerſal Churche might happen by ſomme erroure to be corrupted.
Surely S. Chryſoſtome,Chryſoſtom. in 1. ad Corinth. Homil. 36. 
                     ſpeakinge of the ſtate of the Churche, that he ſawe
in his time, ſaithe thus: Videtur Eccleſia hodiè mulieri, quae manſuetudine veteri exciderit,
ſimilis: quae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Symbola tantùm foelicitatis illius quaedam referat: Arcas, &
Scrinia rerum pretioſiſſimarum adhuc retinens, Theſauro deſtituta. Huic mulieri Eccleſia
hodie videtur ſimilis: The Churche this daie is like vnto a woman, that hath quite
loſte al her olde modeſtie: and that beareth onely certaine badges, and tokens of her former felicitie:
and that, beinge vtterly berefte of the treaſures, keepeth onely the Caſes, and Boxes
of the pretious thinges, ſhe had before. To ſuche a vvoman the churche this daie
maie be likened.Hieronym. in vita Malchi. 
                     Likewiſe S. Hierome, ſpeaking of that he ſawe by experience
in his time, ſaithe thus: Eccleſia, poſtquam ad Chriſtianos principes peruenit,
potentia quidem, & diuitijs maior, ſed virtutibus minor facta eſt: The churche,
after that ſhe is comme to Chriſtian Princes, in deede is greatter in wealth, and richeſſe: But in
vertue, and holineſſe ſhe is leſſe, then ſhe was before. Therefore ſaith
                      Chryſoſtome, Haec
dico,Chryſoſtom. Ad Populum Antioch. Homil. 4. ne quis miretur Eccleſiam propter multitudinem: ſed vt ipſam probatam reddere
ſtudeamus: Thus mutche I tel you, not that wee ſhoulde auaunce the Churche bicauſe of
the Multitude, and encreaſe of people: But that wee ſhoulde endeuour to adourne her
with vertue.
                     
                  
                  
                     Nowe,
                     Bernard. in Conuerſione Pauli, Sermo. 1. 
                     where ye ſaie, the Churche nowe can neuer be brought to fewe, S. Bernarde
ſaithe thus vnto God, by waie of moane: Coniuraſſe videtur contra te vniuerſitas
populi Chriſtiani, à minimo vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad maximum: A planta pedis vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad verticem
non eſt ſanitas vlla. Egreſſa eſt iniquitas à Senioribus Iudicibus Vicarijs tuis, qui
videntur regere populum tuum: O Lorde, the Vniuerſal Companie of Chriſtian

people ſeemeth to haue conſpired againſte thee, from the lovveſt vnto the higheſt.
From the ſole of the foote, vnto the croune of the heade, there is no whole place. Iniquitie
and wickedneſſe is gonne foorthe from thy Elder Iudges,
                     Ci
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        ur ab Holco
                           •
                        o in Sapier
                           •
                        . Lectio. 23. 
                     that be thy Vicares, that are
thought to rule thy people. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Inteſtinalis, & inſanabilis eſt plaga
Eccleſiae: the wounde of the Churche is inwarde, and paſte recouer. Likewiſe
                      Baptiſta
Mantuane complaineth vnto Pope Leo:
                  
                     Sancte Pater ſuccurre Leo,
                        Baptis. Mantuanus, Faſtor. 4. Reſpublica Chriſti
                     Labitur: aegrotat
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Fides iam proxima morti.
                  
                  Healpe, Holy Father Leo: Chriſtes Common Wealth (that is, the Churche) is falling
downe: the Faithe is ſicke, and like to die.
                  
                     So likewiſe ſaithe he,
                     Fortalitium Fidei, lib. 5. 
                     that wrote the Forte of Faithe, Et ſi in hoc Daemonum
bello cadant Religioſi Principes, & Milites, & Praelati Eccleſiaſtici, & Subditi, tamen
ſemper manent aliqui, in quibus ſaluatur Veritas Fidei, & Iuſtificatio bonae Conſcientiae.
Et ſi non niſi duo homines remanerent in mundo, in eis ſaluaretur Eccleſia,
quae eſt Vnitas Fidelium: In this battel of Diuelles, notwithſtandinge the Godly
Princes, the Souldiers, the Eccleſiaſtical Prelates, and Subiectes be ouerthrowen, yet euermore
ſomme remaine, in whome the Truethe of Faithe, and the Righteouſneſſe of a good
Conſcience is preſerued. And although there remained but tvvo menne in the
vVorlde, yet in the ſame twoo the Churche of God ſhoulde be ſaued: vVhiche
Churche is the Vnitie of the Faitheful. The Churche of God is often compared
to the Moone,Auguſt. Epiſt. 48. 
                     which ſometimes is ful, & round, & bright, & glorious: ſommetimes
is wholy ſhadowed & drowned in darkeneſſe: and yet notwithſtanding is not
conſumed, but in Subſtance remaineth ſtil. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Aliquando in
Solo Abel Eccleſia erat: et expugnatus eſt à fratre malo, & perdito Caim.Auguſt. in Pſal. 128. Aliquando
in Solo Enoch Eccleſia erat: & tranſlatus eſt ab iniquis: Sommetime the Churche was
in onely Abel: and he was deſtroied by his brother vvicked Caim. Sommetime the
Churche was onely in 
                        •
                     noch: and he was tranſlated from the wicked. Your owne
                     
Panormitane ſaithe:
                     Extra de Electione. Significaſ
                           •
                        i. Abb. Poſſibile eſt, quòd Vera Fides Chriſti remaneret in Vno
Solo: Atque ita verum eſt dicete, quòd Fides non deficit in Eccleſia. Hoc patuit poſt
Paſſionem Chriſti. Nam Fides remanſit tantùm in Beata Virgine. Quia omnes alij ſcandalizati
ſunt. Tamen Chriſtus ante Paſſionem orauerat pro Petro, vt non deficeret Fides
ſua. Ergo, Eccleſia non dicitur deficere, nec etiam errare, ſi remanet Vera Fides
in Vno Solo, It is poſsible, the trewe Faithe of Chriſte maie remaine in one alone:
And ſo it is true to ſaie, that Faithe faileth not in the Churche. This thinge appeared after
Chriſtes Paſſion. For then the Faithe remained onely in the Bleſſed Virgin. For al the reſte
(bothe the Apoſtles, and others) were offended. Yet had Chriſte praied for Peter before his
Paſſion, that his Faithe ſhoulde not faile. Therefore vve maie not ſaie, the Churche
faileth, or erreth, if the Faithe remaine but in one alone.
                  
                     Againe,
                     Auguſt. in Pſal. 88. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Non tamen propter hos remanebit Chriſtus
ſine Haereditate. Nouit Dominus, qui ſint ſui, &c. Yet ſhal not Chriſte, bicauſe of
the wicked, remaine without his Enheritance. The Lord knovveth vvho be his ovvn.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 13. Diuiſion. 1.
               But leſte ſomme man ſhould ſaie, that the foreſaid thinges happened
onely in the time of the Lawe, of Shadowes, and of Infancie,
when the Truth lay hid vnder Figures, and Ceremonies, when nothing
as yet was brought to perfection, when the Lawe was not
grauen in mennes hartes, but in ſtone; (And yet were that but a fooliſhe
diſtinctiō) for euen at thoſe daies there was the very ſame God,
that is nowe, the ſame Spirite, the ſame Chriſte, the ſame Faith, the

ſame Doctrine,The Churche of Rome maie erre. the ſame Hope, the ſame Enheritaunce, the ſame Couenaunt,
and the ſame Efficacie and Vertue of Gods Woorde: Euſebius
alſo ſaith, Al the Faithful, euen from Adam vntil Chriſte, were
in dede very Chriſtians, though they were not ſo termed): But, as I
ſaid, leſte menne ſhould thus ſaie ſtil, Paule the Apoſtle founde the
like faultes, & falles euen then in the prime, and chiefe of the Goſpel,
in the greatteſt perfection, & in the light: ſo that he was compelled to
write in this ſorte to the Galathians, whom he had wel before inſtructed:
I feare me (quod he) leſte I haue laboured amongeſt you
to ſmal pourpoſe, and leſte ye haue heard the Goſpel in vaine. O
my litle Children, of vvhom I trauaile anevve, til Chriſte be faſhoned
againe in you: And as for the Churche of the Corinthiās,
how fowlely it was defiled, it is nothing needeful to rehearſe. Now
tel me, might the Churches of the Galathians, and Corinthians
goe amiſſe, and the Churche of Rome alone may it not faile nor goe
amiſſe?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVe aunſwere, that in partes of the churche, faultes may be founde, and ſundrie men that ſeme
to be of the Churche, and be in the Churche in deede, maie fal and periſh: al this we graunt.vve ſpeake not of the vvhole Vniuerſal church but onely of the Churche of Rome. But
that the whole, catholique, and vniuerſal Churche, whoſe faith we profeſſe, may erre, fall, and faile:
that we denie vtterly, whiche had ben this Defenders part to proue, els he talketh to no purpoſe. And
where S. Paule rebuketh al the Galathians in general, as though al had forſaken their faith, he doth
it after the wonte of the Prophetes, both in that and other epiſtles, for the greater partes ſake, reprehending
al, though ſome deſerue praiſe. As for the Corinthians, though many among them were
faulty, yet who conſidereth how be beginneth his epiſtle to them, ſhal finde that heBut the ſame Churche this daie is ſubiect to the Religion of Mahomete, and is no Churche. acknowleged a
Churche among them. For thus he writeth: Paule by vocation by Apoſtle, &c. to the churche of God
which is at Corinth. &c.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  That in any particulare Churche faultes may be founde, that, ye ſaie, ye wil confeſſe. But that
the whole Catholique Vniuerſal Churche may erre and faile, that, you ſaie, ye denie vtterly.
                  Notwithſtandinge it is certaine, that the Churches of Corinthe, and Galatia,
and ſundrie others, are nowe, not in any Particulare portion, but thorowly
departed from the Faith: and are nowe wholy ſubiecte to the Turke.
                  This therfore muſte needes be your meaning, that al be it al other Particulare
Churches throughout the worlde happen to erre, yet the Churche of Rome,
that is to ſaie, the Pope and his Cardinalles, can neuer erre. This Leſſon, I
trowe,Pet. de Palude, De poteſtate Curatorum, Ar. 6. ye learned of Petrus de Palude: For neither Chriſte, nor any of his Apoſtles
euer taught it you. This woorthy Doctour ſaith thus: Tota Eccleſia Petri
non poteſt à Fide deficere. Omnes autem Eccleſiae Apoſtolorū omniū poſſunt
deficere à Fide totaliter, indigentes ab Eccleſia Petri confirmari: The whole Churche
of Peter, cannot wholy faile from the Faithe. But al the other Churches of al the Apoſtles
may faile wholy from the Faithe, hauinge neede to be confirmed by the Churche of
Peter.
                     
                     
                        M. Hard. fo. 16. b And to this ende, you your ſelfe cal the Romaine Faith, the Catholique Faith:
making no maner difference betweene either other.Diſt. 21. Omnes. And therefore Pope Nicolas
thus auaunceth, and thundreth out his owne Authoritie: Non quaelibet Terrena
Sententia, ſed illud Verbum, quo conſtructum eſt Coelum, & Terra, per quod denique

omnia condita ſunt Elementa, Romanam fundauit Eccleſiam: Not any worldly
Sectence, but the ſelfe ſame Woorde, where by Heauen, and Earthe was made, and whereby
al the Elementes were created, was it, that founded the Churche of Rome. By whiche
woordes he meaneth, that the Romaine Faithe ſhal ſtande as faſte, as the Fundations
of Heauen, and Earthe. Euen ſo Peter aſſured his promiſſe vnto Chriſte:
Although,
                     Matthae. 26. ſaide he, al others denie thee, yet I alone wil not denie thee. No, though I
ſhoulde preſently die with thee, yet I onely wil neuer denie thee. Neuertheleſſe, when
it came to trial, the ſame Peter denied him firſte.
                  
                     Nowe, that the Churches of Rome, whiche you cal the Catholique Churche,
maie erre, & be foreſaken of God, it is euident by the plaine woordes of S. Paule.
For thus he writeth euen vnto the Churche of Rome:
                     
                     Roman. 11. 
                     Quòd ſi aliqui ex ramis fracti
ſunt &c. If any of the boughes be broken of, and thou, beinge a wilde Oliue tree arte
graffed into the natural Oliue, and made Partaker of the roote, and of the fatneſſe thereof,
boaſte not thee ſelfe againſte the boughes. If thou boaſte, (remember) thou beareſt not the
Roote: but the roote beareth thee. Thou wilte ſaie, The boughes are broken of, that I might
be graffed in. Wel, they are broken of for theire Infidelitie: but thou ſtandeſt faſte by Faithe.
Be not highe minded: but ſtande in awe. Seeinge God hath not ſpared the Natural boughes,
leſte happily he ſpare not thee. See therefore the goodneſſe, and the ſharpeneſſe of God: His
ſharpeneſſe towardes them, that are fallen awaie: but his goodneſſe towardes thee, if thou
continewe,Alioqui & tu excidèris. and remaine in goodneſſe. Othervviſe thou (beinge the Churche of Rome)
ſhalte likevviſe be ſmitten of. Hereby it is plaine, that the Churche of Rome
maie faile, and fal from God, no leſſe, then other like Churches. For otherwiſe
this aduertiſement of S. Paule had benne in vaine.
                     
                  
                  
                     Therefore Hormiſda,Hormiſda pp, ad Epiſcopos Hiſpaniae. 
                     beinge him ſelfe Biſhop of Rome, writeth thus, Dilectiſsimi
Fratres, continuas preces ad Dominum fundamus, & iugi deprecatione poſcamus,
vt & inſtitutione, & opere illi, cuius eſſe membra cupimūs, adhaereamus. nec vnquam
ab illa via, quae Chriſtus eſt, deuio tramite declinemus: ne ab eo iuſtè, quem impiè
reliquerimus, deſeramur: My dearely beloued Brethren, let vs Praie vnto God,
that bothe by profeſſion, and by order of life, we maie cleaue to him, whoſe Members we
deſire to be: and that by any crooked path we neuer turne from that waie, whiche is Chriſte:
leſte vvee (beinge the Churche of Rome) be iuſtely forſaken of him, vvhom vvickedly
vvee haue forſaken. Thus would not the Pope him ſelfe haue written in
the behoufe of the Churche of Rome, yf he had thought, the ſame Churche coulde
neuer haue erred.
                     Chryſoſtom. De varijs locis in Matth. Homi. 20. 
                     To be ſhorte, Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Eccleſia, quocun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      modo
egerit contra voluntatem Chriſti, abijci digna eſt. Non autem abijcitur propter
longanimitatem Chriſti, niſi ſola cauſa Tranſgreſsionis: The Churche, by what waie ſo
euer ſhee doo againſte the wil of Chriſte, is woorthy to be geuen ouer. Yet through the patience
of Chriſte, ſhee is neuer geuen ouer, but onely for breakinge his commaundementes.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 13. Diuiſion. 2.
               Surely Chriſte propheſied longe before of his Churche, that the
time ſhoulde comme, when Deſolation ſhoulde ſtande in the Holy
Place.2. Theſſal. Daniel. 8. And S. Paule ſaith, that Antichriſte ſhoulde once ſet vp his
owne Tabernacle, & ſtately Seate in the Temple of God: and that
the time ſhould be, vvhen menne ſhould not avvaie vvith Holſome
Doctrine, but be turned backe vnto fables, and lies, & that within
the very Churche.
                  1. Petri. 2. Daniel. 8. 
                  Peter likewiſe telleth, how there ſhoulde be
teachers of lies in the Churche of Chriſte: Daniel the Prophete ſpeakinge
of the later times of Antichriſte, Truthe, ſaithe he, in that
ſeaſon ſhalbe throvven vnder foote, & trodden vpō in the vvorld.
                  
And Chriſte ſaithe,Abomination of Deſolation The calamitie and confuſion of thinges ſhalbe
ſo excedinge greate,Matth. 24. that euen the choſen, if it vvere poſsible,
ſhalbe broughte into erroure: & that theſe thinges ſhal comme to
paſſe, not emongeſt the Gentiles, and Turkes, but euen in the
Holy Place, in the Temple of God, in the Churche, & in the Companie
& Felovvſhip of thoſe, whiche profeſſe the name of Chriſte.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Prophecie of Daniel concerninge the Abomination of Deſolation, whereof Chriſte ſpake in
the Goſpell, wee thinke with theVntruthe. For the beſte learned Diuines haue thought othervviſe: As it ſhal appeare. beſt learned Diuines, that it is to be referred, not to the ende of
the worlde,Daniel. 9. Matth. 24. nor to the driuinge away of the Faithe by Antichriſte, as ye imagine, but to the conſummation
and final endinge of the Synagog.
                  Touchinge that ye ſaie of Antichriſte, it maketh nothinge againſte the Catholikes, againſt whoſe
Faithe he preuaileth not. Mary, many good menne thinke, that he hath already begonne to ſet vp his
Tabernacle, and ſtately ſeate in the hartes of many, whiche ought to be the Temple of God, by his
foreronners Martine Luther, Zuinglius, Caluine, and you their ſcholers, with the reſte of that wicked
rable. VVhere ye adde, and that within the Churche, it isVntruthe For S. Paule ſaithe plainely, He ſhal ſit in the Temple of God. 2. Theſſal. 2. more then ye founde in
S. Paule. But we vnderſtande your good will, though wee finde you without euer a good reaſon.
And ye wee graunte,1. 
                           •
                        oan. 2. ye came out from vs, as S. Iohn ſaithe, but yee were not of vs. For if ye had
benne of vs, yee woulde haue taried with vs. So maie the ſaieinge of S. Peter be referred to you,
and likewiſe that of Daniel, whiche ye alleage, though the woordes be not in Daniel. For your
ſchoolemaiſters and you are a limme of Antichriſte and ye labour what ye can, to ouerthrowe and
treade vnder foote the true Faithe of the Churche, and the Catholike Religion.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  What néeded you,2. Theſsalon. 2. Nicol. Lyra. Hieronym. ad Algaſiam. Hippolytus ma
                           •
                        . M. Hardinge, to talke ſo mutche in the fauoure of Antichriſte?
Or, why ſhould you be gréeued, to heare him called the Abomination of
Deſolation? S. Paule calleth Antichriſte, the Man of Sinne:
                      Somme ſaie, He ſhalbe
wholy poſſeſſed of the Diuel: Your owne Hippolytus ſaithe, He ſhal be the Diuel
him ſelfe. Yet haue fewe menne founde them ſelues gréeued with ſutche ſaieinges.
                  I knowe, the Woordes of Chriſte, & of Daniel, by diuers Expoſitions, haue
beene diuerſly applied. Yet maie ye not wel thus condemne al their Iudgementes,
that haue applied the ſame to Antichriſte. Origen one of the moſte Ancient Fathers
of y• Churche, entreatinge of Antichriſte, contrarie to your Expoſition, ſaith
thus:Origen. in Matthae. Tracta. 29. Chryſoſt in Opere Imperfecto, Homil. 49. 
                     Ipſe eſt Abominatio Deſolationis: Antichriſte is y• Abomination of Deſolation.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Hic Antichriſtus dicitur Abominatio Deſolationis:
quia multorum Chriſtianorum animas facturus eſt deſolatas à Deo: This Antichriſte
is called the Abomination of Deſolation: for that he ſhal cauſe the Soules of many Chriſtianes
to be deſolate, and foreſaken of God. Gregorius Nazianzenus ſaithe, Antichriſtus
veniet in Deſolatione Mundi.Gregor. Nazian. Significatio in Ezechielem. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Eſt enim Abominatio Deſolationis: Antichriſte ſhal
comme in the Deſolation of the worlde: For he is the Abomination of Deſolation. S.
                      Hierome
ſaithe, Abominatio Deſolationis intelligi poteſt omne dogma peruerſum:
By the Abomination of Deſolation we maie vnderſtande any manner Peruerſe Doctrine:
Whereof, no doubte, in
                      Antichriſte ſhal wante no ſtoare. And againe, ſpeakinge
namely of the Man of vvickedneſſe, the Aduerſarie of Chriſte, vvhiche is Antichriſte,
that lifteth vp him ſelfe aboue al,
                     Hieronym. in Matth. Cap. 24. Eodem loco. Ambraſi in Lucam, Lib. 10. Ca. 21. 
                     that is called God, He ſaithe,
                      Abominatio
Deſolationum erit in Templo, vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad Conſummationem temporis: The Abomination
of Deſolation ſhal ſtande in the Churche, vntil the Conſummation, or ende of time.
                  
                  S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Abominatio Deſolationis execrabilis Aduentus Antichriſti
eſt: The Abomination of Deſolation is the curſed comminge of Antichriſte.
                     
S. Hilarie expounding theſe ſelfe ſame woordes of Chriſte, When ye ſhal ſee ye 
                        Abomination
of Deſolation ſtandinge in the Holy place, ſaith thus, De Antichriſti temporibus
haec loquutus eſt:
                     Hilari. in Matthae. Canon. 25. Theodoret. in Daniel. Ca. 12. Euſebius Emiſſen. 
                     Chriſte ſpake theſe woordes of the time of Antichriſte.
                      Likewiſe
ſaith Theodoretus, writinge vpon y• Prophete Daniel, Abominationem Deſolationis
ipſum vocat Antichriſtum. And biſides others, the moſte Ancient, & moſt
Catholique Fathers, likewiſe ſaithe Euſebius Emiſſenus in a ſpecial Homilie to
this purpoſe. Now, M. Hardinge, whereas ye ſo certainely aſſure your ſelfe, y• theſe woordes of chriſte maie in no wiſe be taken of y• confuſion, & horroure, y• ſhalbe at
y• ende of y• worlde, biſides al theſe Learned & Godly Fathers, I beſeche you, conſider
the whole drifte,Matthae. 24. & circumſtance of the place, & the woordes, that Chriſte ſpake
immediately before. The Apoſtles demaunded him this queſtion: What is the token
of thy Comminge (to Iudgement) and of y• ende of the worlde? To this queſtion Chriſte
anſweareth in this wiſe: Take heede, yt noman deceiue you. Many ſhal comme in my name,
and ſhal ſaie, I am Chriſte: and ſhal deceiue many. Yee ſhal heare of warres, and talkes of warres:
But be not yee troubled: Al theſe thinges muſt happen: yet this is not the ende, &c. Many
Paſſe Prophetes ſhal riſe, and ſhal deceiue many. Iniquitie ſhal encreaſe: Charitie ſhal waxe
colde. Who ſo continueth vnto the ende, he ſhalbe ſaued. And this Goſpel of the Kingedome
ſhalbe Preached in al the worlde, for a witneſſe vnto al Nations, and then ſhal come the
ende.
                      The nexte woordes, that folowe, are theſe, Therefore when ye ſhal ſee the Abomination
of Deſolation, yt was ſpoken of by Daniel, &c. Thus maie yee ſée, M.
Harding, by the very courſe, & te
                        •
                     oure of Chriſtes anſweare, yt, if the Iudgemente,
be the Iudgemente: if the Ende, be the Ende: if the VVorlde, be y• 
                     VVorlde, then
muſt theſe woordes needes haue relation to the Ende of the vvorlde: what ſo euer
any of your beſte Learned Diuines, of whom ye haue hitherto named none, haue
taught, or ſaide to y• contrarie.Antichriſte ſtandinge in the Churche of God. Whereas wee ſaie, Antichriſte ſhal ſtande euen
vvithin the Churche, y•, ye ſaie, we finde not in S. Paule. Notwithſtandinge, oure good
wil, ye ſaie, ye vnderſtande: although ye finde in vs neuer a good Reaſon. As for the goodneſſe
of our Reaſons, wée wil not ſtriue. But whether S. Paule
                      ſaie, y• 
                     Antichriſte
ſhal ſtande in y• Churche, or no, let vs be iudged by S. Paule. His woordes be plaine
Adeò,
                     2. Theſſalon. 2. 
                     vt in Templo Dei ſedeat, tanquam Deus: So that he wil ſitte in the Churche of
God, as if he were God.
                      If the Churche of God, be the Churche, then dothe S. Paule
ſaie, Antichriſte ſhal ſitte vvithin the Churche. In like ſenſe Chriſte ſaith, Antichriſte
ſhal ſitte in the Holy place:
                     Matthae. 24. Auguſt. De Ciuita. Dei. Li. 20, Cap. 19. In eodem Cap. By whiche woordes many of the beſt learned
Fathers haue expounded, the Churche. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Non enim Templum
alicuius Idoli, aut Daemonis, Templum Dei Apoſtolus diceret: For the Temple of an
Idole, or of a Diuel, the Apoſtle would neuer cal the Temple of God. And he addeth
further, Quidam putant rectiùs Latinè dici, ſicut in Graeco eſt, nō, in Templo Dei, ſed,
in Templum Dei ſedeat: Tanquam ipſe ſit Templum Dei, quod eſt Eccleſia.
Sicut dicimus, Sedet in amicum, id eſt, velut amicus: Somme menne thinke, we ſhould better
reade it in Latine,
                     
                     2. Theſſalon. 2. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     as it is in the Greeke, not, He ſitteth in the Temple of God, but, he ſitteth
For, or As the Tēple of God: As if he him ſelfe vvere the Temple of God,
vvhiche is the Churche. As we ſaie, He ſitteth for a Frende, yt is, He ſitteth as a Frende.
Here S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Antichriſte ſhal not onely ſitte in y• 
                     Churche, but alſo
ſhal ſhewe him ſelfe in outwarde appearance,Herueus De Poteſtate Pap. Ca. 23. as if he him ſelfe were the Churche
it ſelfe. Now, M. Hardinge, who this ſhoulde be, I reporte me to your owne Doctoures,
of whom one hath written thus, Papa quodammodò virtualiter eſt tota Eccleſia:
The Pope in a māner by waie of vertue, or Power,
                     
                     Hieronym. in Ca. 24. Matthaei, Chryſoſtom. in Opere imperfecto, Homil. 49. 
                     is the whole Vniuerſal Churche.
                     
S. Hierome ſaith, Antichriſtus ſtabit in loco Sancto, id eſt, in Eccleſia, & ſe oſtendet,
vt Deum: Antichriſte ſhal ſtande in the Holy place, that is to ſaie, in the Churche: and ſhal
ſhewe him ſelfe, as if he were God.
                      S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Incident in Abominationem
Deſolationis, quae ſtat in Sanctis Eccleſiae locis: They ſhal fal into the Abomination
of Deſolation, that ſtandeth in the Holy places of the Churche.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Hilarie ſaithe,
                     Hilarius contra Auxentium. Vnum moneo: Cauete Antichriſtum. Malè enim vos parietū
                     
                     ch. coepit:
                     Abomination of Deſolation 2. Theſſal 2. 
                     male Eccleſiam Dei in tectis, aedificijs
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         veneramini. Anne ambiguum
eſt, in ijs Antichriſtum eſſe ſeſſurum? One thinge I reade you: Beware of Antichriſte.
For it is not wel, that ye ſhould be thus in loue with walles: It is not wel, that ye
ſhould honoure the Churche in houſes, and buildinges. Is there any doubte, but Antichriſte
ſhal ſitte in the ſame? S. Paule ſaithe, Myſterium iniquitatis operatur:
(Sathan) woorketh the Myſterie of iniquitie: That is to ſaie, he openeth not him
ſelfe, but what ſo euer he doothe, he doothe it in couerte. Vpō whiche woordes Anſelmus
ſaith,
                     Anſelmus. 
                     Iniquitas eorum eſt Myſtica, id eſt, Pietatis nomine pallia
                           •
                        a: The iniquitie
of them is Myſtical, that is to ſaie, It is cloked, and coered with y• name of Godlineſſe.
                  
                     Therefore S.
                     Chryſoſtom in opere Imperfe. Homil. 49. 
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Chriſtiani, qui ſunt in Chriſtianitate, volentes
accipere firmitatem Fidei verae, ad nullam rem fugiant, niſi ad Scripturas,
&c. The Chriſtianes, that be in Chriſtendome, willinge to haue the ſtedfaſtneſſe of the
true Faithe, let them flee to none other thinge, but onely to the Scriptures. Otherwiſe, if
they looke to any thinge els, they ſhal be offended, and periſhe, not knowinge whiche is the
true Churche: And ſo ſhal they fal into the Abomination of Deſolation, that ſtandeth
in the Holy places of the Churche.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 1. &. 2.
               Albeit theſe ſame warninges alone maie ſuffice a wiſeman, to take
heede, he doo not ſuffer him ſelfe raſhely to be deceiued with the
name of the Churche, and not to ſtaie, to make further inquiſition
thereof by Goddes Woorde, yet biſide al this, many Fathers alſo,
many learned, and Godly menne, haue often and carefully complained,
how al theſe thinges haue chaunced in their life time. For euen
in the middeſt of that thicke miſte of darkeneſſe, God would yet there
ſhould be ſomme, whoe, though they gaue not a cleare, and brighte
light, yet ſhould kendle, were it but ſomme ſparke, whiche menne, beinge
in the darkeneſſe, might eſpie.
               Hilarius, when thinges as yet were almoſte vncorrupte, and in
good caſe too,
                  Contra Auxentium. Yee are il deceiued, ſaith he, vvith the loue of vvalles:
ye doo il vvoorſhip the Churche, in that ye vvoorſhip it in houſes
and buildinges: yee doo il bringe in the name of peace vnder
roofes. Is there any doubte, but Antichriſte vvil haue his Seate
vnder the ſame? I rather recken Hilles, vvoodes, Pooles, Mariſhes,
Priſons, and Quauemires, to be places of more ſafetie: for in theſe
the Prophetes either abidinge of their accorde, or forced thither
by violence, didde Propheſie by the Spirite of God.
               
                  Gregorie, as one, whiche perceiued, and foreſawe in his minde the
wracke of al thinges, wrote thus of Iohan Biſhop of Conſtantinople,
the firſte of al others, that commaunded him ſelfe to bee called
by this newe name, the Vniuerſal Biſhop of vvhole Chriſtes
Church:
                  Gregor. Lib. 4. Ad Mauritium. 
                  Yf the Churche, ſaith he, ſhal depende vpon one manne,
it vvil ſoone fal dovvne to the grounde. Who is he that ſeeth not
how this is comme to paſſe longe ſithence? For longe agone hath the
Biſhop of Rome willed to haue the whole Churche depende vpon
him ſelfe alone. Wherefore it is no marueile, though it be cleane fallen
downe longe agone.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye make a foule lie, Syr defender, vpon S. Gregorie. The Woordes you recite, be your owne, not
his. Is it not inough to lie your ſelfe, as you doo very often, but that you father lies alſo vpon the Doctoursi
Thankes be to God, that ſo ye bewraie the weakeneſſe of your cauſe.Vntruthe. For he vvriteth it often. Reade the Anſvveare. Neither in any Epiſtle
to Iohn Biſhop of Conſtantinople, as you ſaie in your Apologie, nor in any to Mauritius the Emperoure,
as you haue noted in the margent, writeth Gregorie,Vntruthe, more pee
                           ••
                        ſhe, then the former. that if the Churche ſhall depende vpon one mā,
y• whole ſhal fall to grounde. I ſee well, you would faine Gregorie had ſo written. And if he had,
yet your argument had benne naught. For you take not the right minor, whiche ſhould haue benne
this, The Church doth depende vpō one man, if you would make your reaſon good, and after the rules
of Logike. For where your minor ſpeaketh onely of the Popes will, thereof your concluſion foloweth
not. Diſpoſe your propoſitions in the forme of a Syllogiſme, and you ſhall eſpie your owne feble
reaſon. And if you make that your minor, then graunte you that, whiche you denie.
                  The woordes whereof you gather this pretenſed ſaieinge of Gregorie,Epiſt. lib. 4. ad Maurit. Epiſt. 32. as I ſuppoſe, be theſe: If any
man hath caught vnto himſelfe that name (of Vniuerſall Biſhop) in that Churche (of Conſtantinople)
then the whole Churche, (whiche God forbid) fell from his ſtate, when he that is called Vniuerſal,
fell. Gregorie vnderſtandeth by the name, Vniuerſall Biſhop, as him ſelfe declareth in many places.
A manifeſte vntruthe vvithout vvitte. ſuche a one, as is a Biſhop altogether and onely, ſo as there be no other Biſhop beſides him. Now if it
were graunted, that the Biſhop of Conſtantinople were this one and onely Vniuerſal Biſhop, this inconuenience
would folowe, that with the fall of that Vniuerſall Biſhop, the Vniuerſall Churche alſo
fell.
For where the Churche is, there be Biſhoppes: and where be Biſhoppes, there is the Churche: and a
Vntruthe. For Chriſte neuer gaue out any ſutche Commiſsion. Biſhop Vniuerſall, by Gregorie, is as muche as all Biſhoppes. That this beinge graunted, the whole
Churche is fallen from the Faithe, thus he proueth. For (ſaithe he) the Biſhoppes of Conſtant inople
haue fallen into the goulfe of great and deteſtable Hereſies: as Neſtorius, who thinkinge Chriſte to be
two perſones, and beleuinge that God coulde not be made man, ranne to a Iewiſhe Infidelitie: and as
Macedonius, who denied the holy Ghoſt to be God. VVherefore if the B. of Conſtantinople be the Vniuerſall
Biſhop, accordinge to the ſenſe aforeſaide, then at the fall of him from the Faithe, as when
thoſe two before named fell, the Churche alſo falleth, as then by this reaſon, when they were Biſhops,
it fell. Thus reaſoneth S. Gregorie in that Epiſtle to Mauritius. But becauſe to Gregorie it ſemeth
very farre from reaſon, and incredible, that the Churche ſhould fall from the Faithe, and faile: therefore
he enucigheth againſte Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople for chalenginge that name of Vniuerſal
Biſhop, and concludeth that theVntruthe, fonde, and vvilful. For S. Gregorie ſpeaketh theſe vvoordes nomore of the B. of Conſtantinople, then of the B. of Rome. Biſhop of that See in any wiſe can not ſo be.
                  But if the woorde, Vn
                        •
                     uerſall, ſignifie a ſoueraintie of charge, and Supremacie of Gouernement ouer
the whole Churche,Here M. Hard. recanteth his errour. For before he ſaide. Theſe vvoordes belonge onely to the Pope. whiche Chriſte committed to Peter, and in Peter to his Succeſſours the Biſhoppes
of Rome,Iohn. 21. when he ſaide, Feede my Shepe: in this ſenſe it is not impious nor erroneus, nor contrary to
the minde of S. Gregorie, to call the Succeſſour of Peter, Chriſtes vicare in Earth, the Vniuerſal Biſhop,
This ſame vvas it, that Gregorie reproued: For thus he vvriteth, Cuncta Chriſti Membra tibi conaris Vniuerſalis appellatione ſupponere: Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 38. that is to ſaie, the higheſt of al, and hauinge power ouer all other Biſhoppes, and Biſhop of the Vniuerſall
Churche. And, as Chriſte gaue to S. Peter and his ſucceſſours, for the benefite of his Churche, a
Supreme auctoritie and power▪ ſo for the ſame Churches ſake,Iohn. 14. for whoſe loue he deliuered him ſelfe to
death,Luke. 22. by petition made to his Father, he obteined for him and his ſucceſſours the Priuilege of this ſupreme
and moſte excellente grace, that their Faithe ſhoulde neuer faile. In conſideration of whiche
ſingular Priuilege, obteined by Chriſte andVntruthe, vtterly voide of ſhame. graunted to the ſee Apoſtolike, and to none other, Gregorie
rebuketh Iohn the Biſhop of Cōſtantinople ſo much, as one that preſumptuouſly vſurped that newe
name of vniuerſal Biſhop againſt the ſtatutes of the Goſpel, and againſt the Decrees of the Canons.
                  To conclude, if either Gregorie, or any other man ſhoulde ſa
                        •
                     e, that the Churche dependeth
vpon one man: he mighte ſeeme to ſaie truthe, meaninge rightly, and that not alone, nor without
good Authoritie.Contra Luciferian. For ſuche a ſaieinge we finde vttered by S. Ierome. The ſafetie of the Churche
(ſaithe he) dependeth vpon the dignitie of the higheſt Prieſie, who if he haue not auctoritie peerleſſe
and aboue all other, there will be ſo many Schiſmes in the Churche, as there be Prieſtes. VVhich
peerleſſe auctoritie aboue all other, as S. Hierome in that place dothe attribute to ‡ to the Biſhop of euery
Dioces directly,Iohn. 21. ſo conſequently to Peters Succeſſor, to whom it was ſaide, Feede my Sheepe. For

by what reaſon in eche Dioces it behoueth one Prieſte to be higheſ
                        •
                     ouer other Prieſtes,The Vniuerſal Churche falleth. by the ſame and
in like proportion noleſſe it behoueth, that in the whole Churche one Biſhop be higheſt ouer other Biſhoppes.
I meane, for auoidinge Schiſmes.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Yf yée had better looked on your Bookes, M. Hardinge, ye woulde not haue
benne ſo haſty in dealinge Lies. Wée falſifie not that good Fathers Woordes: but
reporte them truely, as wée finde them. For thus he writeth in ſundrie places, of
Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, that firſte auanced him ſelfe aboue al his
Brethren, and required to be called the Vniuerſal Biſhop of al the worlde: Vniuerſa
Eccleſia â ſtatu ſuo corruit,
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 32 
                     quando is, qui appellatur Vniuerſalis, cadit:
The whole Vniuerſal Churche falleth from her ſtate, when he falleth, that is called the Vniuerſal
Biſhop.
                      This is no Lie, M. Hardinge: Conferre the places: & yée ſhal finde
the woordes, as wee reporte them. It ſtandeth not, neither with your profeſſion,
nor with your modeſtie, ſo vncourteouſly to vſe your tongue. We neither
Lie our ſelues, nor father Lies vpon the Doctoures. God be thanked, his cauſe is
ſutche, as maie wel be maineteined without Lies.
                  
                  
                     But, to put you further oute of doubte, the ſenſe of theſe woordes ye maie finde
often vttered by S. Gregorie, in other places. Vnto Anaſtaſius, the Biſhop
of Antioche,Gregor. Lib. 6. Epiſto. 24. 
                     he writeth thus: Vt de honoris veſtri iniuria taceam, ſi vnus Epiſcopus
vocatur Vniuerſalis, vniuerſa Eccleſia corruit, ſi Vnus Vniuerſus cadit:
To diſſemble the iniurie donne to your Honoure, if one Biſhop be called Vniuerſal, then if
that One Vniuerſal Biſhop fal, the whole Vniuerſal Churche goeth to grounde.
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe in the ſame Epiſtle,
                     Gregor. in eadē Epiſtola. 
                     Vos eandem cauſam Nullam dicere non debetis.
Quia, ſi hanc aequanimiter portamus, Vniuerſae Eccleſiae Fidem corrumpimus:
Ye maie not ſaie, This is a mater of no importance. For, if wee patiently beare theſe
thinges, wee deſtroie the Faithe of the Vniuerſal Churche.
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſtol. 39. 
                     In iſto Sceleſto vocabulo conſentire, nihil aliud eſt, quàm
Fidem perdere: To conſente vnto this wicked Name, is nothinge els, but to loſe the Faithe.
                  
                     Againe,
                     Gregor. Li. 4. Epiſt. 52. &. 55. 
                     Flens dico: Gemens denuntio: Quia cùm Sacerdotalis Ordo intus cecidit,
foris diu ſtare non poterit: I ſpeake it with teares: I tel it with ſighe of Harte: For,
ſeeinge the Order of Prieſthoode is fallen within, it cannot nowe ſtande longe without
                  
                     Againe,
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 36. 
                     Diabolus ita validè in quibuſdam Eccleſiae neceſſarijs Membris dentes figit,
vt nulli ſit dubium, quin, niſi vnanimiter, fauente Domino, cunctorum prouida Paſtorum
turba concurrat, omne, quod abſit, citiùs ouile dilaniet: The Diuel ſo ſtrongely
faſteneth his Teeth in the neceſſarie Members of the Churche, that, onleſſe by Goddes Grace,
the prouident companie of al Biſhoppes ioine togeather, there is no doubte, but he wil ſoone
deſtroie the whole flocke: whiche God forbid. And againe he compareth the Pride
of this name with the Pride of Antichriſte: and ſaithe, that the one ſhal woorke
the Confuſion of the Churche,
                     Gregor. Lib. 6. Epiſt. 30. 
                     no leſſe, then the other. Thus he ſaith, Nunquid nō,
cùm ſe Antichriſtus veniens Deum dixerit,
                     
                     Deus. 
                     friuolum vald
                           •
                         erit? Sed ramen nimis pernicioſum.
Si quantitatem vocis attendimus, Duae ſunt Syllabae: ſi pondus iniquitatis,
Vniuerſa pernicies: When Antichriſte ſhal comme, and cal him ſelfe God, ſhal it not be
a very trifle? Yet ſhal it be marueilous hurteful (to the Churche). If ye weigh the quantitie of
the woorde, it ſtandeth in twoo Syllables: If ye conſider the weight of the wickedneſſe, it is an
Vniuerſal deſtruction. Theſe are no Lies, as it liketh you to calle them, M. Harding:
They are very plaine woordes: it is the vndoubted meaninge of S. Gregorie.
And therefore he calleth this claime of Vniuerſal Povver, a Superſtitio
                              ••
                           s, a Profane,
an Vngodly, & a Wicked title: a name of Hypocriſie: & a name of Blaſphemie.
                  
                  To auoide theſe Authorities, beinge ſo pregnāt, & ſo cleare, ye are faine to tanſie
ſundrie prety ſhiftes, ſutche as, neither Iohn, nor Gregorie was euer hable to
vnderſtande.
                  
                     
                     Firſte ye ſaie,
                     One Onely Biſhop. 
                     This Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople meante by this title,
vtterly to diſgrade al Biſhoppes, and Patriarkes, what ſo euer: and to make him
ſelfe the Onely Biſhop of al the world. It is a childiſh laboure, to ſeeke a knotte in
a ruſſhe, & to imagine doubtes, where the caſe is cleare. It is certaine, that the Biſhop
of Conſtantinople meante none other Vniuerſal Authoritie, then that now
is claimed by the Pope. Therefore it is thus noted in the Booke, called Chronicon
Euſebij,Chronicon Euſebij, Anno. 607. Inſtitntum fuit, vt Romana Eccleſia Caput eſſet Eccleſiarum omnium:
cùm priùs Conſtantinopolitana id vſurpare tentaſſet: Order was taken,
that the Churche of Rome ſhould be the Head of al Churches: whereas before, the
Churche of Conſtantinople had attempted to Vſurpe the ſame. Whiche thinge is
alſo noted by
                      Matthias Palmerius of Florence, & that without any manner difference,
or change of woordes.
                     Matthias Palmerius. Sabellicus ſaithe, Bonifaciusz. egit ab initio adminiſtrationis
ſuae cum Phoca,Sabellicus Ennead. 8. lib. 6. vt Romana Eccleſia eſſet omniū aliarum Caput. Eſt
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
id aegrè, nec ſine multa contentione Apoſtolicae Sedi datum. Graeci id ad ſe decus
trahentes, ibi Chriſtianae Pietatis Arcem eſſe oportere aiebant, vbi & Imperij:
Bonifacius the thirde, at the firſte enitre into his office, was an earneſte ſuiter vnto the
Emperoure Phocas, that the Churche of Rome might be the Heade of al other
Churches. Whiche thinge hardely, and with greate laboure was graunted to the Apoſtolique
See of Rome. The Grecians drawinge the ſame honoure vnto them ſelues, ſaide, It was
neceſſarie, the Heade of Chriſtian Religion ſhoulde be there, where as was the Heade of
the Empiere: whiche was at Conſtantinople.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe writeth Vrſpergenſis:
                     
                     Vrſpergenſis in Phoca. At the requeſte and ſuite of Pope Boniface,
Phocas the Emperoure appointed the See of the Apoſtolique Churche of Rome, to be
the Heade of al Churches. For before that time, the Churche of Conſtantinople wrote her
ſelfe the Firſt, or Chiefe of al others.
                  
                     By theſe it maie appeare, M. Hardinge, it was greate folie for you, thus to ca
                        
                           •••
                        l
at the name. For the Power, and Iuriſdiction, then claimed by the Biſhop of
Conſtantinople, and afterwarde vſurped by the Biſhoppes of Rome▪ 
                     was al one.
Therefore S. Gregorie ſaithe to Iohn the Biſhop of Conſtantinople,Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 38. Tu quid
Chriſto, Vniuerſalis Eccleſiae Capiti, in Extremi Iudicij dicturus es examine, qui Cuncta
cius membra tibimet conaris Vniuerſalis appellatione ſupponere? What anſweare
wilte thou make, at the trial of the Laſte Judgement, vnto Chriſte the Head of the
Vniuerſal Churche, whiche thus by the name of Vniuerſal Biſhop, ſeekeſte to make al his
Members ſubiecte vnto thee? Euen the ſelfe ſame
                      Vniuerſal povver claimeth nowe
the Biſhop of Rome: and ſéeketh to make al other Biſhoppes through the world,
and the whole Vniuerſal Churche of Chriſte, thral and ſubiecte vnto him.
                  
                  The Biſhoppes of Conſtantinople felle ſommetimes into Hereſies, & were
deceiued. But Chriſte hath praied for Peter, that his Faithe ſhoulde not faiſe. Ergo,
                      ſaie
you, The Biſhop of Rome can neuer poſsibly be deceiued.
                      O, M. Hardinge, let ſhame
once force you to refraine theſe Vanities. I doubte not, but hereafter in place conuenient
I ſhalbe hable to ſhewe, that there haue benne mee Heretiques placed in
S. Peters Chaire, euē in the See of Rome, then you are hable to finde in any one
Sée within Europe.
                  Verily, S. Gregories reaſon, touching the danger, & Confuſion of the Churche,
weigheth nomore againſte the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, then againſte the Biſhop
of Rome. For thus he ſaithe, If he, that is called the Vniuerſal Biſhop, happen
to erre, then needes muſt y• whole Vniuerſal Churche fal togeather with him into Erroure,
And therefore if ye had peruſed the Councel of Baſile, ye ſhoulde haue founde this
ſelfe ſame reaſon alleged there, not againſte the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, but
againſt the Pride,Concil. Baſilien. in Epiſt. Synodal. and Arrogancie of the Biſhop of Rome. The woordes be theſe:
Alioqui, errante Pontifice, ſicut ſaepè contigit, & contingere poteſt, to
                           •
                        a

erraret Eccleſia:
                     The Pope him ſelfe diſclaimeth, &c. 
                     Otherwiſe, when ſo euer the Pope erreth, as he hath often erred, and maie
erre againe, the vvhole Churche ſhould erre with him. Thus wrote the Biſhoppes,
and, by your owne Iudgemente, Catholike Biſhoppes, in the Councel of Baſile:
yet had they not forgotten the Praier, that Chriſte made for S. Peter.
                  
                  
                     And therefore Franciſcus Zarabella, a notable Canoniſte, and Cardinal of the
Churche of Rome, ſeeinge the greate enormities, that grewe hereof, ſaithe thus:
Papae faciunt quicquid libet,Franciſ. Zarabella: C
                           ••
                        atur ab Illyrico, De Sectis. etiam illicita: & ſunt pluſquam Deus. Ex hoc infiniti ſequuti
ſunt errores. Quia papa occupauit omnia iura inferiorum Eccleſiarum: ita
vt inferiores Praelati fint pro nihilo. Et, niſi Deus ſuccurrat ſtatui Eccleſiae, Vniuerſalis
Eccleſia periclitatur: The Popes doo now, what ſo euer they liſte to doo, yea
although it be vnlawfultand are becomme more then God. Hereof haue folowed infinite Erroures.
For the Pope hath inuaded, and entred vpon al the right of the Inferioure Churches: ſo
that the inferiour Biſhoppes maie goe for nought. And onleſſe God healpe the ſtate
of the Churche, the Vniuerſal Churche is in danger. Thus hitherto, M. Harding,
ye haue founde no lie.
                  Nowe, where ye woulde ſeeme to ſaie, Gregorie ſo reproued the Biſhop of
Conſtantinople, that neuertheleſſe he claimed y• ſame Title, & Vniuerſal Authoritie
to him ſelfe: maie it therefore pleaſe you herein to ſtand to y• Iudgemēt of S.
Gregorie him ſelfe, of whō, I recken, ye doo not doubte, but he vnderſtood his owne
meaninge. Doubteleſſe, if ye had ſo diligentely conſidered S. Gregorie, as ye
beare vs in hande, ye ſhould haue found, that, touchinge any his owne right herein,
he Diſclaimeth this Title, & refuſeth it vtterly. For ſo he writeth to y• 
                     Emperour
Mauritius:
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 32. In eadem Epiſt. 
                     Nunquid ego in hac re, pijſsime Domine, propriam cauſam defend?
O my moſte Graceouſe Lord, doo I herein quarrel for myne owne right?
                      Againe he ſaith,
Non mea Cauſa, ſed Dei eſt Nō ego ſolus, ſed tota turbatur Eccleſia: Quia piae Leges,
quia venerandae Synodi, quia ipſa Domini noſtri leſu mandata, Superbi, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         pompatici
cuiuſdam Sermonis inuentione tuibantur: It is Goddes cauſe: It is not mine. Not
I onely am troubled therewith, but alſo the whole Churche. For the Godly Lawes, the
Reuerende Synodes, and the very Commaundementes of oure Lorde Ieſu are broken by the
inuention of a certaine prowde,
                     
                     In eadem. 
                     and pompouſe Name. Againe, Nullus Romanorum
Pontificum hoc Singularitatis Nomē aſſumpſit: Nullus Deceſſorum meorum
hoc tam profano vocabulo vti conſenſit: Nos hunc honorem nolumus oblatum
recipere:
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 36. 
                     None of al the Biſhoppes of Rome euer tooke vpon him this name of
Singularitie: None of my Predeceſſours euer conſented to vſe this Vngodly ſtyle: wee our
ſelues wil not receiue this honoure, though it were offered.
                  
                  Thus it appeareth by the Iudgemente of S. Gregorie, that this Vniuerſal
Authoritie is vtterly vnlawful, not onely in other Biſhoppes, but alſo euen in
the Biſhop of Rome.
                  
                  Touchinge the place of S. Hierome, I ſée, ye are contente to geue ouer, and to
recante youre former erroure. For in your Firſte Booke, ye ſaie, theſe woordes
are Notable aboue others: and therefore might not be diſſembled. And where S.
Hierome ſaithe,M. Hard. Fol. 80. 
                     The ſafetie of the Churche hangeth of the Dignitie of the Highe
Prieſte
                      (meaninge thereby euery ſeueral Biſhop within his owne Limites) ye
thought it good, thus to lard the ſame, by a proper parētheſis, with certaine other
ſpecial ſtuffe, of your owne prouiſion: He meaneth the Pope, Peters Succeſſour:
as if this Highe Prieſte, of whom S. Hierome writeth, could be none other, but
the Biſhop of Rome. Now vpon ſomme better aduiſe, & by waie of Retractation,
ye ſaie thus, This peereleſse Authoritie aboue al other, S. Hierome dooth attribute
to the Biſhop of euery Dioceſe: whiche in déede was the very meaninge
of S. Hierome. Certainely, if S. Hierome, by theſe woordes, meante Onely the
Biſhop of Rome, as ye tolde vs before, then he meant not the Particulare Biſhop

of euery Dioceſe, as ye tel vs nowe. Therefore ye muſte néedes confeſſe, that
either nowe, or before, ye haue ſoughte meanes to beguile your Reader. As for the
Pope, Peters Succeſsour, he meante nomore of him, then of any other Biſhop. If
it ſhal likewiſe hereafter pleaſe you, to cal in other your like ouerſightes, ye ſhal
publiſhe more truthe, and encumber your Reader with leſſe Erroure.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 3.
               Bernarde the Abbate, aboue foure hundred yeeres paſte, writeth
thus: Nothinge is novve ſincere, and pure emongeſt the Cleregie:
vvherefore it reſteth, that the Man of Sinne ſhoulde be reueled.
The ſame Bernarde in his Treatie of the Conuerſion of S. Paule,
It ſeemeth novve, ſaithe he, that Perſecution hath ceaſed: no, no,
perſecution ſeemeth but novve to beginne, and that euen from
thē, vvhich haue chiefe preeminence in the Church. Thy frendes
and neighbours, O God, haue dravven neere, and ſtood vp againſt
thee: frō the ſole of the foor to the crovvn of the head, there is no
part vvhole. Iniquitie is proceded from the Elders, the ludges and
Deputees, vvhiche pretende to rule thy people. VVee cannot ſaie
novve, Looke hovve the people is, ſo is the Prieſte. For the people
is not ſo il, as is the Prieſte. Alas, alas, O Lorde God, the
ſelf ſame perſones be the chiefe in perſecu
                     •
                  ing thee, vvhich ſeeme
to loue the Higheſt place, and beare moſte rule in thy Churche.
The ſame Bernarde againe vpon the Canticles writeth thus: Al
thei are thy frendes: yet are thei al thy foes: Al thy kinneſfolke: yet
are thei al thy aduerſaries. Beinge Chriſtes ſeruauntes, thei ſerue
Antichriſte. Beholde in my reſte, my bitterneſſe is moſte bitter.
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 1.
               
                  Roger Bacon alſo,In Likello de idiomate linguarum. a man of greate fame, after he had in a vehemente
Oration touched to the quicke the woeful ſtate of his owne
time, Theſe ſo many errours, ſaith he, require and looke for Antichriſte.
Gerſon complaineth, that in his daies al the Subſtance, and
efficacie of Sacred Diuinitie was brought vnto a glorious contention,
& oftentatiō of wittes, & very Sophiſtrie. The poore menne,
called pauperes à Lugduno, menne, as touching the manner of theire
life, not to be miſliked, were woonte boldely to affirme, that the
Romiſhe churche (from whence alone al Counſel, and Order was
then ſought) was the very ſame Halot of Babylon, and rovvte of
Diuels, whereof is Propheſied ſo plainely in the Apocalyps.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Now commeth me he in with a newe band, which conſiſteth of tagge and ragge, and a weake
companie, God knoweth, they be to ſhewe theire faces againſte the Catholike Churche, whiche (as the

Holy Ghoſte ſpeaketh by Salomon) is terrible like an armie of men ſet in bataile raie.
                  Firſte frier Bacon the Coniurer, and negromanſer, as commonly they ſaie o him, he is ſet in the
forewarde, a man of greate fame forſoothe.
                  Then commeth in the good plaine father Gerſon, a writer in our Graundfathers time: he complaineth,
that Friers and ſtudentes gaue them ſelues too mutche to the vnprofitable ſubtilitie of Scholaſtical
queſtions. VVhat maketh this againſte the faithe of the Churche?
                  After theſe, this Defender placeth in an out winge the falle brethern of Lyons, commonly called
VValdenſes, or Pauperes de Lugduno, notorius Heretikes condemned of the Churche. Theſe beinge
deteſtable Heretikes condemned of the Churche, we recke not what they ſaie, no more then
what Luther ſaieth, what Zuinglius, what Caluine, what theſe Defenders them ſelues ſaie, what
Antichriſte, what Sathan ſaieth. For the enimies of Gods truthe maie not be admitted to geue witnes
againſte the Truthe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Of theſe laſte Authorities, whiche ye calle tagge, and ragge, wée neuer made
any greate accoumpte. Notwithſtandinge bothe Iohannes Gerſon, and Rogerus
Bacon were notable, and famouſe in theire times, and in al reſpectes comparable
then with the beſte. Plaine Father Gerſon (for by ſutche woordes ye thought if
beſte to quaile his credite, beinge otherwiſe coumpted a ſuttle diſputer, and a profounde
Schole Doctoure) vvas Chauncellar of the Vniuerſitie of Pariſe: and for
his wiſedome, and Learninge, was thought woorthy to be the Directoure of al the
Biſhoppes in the Councel of Conſtance.
                  
                  
                     Rogerus Bacon, as it appeareth by his Booke, De Idiomate Linguarum, was
hable to iudge of the Latine, Greeke, and Hebrevve tongues: and difides diuerſe
other Bookes, writeth alſo ſundrie Epiſtles vnto Pope Clemente: wherein he
mutche complaineth of the ruine, and Confuſion of the Churche. Certainely
the weakeſt of theſe bothe, hath more weight, and Subſtance, then either your
Amphilochius, or your Abdias, or your Hippolytus, or your Leontius, or youre
Anacletus, or your Pope Clemens, whom ye ſo often cal the Apoſtles felovve.
                  
                  Howe be it, there is no man ſo ſimple, but maie beare witneſſe to the Truthe.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactantius, Arnobius, Euſebius, S. Auguſtine, & other
Holy Fathers thought it no preiudice to theire cauſe, to allege the witneſſe of the
Frantique Sibylles: S. Paule allegeth the Authorities of the Heathen Poëtes,
Aratus, Menander, Epimenides, that neuer knewe God: Chriſte thought it no
ſcorne, to receiue witneſſe at Infantes mouthes: No, he refuſed not the Diuels,
when they bare witneſſe with him, and ſaide, We knowe, that thou arte Chriſte the
Sonne of the Liuinge God. Pauperes à Lugduno
                      founde faulte with the Pride of
the Pope:
                     Aeneas Syluius in Hiſtoria Boemica. with the lewde life of the Cleregie: with Purgatorie: with Holy Water:
with Pardonnes: and with other your like deceiuinges of the people.
                  They tranſlated the Bible: and praied in theire natural knowen mother tongue.
Theſe were theire Erroures: Therefore were they called deteſtable Heretiques:
therefore were they cōdemned by your Churche of Rome. But Goddes Name
be bleſſed for euer. Sithence that time the Popes painted Power hath ſtil abated:
and theſe poore deteſtable condemned Heretiques haue ſtil encreaſed.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion, 2.
               I knowe wel yenough the Authoritie of theſe foreſaid perſones
wilbe but lightly regarded amongeſt theſe men▪ Howe then if I cal
foorth thoſe for witneſſes, whō they thē ſelues haue vſed to honoure?
What if I ſaie, that Adrian the Biſhop of Rome did frankly confeſſe,
that al theſe miſchieues braſte out firſte from the high Throne
of the Pope?
               
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Here haue wee a man of ſtrawe ſet vp,Rome the roote of il. whom this defender nameth Adrian Biſhop of Rome. He
geueth him a waze of ſtrawe in his hande, that a farre of ſemeth to be a ſore weapon, taken out of
the armorie of Platina,A greate ſolic. For Platyna vvas deade threeſcoare yeeres before Adrian. 6 vvas Pope. as is pretended. But when ye come neare and beholde what felow this is,
and conferre with Platina, touchinge his weapon, ye ſee it to be a fained thinge. For there is no
ſutche ſaieinge by Platina attributed to any of theVntruthe vaine, and vnaduiſed. For Platyna vvriteth not one vvorde of Adriane the ſixthe. ſix Adrians Biſhoppes of Rome, ‡ whoſe liues he
writeth. And mo there were not. Therefore where you ſaie, What if I ſaie, that Adrian,
&c. I anſwere thereto, that if you ſo ſaie, you ſaie a falſe lie.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Touchinge this pretie fanſie of a man of Cloutes, and a vvaze of ſtravve, I
ſée wel, M. Hardinge, ye thoughte it good policie, to clowte vp the matter, and to
ſatiſfie your Reader with a ſtravven anſvveare. The ſtravve was in your eies,
M. Hardinge, & not in the man. Ye ſtoode too far aluffe: your eies daſeled: and therefore
ye knewe not, what ye ſawe. If ye had drawen neare, ye ſhould ſoone haue
founde your owne erroure. It was no man of ſtravve, but Pope Adrian the
ſixthe, and laſte, that wée ſpake of: Onleſſe ye thinke the Popes Holineſſe to be a
man of ſtravve. For thus he pronounced at Norinberg in Germanie in the
great aſſemblie of y• 
                     Empiere, by the mouthe of Cheregatus his Legate a Latere.
A Sacerdotibus iniquitatem populi dimanare: multis nunc annis, grauiter, multiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         modis
peccatum eſſe Romae:
                     Iohan. Sleidanus Lib. 4. Ann. 1523. 
                     & inde à Pontificio Culmine malum hoc, atque luem ad inferiores
omnes Eccleſiarum Praefectos defluxiſſe: Thus Pope Adrian bade his Legate
ſaie, That the iniquitie of the people grewe from the Prieſtes: And that nowe, for the ſpace
of many yeeres, there haue benne greate, and greuous offenſes committed in Rome: And that
al this plague, and miſchiefe hath flowed vnto al the Inferioure Rulers of the Churche, euen
from the Highe Throne of the Popes Holineſſe.
                      This ſame ſtorie is alſo
extante,Faſciculus rerū Sciendarum. printed at Colaine in a Booke called Faſciculus rerum Sciendarum.
                  
                  Thus therefore once againe wée ſaie, M. Hardinge, that Pope Adrian. 6. frankly
confeſſed, that al theſe miſchiefes procéeded firſte euen from the Throne, or Seate
of the Popes Holineſse: and, ſaieinge the ſame, notwithſtandinge your vnciuile
ſpeache, wée ſaie no lie.
                  
                  
                     And, leſte ye ſhoulde thinke, this Legate Cheregatus either of foregeatefulneſſe,
or of malice, did his errante otherwiſe, then he had in Commiſſion, the like
woordes haue ſithēce bēne vttered in your owne late chapter at Tridente by Cornelius
the Biſhop of Bitōto. Theſe be his woordes: Effecerunt tandem, vt Pietas in
Fucum,Cornel. Bitontinus in Concil. Tridenti. & Hypocriſim, &c. They haue brought to paſſe, that Godlineſſe is turned into Hypocriſie:
and that the Sauoure of Life is turned into the Sauoure of Deathe. Woulde God
they were not gonne wholy with general conſente, from Religion, to Superſtition: from
Faithe, to Infidelitie: from Chriſte, to Antichriſte: from God, to Epicure: ſaieing
with wicked harte, and filthy mouthe, There is no God. Neither hath there benne this
greate vvhile any Paſtoure, or Pope, that regarded theſe thinges. For they al
(bothe Pope, and others) ſought theire ovvne: and not ſo mutche as one of
them (neither Pope, nor Cardinal) ſought for the thinges, that perteine to Ieſus
Chriſte.
                  Therefore, M. Hardinge, ye maie hencefoorthe ſpare your Vnſauery, and bitter
ſpeaches: For in theſe reportes there is no lie.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 3.
               Pighius acknowlegeth herein to be a faulte, that many Abuſes

are brought in,Errours in the Maſſe. euen into the very Maſſe, whiche Maſſe otherwiſe
he woulde haue ſe
                     ••
                  e to be a moſte reuerend matter. Gerſon ſaithe,
that through the number of moſte fonde Ceremonies, al the Vertue
of the Holy Ghoſte, whiche ought to haue ful operation in vs, and
al true godlineſſe is vtterly quenched, and deade. Whole Graecia, and
Aſia complaine, howe the Biſhoppes of Rome with the martes of
theire Purgatories and Pardons, haue both tormented mennes Conſciences, and piked theire purſes.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  In deede pighius in his ſixth cōtrouerſie, ſpeaking of priuate maſſes, denieth not but certaine abuſes
be crept into that moſt Holy and moſt helthful thing, for ſo he ſpeaketh. And adding further, we ſnow
(ſaith he) to what man, and to what men it perteineth the ſame to correcte. And let eche man acknowledge
his owne meaſure, and vnderſtande his dutie. As who ſhoulde ſaie, it is not meere for euery
man to take vpon him to amend any thinge that is amiſſe about the Maſſe. For he meaneth not
that the Maſſe it ſelfe is erroneus, as ful wel there he declareth: but that men be faulty in abuſinge
that moſte Holy Sacrifice. For many come to the Aulter, vnworthely. Many be preſente at it, that ought
not to come within the Churche dores. Some Prieſtes be of ſo lewde liues, and of ſo vnreuerent behauiour
at it, as it were better they abſtained Albeit, I thinke, he meante rather ſutche abuſes, as the
learned Fathers of the prouincial Councel of Coulen woulde to be amended: to witte, certaine peculiar
offices of Maſſes deuiſed by men of late yeeres beſides the ordinance of the Ancient forefathers.
                  As for the other greate troupe ye bringe with you out of Grece and Aſia, firſte, we require you
to make them agree with your ſelues, and with the Catholike Churche aboute the proceſsion of the
Holy Ghoſte, and then we ſhal anſwere both you, and them concerning your greuous matter of Purgatorie
and Pardons. It is not our manner to take the ſaieinges of Heretikes for good and ſufficient Auctoritie.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  In déede, M. Hardinge, here ye hewe ouer highe. Ye take vpon you to make
vs vnderſtande Pigghius meaninge: & yet by your owne Confeſſion it appeareth,
yée neuer knewe your ſelfe, what he meante. Ye ſaie, He founde faulte with the vnwoorthineſſe,
either of the Prieſtes, or of the people, ye knowe not, whether: or with ſome what
els, noted in the late Chapter of Colaine,
                      ye knowe not, what. Yet what ſo euer it ſhal
pleaſe you to imagine, ye thinke, you haue wronge, if wee beléeue you not immediately
vpon youre woorde. But Pigghius him ſelfe, whoes tale ye would ſo fame
telle, ſaithe not, as you woulde make him ſaie, Abuſes haue creapte into the Prieſte, or People,
But plainely, and ſimply he ſaithe, Erroures haue creapte into the Maſſe.
                  
                  Howe be it, Theſe Erroures,
                      ye ſaie, what ſo euer they be, no man maie redreſſe, but
onely the Pope.
                     
                     Extra, de Tranſlatione Epiſcopi, Quāto. In Gloſſ. Extra, de Conceſſ. Praebendae. Propoſuit: In Gloſſa. And good cauſe, why. For your Doctoures ſaie, Papa ex nihilo
poteſt facere aliquid: the Pope of nothinge can make ſomme thinge:
                      And, what ſo
euer he doo, noman maie ſaie vnto him, Domine, cur ita facis? Sir, vvhy doo you
ſo? And the very harte, and roote of al your Diuinitie of Louaine is this, Chriſte
hath praied for Peter: Ergo, the Pope can neuer erre. But if ye meane plainely,
and, if there be no diſſimulation, nor Hypocriſie in your woordes, tel me, I befeche
you, euen as you deſire to be beléeued, Of al the Errours ye 
                     Phigghius meante, for
the ſpace of theſe fourtie yéeres, what one Erroure hathe the Pope redreſſed?
Theire is no plaineneſſe in this dealinge, M. Harding. Your minde is not to ſéeke
redreſſe, be the faulte neuer ſo euident: but ſtil to continewe your ſelues in credite,
and the worlde i
                        •
                      erroure.
                  
                     
                     Al the Chriſtians of Graecia,Graecia, and Aſia. 
                     and Aſia, ye ſaie, be Heretiques: and therefore ye
recke not, what they ſaie. No doubte: for they ſaie, the Pope is not the Heade of
the Churche.Diſt. 22. Omnes. 
                     Whiche thinge who ſo euer denieth, ſaith Pope Nicolas, muſte
néedes be holden as an Heretique. Thomas Aquinâs for that good affection, & reuerence,
he bare towardes the Pope, ſaithe thus, Dicere, Papam non habere Vniuerſalis
Eccleſiae Primatum, eſt error ſimilis errori dicentium, Spiritum Sanctum à
Filio non procedere: To ſaie, that the Pope hath not the Primacie of the Vniuerſal
Churche, it is an Erroure like vnto the Erroure of them, that (mainteine Hereſie touchinge
the Holy Trinitie, and) ſaie, The Holy Ghoſte procedeth not from the
Sonne of God. Of your readineſſe herein Ludouicus Viues writeth thus,
Auguſtinum Vetuſtas ſua tuetur. Qui ſi reuiuiſceret cum Paulo, certe ille contemptui
eſſet Rhetorculus,Lodouicus Viuet in Li 13. De 
                           •
                        iuitate Dei, Ca. 24 aut Grammaticulus: Paulus verò vel inſanirè, vel Haereticus videretur:
S. Auguſtine is ſafe nowe bicauſe of his age. But if he, and Paule were aliue againe,
he ſhoulde be ſhaken of as a bad Rhetorician, or a poore Grammarian. But S. Paule ſhould
be taken, either for a madde man, or for an Heretique.
                  Nowe iudge you, M. Hardinge, what Churche of yours is this, where as S.
Paule, the Apoſtle of Chriſte, if he vvere novv aliue, ſhould goe for an Heretique.
Veſputius, as I remēber, after he had trauailed far, & had ſeene y• Manners, &
Religions of many Countries, ſaithe thus, Graeci implicati ſunt multis Erroribus:
The Greekes are entangled with many Errours:
                      But he addeth withal: Faxit Deus, ne
& Latinis multae irrepſerint Stultitiae. God grount, there be not many folies entred alſo
into the Churche of Rome.
                     
                  
                  Surely, the Chriſtian menne, that be this daie in Graecia, and Aſia, vtterly
abhorre the Pope,
                     Paulus Aemylius, Pantaleon. with al the deformities of his Churche. The Gréeke Emperour
Michael Palaeologus, for that he had ſubmitted him ſelfe to the Pope, in the late
Councel of Florence, was therefore afterward abhorred, and hated of his people,
while he liued: and beinge deade, was forebidden Chriſtian Burial. Iſidorus the
Archebiſhop of Kiouia in Ruſsia, for that, beinge returned from the ſaid Councel,
he beganne for vnities ſake,Matthias à Michouia, in Nouo Orbe. to moue the people to the like ſubmiſſion, was therfore
depoſed from his Biſhoprike, and put to deathe.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 1.
               As touchinge the Tyrannie of the Biſhoppes of Rome, and theire
Barbarous Perſianlike Pride, to leaue out others, whom perchaunce
they recken for enimies, bicauſe they freely, & liberally finde
faulte with theire vices, the ſame menne, whiche haue leadde theire
life at Rome in the Holy Cittie, in the face of the moſte Holy Father,
who alſo were hable to ſee al theire ſecretes, and at no time departed
from the Catholique Faithe, as for example. Laurentius Valla,
Marſilius Patauinus, Frauncis Petrarke, Hierome Sauanorola,
Abbat Ioakim, Baptiſte of Mantua, and before al theſe, Bernarde the
Abbate, haue many a time and mutche complained of it, geuinge the
world alſo ſommetime to vnderſtande, that the Biſhop of Rome him
ſelfe (by your leaue) is very Antichriſte. Whether they ſpake it truely,
or falſely, let that goe: ſure I am, they ſpake it plainely. Neither
canne any man allege, that thoſe Authours were Luthers, or Zuinglius
Scholars: for they liued not onely certaine yeeres, but alſo certaine
ages ere euer Luther, or Zuinglius names were hearde of.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If this Defender were compared to a mad dogge, ſome perhappes woulde thinke it rude, and an
vnmanerly compariſon. Let the man be as he is, who ſo euer he be: verely the manner and faſhion of
bothe is like, howe ſo euer I be contente, his perſon be honoured with the due regard of a man. For as
the mad dogge runneth vp and downe, here and there, and nowe byteth one thinge, and then an other,
ſnappeth at man and beaſte, and reſteth not in one place: So this Defender, to deface the Churche, ſheweth
him ſelfe to haue a very vnquiet heade. Nowe he ronneth at the Biſhop of Rome, then at the
whole cleregie. Nowe he barketh at errours in Doctrine, and ſheweth none, then he ſnappereth at
manners, and backebiteth mennes liues. Nowe he bringeth foorth Scriptures, and them he ſtretcheth
and racketh, but they reache not home. Then commeth be to the Doctoures, and maketh them of his
ſide whether they wil, or no. From Doctoures he runneth to Coniurers, to riminge Poetes, and to Heretikes
themſelues. I thinke they had rather ronne to the Turkes, then the Catholike Faithe ſhoulde
be receiued. And here leauinge that he tooke in hande to proue, that the Churche erreth in neceſſary
Doctrine, he flingeth at the tyrannie and pride of the Biſhoppes of Rome, and bringeth in for witnes
againſte them, white and blacke, good and bad. So he hurte them, he careth not howe, by what
meanes, ne by what perſons.
                  Firſte to geate credite, he vttereth a manifeſte lie, ſaieinge of them al, they leadde theire life at
Rome in the Holy Cittie vnder the noſe of the moſte holy Father, and might ſee al his ſecretes, and neuer
foreſooke the Catholike Faithe. His witneſſes be theſe: Laurence Valla, Marſilius of Padua, Francis
Petrarch, Hierome Sauonarol
                        •
                     , Ioachim Abbot, Baptiſte of Mantua, and S. Bernarde, whom of ſpite
he calleth Bernarde the Abbot. Nowe let vs ſee howe many lies here be made at once. VVhereas
of al theſeVntruthe. For Mantuane dvvelt in Rome: Petrarcha vvas made Poēte in Rome: Sauanorola vvas often in Rome, &c. neuer a one leadde his life at Rome, but Laurence Valla, who was a Canon of Laterane,
and this Defender ſaieth that al did: there is one lie. That al theſe might ſee the Popes ſecretes, there
be two lies. That none of theſe foreſooke the Catholike faithe,Vntruthe. Othervviſe ſhevve, vvherein they foreſooke the Faithe. there be three lies. As for Laurence
Valla, he was not in euery pointe very ſounde, as it appeareth in his Booke of Free wil, and in his annotations
vpon the newe Teſtamente. In althinges he handled, he ſhewed him ſelfe newe fangled,
rather then groundedly lerned, as wel in grammer and logike, as in diuinitie.
                  But Marſ. lius of Padua, to pleaſe the Emperouve Ludouicus Bauarus, who liued aboue twoo hundred
yeeres paſte, through malice conceiued againſte Pope Iohn the xxij of whom the ſaide Ludouicus
was for iuſte cauſes excommunicate, went ſo farre in ſchiſme.Vntruthe. Othervviſe ſhevve, in vvhat Article he vvas an Heretique. as at length he fel into Hereſie.
                  And Abbot Ioachim, whiles he reproued Peter Lombarde,This is Vncerra
                           •
                        ne. Reade Luther touchinge the ſame. vttered Hereſie contrarie to the Catholike
faithe, touchinge the Trinitie: and therefore his booke was condemned by the Churche, though
his perſon was not condemned, becauſe he ſubmitted him ſelfe, and his writinges to the iudgemente
of the Holy Romaine Churche, as we finde in the Decretals. That al theſe haue greately and often
complained of the Biſhoppes of Rome theire tyrannie and pride,Vntruthe. For this vvil ſoone appeare. there be foure lies.Extra, de ſumma
                           •
                        
                        nit. & fide Cathol, Cap. 2. That they declared
the Pope him ſelfe to be very Antichriſte,Vntruthe. For by moſte expreſſe woordes they calle him Antichriſte. there be fiue lies. And whereas, to make this ſhameles
lie, you aſke leaue, ſo we aſke leaue of you to tel it you, and to challenge you of a lie, and ſaieplainely
vnto you, that ſpeaking of them al, you belie them, and that you ſhal neuer be able to proue that
you ſaie of them.
                  Francis Petrarch the Italian Poēte, and Baptiſte of Mantua the Latine Poëte, ſpeake like Poëtes,
eche of them once in theire woorkes againſte the euil manners of the Courte of Rome. But what
proufe maketh al this, that the Romaine Churche, that is to ſaie, the Weaſt Churche, whiche onely remaineth,
and euer hath remained whole and ſound of Faithe, erreth in Doctrine? Or what argumente
can you gather out of al theſe, I wil not ſaie againſte the life, but againſte the office, Auctoritie, and
dignitie of the Biſhop of Rome? The argumente, you can make hereupon is this: Poëtes reprehende the
vices of the Courte of Rome: Ergo, the Pope is Antichriſte. Or, ergo the Catholike Churche erreth,
and is to be foreſaken. VVhat force is in this reaſon, euery reaſonable man, be he neuer ſo meane
of witte, may ſoone iudge:
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Your Compariſon of Madde Dogges, M. Hardinge, becommeth wel the reſt

of your Courteous eloquence.Antichriſte. Who ſo ſhal marke, howe vainely you ſnappe at,
what ſo euer ye can imagine, is in your waie: nowe at our Logique: nowe at our
Rhetorique: nowe at our Greeke: nowe at our Latine: nowe at our Lameneſſe:
nowe at our leane Cheekes: nowe at oure thinne Beardes: nowe at our Superintendenteſhippes:
nowe at our Miniſterſhippes: nowe at oure Maiſterſhippes:
nowe at our Maſhippes, (for this is the ſobrietie, and grauitie of your ſpeache):
and further howe greedily, and egrely ye faſten your teeth, and feede your ſelfe with
Winde, and are ſtil ſnappinge, and catche nothinge: although in regarde of manhood
he ſpare to cal you a Madde Dogge, as it liketh you to calle others, yet he
maie wel thinke you ſcarcely to be a ſober man.
                  Chriſte founde faulte, ſommetime with the Biſhoppes: Sommetime with
the Prieſtes: Sommetime with the Scribes: Sommetimes with the Phariſeis:
Sommetime with the People: Sommetime with theire Religion: Sommetime
with theire Traditions: Sommetime with theire Ignorance: Sommetime with
theire Praiers: Sommetime with theire Faſtinges: ſommetime with theire Life:
Sommetime with theire Hypocriſie: Sommetime with theire Crueltie: And
thus in your fantaſie, he ranne hither, and thither, vp, and downe. Yet, I trowe, ye
wil not touche him with your Compariſons, nor ſaie therfore, as ye ſaie to vs, he
had a very vnquiet Heade.
                  
                  
                     Who ſo hath eies to ſee, and conſidereth the miſerable Abuſes of the
Churche of Rome, touchinge either Life, or Religion, cannot lightly wante
iuſte mater to reproue. Ye remember, what Churche it is, whereof S. Bernarde
ſaithe,
                     Bernardus in Conuerſione Pauli, Sermo. 1. 
                     A planta pedis, vſque ad verticem Capitis non eſt Sanitas vlla: Non
eſt iam dicere, vt Populus, ſic Sacerdos. Quia nec ſic Populus, vt Sacerdos:
There is not one whole place from the ſole of the foote, to the toppe of the Heade. Wee
maie not nowe ſaie, As is the People, ſo is the Prieſte: For the People is nothinge ſo il, as is
the Prieſte.
                  Ye ſaie, theſe witneſſes dwelt not in Rome: and here in a ſmal matter, ye haue
noted a great lie. Howe be it, Bernarde the Abbate, that dwelte furtheſte of, was
twiſe in Rome:Gulielm. Abb. in Vita Bernard. Raphael Volaterran. and was Chiefe of Councel with Pope Innocentius in his greateſte
affaires Franciſcus Petrarcha was made Poete in the Capitol, and
keapte Laura his Concubine in the eie of the Pope, and had his moſte aboade in
Rome. Laurentius Valla vvas Cauon of the Cathedral Churche in Laterane,
and leadde his Life, and died in Rome. Briefely, S. Bernarde onely excepted,
al the reſte were Italians, and dwelte neuer far from Rome: & as it maie appeare
by the plaineneſſe of theire ſpeache, vnderſtoode ſomme parte of the déepeſte
Secretes of the Churche of Rome.
                  
                  
                     Marſilius Patauinus, ye ſaie, was an Heretique: But what one Hereſie
he defended, or before what Iudge he was conuicted, or where he was either abtured,Marſilius Patauinus.
or pouniſſhed for the ſame, neither you, nor any of al your Felowes haue
hitherto tolde vs. Therefore wée muſte thinke, He vvas an Heretique vvithout
Hereſie:
                     Ioachimus Abb. Extra. De Summa Trinitate, & Fide Catholica, Dānamus. Apocal. 17. 
                     as ſomme menne be Doctoures vvithout Diuinitie.
                  
                  
                     Ioachimus Abbas founde faulte with the Biſhop of Rome: And therefore
he muſte néedes be an Heretique. As for that he is charged in the Popes
Decretalles with erroure, touchinge the Trinitie, it is a greate Vntruthe: as ye
maie clearely perceiue by a Booke, that Martin Luther hath pourpoſely written
in his Defence.
                  But,Vergil. Septem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vna ſibi muro circundabit Arces. Iren. li. 5. Cavlt. to comme neare the matter, and to ſpeake of the thinge, that moſte miſliketh
you, S. Iohn ſaith, Antichriſte ſhal fitte in a Cittie builte vpon ſeuen Hilles:
                      (and
ſo is the Cittie of Rome). Irenaeus ſaith, The number of Antichriſtes Name ſhalbe expreſſed

by this woorde, Latinus. Sibylla ſaith, The greateſte terroure, and furie of
his Empiere,Sibylla, Oratione 8. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Hieronymus ad Algaſiam. Gregor. Lib. 6. Epiſt. 30. and the greateſte woe, that he ſhal woorke, ſhal be by the bankes of
Tyber. Whiche circumſtances ſéeme plainely to painte out the Cittie of Rome.
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe, Antichriſtus fedebit in Templo Dei: vel Hieroſolymi, vt
quidam putant: vel in Eccleſia, vt veriùs arbitramur: Antichriſte ſhal fit in the Temple
of God: either at Hieruſalem, as ſomme thinke: or els in the Churche (of God) it
ſelfe: vvhiche vvee take to be the truer meaninge. S.
                      Gregorie ſaithe, Ego fidenter
dico, quo'd quiſquis ſe Vniuerſalem Sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari defiderat, in elatione
ſua Antichriſtum praecurrit: I ſpeake it boldely: Who ſo euer calleth him ſelfe the
Vniuerſal Prieſte, or deſireth ſo to be called, (as doth the Pope) in the Pride of his harte
he is the forerenner of Antichriſte.
                  
                     And when Iohn, then Biſhop of Conſtantinople, had firſte entred his claime
vnto this title,
                     Gregor. Lib. 4. Epiſt. 34. 
                     S. Gregorie made anſweare vnto the ſame, Ex hac eius Superbia,
quid aliud, niſi propinqua iam eſſe Antichriſti tempora deſignantur? By this
Pride of his, what thinge els is ſignified, but that the time of Antichriſte is euen at hande?
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe vpon occaſion of the ſame, Rex ſoperbiae propè eſt: &, quod dici
nefas eſt, Sacerdotum eſt praeparatus exercitus:
                      The Kinge of Pride (that is Antichriſte)
is comminge to vs: and an Armie of Prieſtes is prepared: whiche thinge is wicked to be
ſpoken.Hieronym. ad Algaſiam. 
                     S. Hierome ſaithe, Antichriſtus omnem Religionem ſuae ſubijciet Poteſtati:
                     
Antichriſte ſhal cauſe al Religion to be ſubiecte to his Power.
                  I wil not here take vpon me to diſcrie, either the Perſon, or y• dwelling Place of
Antichriſte. Who ſo hath eies to ſée, let him ſée. Theſe Circūſtances agree not vnto
many. S.2. Theſſal. 2. 
                     Paule ſaith, Antichriſte woorketh the Myſterie, or ſecrete practiſe of Iuiquitie.
                     
Whereupon the Gloſe ſaith, Myſtica eſt Impietas Antichriſti, id eſt, Pieratis nomine
palliata: The wickedneſſe of Antichriſte is Myſtical: that is to ſaie,
                      (It is not plaine, &
open, or eaſy to be eſpied of euery body, but) cloked vnder the name of Godlineſſe.
                  
                  
                     And, for as mutche as M. Hardinge thinketh, wee miſallege theſe Writers,
and violently force them to our ſide, whether thei wil, or no, S. Bernarde ſaithe
thus,
                     Bernardus Epiſt. 125. Pag. 1316. Beſtia illa de Apocalypſi, cui datum leſt os loquens Blaſphemias, & bellum gerere
cum Sanctis, Petri Cathedram occupat, tanquam Leo paratus ad praedam: That
Beaſte, that is ſpoken of in the Booke of Reuelations, vnto whiche Beaſte is geuen a
mouthe to ſpeake Blaſhemies, and to keepe warre againſte the Sainctes of God, is novve
gotten into Peters Chaire, as a Lion prepared to his praie, Ioachimus Abbas ſaide aboue
three hundred yéeres ſithence,
                     Ioachimus Abbas. Antichriſtus iam pridem natus eſt Romae: & altiùs
ſe extollet in Sede Apoſtolica: Antichriſte is already borne in Rome: and ſhal
auaunce him ſelfe higher in the Apoſtolique See.
                  Arnulphus,In Concilio Remenſi, Inter Opera Bernardi. 
                     in the Councel of Remes, ſaith thus, Quid hunc, Reuerēdi Patres,
in ſublimi Solio reſidentem, veſte purpurea, & aurea radiantem, quid hunc, inquam, eſſe
cenſeris? Nimirùm, ſi charitate deſtituitur, ſola
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſcientia inflatur, & extollitur,
Antichriſtus eſt in Templo Derſedens, & ſeſe oftendens, tanquam ſit Deus:
What thinke you, Reuerend Fathers, of this man (be meaneth the
                      Pope) ſittinge on highe
in his Throne, glitteringe in purple, and clothe of Golde? What thinke you him to be? Verily,
if he be voide of Charitie, and be blowen vp, and auaunced onely wt knowledge, then is he
Antichriſt, ſitting in the Temple of God, and ſhewing out him ſelfe, as if he were God.
                  
                  
                     The Biſhoppes in the Councel at Reinſpurg ſaie thus,
                     Auentinus. Hildebrandus Papa,
ſub ſpecie Religionis, iecit Fundamenta Antichriſti: Pope Hildebrande, vnder a
coloure of holineſſe (by forebiddinge Prieſtes mariage) hath ſaide the Fundation for Antichriſte.Dantes in Cantione. 32.
Dantes an Italian Poëte by expreſſe woordes calleth Rome the Whoore
of Babylon. Fanciſcus Petrarcha likewiſe ſaithe, Rome the Whoore of Babylon:
The Mother of al Idolatrie,Franciſ. Petrarcha, Epiſt. 20. 
                     and Fornication: the Sanctuarie of Hereſie: and the
Schole of Errour. I knowe, theſe woordes wil ſéeme odious vnto many. Therefore
I wil ſtaie, & ſpare the reſte. The Pope him ſelfe, for that he ſawe, to whoes

Perſon, and credite theſe thinges belonged, therefore in his Late Councel of
Laterane gaue ſtraite Commaundemente to al Preachers,
                     Concil. Lateran. ſub Iulio & Leone. Seſsion. 11. 
                     that noman ſhoulde
dare once to ſpeake of the Comminge of Antichriſte.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 17. Diuiſion. 1.
               And what marueile if the Churche were then carried awaie with
errours in that time, ſpecially when neither the Biſhop of Rome,
who then onely ruled the roſte, nor almoſte any other, either didde
his duetie, or once vnderſtoode, what was his duetie? For it is harde
to be beleeued, whiles they were idle and faſte aſleepe, that the Diuel
alſo al that while either fel aſleepe, or els continually laie idle.
For howe they were occupied in the meane time, and with what
faithfulneſſe they tooke care of Goddes Houſe, though we holde our
peace, yet, I praie you, let them heare Bernarde theire owne frende.
The Biſhoppes (ſaith he) vvho novve haue the charge of Goddes
churche, are not Teachers, but Deceiuers: They are not Feeders,
but Beguilers: They are not Prelates, but Pilates. Theſe wordes
ſpake Bernarde of that Biſhop, who named him ſelfe the higheſte
Biſhop of al, and of the other Biſhoppes likewiſe, whiche then
hadde the place of gouernemente. Bernarde was no Lutherane: Bernarde
was no Heretike: he had not forſaken the Catholike Churche:
yet neuertheleſſe he did not lette to cal the Biſhoppes, that then were,
Deceiuers, Beguilers, & Pilates. Nowe, when the people was openly
deceiued: and Chriſtian mennes eies were craftily bleared: and
Pilate ſate in Iudgement place, and condemned Chriſte, and Chriſtes
Members to Swerde, and Fiere, O good Lorde, in what caſe was
Chriſtes Churche then? But yet tel me, of ſo many, and ſo groſſe
errours, what one erroure haue theſe menne at any time refourmed?
Or what faulte haue they once acknowledged, and confeſſed?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhy Sirs, are ye ſo wel learned, and ſo holy of life your ſelues, that ye take vpon you to iudge the
Biſhop of Rome, Chriſtes chiefe officer in earthe, and al other men, before the time of your Apoſtates,
and Renegate Frters, to haue ben both impious for not doing theire dutie, and ignorant for not knowinge
what was theire dutie? VVas al Vertue ſo farre banniſhed, al neceſſarie knowledge and Chriſtian
learninge ſo cleane put out, that wee muſte nowe beginne to learne how to beleue, and howe to
liue a Chriſtian life of ſutche light preachers,The Sprite of Modeſtie. Wicked vowbreakers, lewde Lecherous Lurdens, and
deteſtable blaſphemers, as your deuiliſhe rable is?
                  S. Bernardes wordes to Eugenius be theſe: Age indagemus adhuc diligentiùs, quis ſis, &c.
VVel goe too.Lib. 2. De conſideratione. Let vs ſomewhat more diligently examine, what manner a man thou art, what perſon
thou beareſt for the preſente time in the Churche of God. VVho art thou? The greate Preieſte, the higheſt
Biſhop. Thou arte the chiefe of al Biſhoppes, thou arte the heire of the Apoſtles: for primacie
thou arte Abel, for Gouernement Noë, for Patriarkſhip Abraham. for holy order Melchiſcdech, for dignitie
Aaron, for Auctoritie Moyſes. for iudgemente Samuel, for power Peter,The Pope is Chriſte. for thy anointinge
Chriſte. Thou art he
                        •
                     to whom the Keies were deliuered, to whom the Shepe were committed. There be
alſo other porters of Heauen, and Paſtours of flockes. But thou ſo mutche farre paſsinge al other, as
thou haſte inherited bothe names mutche more indifferent. They haue theire flockes aſsigned vnto them.
ech man one. Al are committed to thee, the one whole flocke to one. Neither arte thou onely the Paſtour
of al the Sheepe, but alſo the onely Paſtour of al the Paſtours.
                  
                     
VVherefore accordinge to thine owne Canons,The ſtate of the Churche of Rome. other are called into parte of care, thou into falnes
of power. The Auctoritie of others is reſtrained to certaine preſcripte boundes: thine is extended
euen vpon thoſe, who haue receiued power ouer others. Canſt not thou, if there be cauſe why, cloſe vp
heauen gates againſte a Biſhop, depriue him of his Biſhoprike, and geue him vp to the Deuil?
                  Nowe heare an other reaſon whiche confirmeth that prerogatiue to thee, as wel as the other. The
Diſciples rowed,Iohan, 12. and our Lorde appeared vnto them on the ſhore, and that in his Body nowe againe
reſtored vnto life, whiche was more confortable vnto them. Peter knowing that it was our Lorde,
leapte into the ſea,S. Peter leapeth for the Popedome. and ſo came vnto him, and the reſte came by bote. VVhat meaneth this? Forſooth it
was a ſigne of the ſingulare Popedome of Peter, by whiche he tooke into his Gouernemente, not one
onely one Shippe, as the other did, eche man his owne, but the whole worlde.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Apoſtates, Renegates, Lecherous Lurdaines, Deteſtable, Diueliſhe rable?
O M. Hardinge, the Veſſel, that helde this liquoure, was not cleane. Wee condemne
not your Cleregie, either for life, or for Learning: but onely reporte therein
the iudgemente of others, youre ſpecial frendes. And therefore, if any thinge
miſlike you herein, the faulte is in them, & not in vs. S. Bernarde ſaith, Your Biſhoppes
in his time were not Doctoures, but Deceiuers: Not Feeders, but Defrauders:
Not Prelates, but Pilates. Iudge you nowe, in what caſe the Churche
of God ſtoode then, when the Biſhoppes, that were the Guides, and Leaders of
the people, might be compared to Pilate, that gaue Sentēce in iudgement againſt
Chriſte.
                  Iohannes Vitalis a Cardinal of Rome, and therefore in no wiſe of your parte
to be refuſed,
                     Iohan. Vitalis de praelatis & Sacerdot. Hiere. 5. 
                     ſaithe thus, De Sacerdotibus modernis dicit Hieremias: Stupor, & mirabilia
facta ſunt in terra. Prophetae praedicabant mendacium: & Sacerdotes applaudebant
manibus: Et populus meus dilexit talia: Concerninge the Prieſtes, that
nowe be, Hieremie ſaith, Honoure, and woonders are wrought vpon the Earth. The Prophetes
haue preached Lies: the Prieſtes haue clapte theire handes at it for ioie, and liked it wel:
and my people hath loued ſutche thinges.
                  
                  Albertus Magnus ſaith,
                     Albertus in Iohannē, Ca. 10. EE. Illi, qui modo' praeſunt in Eccleſijs, plurimùm ſunt Fures,
& Latrones: plùs Exactores, quàm Paſtores: plùs Spoliatores, quàm Tutores:
plùs Mactatores, quàm Cuſtodes: plùs Peruerſores, quàm Doctores: plùs Seductores,
quàm Ductores. Iſti ſunt Nuntij Antichriſti, Subuerſores Ouiū Chriſti:
They that nowe gouerne the Churche, for the moſt parte, be Theeues, and Murtherers: more
Catches, then Feeders: more Spoilers, then Defenders: more Killers, then Keepers: more Deceiuers,
then Doctoures: more Beguilers, then Cuiders, Theſe be the vauntcurrers of Antichriſte,
the Subuerters of the Sheepe of Chriſte.
                  
                     VVilliam Holcote ſaithe,
                     
                     Guliel. Holcote in Li. Sapientiae Lectio. 182. 
                     Sacerdotes moderni ſunt ſimiles Sacerdotibus
Baal: ſunt Angeli Apoſtatici: ſunt ſimiles Sacerdotibus Dagon: ſunt Sacerdotes
Priapi: ſunt Angeli Abyſsi: The Prieſtes of this time are like the Prieſtes of Baal: Thei are
the Renegate Angels: They are like the Prieſtes of Dagon: They are the Prieſtes of Priapus:
They are the Angels of Helle.Bernard. in Concilio Remenſi. 
                     S. Bernarde ſaithe, Dicimini Paſtores, cùm ſitis
Raptores. Fratres, Ieſus hodiè elegit ſibi multos Diabolos Epiſcopos. Non ſunt
Paſtores, ſed Traditores:
                      Ye are called Biſhoppes, but ye are Rauenners. O my Brethren,
Ieſus at this time hath choſen vnto him many Diuels to be Biſhoppes: thei are not Feeders: thei
are Traitours.Iohan. Sariſburien. in Polycratico. Li. 6. Ca. 24. 
                     Iohannes Sariſburienſis ſaide boldely vnto Pope Adrian the fourth,
Ideò mea opinione Papae frequentiùs moriūtur, ne totam corrumpant Eccleſiam:
Therefore in my iudgemente the Popes die the oftener, leſte (if they ſhould continew longe)
they ſhoulde infecte the whole Churche.
                  
                     Againe S.
                     Bernard in Cantica, Sermo. 66. 
                     Bernarde ſaithe, Pudeat Succeſſores Apoſtolorum Lucem non eſſe
Mundi, ſed Modij: Mundi autem tenebras. Dicamus eis, Vos eſtis tenebrae Mundi:
                     
Let it ſhame the Succeſſours of the Apoſtles not to be ye Lighte of the Worlde, but the Light
of the Buſſhel: and rather the Darkeneſſe of the VVorlde. Let vs therefore ſaie vnto them,
yee are the Darkeneſſe of the VVorlde.
                  
                  
                     Through theſe ſpectacles wée maie beholde the ſtate of the Churche of Rome.
For Chriſte ſaithe,
                     Matthae. 6. If the Lighte it ſelfe, that is in thee, be made Darkeneſſe, how
greate then wil the Darkeneſſe it ſelfe be? How can the Cittie be keapte in ſafetie, if
the Watcheman be blinde, and ſée nothinge? If the Blinde leade the Blinde, bothe falle
into the pitte.Matthae. 15. Matthae. 13. Hilari. in Matthae. Canon. 8. 
                     Chriſte ſaithe, Dormientibus illis, creuerunt Zizania:
                      While the Huſbandemenne
were aſleepe, then the Cokle, and Darnel grewe. S. Hilarie ſaithe, Eccleſiae,
intra quas Verbum non vigilat, naufragae ſunt:
                      The Churches, wherein
Goddes VVoorde watcheth not, ſuffer ſhipwracke, and are drowned.
                  But Bernarde, ye ſaie, ſtoutely maineteineth the Popes Supremacie. I
graunte you. Neither did wée euer allege him, to proue the contrarie. He defendeth
alſo other greate, and groſſe errours, as liuinge in a time of déepeſt Darkeneſſe.
But the Reaſon,Bernar. De Conſideratione ad Eugeni. Lib. 2. Iohan. 21. he vſeth, ſeeme very weake, ſpecially to winne ſo great a mater.
For thus he ſaithe, Peter leapte into the vvater, and came to Chriſte:
The reſte of the Diſciples came by bote:
                  
                  Ergo, The Pope hath the Iuriſdiction of al the vvorlde.
                  Sutche other prety Reaſons, made in the Popes behalfe, ye maie finde many.
Peter Crab,
                     Concil. to. 1. Pagin. 10. Matthae. 17. Iohan. 21. Luc. 5. Mark. 14. Luc. 22. Iohan. 1. Matthae. 26. that lately compiled the Bookes of Councelles, reaſoneth thus:

                        Peter paide the tribute monie for Chriſte, and him ſelfe:
                        Chriſte ſaide vnto Peter, Folowe thou me:
                        Againe he ſaide, Lanche foorthe into the deepe:
                        Againe, Peter arte thou aſleepe? Couldeſt thou not watche with me one houre?
                        And againe, From hencefoorthe thy name ſhalbe Peter:
                        
                        And, Peter drewe his Swerde, and cutte of Malchus Eare:
                     
                     Ergo, ſaithe he,
                      The Pope hath Vniuerſal Authoritie ouer the whole Churche of God.
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge, how ſo euer theſe Reaſons holde, Bernarde ſaithe, The
Popes are the Heades of the Churche. True it is. But againe the ſame Bernard ſaith,
The ſame Heades are the Miniſters of Antichriſte, Deceiuers, Defrauders, Rauenners,
Traitours, the Darkeneſſe of the Worlde, VVoulfes, Pilates, and Diuels.
And this was ſufficient for our pourpoſe.
                     Gregor. Homil. 17. in illa verba, Meſsis quidem multa. 
                     S. Gregorie ſaithe, Conſiderate,
quid de Gregibus agatur, quando Lupi ſunt Paſtores: When the VVoulfe is becomme
the Sheephearde, conſider then, what maie becomme of the Flocke.
                  
                  As for that S. Bernarde ſaithe, The Pope is Abel: The Pope is Noë: The
Pope is Abraham: The Pope is Melchiſedek: The Pope is Aaron: The Pope
is Moſes:
                     The Pope is Chriſte. The Pope is Samuel: The Pope is Peter: The Pope is Chriſte, I
doubte not, but your owne Conſcience wil anſweare, it is too mutche. Yet is that a
greate deale more likely, that others haue ſaide, as I haue alleged before, The
Pope is Antichriſte. For bothe Heauen, & Earthe knoweth, he is not Chriſte.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 18. Diuiſion. 1.
               But, forſomutche as theſe menne auouche the Vniuerſal poſſeſſion
of the Catholique Churche to be their owne, and cal vs Heretiques,
bicauſe we agree not in iudgemente with them, let vs know,
I beſeeche you, what proper marke, and badge hathe that Churche
of theirs, whereby it maie be knowen, to bee the Churche of God.
Yewis it is not ſo harde a matter to finde out Goddes Churche, if a
manne wil ſeeke it earneſtly, and diligently. For the Churche of

God is ſette vpon a highe, & gliſteringe place, in the toppe of an Hille,
and builte vpon the Fundation of the Apoſtles, and Prophetes:
There,
                  Auguſtin. De Vnitate Eccle. Catholicae. ſaithe Auguſtine, lette vs ſeeke the Churche: there lette vs trie
oure maters. And, as he ſaithe againe in an other place,
The Churche muſte be ſhevved out of the Holy, and Canonical
Scriptures: and that, vvhiche can not be ſhevved out of them, is
not the Churche. Yet for al this, I wote not how, whether it be
for feare, or for conſcience, or deſpaire of victorie, theſe menne alwaie
abhorre, and flee the VVoorde of God, euen as the Theefe fleeth the
Gallowes. And no woonder truely. For, like as menne ſaie, the Cantharus
by and by periſheth, & dieth, as ſoone as it is laide in baulme,
notwithſtandinge Baulme be otherwiſe a moſte ſweete ſmellinge
ointemente: euen ſo theſe men wel ſee, their owne matte is damped,
and deſtroied in the VVoorde of God, as if it were in poiſon.
Therefore the Holy Scriptures, whiche oure Saueour Ieſus Chriſte
did not onely vſe for Authoritie in al his ſpeache, but did alſo at laſte
ſeale vp the ſame with his owne Bloude, theſe menne to the entent
they mighte with leſſe buſineſſe driue the people from the ſame, as
from a thinge daungerous, and deadly, haue vſed to cal theim a
Bare Letter,
                  Albertus Pighius in Controuer. De Eccleſia. 
                  Vncertaine, Vnprofitable, Doūbe, Killinge, & Deade:
whiche ſeemeth to vs al one, as if they ſhoulde ſaie, The Scriptures
are to no pourpoſe, or, as good as none at al. Hereunto they adde
alſo a Similitude not very agreeable, how the Scriptures be like
to a Noſe of VVaxe, or a Shipmans Hoſe: how thei may be faſhioned,
and plied al manner of waies, and ſerue al mennes turnes.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhere ye ſaie, the Churche is builded vpon the Fundation of the Apoſtles and Prophetes, and
ſhewed by the Holy Canonicall Scriptures: we confeſſe the ſame with S. Auguſtine. VVhen ye adde,
the Churche, whiche can not be ſhewed out of the Scriptures, to be no Churche, we ſaie, that though
Vntruthe. For S. Auguſtine in the ſame places, and elsvvhere, oftentimes ſaith the ſame. S. Auguſtine haue no ſuche woordes in the Chapters, whiche ye alleage in the Margent, yet were
it neuer ſo muche graunted, that he had thoſe woordes in that place, they ſhoulde make nothinge
for your pourpoſe. S. Auguſtine in that Booke diſputeth againſte the Donatiſtes, who would reſtraine
the Catholike Churche to the onely Countrie of Aphrike, denieinge other Chriſten menne to be members
thereof. S. Auguſtine refutinge their Hereſie, declareth the Sonne of God to be Heade, and all
the true Faithfull to be the Body of the Churche: and that it is not ſufficient to holde with the Head
alone, or with the Body alone: but we muſte holde with bothe together, if we will be ſaued.
                  The Donatiſtes did graunte the Heade Ieſus Chriſte, and denied his Body the Churche. For this cauſe
ſaithe S. Auguſiine, Ipſum Caput de quo conſentimus, oſtēdat nobis Corpus ſuum, de quo
diſſentimus: Let the Heade, vpon whom we agree, ſhewe vnto vs his Body, whereupon we diſagree.
The Head is Chriſte, who ſpake firſte by his Prophetes, afterwarde by him ſelfe, and laſte of
all by his Apoſtles. In his igitur omnibus quaerenda eſt Eccleſia. In all theſe (ſaithe he) the
Churche muſte be ſought.VVhere the Churche is to be ſought,
                  
                  If thou marke, good Reader, that, whiche I haue here reherſed out of S Auguſtine, it is to be
ſeene, that he bindeth not the proufe of the Churche ſimply to the Holy Scriptures,Vntruthe. For S Auguſtines vvoordes are general. but onely in
a caſe, when he hath to doo with an Heretike, who wil not admitte the auctoritie of the Churche.
ThereforeHere M. Hardinge ſecretely confeſſeth, that his Churche of Rome cannot be ſhevved by the Scriptures. a true Churche maie be founde, whiche is not ſhewed in the Scriptures, ſo the contrarie

thereof be not ſhewed in the Scriptures.Churche knovven by Goddes vvoorde. Now if theſe Defenders will haue that to be no Churche,
which can not be ſhewed out of Scriptures, they ſhall vnderſtande, that as therein they plaie the Donatiſtes,
ſo we muſt needes folow's. Auguſtine in bringinge Scripture againſt them, not as theVntruthe. For S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Nunc nullo modo cognoſcitur, quae ſit vera Eccleſia, niſi Tantummodò per Scripturas.
                      onely
proufe in deede (whiche they falſely ſaie) but as a very good and chiefe kinde of proufe, moſte profitable
in all caſes, and neceſſary at ſuche time, as the aduerſarie will admitte none other proufe, &c.
                  VVherefore it remaineth, that it is the Synagog of Antichriſte, and Lucifer. VVho as he fell out
of Heauen like a lightninge, ſo he maketh a blaſe and ſhewe of a Churche in the Earthe for a time.
But as we can tell when it was not borne, ſo ſhall it not be longe, but that through Gods power it
will vaniſhe awaie diſperſed, and be ſcattered by the lightſome Maieſtie of Chriſtes true Churche,
whiche from S. Peters time to this daie floriſheth in her Head the Biſhop of Rome, and in her members
throughout the worlde.In the Vnitie of the B. of Rome. 
                     vvhiche abide in the Vnitie of the ſame Biſhop.
                  
                  VVee eſteeme and vnderſtande the Scriptures to be the ſenſe and the woorde. If they can pretende
the bare woorde, they thinke themſelues good inough to make a ſenſe of their owne. VVhiche
bare woorde, as they miſuſe it, Pighius perhaps compareth to a noſe of waxe. But the Scriptures he
neuer meante to diſhonour with that ſimilitude. If it were lawfull for vs to vſe Scripture after
our owne interpretation, as they doo, we ſhoulde not lacke ſufficient matter in the Holy Bookes to
ouerthrowe by our owne applieinge all theire falſe opinions and Hereſies.Vntruthe manif
                           •
                         ſt, & ſhameleſſe. For M. Hard, knovveth, that in the greatteſt caſes, that lie in queſtion, he can allege neither Scripture, nor Doctoure. But we are bounde to
that religious awe, and reuerence of them, that excepte we haue an Authour to auouche the ſenſe,
whereof we take holde, we dare bringe foorthe nothinge. And yet reade our Bookes who will, he
ſhall lacke neither Scriptures in them, nor witneſſes of our interpretation in any controuerſie of this
age. Let it be agreed, that for deciſion of controuerſies, ſuche ſenſe of the Scriptures be taken for
Scripture, whiche the Holy Ghoſt hath taught the Churche, and then let the worlde iudge, who flieth
the woorde of God, as the Theefe dothe the Gallowes.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Contrarie to that, wée haue here alleged of S. Auguſtine, ye ſaie, A true Churche
maie be founde, whiche is not ſhewed in the Scriptures: Whereby it appeareth, ye are lothe,
your Churche ſhoulde comme to the trial of this Standerde. But, for as mutche
as this quarrel groweth of S. Auguſtine, let S. Auguſtine him ſelfe be the
Iudge. And, to allege a fewe woordes in ſtéede of many, thus he ſaithe, Vtrùm
ipſi Eccleſiam teneant,
                     
                     Auguſtin. De Vnitate Eccle. Ca. 16. 
                     Diuinarum Scripturarum Canonicis Libris oſtendant.
Eccleſiam Chriſti, ſicut ipſum Caput Chriſtum, in Scripturis Sanctis Canonicis debemus
agnoſcere: VVhether they haue the Churche, or no, let them ſhewe by the Canonical
Bookes of the Holy Scriptures. VVee muſte knowe the Churche of Chriſte, euen as wee
likewiſe knowe Chriſte, whiche is the Heade of the Churche, in the Holy Canonical Scriptures.
Againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. Contra Creſconium Cram. Lib. 1. Ca. 33. 
                     Eccleſiam ſine vlla ambiguitate Sancta Scriptura demonſtrat:
The Holy Scripture ſheweth the Churche without any doubtefulneſſe.
                  
                     Againe, Quaeſtio eſt, vhi ſit Eccleſia. Quid ergo facturi ſumus? Vtrùm in verbis noſtris
eam quaeſituri, an in Verbis Capitis ſui, Domini noſtri Ieſu Chriſti? Futo, quòd
in illius potiùs Verbis eam quaerere debemus,
                     
                     Auguſt De Vnita Eccleſi. Ca. 2. 
                     qui Veritas eſt, & optimè nouit
Corpus ſuum: The queſtion, or doubte is, where the Churche ſhould be. What then ſhal we
doo? VVhether ſhal wee ſeeke the Churche in our owne woordes, or in the VVoordes of her
Heade, whiche is oure Lorde Ieſus Chriſte? In my Iudgemente wee ought rather to ſeeke
the Churche in his VVoordes: for that he is the Truthe, and beſte knoweth his owne Body.
                  
                  
                     Againe,
                     Auguſt. Eodem Li. Ca. 3. Non audiamus, Haec dico, Haec dicis: Sed audiamus, Haec dicit Dominus.
lbi quaeramus Eccleſiam: Ibi diſcutiamus cauſam noſtram: Let vs not heare
theſe woordes, This ſaie I, This ſaiſte thou: But theſe woordes ſet vs heare, Thus ſaithe
the Lorde: there let vs ſeeke the Churche: there let vs diſcuſſe oure cauſe. And
againe,
                     
                     In eodē capite. Nolo Humanis Documentis, ſed Diuinis Oraculis Sanctam Eccleſiam demonſtrari:
I wil not haue the Holy Churche to be ſhewed by Mannes Iudgemente, but by
Goddes VVoorde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Likewiſe ſaithe S.
                     Vnitie of the Churche in one Pope. Chryſoſtome, Nunc nullo modo cognoſcitur, quae ſit
vera Eccleſia Chriſti, niſi Tantummodò per Scripturas: Now can noman knowe,
whiche is the true Churche of Chriſte, but Onely by the Scriptures. Againe he ſaithe, in
like fourme of woordes,
                      Volens ergo quis cognoſcere, quae ſit Vera Eccleſia Chriſti,
vnde cognoſcat in tanta confuſione ſimilitudinis,Chryſoſt. in opere Imperfe. Homil 49. In Eadem Hom. nifi Tantummodo' per Scripturas?
If a man be deſirous to knowe, whiche is the true Churche of Chriſte, how can he
know it in ſutche a confuſion of likeneſſe, but Onely by the Scriptures? Theſe woordes
be ſo euident and ſo plaine, that noman with modeſtie maie wel denie them.
                  
                  
                     And, whereas you ſaie, Al this notwithſtandinge, A true Churche maie be founde,
whiche is not ſhewed in the Scriptures. S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſi, Hexameron. li. 4. ca. 8. Eccleſia fulget, non ſuo,
ſed Chriſti Lumine: The Churche ſhineth (or is knowen) not by her owne Lighte, but
by the Light of Chriſte, whiche is, by the VVoorde of God.
                  
                     And chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. in Iohan Homil. 58. Qui Sacra non vtitur Scriptura, ſed aſcendit aliunde,
id eſt, non conceſſa via, hic Fur eſt, & Latro: Who ſo vſeth not the Scripture, but geateth
vp an other waie, that is, by a waie, that is not lawful, he is a Theefe, and a Murtheier.
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 46. Hieruſalem hîc ſemper Eccleſiam intellige, quae dicitur Ciuitas
Pacis: cuius Fundamenta poſita ſunt ſuper Montes Scripturarum: Here by Hieruſalem
euermore vnderſtande thou the Churche, whiche is called the Cittie of Peace:
The Fundations whereof are ſaide vpon the Mountaines of the Scriptures.
                  
                  Ye magnifie your Churche of Rome, and ſaie, It ſhieth on highe vpon the Mounte.
Yet S. Bernarde ſaithe to the Pope, and his Cleregie, as it is alleged before, Vos
eſtis Tenebrae Mundi: Ye are the Darkeneſſe of the VVorlde.
                      Therefore ye maie not
wel vaunte your ſelues ſo mutche of the brightneſſe of your Beames. As for that,
ye cal our Churche the Synagoge of Lucifer, and Antichriſte, we maie wel ſuffer
it to blowe euer, as the vaine vnſauery ſmoke of ſomme impatiente Cholerique
humoure. Our cauſe is not the woorſe, M. Hardinge, in the Iudgemente of the
wiſe, for that you haue learned ſo readily to ſpeake il.
                  
                     But what Louanian vanitie is this, to ſaie, The Members of the Churche of Chriſte
abide in the
                      Vnitie of the Pope? What Scripture, or Doctoure, or Father euer tolde
you of ſutche Vnitie? S. Paule ſaith, Wee are alone not in the Pope, but) in Chriſte
Ieſu. And what ſo greate Vnitie, can you ſaie, there is, or hathe benne in your
Popes?
                     Platyna in Stephano. Platyna ſaithe, Poſt Stephanum ſemper haec conſuetudo ſeruata eſt, vt acta
Priorum Pontificum ſequentes ant infringereat, aut omnino' tollerent: It hathe benne
an ordinarie cuſtome emonge the Popes euer ſithence the time of Pope Steuin, that the
Popes, that folowed afterworde, would euermore either breake, or aboliſhe the Actes of the
Popes,Eraſmus in Annotationib. in 1. Corin. 7. 
                     that had benne before them. Eraſmus ſaith, Iohannes. 22. & Nicolaus totis
Decretis inter ſe pugnāt, id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in his, quae videntur ad Fidei negotium pertinere: Pope
Iohn. 22. and Pope Nicolas in theire whole Decrees are contrarie the one againſte the
other: yea, and that in maters, that ſeeme to belonge to caſes of the Faithe.
                  
                  To be ſhorte, the Popes haue fouly corrupted the Scriptures: they haue corrupted
the Decrees, & Canons of Councelles: they haue benne Sorcerers, Idolaters,
Scribes, & Phariſeis: Thei haue benne Arian Heretiques: Neſtorian Heretiques:
Monothelite Heretiques: Montaniſte Heretiques: thei haue mainteined damnable
Hereſies againſt y• 
                     Godhed of Chriſte: againſt y• 
                     Perſonne of Chriſte: againſt
y• 
                     VVil of Chriſte: & againſt the Immortalitie of the Soule: they haue henne contrarie
to themſelues, one directly, and expreſſely againſte an other: Yet muſte the
Pope beare vp the whole Churche of God, euen as Atlas beareth vy the Heauens?
and onleſſe al the worlde abide in him, is there no Vnitie in the Churche?
                  
                  
                     Thus ſaith Hoſius,Hoſius in Petricouien. Confeſſ. Ca. 27. Vnum praeeſſe toti Eccleſiae, vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ade ò eſt neceſſarium,
vt abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      hoc Eccleſia Vna eſſe non poſsit: It is ſo neceſſarie a thinge, that one haue the
gouernmente of the whole, that otherwiſe the Churche of God cannot be One.
                  
                  
                     
                     Likewiſe it is noted in the Popes ovvne Gloſes vpon his Decretalles,
Conſtat Eccleſiam ideo eſſe vnam, quia in Vniuerſali Eccleſia vnum eſt caput
Supremum, ſcilicet, Papa: It is plaine, that the Churche is one, for that in the Vniuerſal
Churche there is one Supreme Heade, that is, the Pope. An other of your Doctours
doubteth not to ſteppe yet a litle farther,
                     Clemen. 5. Ad noſtrum. In Gloſſa. Iohan. De Pariſijs, De Poteſtate Regia, & Papali, Ca 3. 
                     and thus to expounde the woordes
of Chriſte, Fiet Vnū Ouile, & Vnus Paſtor: Quod quidem de chriſto intelligi non
poteſt: Sed de aliquo alio Miniſtro, qui praeſit loco eius: There ſhalbe one Folde, and one
Shepehearde. Theſe vvoordes vvee maie not vnderſtande of Chriſte, but of ſomme
other Miniſter, that ruleth in his roome. By whiche Doctours Catholique Iudgemente
wée finde, that the
                      Vnitie of the Churche hangeth not of Chriſte, but of the
Pope.
                  But theſe be ouer vaine, and groſſe vanities. For though the Pope, were no
Pope, yea, though Antichriſte were the Pope, yet is Chriſte hable to holde his
Churche in perfite Vnitie.
                     
                        
                           •
                        pheſi. 4. S. Paule ſaithe, Chriſtus eſt Caput, ex quo totum
Corpus coagmentatur, & connectitur: Chriſte is the Heade, of whom the whole Body
                     
(of the Churche) is framed faſte, and ioined togeather. Therefore S. Chryſoſtome
ſaithe,Chryſoſt. ad Coloſſen. Homi. 7. Citatur in Cathena in 1. Cap. Iohannis. 
                     Ex hoc capite Corpus habet, & vt ſit, & vt bene ſir. Quid relicto
Capite Membris adhaeres? Of this Heade (that is Chriſte) the Body hathe bothe to
be, and alſo wel to be. What cleaueſt thou to the Members, and leaueſt the Heade?
                     
                  
                  This is the Vnitie of the Churche, that the whole Flocke maie heare the
voice of that One Shepehearde, and folowe him. And that one Shepehearde is
Chriſte the Sonne of God, and not the Pope. Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Per hanc Poteſtatem, quam ſolùm ſibi Chriſtus retinuit, ſtat Vnitas Eccleſiae,
de qua dictum eſt, Vna eſt Columba mea: By this Power, whiche Chriſte
                      (he ſaithe
not, hath geuen ouer the Pope, but) hath reſerued onely to him ſelfe, ſtandeth the Vnitie
of the Churche: of whiche Vnitie it is ſaide, My Dooue is One.
                     
                  
                  Ye ſaie, there appeareth in your Bookes ſufficient abundance of Scriptures,
touchinge any controuerſie of this age, and that accordinge to the very ſenſe, and
meaninge of the ſame, togeather with the conſente, and Iudgemente of the Holy
Fathers. But as for vs, ye ſaie, wée builde onely vpon the bare woordes, and make
a meaninge of oure owne.
                  
                     In déede it is no greate Maiſterie for you, to arme your ſelfe with ſomme ſhew
of Scriptures.Matthae. 4. In Con. Chalcedon. Actione. 2. Athanaſ. contra Arianos Oratione. 1. Tertullian. De Baptiſmo. 
                     The Diuel was not altogeather voide of ſutche furniture, when
he came to tempte Chriſte. S. Cyril ſaithe, Omnes Haeretici de Scriptura diuinitùs
inſpirata ſui colligunt erroris occaſiones: Al Herotiques out of the Heauenly inſpired
Scriptures geather occaſion of their erroure. Athanaſius ſaithe, Haeretici Scriptutarum
Verbis pro eſca vtuntur: Heretiques vſe the woordes of the Scriptures for a baite.
                  
                  
                     Tertullian ſaithe, Fidem ex his impugnat, ex quibus conſtat: An Heretique aſſauſteth
the Faithe by the ſame woordes of God, that breede the Faithe.
                  But for as mutche as ye ſaie, yee beare ſutche awe, and reuerence vnto the
VVoorde of God, and in the interpretation thereof folowe onely the ſenſe of the
Holy Ghoſte, and the Iudgemente of the Doctours and Fathers of the Churche,
for ſomme trial of your truthe herein, let vs ſée, how diſcretely, and reuerently ye
haue vſed the ſame.
                  
                     In your late Councel holden at Laterane in Rome, one Simon Begnius, the
Biſhop of Modruſia,Concil. Lateran. Seſsion. 6. Pag. 601. 
                     ſaith thus vnto Pope Leo, Ecce venit Leo de Tribu Iuda,
Radix Dauid &c. Te Leo Beatiſsime Saluatorem expectauimus &c. Beholde,
the Lion is comme of the Tribe of Iuda, the Roote of Deuind &c. O moſte Bleſſed Leo,
wee haue looked for thee, to be oure Saueour. In your late Chapter at Tridente
Cornelius the Biſhop of Bitonto ſaide thus,
                     Concil. Trident. Cornelius Bitont inus. Papa Lux venit in Mundum: & dilexerunt
homines tenebras magis, quàm Lucem. Omnis, qui màlè agit, odit lucem, & non

                     venit ad Lucem:
                     Abuſinge of the scriptures. The Pope beinge the Lighte is comme into the VVorlde: and menne haue
loued the Darkeneſſe more then the Light. Euery man, that doothe euil, hateth (the Pope
that is) the Lighte, and commeth not to the Lighte.
                  Pope Adrian ſaith,
                     Concil. to. 2. Decreta collecta per Adrianum, Pag. 613. Papa non iudicabitur à quoquam: Quia Scriptum eſt, Non
eſt Diſcipulus ſupra Magiſtrum: No man ſhal Iudge the Pope: for it is written, the
Scholar is not aboue his Maiſter.
                  
                  
                     The Pope ſuffered the Embaſſadours of Sicilia to lie proſtrate on the
grounde,
                     Paulus Aemylius, Lib. 7. 
                     and thus to crie vnto him, as if it had benne vnto Chriſte, Qui tollis
Peccata Mundi, miſerere noſtri: Qui tollis Peccata mundi, dona nobis Pacem:
O thou (Holy Father) that takeſt awaie the Sinnes of the Worlde, haue mercie vpon vs:
thou, that takeſt awaie the Sinnes of the Worlde, geue vs Peace.
                  
                  
                     Pope Sixtus ſaithe, Who ſo accuſeth the Pope, can neuer be forgeuen. And
his reaſon is this,Concil. tomo. 1. In purgatione Sixti. 
                     Quia qui peccat in Spiritum Sanctum, non remittetur ei, neque
in hac vita, neque in futura: He, that ſinneth againſte the Holy Ghoſte, ſhal neuer be foregeuen,
neither in this VVorlde, nor in the VVorlde to comme.
                      And by theſe woordes of the
Scriptures, ſo wel applied, he concludeth, that noman maie accuſe the Pope. And,
to leaue a heape of other examples (for they are infinite), you your ſelfe, M. Hardinge,
haue often vſed the Scriptures in like ſorte.
                  
                     Thus ye ſaie,
                     M. Hard. fo. 99. a The Sonne of Man came not to deſtroie (the Soules of menne) but to ſaue:
Ergo, The subſtance of Breade in the Sacramente is not annihilate, or conſumed to nothinge.
                  And this, yee ſaie, was the Senſe, and meaninge of the Holy Ghoſte: this is
the Iudgemente of al the Doctours, and Holy Fathers. Sutche religious awe, and
reuerence ye beare towardes the VVoorde of God. Yet ſaithe your Doctoure
Hoſius,
                     Hoſius Contra Brentium. Li. 4. Fol. 178. a. 
                     The Scripture, as it is alleged by vs, is the VVoorde of the Diuel: but as it is alleged,
and handled by you, ſo onely it is the VVoorde of God.
                      If yee had not vtterly
wypte al ſhame from your faces, yée woulde neither make ſutche mockeries of
Goddes Holy Woorde, nor ſo lewdely abuſe the people of God.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 19. & 20. Diuiſion. 1.
               Woteth not the Biſhop of Rome, that theſe thinges are ſpoken
by his owne Minions? or vnderſtandeth he not, he hathe ſutche
Chāpions to fighte for him? Let him herken then how Holily, & ho
                     •
                  
Godly one Hoſius writeth of this matter, a Biſhop in Polonia, as
he teſtifieth of him ſelfe: a man doubtleſſe wel ſpoken, and not vnlearned,
and a very ſharpe, and a ſto
                     ••
                  te mainteinour of that ſide. Thou
wilt marueile, I ſuppoſe, how any good man could either conceiue ſo
wickedly, or write ſo deſpitefully of thoſe woordes, whiche, he knew,
proceeded from Goddes mouthe, and ſpecially in ſutche ſorte, as hée
woulde not haue it ſeeme his owne priuate opinion alone, but the
common opinion of al that bande. He diſſembleth, I graunte you
in deede, and hideth, what hee is, and ſetteth foorthe the matter ſo,
as though it were not he,Hoſius de Expreſso Verbo Dei. and his ſide, but the zvvenkfeldian Heretiques,
that ſo did ſpeake. VVee, ſaithe he, vvil bidde avvaie vvith
the ſame Scriptures, vvhereof vve ſee brought, not onely diuerſe,
but alſo contrarie interpretations: and vve vvil heare God ſpeake,
rather then vvee vvil reſorte to the naked Elementes, or bare
vvoordes of the Scriptures, and appointe oure Saluation to reaſte
in them. It behoueth not a man to be experte in the Lavve, and

Scripture, but to bee taught of God. It is but loſte laboure, that a
manne beſtovveth in the Scriptures. For the Scripture is a Creature,
and a certaine bare Letter. This is Hoſius ſaieinge, vttered
altogeather with the ſame Sprite, & the ſame minde, wherewith in
times paſte the Heretiques Montanus and Marcion were moued,
whoe, as it is written of them, vſed to ſaie, when with contempte thei
reiected the Holy Scriptures, that them ſelues knewe many moe,
and better thinges, then either Chriſte, or the Apoſtles euer knewe.
               What then ſhal I ſaie heere, O ye principal Poſtes of Religion,
O ye Archegouernours of Chriſtes Churche: is this that your reuerence,
whiche yee geue to Goddes VVoorde? The Holy Scriptures,
whiche S. Paule ſaithe, came by the inſpiration of God,
whiche God did commende by ſo many Miracles, wherein are the
moſte perfite printes of Chriſtes owne ſteppes, whiche al the Holy
Fathers, Apoſtles, & Angels, whiche Chriſte him ſelfe the Sonne
of God, as often as was needeful, did allege for teſtimonie and proufe,
wil ye, as though they were vilwoorthy for you to heare, did them
Auaunt? That is, wil ye enioine God to keepe ſilence, who ſpeaketh
to you moſte clearely by his owne mouthe in the Scriptures?
               
               Or, that VVoorde, whereby alone, as Paule ſaithe, we are reconciled
to God, and whiche, the Prophete Dauid ſaithe, is Holy, and
Pure, and ſhal laſte for euer, wil ye cal that but a bare, and deade Letter?
Or wil ye ſaie, that al our laboure is loſte, whiche is beſtowed
in that thinge, whiche Chriſte hath commaunded vs diligently to
ſearche, and to haue euermore before our eies? And wil ye ſaie, that
Chriſte, & the Apoſtles meante with ſuttletie to deceiue the people,
when they exhorted them to reade the Holy Scriptures, that thereby
they might flowe in al wiſedome, and knowledge? No marueile at
al, though theſe men deſpiſe vs, and al our dooinges, ſeeinge they ſet
ſo litle by God him ſelfe, and his infallible ſaieinges. Yet was it but
wante of witte in them, to the intent they mighte hurte vs, to doo ſo
extreme iniurie to the VVoorde of God.
               
               But Hoſius wil here make exclamation, and ſaie, that wee doo
him wronge, & that theſe be not his owne woordes, but the woordes
of the Heretique zvvenkfeldius. But how then, if zvvenkfeldius
make exclamation on the other ſide, and ſaie that the ſame very
woordes be not his, but Hoſius owne woordes? For tel me, where
hath zvvenkfeldius euer written them? Or if he haue written them,
and Hoſius haue iudged the ſame to be wicked, why hath not Hoſius
ſpoken ſo mutche as one woorde, to confute them? How ſo euer the
mater goe, although Hoſius peraduenture wil not allowe of thoſe
woordes, yet he dothe not diſallow the meaninge of the woordes.
               For welueare in al Controuerſies, & namely touchinge the vſe of the

Holy Communion vnder Bothe Kindes, although the woordes of
Chriſte be plaine, and euident, yet dothe Hoſius diſdeinefully reiecte
them, as no better, then Colde, & Dead Elementes: and commaundeth
vs to geeue Faithe to certaine Newe Leſſons, appointed by his
Churche, and to, I wote not what, Reuelations of the Holy Ghoſte.
And Pighius ſaith, Mēne ought not to beleue, no not the moſt cleare,
& manifeſte woordes of the Scriptures, onleſſe the ſame be allowed
for good by the Interpretation, & Authoritie of the Churche: whereby
he meaneth the Churche of Rome.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  How ignorantly, wickedly, and ſtubbornely the Authour of this Apologie burdeneth the reuerent
Father in God, and Honourable prelate Cardinall Hoſius with that he neuer ſaide, it is not vnknowen
to al men, who haue readen that Booke, whiche he wrote, De Expreſſo verbo Dei, of the
expreſſe VVoorde of God. Here I aſke ſo muche pardon, as to detecte an hereticall touche or twoo, before
I make direct anſweare to the foule ſlaunderinge of Hoſius.
                  Firſte I note, with what fidelitie theſe newe Holy brethren doo their thinges. It maie be thought
that the Secretary of this newe Clergie at his penninge of the Apologie, ſawe not Hoſius Booke of the
expreſſe woorde of God. But as they haue benne conuerſant in S. Auguſtine, Hierome, Chryſoſtome, and
the Auncient Fathers, ſo vſe they Hoſius at this time: that is to ſaie, they reade neither the Olde Fathers
with any diligence, neither the writers of our time: But by ſnappes and pieces either them
ſelues write out here and there a line or two, or vſe that, whiche ſome of their owne ſecte hath taken
out of them. So that for moſte parte they neuer knowe the true meaninge of the place, whiche
they alleage. But vſinge patched note bookes, and bringinge in ſcattered Authorities, they be deceiued
themſelues, and deceiue others. And he that tooke the note, knewe well they were not the
woordes of Hoſius, and did but onely put the name of Hoſius vnto them, becauſe they were taken out
of his Booke. The writer of this Apologie, not knowinge, or not remembringe ſo muche, when he
founde in the note booke the name of Hoſius with ſuche woordes, he did raſhely put them in printe, to
his owne greate ſhame, and diſcredite. If this excuſe be not true, wee muſte needes laie maruelous
malice to the ſaide writer, who wittingly and of ſet purpoſe did impute the woordes to Hoſius,
whiche he reported by waie of miſlikinge of them, and ſhewinge whoſe Hereſie they conteined.
                  Now let the Defenders choſe, whether they will haue their Secretarie condemned of ignorance,
or of malice. How ſo euer it be, marke yet the thirde pointe, whiche hereof we wil gather. The Apologie
was ſkant Printed and publiſhed, but that groſſe errour was out of hande eſpied, and woorde
thereof brought to the Authour, I meane him, that penned it. But what did he? Did he confeſſe, that he
was deceiued? Did he crie Hoſius mercie? No, no. That is not the woonte of Heretikes. They wil go
forewarde with the matter once begonne, what ſo euer come of it. VVhat did he then? VVhen it
ſhoulde be ſet foorthe in Engliſhe, and woorde came to him thereof, he made an excuſe, I warraunt
you meete for an Heretike, whoſe propertie it is Proficere in peius, as S. Paule ſaithe, to proceede
to worſe and worſe, to take his degree backewarde, and of a great faulte to make a farre greatter.
For whereas before (as Charitiemoueth me to thinke) he had made an errour, ſuppoſinge Hoſius to
haue ſaide that, whiche he had not, after warde by ſtubborne mainteininge of it, he ſheweth what ſpirite
he is of. And when he mighte reaſonably haue excuſed his ignorance, choſe rather ſpitefully
to diſcouer his malice: As it ſhall manifeſtly appeare by the circumſtance of the thinge. He laieth
to Hoſius charge, and in his perſone to all our charges, that we do not eſteeme the Holy Scriptures. He
proueth it by certaine woordes alleaged out of a treatiſe made by Hoſius De Expreſſo verbo Dei.
The woordes are here put in the Apologie, as the reader maie ſee. The true argumente of Hoſius booke
is no other then to ſhewe, that all Heretikes haue alleaged the woordes of God, as they be written: But
none of them all haue taken the righte vnderſtandinge of Goddes woordes, as they doo in deede ſignifie.
For that onely the Catholike Churche atteineth vnto, becauſe onely it hath the Holy Ghoſte. All

Heretikes haue brought for their opinions the written VVoorde of God ſo longe, vntill at the laſte
(ſaithe Hoſius) there were founde, who by the woordes of the Scriptures toke vpon them to take away
al Auctoritie from Scriptures. Natum eſt (ſaithe he) nouum quoddam Prophetarum genus,
qui non ſunt veriti Scripturarum auctoritate Scripturis auctoritatem omnem detrahere.
En quò perduxit rem tandem Saranas? A certaine newe kinde of Prophetes is riſen, who
ſticke not by the Authoritie of Scriptures to take away al auctoritie from Scriptures. See whither
at the length the Deuill hath brought the matter.
                  Now afterwarde expoundinge this matter more at large, he declareth the Capitaine of that Hereſie
to haue benne Zwenkfeldius. He ſheweth that by a Texte of Scripture, where Dauid ſaithe, I
will heare, what our Lorde ſpeaketh in me: Zwenkfeldius wente aboute to wil men to heare what
God telleth euery man by inſpiration, rather then to geue attendance to the written woorde of God.
And whiles Hoſius reporteth, what Zwenkfeldius ſaide for the maintenance of his fonde Hereſie, amonge
other his woordes theſe are, which be brought in this Apologie againſt Hoſius, and againſte the
Catholikes: whereas it is neither Hoſius, nor any Catholike that ſpeaketh them, but onely Zwenkfeldius
him ſelfe.
                  Hitherto we haue ſhewed that the woordes alleaged in the Apologie vnder the name of Hoſius,
make neither againſte him, nor againſt vs, as not beinge his woordes, nor ours, but onely the woordes
of Zwenkfeldius. VVell, what credite maie we geue to this man in expoundinge the VVoorde of
God, (whoſe true meaninge he maie falſiſie at his pleaſure, becauſe we can not bringe foorthe God
him ſelfe to declare his woordes) ſeeinge he dareth to burthen Hoſius with theſe woordes, whiche
Hoſius him ſelfe beinge yet aliue can declare to haue another meaninge, as the Booke it ſelfe doothe
witneſſe to all that liſte to reade the ſame. This was a greate faulte, to impure ſo horrible an Hereſie
to Hoſius vniuſtly. This was a greate ignorance, to charge him with that Hereſie, whiche he refuteth
and impugneth. They are greate crimes, and yet ſuche, as might ri
                        •
                     e of miſreporte and ignorance.
But when he was tolde of them, he ſhoulde of reaſon haue corrected them. He ſhould haue repented
with Peter, and not deſpaired with Cain and Iudas.
                  But what did he, when he vnderſtoode he had erred? He addeth a Gloſe farre more malicious then
the former errour was. For, graun
                        •
                     inge that Hoſius ſetteth out the matter ſo, as though neither he, nor
any of his ſide, but the Heretikes Zwenkfeldians ſpake ſo, this not withſtandinge he burtheneth bothe
him and the Catholikes with it, ſaieinge, that he diſſembleth, and hideth what he is. Syr, was this
the waie to amende your faulte, to graunt that Hoſius ſpake againſt the Zwenkfeldians, and yet to
beare men in hande, he fauoured them? If he had fauoured their Hereſie, what needed he to refell it?
But how ſaie you, that Hoſius diſſembleth and hideth what he is ſith that euen here in two places in
moſte plaine woordes, you laie the Zwenkfeldian Hereſie to his charge? Reade your owne Booke.
Before the allegation of Zwenkfeldius Hereſie, ſaie you not thus? VVe, ſaithe he, will bid away, &c.
And after the allegation, haue you not theſe woordes, This is Hoſius ſaieinge? How ſtandeth all this
togeather? You haue forgotten the Prouerbe, that biddeth a lier to be mindefull. I can not tell howe
to name this kinde of your dealinge, lieinge, or detraction, ſlaunderinge, or malicious ſpeakinge. But
Sir, if Hoſius haue ſpoken euill, why geue you not witneſſe againſt him of euill? If he haue ſpoken
well, euen by your owne confeſsion in reputinge the Zwenkfeldians for Heretikes, why finde you
faulte with him for his good woordes, ſuche I ſaie, as your ſelfe confeſſe to be good? You reprooue him,
who ſpeaketh not againſt Zwenkfeldius: and againe you graunt he ſpeaketh againſt him: and yet becauſe
you had once reproued him, you will contine we in it without reaſon, learninge, or witte. But it
muſt needes ſo be: for without pertinacie no man is either a perfite Heretike, or a perfite ſlaunderer.
                  If yet you ſtande in Defence of it, all the worlde will accompte you for a deſperate perſone.
For no man that euer ſawe Hoſius woorkes, can thinke that he was gilty of that you burthen him
with. But ſome man might thinke you were deceiued, and miſtooke Hoſius. But ſith you graunt, you
doo not now miſtake him, and yet charge him with auouchinge that, whiche he holdeth for Hereſie:
he that vnderſtandeth thus muche of you, maye aſſure him ſelfe, that you are diſpoſed to belie and
ſlaunder Hoſius, though it coſte you the damnation of your Soule. For ſhame man, repente, and reuoke
that, for whiche your owne conſcience ſtinteth not to barke at you.
                  
                     
But Hoſius (ſaie they) peraduenture will not allowe the woordes of Zuenkfeldius:The miſtakinge of Hoſius. yet he doothe
not diſallowe the meaninge of the woordes. VVell and clerkely reaſoned. As though woordes were
allowed or diſallowed for any other ſo principall a cauſe, as for theire meaninge. And therefore he
that diſalloweth woordes, hath muche more diſallowed the meaninge of them. Yet, (ſaie they) of
the Holy Communion vnder Bothe Kindes he reiecteth the plaine woordes of Chriſte, as Deade and
colde Elementes. Verely a man mighte thinke this Booke was ſet foorthe by ſome ennemie of our newe
Engliſhe Clergie, it is ſo mutche to their defacinge, had not thēſelues at diuerſe times acknowleged it
for a whelpe of their owne littour. A mā for his life can not finde one leafe in it without many Lies.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  I cannot greately blame you, M. Hardinge, though yée ſhewe your ſelfe hote,
and vehement in defence of Hoſius. For of him you, and ſomme of your Felowes
maie ſaie, as Carneades ſaide ſommetime of Chryſippus, Niſi Chryſippus fuiſſet,
ego non eſſem: If Chryſippus had not benne, then had I neuer benne.
                      For had
not Hoſius benne good vnto you, and ſpared you parte of his furniture, ſutche as
it was, your Diuinitie had benne ful bare.
                  Ye ſaie, wée reade neither the Olde Writers, nor the Newe, but are vtterly
ignorante, and voide of al learninge: and, in reſpecte of the Beames of your knowlege,
knowe nothinge. It were a very ambitious, and a childiſhe vanitie, to make
vauntes of Learninge. For as motche as ye ſeeme deſirous of the ſame of greate
Readinge, ye ſhal haue the whole praiſe, and glorie of it, M. Hardinge, without
contention. Wée wil rather ſaie with S. Paule, Wee knowe nothinge, but onely Ieſus
Chriſte Crucified vpon his Croſſe.
                      Yet notwithſtandinge wée are neither ſo ignorant,
nor ſo idle, but that wee are hable, and haue leaſure to reade, as wel the Olde
Doctours, & the Fathers of the Churche, as alſo your lighte vnciuile Pamflettes,
and blotted Papers: whiche, God wote, in al reſpectes are very Newe. And for either
of them, wee are mutche aſhamed in your behalfe: For the Olde Doctours, &
Fathers, to ſee them of your parte, either of wilfulneſſe, or of forgeatefulneſſe, or of
ignorance, ſo fowly miſuſed: of your owne Papers, & Nouelties, to ſee them with
vntruthe, and other vncourteous ſpeache ſo fully freighted.
                  But, touchinge Hoſius, yée condemne vs vtterly, either of ignorance, or of
malice. For the woordes, wherein wée finde ſutche faulte, were vttered by him, as
you ſaie, not as any parte of his owne Iudgemente, but onely, as in the perſonne
of the Heretique Zuenkfeldius. Therefore, ye ſaie, wée charge him wrongefully
with the allowinge of that thinge, whiche he expreſſely, and plainely reproueth.
                  Firſte of al, the Authour of the Apologie proteſteth, that, if there were any
ouerſight herein, it procéeded onely of erroure, and not of malice: as it maie wel appeare,
in yt he was not deceiued alone. For if he were deceiued in miſtakinge theſe
woordes, diuerſe others, the beſte Learned of this age, haue benne deceiued therein
as wel, as he.Nicolaus Gallus. 
                     Nicolaus Gallus hereof writeth thus, Hoſius Cardinalis Legatus
Sanctiſsimi, & praeſidens Concili
                           •
                         Tridentini, in ſuo Libro de Expreſſo Verbo
Dei, ait, Nos verò Dei de Coelo ſententiam potiùs expectabimus &c. Non oportet
Legis, aut Scripturae eſſe peritum, ſed à Deo doctum. Vanus eſt labor,
qui Scripturis impenditur. Scriptura enim Creatura eſt, & egenum quoddam
Elementum: Cardinal Hoſius, Legate vnto the moſt Holy Father, and Preſident
of the Councel of Trident, in his Booke, De Expreſſo Verbo Dei, ſaithe thus: We
wil rather waite for Goddes wil from Heauen, &c. It behooueth not a man to be ſkilful in the
Lawe of God, or in the Scriptures, but to be taught of God. It is but loſte laboure that is
ſpente in the Scriptures. For the Scripture is a Creature, and a poore kinde of out warde Elemente.
                     
Thus Nicolaus Gallus burdeneth your owne Catholique Frende Hoſius
with theſe woordes, and not the Heretique Zuenkfeldius.
                  
                  
                     
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Flacius Illyricus,The miſtakinge of Hoſius. 
                     ſpeakinge of the ſame woordes of Hoſius,
Vnum locum ex plurimis proferam, in quo Hoſius alterius cuiuſdam ſententiam de
hac re citans,Flacius Illyricus in Norma Concilij. comprobat: Nos Dei de Coelo Sententiam potiùs expectabimus &c. vanus
eſt labor, qui Scripturis impenditur: One place I wil allege out of many, where Hoſius
bringinge in the ſaieinge of one certaine man (meaninge
                      Zuenkfeldius) allovveth vvel
of the ſame. Theſe woordes, ſaithe Illyricus, Hoſius vttereth in the name, & perſonne
of Zuenkfeldius: Yet neuertheleſſe he alloweth them, as his owne.
                  
                  
                     To like pourpoſe writeth Iacobus Andreae: who, after he had reported al the
foreſaide woordes,
                     Iacob. Andreae, De Authorita. Sacrae Scripturae. 
                     in the ende concludeth thus: Hactenus Hoſius: Quae verba ſiue
Hoſius ſuo, ſiue aliorum nomine recitet, certè hanc else Aſoti, & Hoſij de Sacra
Scriptura ſententiam, non eſt obſcurum: Thus farre Hoſius: whiche woordes, how ſo
euer Hoſius reporte them, either in his owne name, or in the name of ſomme other, without al
doubte, this is the Judgemente, that bothe Aſotus, and Hoſius haue of the Holy Scripture.
                  
                  So likewiſe ſaith that moſte Graue and Learned Father Iohannes Brentius:
Intereà vociferantur,
                     Iohan. B
                           ••
                         in Pra
                           ••
                         in lac
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         dreae contra Hoſium. 
                     Sacram Scripturam else Dubiam, Ambiguā, Praeceptorem
Mutum, Literā Occidentem, Literam Mortuam: adeo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , fi Reuerendis illis Patribus
libuerit, Aeſopi Fabulas: In the meane while they crie out, y• the Holy Scriptures are
Blinde, and Doubteful: a Doūbe Scholemaiſter: a killinge VVrite: a deade Letter:
yea, and, if it ſhal like theſe Reuerende Fathers, no better, then Eſopes Fables.
                      Perhaps
ye wil ſaie of theſe Learned Menne, as yée ſaie of ſome others, Thei vſed onely their
patched Notebookes, and ſcattered Authorities, by ſnappes, and peeces, here, and there a line,
or twoo: and vnderſtoode not, what they wrote. Notwithſtandinge, what ſo euer it
ſhal pleaſe you to ſaie, as therein your grace is very greate, yet you ſée by theſe
fewe, and muſte néedes confeſſe, if the Authoure of the Apologie, thouchinge this
place of Hoſius, were happily ouerſeene by erroure, yet he had to many of the beſte
Learned of this age, to keepe him companie in his erroure. Verily, they ſaie not, as
you ſaie, Thus ſaithe Zuenkfeldius: They ſaie, as wée ſaie, Thus ſaith Hoſius:
It Hoſius were hable to blinde ſo many, wée muſt thinke, he was a ſkilful Writer.
                  
                     The faireſt coloure, ye can laie hereon, is this: How ſo euer theſe woordes be vttered
by
                      Hoſius,Iacob. Andreae. 
                     yet was this no parte of his meaninge. Yet
                      Iacobus Andreae ſaith, Hanc
else Aſoti, & Hoſij ſententiam, non eſt obſcurum: Without doubte this is the very
meaninge of Alotus,Flaci. Illyricus: Alterius cuiuſdam ſententiam de hac re citans. comprobat. and Hoſius. And Illyricus ſaith, Hoſius alleginge ye ſaieinge
of one certaine man (whereby he meaneth the Heretique Zuenkfeldius) allovveth
vvel of the ſame.
                  But, for as mutche as yée ſaie, This Gloſe is more maliceous, then the Former Erroure: and
that therein wee ſpitefully diſcouer our Malice, without Reaſon, without Learninge, without
VVitte: and require vs to repente for ſhame, as if it were a Sinne, not againſte Hoſius,
but againſte the Holy Ghoſte, I beſeche you therefore indifferently to conſider,
with what reuerence, and modeſtie, not onely Hoſius, but alſo ſundrie others your
Frendes of that ſide, haue vſed to ſpeake, and write of the VVoorde of God.
                  
                  Ludouicus a Canon of ye Churche of Laterane in Rome, in an Oration openly
pronounced in your late Chapter at Tridente,Ludouicus, Citatur ab Illyrico in Norma Concilij. 
                     ſaithe thus: Eccleſia eſt Viuum
pectus Chriſti: Scriptura autem eſt quaſi Mortuum Atramentum: The Churche
is the Liuely Breaſte of Chriſte: But the Scripture is, as it were, Deade Inke. Likewiſe ſaide
the Biſhop of Poiters in the ſame your Chapter: Scriptura eſt res manimis, &
muta,Iohan. Sleidanus Lib. 23. ſicut etiam ſunt reliquae Leges Politicae: The Scripture is a Deade, and Doumbe
thinge, as are al other Politique Lawes. Albertus Pigghius ſaithe, Si dixeris,
haec referri oportere ad Iudicium Scripturarum,Albert. Pigghius Controuer. 3. De Eccleſia. Communis re ſenſus ignarum eſſe
comprobas. Sunt enim Scripturae Muti Iudices: If thou ſaie, Theſe maters
muſte be put ouer to the Iudgemente of the Scriptures, thou ſhe weſt thee ſelfe to be voide
of common reaſon. For the Scriptures are doumbe Iudges, and cannot ſpeake.

Eckius calleth the Scriptures,
                     The miſtakinge of Hoſius. Euangelium Nigrum, & Theologiam Atramentariam:
The Blacke Goſpel, and Inken Diuinitie. Againe Pigghius ſaithe,
Eccleſia habet illam poteſtatem,Martinus Kemnitius in Examine Con. Tridentini, Pag. 32. Martin. Kemnitius, in eodem Examine, Pag. 240. vt poſsit Scriptis quibuſdam impertiri Canonicam
Authoritatem, quam nec ex ſe, nec ex ſuis Authoribus habent: The Churche
hath power to geeue Canonical Authoritie vnto certaine Writinges, whiche otherwiſe they
haue not, neither of them ſelues, nor of their Authours. There maie be certaine
Bookes allowed for Scripture, ſaithe he, yt haue no credite, nor Authoritie of them
ſelues. Therefore the meaninge hereof muſt néedes be this: The Churche (of Rome)
hath Authoritie to make Scriptures. Againe he ſaithe, Sunt Scripturae, vt, non minùs
verè, quàm feſtiuè dixit quidam, velut Naſus Cereus, qui ſe horſum, illorſum, & in
quancunque volueris partem,Pigghius Hierar. Li. 3. Cap. 3. Fol. 103. trahi, retrahi, fingi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      facilè permittit: As one man bothe
truely, and merily ſaide, the Scripture is like a Noſe of VVaxe, that eaſily ſuffereth it ſelfe
to be drawen backewarde, and forewarde, and to be moulded, and falſhioned, this waie, and that
waie, and how ſo euer yee liſte.
                  
                  Thus, M. Harding, yée teache the people to reuerence, & weighe the VVoorde
of God. Ye calle it Deade Inke: a Liueleſse mater: a doumbe Iudge, that cannot
ſpeake: a Blacke Goſpel: Inken Diuinitie: a Noſe of vvaxe: and a thinge vtterly
voide of Authoritie of it ſelfe. Examine theſe places: weigh theſe woordes. They
are no Lies: They are no Sclaunders. Iudge vprightly: remoue affection: ye ſhal
finde, that Hoſius, and Zuenkfeldius, touchinge the Authoritie, and Credite of
Goddes VVoorde, accorde in one. For proufe whereof, when obiection was
made, that Kinge Dauid, beinge, not a Biſhop, but onely a Temporal Prince, had
written Pſalmes, that is to ſaie, the very kete of the Scriptures, Hoſius made anſweare,Hoſius Lib. 2. Contra Brentium.
                     Quid ni ſcriberet? Scribimus indocti, docti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         poëmata paſsim: VVrote
Dauid Pſalmes? And why ſhoulde he not write them? Horace ſaith, VVee write Ballades
euery body, learned, and vnlearned: tagge, and ragge.
                      So vnreuerently, & like an Heathen,
he ſcorneth, and ſcoffeth at the scriptures of God, and likeneth the Heauenly
Ditties of the Holy Ghoſte, to a Vile, Heatheniſhe, Wanton ballade. This in
Zuenkfeldius had benne great Blaſphemie: Yée allowe it in Hoſius, as a vertue.
                  
                     S.
                     Luke. 7. Luke ſaithe, Phariſaei, & Iuriſperiti ſpreuerunt conſilium Dei in ſemetipſis:
The Phariſeis, and Learned in the Lawe deſpiſed ye Councel of God in them ſelues. Irenaeus
ſaithe,
                     Irenae. Li. 3. ca. 2. Haeretici accuſant Scripturas, quaſi nō rectè habeant, necſint ex Authoritate,
&c. Heretiques finde faulte with the Scriptures, as if they were not wel written, and as
if they were not of ſufficient Authoritie, &c. And thus they doo, to the ende, to cauſe the
people to lothe, & doubte the Woorde of Life, & ſo to becomme captiue to their owne
                     
Traditions.Cardinal. Cuſan. De Authorita. Eccleſiae, & Concilij Supra, & Cōtra Scripturam. 
                     Therefore Cardinal Cuſanus ſaithe thus, Haec eſt omnium ſanè intelligentium
ſententia: qui Scripturarum Authoritatem, & intellectum in Eccleſiae
approbatione fundant: & non è conuerſo, Eccleſiae Fundamentum in Scripturarum
Authoritate locant, &c. Dico, nulla else Chriſti praecepta, niſi quae per Eccleſiam
pro talibus accepta ſunt: This is the Iudgemente of al them, that meane wel:
whiche founde the Authoritie, and vnderſtandinge of the Scriptures in the allowance of the
Churche: But contrarie wiſe laie not ye Fundation of the Churche in the Authoritie of the Scriptures.
Thus I ſaie, There are no Cōmaundementes of Chriſte, but onely ſutche, as by ye Churche
are allowed for Chriſtes Commaundementes.
                     Albert. Pigghius Hierar. Lib. 1. Ca. 2. 
                     So ſaithe your higheſt Doctoure Albertus
Pigghius, A poſtoli quaedam conſcripſerunt, non vt Scripta illa praeeſſent Fidei, &
Religioni noſtrae, ſed potiùs vt ſubeſsent: The Apoſtles wrote certaine thinges, not
that their Writinges ſhoulde be aboue our Faithe,
                     Iohan. Maria Verractus. Editus. An. 1561. Hoſius, De Expreſſo Verbo Dei Pa. 97. 
                     and Religion, but rather, that they ſhoulde
be vnder. Iohannes Maria Verractus ſaithe, Determinatio Eccleſiae appellatur
Euangelium: The Determination of the Churche is called the Goſpel.
                  
                  
                     Therefore Hoſius by his Epiſcopal Authoritie pronounceth Sentence Definitiue
in this wiſe: Quod Eccleſia docet, Expreſſum Dei Verbum eſt: quod

contra Senſum,
                     
                     The miſtakinge of Hoſius. & Conſenſum Eccleſiae docetur, Expreſſum Diaboli Verbum
eſt: What ſo euer the Churche teacheth (by the Churche he meaneth the Pope, and his
Cardinalles, and the Churche of Rome, &c.) that is the Expreſſe VVoorde of God:
what ſo euer is taught againſte the Meaninge, and Conſente of the Churche, that is the Expreſſe
VVoorde of the Diuel.
                  This was ſommetime an ordinarie practiſe of ſundrie Olde Heretiques, to
ſcorne, and to diſdeigne the Scripures of God: and to grounde them ſelues vpon
other Concluſions, and imaginations of theire owne. So the Heretique Carpocrates
ſaide,Epiphani. Lib. 1. Haere. 27. Tertullian. De Praeſcription. He knewe more, then either Chriſte him ſelfe, or his Apoſtles.
                  
                  
                     Tertullian ſaithe, Diſcipuli Montani dicunt, Paracletum plura in Montano dixiſſe,
quàm Chriſtum in Euangelio protuliſſe: nec tantùm plura, ſed etiam meliora at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         maiora:
The Diſciples of Montanus the Heretique ſaid, that the Holy Ghoſte vttered moe
thinges in Montanus theire Maiſter, then euer Chriſte vttered in the Goſpel: and not
onely moethinges, but alſo greatter, and better thinges.
                      And againe they ſaide, Paulus ex
parte ſciebat, & ex parte prophetabat. Nondum enim venerat, quod perfectum eſt:
Paule knewe in parte,
                     
                     Auguſtin. ad Quoduulideum. 
                     and propheſied in parte. For the perfection (that was afterwarde in
Montanus) was not yet comme.
                      Therefore it is not vniuerſally true, M. Hardinge,
that you ſaie, Al Heretiques haue alleged the Scriptures.
                      For ſomme Heretiques, in
whoes ſteppes ye ſéeme to treade, haue made lighte of, and diſdeigned the Scriptures,
as wel, as you. But, as ſomme Heretiques haue alleged the Scriptures,
as you doo, without ſenſe: euen ſo al Heretiques are euermore reproued by the
Scriptures, as you bée. And that is the cauſe, that you, and your Felowes, for
the moſt parte, ſo fearefully ſhunne the Scriptures. For he that dooth euil, fleeth the
Light.
                     
                  
                  Therefore, wereas ye cal vs foorthe, and bidde vs humbly to crie you mercie,
firſte bidde Hoſius your Scholemaiſter to recante his Errours: wil him to ſpeake
more reuerently of Goddes VVoorde: for it is Holy: Let him confeſſe, & repente
his Blaſphemie in comparing the Scriptures of God with Heatheniſhe Ballades.
Recante you the Errours, that Pigghius, Cuſanus, Eckius, and others your Doctoures,
and Felowes haue ſet abroade: And the Authoure of the Apologie ſhal
doo, what ſo euer ſhal behoue him.
                  Remember alſo, howe vniuſte, and vntrue reportes you your ſelfe, and your
Felowes haue witingly, and willingly publiſhed, and blaſed in writinge, not ſparinge
any man, whom it pleaſed you to touche with ſclaunder. You your ſelfe in
this ſelfe ſame Booke haue written thus:M. Har. Fol. 141. b. The Learned Goſpellers of the Sea
Townes in Saxonie teache, that there is no Helle at al.
                  
                  An other of your Companie there, thus moſte vniuſtly ſclaundereth that godly
Father Doctoure Peter Martyr:
                     Copus Dialo. 3. Pag. 331. 
                     Petrus Martyr negat, Chriſtum else noſtrum
Deprecatorem: Peter Martyr denieth, that Chriſte is our Interceſſoure.
                      Likewiſe
againe, with one general ſclaunder, he miſreporteth al the Profeſſours of the Goſpel
what ſo euer:Copus Dialo. 6. Pag. 878. 
                     Omnes Euangelici Pſeudomartyres negant Chriſtum veniſse
in Carne: Al the Goſpellers
                      (whom he thought it better, to calle the Falſe witneſſes
of the Goſpel) denie that Chriſte euer came in the Fleaſhe. I wil preſſe you no further
with Examples of your immoderate ſclaunders. As your vncourteous tongue hath
no bridle, ſo your waſte woordes haue no ende.
                  Al theſe, and other like reportes, your conſcience knoweth, are moſte vntrue.
Yet haue ye not doubted, thus to haſarde your whole credite, and vainely with the
ſame to féede the world. Suffer me therefore, M. Hardinge, to anſweare you with
your owne woordes: For ſhame man, repente, and reuoke that, for whiche your owne Conſcience
ſtinteth not to barke againſte your ſelfe.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 21. Diuiſion. 1.
               And yet, as though this were too litle, they alſo burne the
Holy Scriptures, as in times paſte wicked Kinge Aza, or as Antiochus,
or Maximinus did, and are woonte to name them Heretiques
Bookes.
                  Euſebius. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. And out of doubt, as it ſeemeth, thei would doo, as Herode
in olde time did in Ievvrie, that hee might with more ſurety
keepe ſtil his vſurped Dominion. Who being an Idumean borne, and
a ſtraunger to the ſtocke, and kinred of the Ievves, and yet couetinge
mutche to be taken for a Iewe, to thende he might eſtabliſhe to him,
and his Poſteritie the Kingdome of that Countrie, whiche he had
gotten of Auguſtus Caeſar, he commaunded al the Gen
                     •
                  alogies, and
Petigrees to be burnt, and made out of the waie, ſo that there ſhould
remaine no recorde, whereby it might be knowen to them that came
after, that he was an Alien in bloude: whereas euen from Abrahams
time theſe monumētes had benne ſafely keapte amongeſt the Ievves,
and laide vp in theire treaſurie: bicauſe in them it might eaſily, and
moſte aſſuredly be founde, of what linage euery one did deſcende. So
(in good faithe) doo theſe menne, when they woulde haue al theire
owne dooinges in eſtimation, as though they had benne deliuered to
vs euen from the Apoſtles, or from Chriſte him ſelfe: to thende there
might be founde no where any thinge hable to conuince ſutche theire
dreames, and lies, either they burne the Holy Scriptures, or els they
craftily conueigh them from the people.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Pardon me, I praie thee, Reader, if I vſe woordes ſome what vehemente, the cauſe ſo requiringe.
This Defender crieth out, O ye pillours of Religion. But how mutche more iuſtly crie we againe
to him O thou captaine lier, O moſte woorthy, not the rewarde of a whetſtone, but the iudgemente of
abackebiter, of a ſlaunderer, a curſed ſpeaker, of a mocker, of the accuſer of the brethren, of a Blaſphemer:
Is this the regarde thou haſte,Al this is M. Hardinges ſobrietie: It is no railinge. I ſaie not to God, or to Chriſten men, but to thine owne eſtimation,
and common honeſtie of a man? Canſte thou perſuade thy ſelfe to greate credite by lieinge? To ſeme
ſober by railinge? Honeſte by villanie? Charitable by ſlaunderinge? Vpright by deceit? Iuſte by impietie?
Why ſaieſt thou of vs in general, that is to ſaie, of the Catholike Churche, that we deſpiſe, hate, caſte
awaie, and burne the Holy Scriptures? Had we not loued and kepte the Scriptures, howe couldeſt thou
and thy fellowes haue comme by them? Had ye not them of vs? From the Apoſtles time to this daie we
haue kepte themVntruthe. For the Olde Latine texte hath infinite corruptiōs. vnſpotted and vndefiled: and ye within theſe fifty yeres haue by your vulgare tranſlations
Vntruthe. Othervviſe let M. Hirdinge ſhevve one pointe of Corruption. corrupted them, that lamentable it is to conſider. And when we burned the ſame corrupte
tranſlations or any parte thereof, or any of your Heretical treatiſes, we burned not the Scriptures,But he is a fooliſhe man, that burneth dovvne bothe the Trees and Caterpillers al togeather. no
more then one dothe the apple tree, that burneth the caterpillers.
                  The Scriptures we honourè, and kepe moſte reuerently and diligently. Therefore your comparinge
of vs with the wicked Kinges Aza, Antiochus, Maximinus, and Herode, is falſe and ſlaunderous. For
how ſaie you, Sir Captaine of liers,You had it in your Libraries. But the poore people had it not. had we not the Scripture in euery Monaſterie, Cathedral Church,
college, in euery priuate library of any that was lerned?
                  The like thinge was obiected to S. Auguſtine and the Catholikes in his time by the Donatiſtes,
beinge then Heretikes, as ye are nowe. To whom he anſweareth, as we wil anſweare you: Certè ille
ignibus tradidiſſe credatur, qui eis lectis non conſentire conuincitur. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Let him be
thought to haue caſte they Holy Scriptures into the fire, who, when they are reade, is conuict not to conſente
vnto them. VVe reade in the Holy Scriptures, that Chriſte ſaid, This is my Body. VVho beleueth

it,Burninge of the Scriptures ye,Vntruthe. For vve denie it not. that denie it, or we, who are contente to die for the defence of that his real body in the
bleſſed Sacramente? S. Iames ſaithe, a man is iuſtified by woorkes, and not by faithe onely. VVho beleueth
thus, they, whiche ſaie that onely faith iuſtifieth, or they whiche ſaie, that woorkes be required
alſo to iuſtifie at ion?Ioan. 6. Chriſt ſaith,A vvoorthy Argumente, and ful vviſely applied. Reade the Anſvveare, 
                     Qui māducat hunc panem, viuet in Aeternum: he that eateth
this breade, ſhal liue for euer.‡ VVho beleueth this, they that ſaie both kindes be neceſſarie to laie men
by commaundement of Chriſte, or they, who ſaie, that one kinde is ſufficiente to ſaluation concerninge
the eatinge of the Sacramente.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Ye maie ſoone be Pardoned, M. Hardinge, for ſpeakinge il: for as mutche as,
for ought, that maie appeare by youre ſpeache, ye haue not yet learned to ſpeake
wel. Whether ye haue burnte the Scriptures of God, or no, bothe Heauen, and
Earthe, and Sea, and Lande maie beare witneſſe. For a poore excuſe, ye ſaie, ye
haue burnte our Errours, and Heretical Tranſlations, and not the Scriptures: as
the Houſbandeman vſeth to burn Caterpillers. Howe be it, he maie be thought
an vnwiſe Houſbandeman, that burneth vp his Caterpillers, & Trées too, bothe togeather:
and, to wreake him ſelfe of the one, is contente to deſtroie the other. If
al Bookes conteininge Erroure ſhould be burnte, then ſhould your Louanian Nouelles
goe to wracke. For yewis, M. Hardinge, contention, and vaine glorie ſet a
part, ye know right wel, thei are ful of Errours. Moreouer ye knowe, there be Errours
in S. Auguſtine: There be Errours in Origē, in Tertulliā, in S. Ambroſe,
in S. Hierome. There be Errours in euery of ye Aunciente Fathers: in ye 
                     Greekes:
in the Latines: in one, and other. There be Errours in your Schole Doctoures:
There be Errours in your Canoniſtes: Briefely, your Holy Fathers Decrees, &
Decretalles are not voide of Errours. Yet is there no Booke woorthy to be burnte,
in reſpecte of Erroure, but onely the Booke of the Scriptures?
                  
                  If there were ſutche Errours in the Vulgare Tranſlations, ye ſhoulde haue
diſcried them, although not al, yet for your credites ſake, one at the leaſt. Ye ſhould
haue remoued the Errour, and haue reſtoared the Scriptures, to the vſe, and comforte
of the people. But this is it, that troubleth you ſo ſoare: that the Scriptures
are publiſhed in the Common knowen tongues, and that the ſimple people of al
ſortes (whom otherwiſe ye cal Dogges, and Svvine, & filthy brute Beaſtes voide
of reaſon) maie vnderſtande them. This, M. Hardinge, is that greate, and horrible
Errrour: This is the Erroure of al Errours. Therefore Irenaeus ſaithe, as it
is alleged before,Irenae. Li. 1. Ca. 2. 
                     Haeretici, cùm ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accuſationem vertuntur
Scripturarum: Heretiques, when they be reproued by the Scriptures, then beginne
they to finde faulte with the Scriptures.
                     
                     Ambroſ. in Lucā Lib. 3. Cap. 3. And therefore S. Ambroſe ſaith, Herodes
conſcius ignobilitatis ſuae, Scripturas incendit: ne qua Poſteris ſuis, vel de praeſcripto
Veteri quaeſtio moueretur: exiſtimās, quòd ſi Indicia de publico ſuſtuliſſet, nullis alijs
Teſtimonijs clarere poſſet, quin de Patriarcharum, & Proſelytorū Veterum genere
emanaret: King Herode, for that he wel vnderſtoode the baſeneſſe of his Houſe, therefore
he burnte the Scriptures: leaſte that, by meane of ſutche Ancient Recordes, ſomme doubte
might afterwarde be moued againſt his poſteritie. For he thought, if he had once remoued ſutche
Monumentes, it could neuer be proued by any manner other witneſſe, but that he came by deſcente
from the ſtocke of the Patriarkes, and Olde Proſelytes:
                      Whereas in deede he was
amere altene, and a ſtranger to the Houſe of Iſrael, and a very tyrannous Vſurper
of the Crowne, as beinge lineally deſcended, not from Iacob, but from Eſau.
                  But ye ſaie, You haue keapte, and preſerued the Scriptures, in your Libraries, in veleme, and,
I trowe, in letters of golde. Euen in like ſorte, and with like truthe ye might ſaie,
that you haue keapte the Sonne, and the Moone: and, had it not benne for your
kéepinge, they had benne loſte. It was God, M. Hardinge, that of his Mercie preſerued
his Holy VVorde: euē as he preſerued Daniel in the Caue of Lions: Ionas
                     
in the Whales belly:Keepinge of the Scriptures The three Children in the middes of the flaming Fire. Yée
kéepe the Scriptures as the Dogge keepeth the haie: whiche neither eateth it him
ſelfe: nor ſuffereth the poore hungrie cattle, that faine woulde eate it: Yée kéepe thē
in warde, in duſte, & moulde: as the Ievves, before the time of Kinge Ioſias, keapte
the Booke of Deuteronomie cloſely in the corners,2. Regum. 22. or emongeſt the treaſures of ye
Temple: ſo, the noman knewe, where to finde it. Had it not benne for Goddes
ſpecial prouidence, notwithſtandinge your kéepinge, they might haue periſhed.
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt in Epiſ. ad Hebraeos, Homil. 8. 
                     Nunc ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         an ſint Scripturae quidam ſciunt: Spiritus tamen
ita diſpēſauit, vt cuſtodiantur: Now a daies there are ſomme, that cannot tel, whether
there be any Scriptures, or no. Yet hath the Sprite of God ſo prouided, that they are ſtil preſerued.
                  Thus the Ievves made theire vauntes, that they were the keepers of the
Lavve, & that the Chriſtians had al of them. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Iudaei dicūt, non
Noſtra nos Lege vti,
                     Auguſt. In quaeſtionibus ex Veteri Teſtament. quaeſt 44. Paulus Phagius in Deuter. Ca. 17 
                     ſed Sua: The Ievves ſaie, That wee haue no Lawe of our owne,
but onely theires.
                      Likewiſe euē at this daie the Iewes keepe, & vſe the Lavve of God
with al reuerence: They neuer laie any other Booke vpon the Bible: Thei waſſhe
theire handes, before they touche it: They wil not ſit vpon the benche, where the
Bible lieth: As often, as they either open it, or ſhutte it, they vſe to kiſſe it: when ye
                     Pope goeth through Rome to his Palace of Laterane, the Ievves méete him vpō
the waie, and offer him the Bible, and deſire him reuerently to embrace it, as
though the Pope coulde haue no Bible, but onely of them. Al theſe thinges notwithſtandinge,
the Pope anſweareth them of courſe, euen as wée maie anſweare
you: Sanctam Legem, viri Hebraei, & laudamus, & veneramur: obſeruantiā verò
veſtram,
                     Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Cap 8. 
                     & vanam interpretationem damnamus, & improbamus: Ye menne
of the Ievves Profeſsion, wee praiſe, and honoure the Holy Lavve: But your Tradition,
and vaine Interpretation wee vtterly condemne, and reproue.
                     
                  
                  
                     For Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſo. in Matt. Homil. 33. Nihil nunc apud Iudaeos remanſit, niſi Sola Scriptura
Librorum, omni Legis obſeruantia pereunte: There remaineth nowe nothinge emonge the
Ievves, but onely the writinge conteined in Bookes: for al the obſeruation of the Lavve is
paſte from them.
                     Chryſoſto. in Ceneſim, Homil. 8. Chryſoſtom. in Pſalm. 117. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Literae quidem Legis apud illos ſunt: Senſus
autem eſt apud nos: The Letters of the Lavve are with the Ievves: But the Senſe, and
Meaninge is with vs. Likewiſe he ſaith vnto the
                      Ievves, Vos complicatis membranas
animaltum mortuorum: Nos poſsidemus Spiritum viuificautem: You
turne the leaues of the Scriptures, made of the ſkinnes of deade Cattle: but we haue the Sprite,
that geeueth Life.
                     Auguſt de Fide rerum inuiſibil. Cap. 6. Auguſt. Contra Fauſiū Mantchae. Lib. 16. Cap. 21. 
                     So ſaithe S. Auguſtine: Iudaei in Libris ſuffragatores noſtri ſunt: in
Cordibus hoſtes noſtri: The Iewes healpe vs, and aide vs with theire Bookes: But thei are
our enimies in theire hartes. Againe he ſaith,
                      Magnum aliquid actum eſt in vſum noſtrum
de Infidelirate Iudaeorum: vt ijdem ipſi, qui haec propter ſe non haberent in Cordibus,
ea propter nos haberent in Codicibus: Somme greate good thinge is wrought to our vſe by
the infidelitie of the Iewes: that they, that, to doo them ſelues good, had not theſe thinges in
theire hartes, yet for our ſakes, to doo vs good, ſhoulde haue ſame thinges in theire Bookes.
                  
                  Speake not therefore ſo mutche, M. Hardinge, of your ſafe keepinge of ye 
                     Scriptures
For the Jevves haue keapte, and vntil this daie doo kéepe them as ſafely,
as you. Yae keapte the Scriptures, as the Augures of Rome ſommetime
keapte the Sibylles Bookes: that is to ſaie, yée keapte them to your ſelues, in cloſe
priſonne, & in ſecreſie: that the people ſhould knowe nothing, but in al caſes ſhould
be forced to ſeeke to you. Thus ye keapte the Light in Darkneſſe: and, as S. Paule
ſaithe,Roman 1. Chryſo in Matt. Homil. 35. ye keapte the Truthe of God in VVickedneſſe.
                  
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Quando vides Scripturas Prophetarum, & Euangelij,
& Apoſtolorum traditas eſſe in manus Falſorum Sacerdotum, num intelligis,
quód Verbum veritatis traditum eſt Principibus iniquis, & Scribis? When thou ſeeſte the
                     
Scriptures of the Prophetes, of the Goſpel, and of the Apoſtles to be deliuered into the
handes of Falſe Prieſtes,This is my Body. 
                     dooſte thou not vnderſtande, that the Woorde of Truthe is deliuered
vnto the wicked Princes, and vnto the Scribes? To be ſhort, I maie anſweare you
with the woordes of
                      Chryſoſtome, Arcas, & Scrinia rerum pretioſiſsimarum adhuc
ſeruatis,Chryſoſtom. in 1. Corin. Homi. 37. The ſauro deſtituti: Yee keepe ſtil the Cheaſtes, and boxes of moſte pretious thinges:
but the Iewelles, and Treaſures be cleane gonne. Therefore, your ſafe kéeping of the
                     
Scriptures notwithſtandinge, wée maie ſaie to you, as S. Auguſtine ſommetime
ſaid to the Heretique Petilian: Iudas Chriſtum Carnalem tradidit: Tu Spiritualem:
furens Euangelium sanctum flammis ſacrilegis tradidiſti:Auguſti. Contra Literas Petilia. Lib. 2. Cap. 7. 
                     Iudas betraiede
Chriſte Carnal: thou haſte betraied Chriſte Spiritual: for thou in thy rage haſte deliuered
the Holy Goſpel vnto wicked fires.
                  
                  
                     Yée replie, You rather haue burnte the Goſpel: for that you denie the woordes of the Goſpel.
For example ye allege theſe woordes of Chriſte, This is my Body: vvhiche
vvoordes, ye ſaie, of our part are denied. God be thāked, as wee haue not burnte,
ſo haue wée not denied any woorde, or parcel of the Goſpel. Touchinge theſe wordes
by you alleged, wée embrace them, and reuerence them, and beleue them, euen as
the VVoordes of Chriſte. But wée embrace them, not as you haue fondely
rackte, & wreaſted them, and fowly abuſed them, by your vaine Conſtructions: but
as Chriſte meante them, and as the Aunciente Catholique Fathers in the Olde
times haue expounded them.
                     Chryſoſtom. in Iohan. Homi. 14. 
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Sacrae Scripturae Verba
non vult Deus, vt Simpliciter, ſed multa cum prudētia intelligantur: God wil not, that we
ſhoulde vnderſtande the vvoordes of the Holy Scripture ſimply and plainely, as thei lie,
but with greate wiſedome,
                     Chryſoſto. in Iohan. Homil. 39. 
                     and diſcretion. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Diligenter inuigilandum
eſt: vel potiùs Diuina Gratia opus eſt, ne nudis verbis inſiſtamus. Ita Haeretici in Errorem
incidunt: Wee muſt take great heede: or rather we haue neede of the Grace of God,
that wee reaſte not vpon the bare VVoordes of the Scriptures. For by that meanes
Heretiques fal into Erroure.Auguſt. ad Conſentiū. li. 1. ca. 10. Hierony. ad Galat. Cap. 1. 
                     S Auguſtine ſaithe, Omne Figuratè, aut factum,
aut dictum, hoc enuntiat, quod Significat: Euery thinge that is either donne, or ſpoken in a
Figure, ſheweth foorth the ſame thinge, that it Signifieth. S. Hierome ſaithe: Ne puremus
in Verbis Scripturarum eſſe Euangelium, ſed in Senſu: Let vs not thinke
that the Goſpel ſtandeth in the VVoordes of the Scripture, but in the Meaninge.
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Hieron. in Matt. Cap. 16. 
                     Cùm Seniores putentur in Eccleſijs, & Principes Sacerdotum,
Simplicem ſequentes Literam, occidunt Filium Dei: Whereas thei be taken for
the Elders of the Churche, and the Chiefe of the Prieſtes, folowinge the Plaine Letter, (as it
is written, and not regardinge the meaninge) they kille the Sonne of God.
                  Let vs ſée therefore, in what ſenſe the Holy Catholique Fathers haue in Olde
times expounded theſe Woordes of Chriſte.
                  
                     Firſt, Tertullian ſaithe thus, Chriſtus acceptum Panem, & diſtributum Diſcipulis,
Corpus ſuum illum fecit,Tertullian. Contra Marcionem. Lib. 4. Auguſti. Contra Adiman. Cap. 12. Hoc eſt Corpus meum, hoc eſt, Figura Corporis
mei: Chriſte taking the Breade, and diuiding it to his Diſciples, made it his Body, ſaieing:
This is my Body, that is to ſaie, This is a Figure of my Body. S. Auguſtine
ſaith, Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, Hoc eſt Corpus meum, cùm daret Signum Corporis
ſui: Our Lorde doubted not to ſaie, This is my Body, when he gaue a Token of
his Body. I leaue infinite other Authorities to like pourpoſe. By theſe fewe we
maie eaſily perceiue, in what ſenſe the Holy Fathers in Olde time vnderſtoode
theſe Wordes of Chriſte, This is my Body. Yet were thei neuer therefore condemned
of. Hereſie, nor thought to denie any parcel of the Scriptures. S. Auguſtine
ſaith,
                     Auguſt. in quaeſsionib. in Leuit. quaeſt. 57. Solet res, quae Significat, eius rei nomine, quam Significat. nūcupari: Hinc eſt,
quod dictum eſt, Petra erat Chriſtus. Non enim dicit, Petra Significat Chriſtum:
Sed, tanquam hoc eſſet, quoód vtique per Subſtantiam non erat, ſed per Significationē:
The thinge that Signifieth, is Commonly called by the name of that thinge, that it Signifieth.
Therefore is it, that S. Paule ſaithe, The Rocke vvas Chriſte. For he ſaithe not, The

Rocke signified Chriſte (but,
                     This is my Body. The Rocke is Chriſte) As if the Rocke had benne
Chriſte in deede: whereas, touchinge the Subſtance, it was not ſo: but ſo it was by Signification.
                  
                  
                     In this ſorte is the Breade Chriſtes Body: not verily, and in déede: but, as S.
Auguſtine ſaithe, after a certaine phraſe, or manner of ſpeache. And ſo is it noted
euen in your owne Gloſe,De Conſ. Diſt. 2. Hoc eſt. In Gloſſ. Vocatur Corpus Chriſti, id eſt, Significat Corpus
Chriſti: The Breade is called the Body of Chriſte: that is to ſaie, The Breade Signifieth
the Body of Chriſte. Thus wée denie not Chriſtes Woordes, M. Hardinge:
But we denie the fonde, and fantaſtical ſenſes, that you haue imagined of
Chriſtes VVoordes. Therefore where you allege theſe woordes, as ſpoken by S.
Auguſtine, He is a burner of the Scriptures, that conſenteth not vnto the Scriptures, Yée
might haue remembred,
                     
                     Augu. Epiſt 162. 
                     that the ſame S. Auguſtine likewiſe ſaithe, Ille credatur
Teſtamentum tradidiſſe flammis, qui contra Voluntatem litigat Teſtatoris: He is to be
thought, to haue deliuered the Teſtamente to the fire, that quarrelleth (as you doo) againſte
the wil, and meaninge of him, that made the Teſtamente. S.
                      Gregorie ſaithe, Facilè in
verbis agnoſcimus aliud eſſe, quod intimant, aliud, quod ſonant: Tanto' autem quiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      notitiae
illius Extraneus redditur.Gregorius in Iob. Lib. 4. Ca. 1. quāto' in Sola eius Superficie ligatur: In wordes wee doo
wel perceiue, that there is one thing, that they Signifie, and an other thing, that they ſound.
And the more a man bindeth him ſelfe to the ovvtvvarde ſight, and ſhevve of the
Letter, the further of is he from the vnderſtandinge of the ſame.
                  
                  The obiection of difference, that ye make bitwéene S. Iames, and S. Paule,
(S. Auguſtine ſaithe) is made by thē y• vnderſtand, neither S. Iames,
                     Augu. in Lib. 83. quaeſtionū q. 76. Parte. 1. Ca. 10. Diui. 1. nor S. Paule,
The whole force thereof is anſweared before. It is eaſy to ſée, that S. Paule
ſpeaketh of one Kinde of VVoorkes, and S. Iames of an other: & againe, S. Paule
of one kinde of Iuſtification, and S. Iames of an other. Therefore this difference
is ſoone auoided. Certainely wee denie neither S. Paule, nor S. Iames: nor thinke,
the one of them to be contrarie to the other.
                  Touchinge the Woordes of Chriſte, that ye haue alleged out of S. Iohn, it appeareth,
ye were in ſomme baſte,Iohan. 6. and therefore were faine to take, that came firſte
to hande. For I wil not ſaie, M. Hardinge, what Doctoure, or Father, but, what
drifte, or diſcretion of Common ſenſe euer taught you to reaſon thus? Chriſte ſaithe,
He that Eateth of this Breade ſhal liue for euer: Ergo, The people muſte receiue the
Communion vnder One kinde.
                     Remnitius in Examine Conci. Triden. Pag. 598. Freere Eckius your Felow reaſoneth with like diſcretion
to like pourpoſe:
                  Geue vs, ſaithe he, our daily Breade:
                  Ergo, VVee maie reſtraine the people from the Cuppe.
                  Perhaps ye wil ſaie, The name of Breade belongeth to Eatinge onely, and
not to Drinkinge. This maie be graunted wel without preiudice. Notwithſtandinge,
S. Cyprian doubted not to ſaie,Cyprian. De Coena Domini. In eodem Serm. 
                     Manducauerunt, & Biberunt de eodem
Pane: They did bothe Eate, and Drinke of one Breade. And againe he ſaithe,
Manducamus & Bibimus eius Sanguinem: Wee Eate and Drinke his Bloude.
                  
                  
                     How be it, in déede theſe woordes of Chriſte in the ſixthe of S. Iohn, belonge onely
to the Spiritual Eatinge, and drinkinge of Chriſtes Body, and Bloude, (that
is wrought, not by the Mouthe, but onely by Faith) and nothinge to the outward
Miniſtration of the Sacramente.Nicolaus Lyra, in Pſalm. 110. 
                     Your owne Doctoure Nicolas Lyra ſaith, Haec
verba nihil directè pertinent ad Sacramentalem, vel Corporalem Manducationem.
Nam hoc verbum dictum fuit, antequam Sacramentum Euchariſtiae eſſet inſtitutum.
Ex illa igitur Litera de Sacramentali Communione non poteſt fieri Argumentum
efficax: Theſe Woordes of Chriſte in the ſixth Chapter of S. Iohn, directely perteine
nothing to the Sacramental, or Corporal Eatinge. For theſe woordes were ſpoken longe
before the Sacramente was ordeined. Therefore of this place there can be made no good
ſufficiente Argumente, touching the Sacramental Communion. You ſaie, your proufe, taken

of theſe woordes is ſufficient,
                     
                     Communion vnder one kinde. 
                     & therewith ye deceiue the Ignorant. Lyra ſaithe, It
is not ſufficient. Now let your indifferente Reader Iudge, whether of you twoo is
deceiued.
                  
                  And, whereas ye woulde ſeeme to ſaie, Chriſte gaue no Commaundemente of Bothe
kindes, to be receiued of the people, Euen ſo, and with lyke truethe yee might alſo
ſaie, Chriſte gaue no Commaundemente, no not of one kinde at al to be receiued
of the people. For there was no man preſent, but onely the Apoſtles, at the Inſtitution,
as wel of the one kinde, as of the other. Therefore, that the people maie
claime any one parte of the Sacramente, they haue it not of any right, but onely
of youre mere, and free liberalitie. For otherwiſe of dewtie, by youre iudgemēte,
they ſhoulde haue nothinge.
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge Chriſte ſaithe, Bibite ex hoc omnes: Drinke ye (not onely
the Apoſtles, but) Drinke ye al of this, Whiche woordes
                      Paſchaſius expoundeth
thus:
                     Paſchaſius. Bibite ex hoc omnes, Hoc eſt, tam Miniſtri, quàm reliqui Credentes:
Drinke ye al of this: that is to ſaie, as vvel the Miniſters, as the reſte of the
Faithful.Gloſſa. Citaturà Caſſandro, de vtra
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Specie. 
                     An other ſaithe thus, Bibite ex hoc Omnes: Omnes, ſcilicet, ſine
perſonarum acceptione: Drinke ye al of this: Al, that is to ſaie, without difference, or
choiſe of perſonnes.
                  
                  But hereof we haue ſpoken more at large in other places.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 21. Diuiſion. 2. &. 3.
               Very rightely, and aptely doth Chryſoſtome write againſt theſe
menne. Heretikes, ſaithe he, ſhutte vp the gates againſt the Truethe:
for they knowe ful wel, if the gate were open, the Churche ſhoulde be
none of theires.
               
                  Theophylacte alſo: Goddes VVoorde, ſaithe he, is the Candel,
whereby the Theefe is eſpied.
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 21. Diuiſion, 4.
               And Tertullian ſaith, The Holy Scripture manifeſtly findeth out
the fraude, and theafte of Heretiques. For why doo they hide, why
doo they keepe vnder the Goſpel, whiche Chriſte woulde haue preached
alowde from the houſe toppe? Why whealme they that light
vnder a Buſſhel, whiche ought to ſtande on the Candelſticke?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Scripture ſaithe, There ſhalbe menne ſtanding in their owne conceite, vnchaſte, louing pleaſure
more then God.2. Tim. 3. VVho are vnchaſte? they that exhorte al menne toThis Chaſtitie in the more part is open filthineſſe. They forebidde Marriage, and ſuffer Concubines, for the better meane to ſerue God. Math. 23. Chaſtitie, and them
ſelues abſtaine from wedlocke for the better meane to ſerue God: or ye, that bidde menne, whiche
haue vowed chaſtitie, to breake their vowes?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  I leaue youre Chaſtitie to the iudgemente of the Worlde. Yet you maie remember,
there were ſomme in olde times, whome Chriſte likened to Painted
graues: outwardely in appearance faire, & glorious: but inwardly ful of ſtinking
boanes. It appeareth by the whole courſe, and order of youre liues, that Single
Life,
                     Hierony. in Daniel. Cap. 11. and Chaſtitie are ſundrie thinges. S. Hierome ſaithe thus, Super Concupiſcentiam
foeminarum non intelliget: De Antichriſto facilior interpretatio eſt: quoód
ideó ſimulet Caſtitatem, vt plurimos decipiat: He ſhal haue no ſkil, touching the deſiere of

weemen:
                     
                     Countrefeite Chaſtitie. 
                     The better expoſition hereof, is to applie theſe woordes to Antichriſte: For
that he ſhal Countrefeite Chaſtitie, to the ende to deceiue many.
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe of the Heretiques called the Manichees:Auguſtin. De Moribus Eccleſiae Cathol. li. 1. cap. 1. Ambro. De Noe & Arca, ca. 14. Vitae Caſtae, &
memorabilis continentiae imaginem praeferunt: They beare a countenance of continent
life, and notable Chaſtitie. S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Multi ſunt Haereticorum, qui praetendere
volunt Corporis continentiam? There be many Heretiques, that wil countrefeite,
and pretende Chaſtitie of body (that by the witneſſe thereof they maie winne Credit to
theire Doctrine.) Therefore, M. Hardinge, when you thus vaunte your ſelues of
this
                      Coloure of Chaſtitie, ye make boaſte of that thing, that other Heretiques,
and Antichriſte him ſelfe ſhal haue, as wel as you.
                  
                  S. Paule, where he foretelleth vs of the Diſciples of Antichriſte, emongeſt
other markes, whereby they maie be knowen, ſaithe thus: Prohibentes nubere:
                     1. Tim. 4. Hierony. in Hieremi. cap. 7. lib. 2.
whereby he meante, that Antichriſte ſhoulde geue out a greate ſhine of Chaſte
life, and forbidde Marriage. Of ſutche S. Hierome ſaithe, Iactant pudicitiam ſuam
impudenti facie: They make bragges of their Chaſtitie with whooriſhe Countenance.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 21. Diuiſion. 5. & 6.
               Why truſte they more to the blindeneſſe of the vnſkilful multitude,
and to ignorance, then to the goodneſſe of their cauſe?
               Thinke they their ſleightes are not already perceiued, and that
they can walke nowe vnſpied, as though they hadde Gyges ring to
goe inuiſible by, vpon their finger? No, no.
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 21. Diuiſion. 7.
               Al menne ſee nowe wel, and wel againe, what good ſtuffe is in that
cheſte of the Biſhop of Romes boſome. This thing alone of it ſelfe
maie be an argument ſufficient, that they woorke not vprightly, and
truely.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  You are mutche troubled with the cheſte of the Popes boſome, wherein be is thought to haue al
lawes. At this you ſcoffe foure or fiue times in your Apologie, medlinge with a matter, that you
vnderſtande not. For it is a Lawiers phraſe. VVho preſuppoſeth the Prince of euery common weale
to knowe the lawe of the ſame, no leſſe then if it were written in his breaſte. And therefore
when he maketh a newe lawe, he repealeth the former lawe, whereunto the latter is contrary.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  For as mutche as this matter of the Popes breaſte is ſo deepe, and full of
darkeneſſe, ſpecially being as you ſaie, a Lavviers phraſe, that no man maie ſafely
enter into it, but onely you, that neuer were ſtudent in any Lavve, lette vs
therefore ſee, what your owne Canoniſtes, and Lavviers them ſelues haue
meante hereby.
                  Firſte of al,Baldus. 
                     Baldus of Peruſium ſaithe, Papa eſt Doctor vtrius
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Iuris, Authoritate,
non Scientia: The Pope is Doctour of bothe Lawes
                      (as wel Ciuile, as Canon)
by Authoritie, but not by knowledge. Here wee finde, howe ſo euer the Pope be ſtoared
of Learninge, yet at the leaſte he is a Doctoure by Authoritie.
                  
                     Further youre Gloſe ſaithe,
                     9. quae. 3. Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        . ab Auguſto. Dis. 19. Si Romanorum. In Gloſs. 
                     Etſi totus mundus ſententiaret in aliquo negotio
contra Papam, tamen videtur, quo'd ſtandum fit ſententiae Papae. Iura enim omnia in
Scrinio pectoris ſui habere videtur. Quod ergo Papa approbat, vel reprobat, & nos
approbate, vel reprobare debemus. Quiſquis ergo non obedit Statutis Romanae Eccleſiae,

Haereticus eſt cenſendus.
                     The Cheaſte of the Popes boſome. 
                     Et Sacrilegij inſtar eſſet, diſputare de facto Papae:
Although al the worlde woulde iudge in any mater againſte the Pope, yet it ſeemeth, wee
ought to ſtande to the iudgemente of the Pope.
                      For he ſeemeth to haue al Lavves in the
Cheaſte of his boſome:Diſt. 40. Si Papa, 
                           〈◊〉
                         gloſsa. Therefore, what ſo euer the Pope either alloweth, or diſalloweth,
wee are bounde likewiſe to allowe, or diſallowe the ſame. And who ſo euer is not obedient
to the Lawes of the Churche of Rome, muſte be deemed an Heretique. And it were as
great ſinne as Churcherobbinge, to reaſon of any of the Popes dooinges.
                  
                     Further,
                     Extra De trāſta. Epiſcopi. Quāto In Gloſsa. Felin. De Reſcriptis. Ad Audientiam. 2. ver. 
                     youre Lavviers ſaie thus, Papa dicitur habere Coeleſte arbitrium:
Vnde in his, quae vult, eſt ei pro Ratione Voluntas. Nec eſt, qui dicat illi, Domine,
cur ita facis? Quia ſicut ex Sola Voluntate poteſt per Papam Lex creari, ita per Solam
Voluntatem poteſt cum ea diſpenſari: The Pope is ſaide to haue a heauenly iudgemente:
Therefore in ſutche thinges, as he willeth, his Wil ſtandeth in ſteede of Reaſon.
Neither maie any man ſaie vnto him, O ſir, VVhy doo yovv thus? Like as a Lavve
maie be made by the Onely VVil of the Pope: ſo maie the ſame Lavv bee diſpenſed
withal onely by the vvil of the Pope.
                  This, M. Hardinge, is the expoſition of youre Lavviers phraſe. Theiſe are
the treaſures, that wee are taughte to ſeeke in the Cloſet of the Popes breaſte.
Thus maie wee ſet aparte Scriptures, Doctoures, Councelles, and what ſo euer
is biſide: The Popes breaſte maie ſerue for al.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 21. Diuiſion. 8.
               Worthily ought that mater ſeeme ſuſpicious, whiche fleeth trial,
and is afraide of the light. For he that dooth euil, as Chriſte ſaith,
ſeketh darkeneſſe, and hateth the light. A cōſcience, that knovveth
it ſelfe cleere, commeth vvillingly into open ſhevve, that the
vvoorkes vvhiche proceede of God maie be ſeene. Neither bee
they ſo very blinde, but they ſee this wel yenough, that theire Kingdome
ſtreightwaie is at a pointe, if the Scriptures once haue the
vpper hande: and that, like as menne ſaie, the Idolles of Diuelles in
times paſte, of whome menne in doubtful maters were then woonte
to receiue anſweares, were ſuddainly ſtriken doumbe at the ſight of
Chriſte, when he was borne, and came into the worlde: euen ſo they
ſee, that nowe al their ſuttle practiſes wil ſoone fal downe hedlonge,
euen vpon the ſight of the Goſpel. For Antichriſte is not ouerthrowen,
but with the brightneſſe of Chriſtes comming.
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 22. Diuiſion. 1.
               As for vs, wee renne not for ſuccour to the Fire, as theſe mennes
guiſe is, but wee renne to the Scriptures: neither doo wee reaſon
with the Swerde, but with the VVorde of God: and therewith, as
ſaithe Tertullian, doo vvee feede our Faithe: by it doo vvee ſtirre
vp oure hope, and ſtrengthen our Confidence.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye flie not to the Fire, as wee doo, ſaie ye, but vnto the Scriptures. Neither doo ye reaſon with
vs with the ſworde, but with the VVoorde of God. Ah good woorde of God, thou ſerueſt to many
purpoſes. And is it in deede the woorde of God Sirs, that keepeth ſo many reuerende Fathers in

priſon theſe many yeeres?Heretiques to death. It is the woorde of God, that hath depriued ſo many menne, ſome of their
liuinges,Al this novve is extreme Crueltie. Not long ſithence it hadde benne taken for greate Mercie. ſome of theire countries, whoſe life ye can not blame? Is it the woorde of God, that by
crueltie of impriſonmente of late yeeres gaue moſte certaine occaſion of death to thoſe holy, learned,
and worſhipful menne, who for their ſingular vertue beinge wel knowen, neede not here to be named?
Is it the woorde of God, that made ſo mutche adoo in youre late parlament for eſtabliſhinge of
youre bloudy lawe, whereby ye woulde haue power to put menne to deathVntruthe. For it is either Idolatrie, or open folie: and no part of the Faith of Chriſtēdome. for the Faithe of Chriſtendome?
The Turkes and Saracenes haue alwaies ſuffered them to liue in their dominions, but our
Goſpellers by their woorde of God are taught to kil them. Bleſſed be God, who hath geuen to our noble
and moſte clement Queene Elizabeth a better ſpirite to vnderſtande his woorde in this point.VVhat Sprite then had you M. Harding and youre Felovves that burnt ſo many? then
theſe Goſpellers haue yet attained vnto.
                  If any of you doo ſaie, that the newe Superintendentes doo not keepe the olde Biſhoppes and
leanred Clergie in priſon, but the Lawe of the Realme: I anſwere, firſte, that the Lawe is a crabbe
of your owne ſtocke: next that neither the Biſhoppes before time burnt Heretiques, but the Lawe of
the Realme, the lawe of the Prince, the lawe of al Chriſtendome. Neither was the ſame made by
Papiſtes of late yeres, as ye woulde youre deceiued diſciples to beleue, but of olde time thoughtThis mater thus vttered in generalitie, is a greate Vntruth. neceſſarie
by Princes to be enacted, for the better maintenance of quiet in their dominions.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It is no newe practiſe, ye ſaie, to kille Heretiques. I graunte you. Neither is
it a newe practiſe, to condemne godly menne by the name of Heretiques. Youre
Fathers ſommetime cried out againſte Chriſte the Sonne of God, Wee haue a
Lawe:Iohan. 19. and by the Lawe he ought to die. And Chriſte him ſelfe ſaide ſommetime
to Hieruſalem the Cittie of bloude,Luke. 13. 
                     O Hieruſalem, Hieruſalem, that killeſt the
Prophetes, and ſtoaneſt them to death, that he ſent vnto thee.
                      But S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Nullis bonis in Catholica hoc placet,
                     Auguſtin. Contra Creſcon. Gram. li. 3. ca. 50 
                     ſi vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad Mortem in quenquam, licet Haereticum,
ſaeuiatur: It ſeemeth good vnto no good man in the Catholique Churche, that crueltie vnto
death be ſhewed vnto any man, no though he be an Heretique.
                  
                  Notwithſtanding, it agreeth wel with youre Religion, M. Hardinge, though
your mouthes now be mouſled, yet to rampe, and gape ſtil after bloude. Fulfil ye
the meaſure of youre Fathers. Let it not greeue you, to heare, what Salomon
ſaithe,Math. 23. Prouerb. 12. 
                     Viſcera impiorum crudelia: The very bowelles of the wicked are ful of crueltie.
                     
When youre Fables, and folies be eſpied, then ye flee to Swerde, and Fire.
Whiche beeinge once wreaſted from you, youre whole Religion muſte needes
comme to grounde. S. Hierome ſaithe of other youre peeres, Pugnant Epicherematis
ex carnificum officinis: They fighte with Argumentes taken from the Bouchers
ſhoppes.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ye haue wreakte youre angre longe yenough vpon innocente bloude. Beginne
once to knowe the hande of God. It is harde for you, to kike ſtil againſt the pricke.
Wee maie truely ſaie vnto you with S. Cyprian, Sacerdos Dei Euangelium tenens,
& Chriſti Praecepta cuſtodiens,Cyprian ad Cornel. Occidi poteſt, Vinci non poteſt. The Prieſte of God,
holding the Goſpel, and keeping the Commoundementes of Chriſte, maie wel be killed: But
conquered he cannot be.
                     Tertull. ad Scapulam. Tertul. in Apologetico. 3. Eſdr. 3. Prouer. 21. Hacron. in Eſai. lib. 5. cap. 14. Auguſtin. Confeſsi. li. 12. ca. 14. 
                     Wee maie ſaie with Tertullian, Crudelitas veſtra, Gloria noſtra
eſt: Plures efficimur, quoties metimur à vobis: Youre Crueltie is oure Glorie. When
ye comme to recken vs ye finde vs moe, and moe. Truethe aboue al thinges vvil preuaile.
There is no Counſel againſte the Lorde.
                  
                     As for oure parts, wee were neuer yet guilty to one droppe of youre bloude.
Wee ſeeke no aide at Fire, or Swerde. Wee wil rather ſaie with S. Hierome,
Vtiuam filios Haereucorum, & omnium qui decepti ſunt, interficiamus Sagittis Spiritualibus,
id eſt, Teſtimonijs Scripturarum.
                      Woulde God wee maie rather kille the Children of
Heretiques, and of al them, that be deceiued, with Spiritual Arrowes, that is to ſaie, with the
Teſtimonies of the Scriptures: And with S. Auguſtine, O fi occidas eos de gladio bis

acuto,
                     
                     If an Angel from Heauē, &c. 
                     & non ſint Hoſtes tui: Sic enim amo eos occidi ſibi, vt vitrani tibi: Woulde God
thou wouldeſt kille them, O Lorde, with the twoo edged sworde, (that is, with thy
Holy Woorde) That they maie no lenger be thine Enimies. For ſo I wiſſhe them to bee
killed vnto them ſelues, that they maie liue vnto thee.
                  
                     And againe, Vindicet nos Deus de vobis, vt ipſum errorem veſtrum in vobis occidat,
& nobiſcum de Veritate gaudeatis:Auguſtin. Epiſt. 166. 
                     God ſo reuenge oute cauſe againſte you, that he
maie kille youre erroure in you, that ye maie reioice togeather with vs of the Truethe.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 22. Diuiſion. 2.
               For we knowe, that the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſte is the power of
God vnto Saluation, and that therein conſiſteth Eternal Life. And,
as Paule warneth vs, we doo not heare, no not an Angel of God,
though he came from Heauen, if he goe aboute to pul vs from any
parte of this Doctrine.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Boaſte no more of the Goſpel. VVe (I meane the catholique Churche) had it, we keapte it, and
vnderſtode it, before ye were borne, and before youre hereſie was hearde of.
                  But a Deuil comminge from hel (for who is authour of diuiſion but Satan?) hath caried you awaie
into an other Goſpel: whereas in deede there is but one true Goſpel. And here let any indifferent
man conſider, howe vprightly you alleage S. Paule. You write, that Paule warneth you
not to geue eare to an Angel comming from heauen,Galat. 1. if he goe about to drawe you from any parte of
this Doctrine. Of whiche this Doctrine meane you? Of this, whiche you haue declared in this
Apologie?And did S. Paul euer reade your late Chapter of Trente. Did S. Paule euer reade youre A pologie? Howe then pronounced he of it that ſentence?
VVee meane (ſaie you) by this Doctrine, the Doctrine of the Goſpel. If you meane ſo, wee ſaie
the ſame. But wee tel you, that S. Paule ſpake not of euery Goſpel generally, but of a certaine
Goſpel qualified. For he ſaieth, Si quis vobis euangelizauerit praerer id quod accepiſtis, anathema
ſit: If any man preache a Goſpel vnto you beſides that ye haue receiued, be he accurſed.
Heare you the Goſpel S. Paule ſpeaketh of? It is not euery Goſpel. It is a Goſpel preached and receiued.
If ye preache that Goſpel, whiche ye receiued, we ioine handes with you. But if ye preach
a Goſpel whiche ye haue receiued of no Apoſtle, nor Apoſtoiique preacher, and whiche was not hearde
of in the earth, when Luther ranne out of his Cloiſter, and forſooke his Religion: then be ye aſſured,
that ye are the menne, who are holden for accurſed of S. Paule.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, ye woulde faine ſcape awaie with a Childiſhe Cauil. Paul,
ye ſaie, ſpeaketh of a Goſpel qualified: whereby ye meane a Goſpel deliuered,
and receiued: As if ye woulde ſaie, The Goſpel of Chriſte, onleſſe it be deliuered
by you, is no Goſpel. But S. Paule meante not the Doctrine deliuered
from hande to hande, or from Pope to Pope: But the Doctrine deliuered, and
receiued in the Scriptures. And in this ſenſe he ſaithe of him ſelfe: Quod accept à
Domino, Hoc & tradidi vobis. The thinge, that I haue receiued of the Lorde, the
ſame haue I deliuered vnto you.
                      In like ſorte he calleth him ſelfe an Apoſtle, not of
menne,
                     1. Cor. 11. Galat. 1. 
                     nor by menne, but by Ieſus Chriſte. Howe be it, what neede many wordes?
The caſe is cleare. S. Auguſtine ſaithe plainely, Paulus ait, Si Angelus de Coelo
vobis annuntiauerit,
                     Auguſt. Contra literas Petilia. lib. 3. cap. 6. 
                     praeterquam quod in Scripturis legalibus, & Euangelicis accepiſtis,
Anathema ſit: If an Angel from Heauen preache vnto you any other thinge,
then ye haue receiued
                      (not by Tradition, or by deliuerie from youre Elders, but) in
the Scriptures of the Lavve, and of the Goſpel, accurſed be he. Theſe wordes be plaine,
M. Hardinge, and quite diſgrace al your Gloſes.
                  
                  Hereto Chryſoſtome addeth further, Non dixit Paulus, Si contraria annuntiauerint,
                     Chryſoſt. In Epi. ad Galat. cap. 1.
                     
                     aut totum Euangelium ſubuerterint,
                     Coūcelles. 
                     verùm, Si vel paulùm Euangelizauerint,
praeter Euangelium, quod accepiſtis, etiamſi quiduis labefactauerint, Anathema
ſint. S. Paule ſaithe not, If they teache the contrarie, or, if they ouerthrowe the
whole Goſpel: But he ſaithe, if they preache any little ſmal thinge, beſides the Goſpel, that
ye haue receiued, or, if they looſe, or ſhake downe any thinge, whatſoeuer it bee, accurſed bee
they.
                      Theſe woordes, M. Hardinge, touche you very neare. Ye haue altered the
whole fourme of the Churche of God. Therefore repente youre ſelues, leſte ye remaine
ſtil within the daunger of the Curſe.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De bono viduitatis. ca. 1. Roma. 12. 
                     Sancta Scriptura noſtae Doctrinae Regulam figit,
Ne audeamus plus ſapere, quàm oporteat ſapere: The Holy Scripture hath laide a rule
vnto oure Doctrine, that we dare not to vnderſtand more, then is meete for vs to vnderſtand.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 22. Diuiſion. 3.
               For, where theſe menne bid the Holy Scriptures away, as doumbe,
and fruteleſſe, & procure vs to comme to God him ſelfe rather, who
ſpeaketh in the Churche, & in theire Councelles, that is to ſaie, to beleue
their fanſies, and opinions: this waie of finding out the Truthe
is very vncertaine, and exceeding dangerous, and in manner a fantaſtical
& madde waie, & by no meanes allowed of the Holy Fathers.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhere they ſaie, we paſſe but litle on the Scriptures, as dumbe and vnprofitable, therein they
Vntruthe. For theſe be youre ovvne Felovves vvoordes. Reade the Anſvveare. ſlaunder vs, as in other thinges. VVe do not ſo. But we ſaie, that as euery act of Parlament muſt be
executed by a lawful Iudge, ſo the holy Scriptures haue their execution by lauful Iudges, who are the
biſhoppes and fathers, and wel in other places, as ſpecially when they be laufully aſſembled in general
councelles. Now ſaie theſe men, that way is very vncertaine, dangerous, in maner mad, and not allowed
of the fathers. VVho euer heard men thought to haue their right wittes, talke after ſo looſe a
ſorte? Did the fathersGregorius Naziāzenꝰ ſaith, He neuer ſavve good comme of any Councel. diſproue the order of comming together in general councelles? Or thought
they the ſame to be a way for men to be the ſoner deceiued? If ſo many maie be deceiued with moſte
diligent ſtudie and mature iudgement conferring together, howe mutche ſoner may one or two alone
leadde by priuate phanſie and ſelf wil, be caried away into errour? At the Nicene councel came together.
318 biſhops: At the firſt of Cōſtantinople. 150. at the Epheſme coūcel. 200. At that of Chalcedō 630
Al theſe foure councelles ſundry ancient fathers, namely S. Gregorie, eſtemed as the foure Goſpels. Yea
but ſaith he, I haue the word of God. But what if 300. farre holier, and better learned men ſaie, he hath
it not? Let the reader be iudge, ſaith he. A meete iudge, in ſuche a cauſe. The Scholers maie reade, but
iudge of their maiſters they maie not by Chriſtes doctrine,Math. 10. who ſaid, Non eſt diſcipulus ſupra magiſtrum,
the ſcholer is not aboue his maiſter. VVhy not, for al that, ſaie you, if the Holy Ghoſt inſpire
him? Sir, is it not to be thought, God doth aſsiſt his Churche repreſented in ſutche ſolemne aſſemblies of
three hundred or moe fathers gouernours of Chriſten people, rather then one man?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Whether ye cal the Scriptures of God a Dumbe thing,Cap. 19. Diui. 1. Ludouicus in Con. Triden. Epiſcop. Pictauien. in Con. Triden. Albert. Pigghi. Controuer. 3. Eckius. or no, I reporte me to
that, is ſaide before. One of you calleth it Mortuum Atramentum, Dead Inke:
An other ſaith, Scriptura eſt res inanimis, & muta: The Scripture is a dead and
a dumbe thinge: An other calleth the Scriptures, Nigrum Euangelium, The blacke
Goſpel.
                      Nowe if the Scriptures be Dead, and Doumbe, and can not ſpeake, then
muſt it needes folowe, they are vnprofitable. Neither doo we deſpiſe the Authoritie
of Councelles. Good Councelles be graue, and reuerende. But thus we ſaie,
Councelles are often againſt Councelles: And, if wee make rekening of number,
the Arian Heretiques haue had moe Councelles, then the Chriſtians. S. Hierome
                     
ſaithe,The people cannot Iudge. 
                     Spiritus Sancti Doctrina eſt, quae Canonicis literis prodita eſt: Contra quam ſi
quid ſtatuant Concilia, nefas duco: That is the Doctrine of the Holy Goſte, that is ſet
abroade in the Canonical Scriptures:Hierom. in epist. ad Galath. Chrysost. In. 2 ad Timoth. Hom. 2. 
                        Againſte whiche Doctrine if Councelles determine
any thing, I thinke it vvicked.
                  
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe further in more earneſte ſorte: Plus aliquid dicam: Ne
Paulo quidem obedire oportet, ſi quid dixerit proprium, ſi quid humanum: I wil ſaie
more: Wee ought not to beleeue, no not Paule him ſelfe, if he ſpeake any thinge of his
owne, or if he ſpeake onely as a man.
                  
                  And to encreaſe the vncertaintie hereof, the whole weighte, and iudgemente
of Councelles hangeth nowe euermore vpon the Pope: as it maie appeare by
theſe woordes of the Concluſion of the late Chapter at Trident: Saluaſemper
in omnibus Sedis Apoſtolicae Authoritate:
                     Concil. Triden. Seſsion. 6. Platyna in Stephano. 
                     The Authoritie of the Apoſtolique See in
al thinges euermore reſerued. But Platyna ſaithe, as it is alleged before, Acta
                        
priorum Pontificum ſequentes Pontifices ſemper aut infringunt, aut omnino' tollunt:
The Popes, that folowe, doo euermore either breake, or wholy abrogate the Decrees
of the Popes, that were before.
                     
                  
                  
                     Whether the Scripture bee wel alleged, or otherwiſe, thereof, ye ſaie, the people
maie not Iudge. For Chriſte ſaithe, The Scholar is not aboue his Maiſter. Certainely,
M. Hardinge, the ſimpleſt of al the people, notwithſtandinge, by youre
reſtrainte, he maie not iudge of the Scriptures, yet he maie eaſily iudge of you,
either that ye vnderſtande not, or that ye vnaduiſedly abuſe the Scriptures.
Whether it be the Woorde of God, or no, the people,
                      ye ſaie, maie not Judge: And that
ye proue euen by the Scriptures, God knoweth, ful handſomely, and ful diſcretely
applied: For the Scholar (ye ſaie) is not aboue his Maiſter. Thus we maie learne
by the Logique of Louaine, that Populus is Latine for a Scholar: & that Scripture
is Latine for a Maiſter. And thus by youre vaine premiſſes without ſenſe ye
proceede vainely, and conclude nothinge.
                  O, M. Hardinge, haue ſome regarde to that ye write. The ſimpleſte maie
ſoone eſpie your dooinges. Ye can no longer thus mocke the worlde with ſhewes
of woordes. Chriſte ſpake not theſe woordes of the vnderſtandinge of the
Scriptures: but of perſequution for the Scriptures. For thus the woordes
lie togeather: When they ſhal perſecute you in one Cittie, flee into an other, &c.
The Scholar is not aboue his Maiſter: Nor the Seruant aboue his Lorde. If
they haue called the Maiſter of the houſe Beelzebub,
                     Matthae. 10. 
                     howe mutche more wil they ſo cal
his houſholde ſeruauntes?
                  
                  
                     Alas, where learned you to frame ſutche Argumentes, The Apoſtles, beeing
the Scholars, can nomore eſcape perſecutiō, then could Chriſte, that vvas
the Maiſter: Ergo, The people cannot vnderſtande, vvhat they reade in the
Scriptures? Here is neither Antecedente, nor Conſequente, nor Sequele in
Reaſon. For the honour of y• Vniuerſitie, haue better regarde vnto your Logique.
                  
                  Ye bewraie the weakeneſſe of youre cauſe, when yee ſo ſclenderly abuſe the
Scriptures.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 22. Diuiſion. 4.
               
                  Chryſoſtome ſaithe, There be many oftentimes, vvhiche boaſte
them ſelues of the Holy Ghoſte: but truely, vvho ſo ſpeake of
their ovvn head, do falſely boaſt that thei haue the ſprite of God.
For like as, ſaith he, Chriſte denied, he ſpake of him ſelfe, vvhen
he ſpake out of the Lavve, and Prophetes, euen ſo novve, if any

                  tiauerint,
                  Coūcelles. 
                  aut totum Euangelium ſubuerterint, verùm, Si vel paulùm Euangelizauerint,
praeter Euangelium, quod accepiſtis, etiamſi quiduis labefactauerint, Anathema
ſint. S. Paule ſaithe not, If they teache the contrarie, or, if they ouerthrowe the
whole Goſpel: But he ſaithe, if they preache any little ſmal thinge, beſides the Goſpel, that
ye haue receiued, or, if they looſe, or ſhake downe any thinge, whatſoeuer it bee, accurſed bee
they. Theſe woordes, M. Hardinge, touche you very neare. Ye haue altered the
whole fourme of the Churche of God. Therefore repente youre ſelues, leſte ye remaine
ſtil within the aunger of the Curſe.
               
               
                  S.
                  Auguſt. De bono viduit atis. ca. 1. Roma. 12. 
                  Auguſtine ſaithe, Sancta Scriptura noſtae Doctrinae Regulam figit,
Ne audeamus plus ſapere, quàm opor
                        •
                     eat ſapere: The Holy Scripture hath laide a rule
vnto oure Doctrine, that we dare not to vnderſtand more, then is meete for vs to vnderſtand.
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 22. Diuiſion. 3.
               For, where theſe menne bid the Holy Scriptures away, as doumbeand
fruteleſſe, & procure vs to comme to God him ſelfe rather, who
ſpeaketh in the Churche, & in theire Councelles, that is to ſaie, to beleue
their fanſies, and opinions: this waie of finding out the Truthe
is very vncertaine, and exceeding dangerous, and in manner a fantaſtical
& madde waie, & by no meanes allowed of the Holy Fathers.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhere they ſaie, we paſſe but litle on the Scriptures, as dumbe and vnprofitable, therein they
Vntruthe. For theſe be youre ovvne Felovves vvoordes. Reade the Anſvveare. ſlaunder vs, as in other thinges. VVe do not ſo. But we ſaie, that as euery act of Parlament muſt be
executed by a lawful Iudge, ſo the holy Scriptures haue their execution by lauful Iudges, who are the
biſhoppes and fathers, as wel in other places, as ſpecially when they be laufully aſſembled in general
councelles. Now ſaie theſe men, that way is very vncertaine, dangerous, in maner mad, and not allowed
of the fathers. VVho euer heard men thought to haue their right wittes, talke after ſo looſe a
ſorte? Did the fathersGregorius Naziāzenꝰ ſaith, He neuer ſavve good comme of any Councel. diſproue the order of comming together in general councelles? Or thought
they the ſame to be a way for men to be the ſoner deceiued? If ſo many maie be deceiued with moſte
diligent ſtudie and mature iudgement conferring together, howe mutche ſoner may one or two alone

                        •
                     eadde by priuate phanſie and ſelf wil, be caried away into errour? At the Nicene councel came together.
318 biſhops: At the firſt of Cōſtantinople. 150. at the Epheſine coūcel. 200. At that of Chalcedō 630
Al theſe foure councelles ſundry ancient fathers, namely S. Gregorie, eſtemed as the foure Goſpels. Yea
but ſaith he, I haue the word of God. But what if 300. farre holier, and better learned men ſaie, he hath
it not? Let the reader be iudge. ſaith be. A meete iudge, in ſuche a cauſe. The Scholers maie reade, but
iudge of their maiſters they maie not by Chriſtes doctrine,Math. 10. who ſaid, Non eſt diſcipulus ſupra magiſtrum,
the ſcholer is not aboue his maiſter. VVhy not, for al that, ſaie you, if the Holy Ghoſt inſpire
him? Sir, is it not to be thought, God doth aſsiſt his Churche repreſented in ſutche ſolemne aſſemblies of
three hundred or moe fathers gouernours of Chriſten people, rather then one man?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Whether ye cal the Scriptures of God a Dumbe thing,
                     Cap. 19. Diui. 1. Ludouicus in Con. Triden. Epiſcop. Pictauien. in Con. Triden. Albert. Pigghi. Controuer. 3. Eckius. 
                     or no, I reporte me to
that, is ſaide before. One of you calleth it Mortuum Atramentum, Dead Inke:
An other ſaith, Scriptura eſt res inanimis, & muta: The Scripture is a dead and
a dumbe thinge: An other calleth the Scriptures, Nigrum Euangelium, The blacke
Goſpel. Nowe if the
                      Scriptures be Dead, and Doumbe, and can not ſpeake, then
muſt it needes folowe, they are vnprofitable. Neither doo we deſpiſe the Authoritie
of Councelles. Good Councelles be graue, and reuerende. But thus we ſaie,
Councelles are often againſt Councelles: And, if wee make rekening of number,
the Arian Heretiques haue had moe Councelles, then the Chriſtians. S. Hierome

                     ſaithe,
                     The people cannot Iudge. Spiritus Sancti Doctrina eſt, quae Canonicis literis prodita eſt: Contra quam ſi
quid ſtatuant Concilia, nefas duco: That is the Doctrine of the Holy Goſte, that is ſet
abroade in the Canonical Scriptures:Hierom. in epiſt. ad Galath. 
                     Againſte whiche Doctrine if Councelles determine
any thing, I thinke it vvicked.
                  
                     S.
                     Chryſoſt. In. 2. ad Timoth. Hom. 2. Chryſoſtome ſaithe further in more earneſte ſorte: Plus aliquid dicam: Ne
Paulo quidem obedire oportet, ſi quid dixerit proprium, ſi quid humanum: I wil ſaie
more: Wee ought not to beleeue, no not Paule him ſelfe, if he ſpeake any thinge of his
owne, or if he ſpeake onely as a man.
                  
                  And to encreaſe the vncertaintie hereof, the whole weighte, and iudgemente
of Councelles hangeth nowe euermore vpon the Pope: as it maie appeare by
theſe woordes of the Concluſion of the late Chapter at Trident:
                     Concil. Triden. Seſsion. 6. Platyna in Stephano. 
                     Salua ſemper
in omnibus Sedis Apoſtolicae Authoritate: The Authoritie of the Apoſtolique See in
al thinges euermore reſerued.
                      But Platyna ſaithe, as it is alleged before, Acta
priorum Pontificum ſequentes Pontifices ſemper aut infringunt, aut omninò tollunt:
The Popes, that folowe, doo euermore either breake, or wholy abrogate the Decrees
of the Popes, that were before.
                     
                  
                  
                     Whether the Scripture bee wel alleged, or otherwiſe, thereof, ye ſaie, the people
maie not Iudge. For Chriſte ſaithe, The Scholar is not aboue his Maiſter. Certainely,
M. Hardinge, the ſimpleſt of al the people, notwithſtandinge, by youre
reſtrainte, he maie not iudge of the Scriptures, yet he maie eaſily iudge of you,
either that ye vnderſtande not, or that ye vnaduifedly abuſe the Scriptures.
Whether it be the Woorde of God, or no, the people,
                      ye ſaie, maie not Iudge: And that
ye proue euen by the Scriptures, God knoweth, ful handſomely, and ful diſcretely
applied: For the Scholar (ye ſaie) is not aboue his Maiſter. Thus we maie learne
by the Logique of Louaine, that Populus is Latine for a Scholar: & that Scripture
is Latine for a Maiſter. And thus by youre vaine premiſſes without ſenſe ye
proceede vainely, and conclude nothinge.
                  O, M. Hardinge, haue ſome regarde to that ye write. The ſimpleſte maie
ſoone eſpie your dooinges. Ye can no longer thus mocke the worlde with ſhewes
of woordes. Chriſte ſpake not theſe woordes of the vnderſtandinge of the
Scriptures: but of perſequution for the Scriptures. For thus the woordes
lie togeather: When they ſhal perſecute you in one Cittie, flee into an other, &c.
The Scholar is not aboue his Maiſter: Nor the Seruant aboue his Lorde. If
they haue called the Maiſter of the houſe Beelzebub, howe mutche more wil they ſo cal
his houſholde ſeruountes?
                     Matthae. 10.
                  
                  
                     Alas, where learned you to frame ſutche Argumentes, The Apoſtles, beeing
the Scholars, can nomore eſcape perſecutiō, then could Chriſte, that vvas
the Maiſter: Ergo, The people cannot vnderſtande, vvhat they reade in the
Scriptures? Here is neither Antecedente, nor Conſequente, nor Sequele in
Reaſon. For the honour of yV Uniuerſitie, haue better regarde vnto your Logique.
                  
                  Ye bewraie the weakeneſſe of youre cauſe, when yee ſo ſclenderly abuſe the
Scriptures.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 22. Diuiſion. 4.
               
                  Chryſoſtome ſaithe, There be many oftentimes, vvhiche boaſte
them ſelues of the Holy Ghoſte: but truely, vvho ſo ſpeake of
their ovvn head, do falſely boaſt that thei haue the ſprite of God.
For like as, ſaith he, Chriſte denied, he ſpake of him ſelfe, vvhen
he ſpake out of the Lavve, and Prophetes, euen ſo novve, if any

thinge be preſſed vpon vs in the name of the Holy Ghoſt, ſaue the
Goſpel, vve ought not to beleue it. For as Chriſte is the fulfillinge
of the Lavve and Prophetes, ſo is the Holy Ghoſt the fulfillinge
of the Goſpel. Thus farre goeth Chryſoſtome.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  They alleage out of Chryſoſtome, that who ſo euer ſpeake of their owne, doo vntruely attribute
to them ſelues the Spirite of God. But they remember not, howe they, who are gathered together in
the name of Chriſte,Math. 18. doo not ſpeake of their owne, becauſe Chriſte, who is the truthe, hath promiſed
to be in the middeſt of them. Nowe if they tel vs, that the Fathers at Trent were not gathered together
in the name of Chriſte, howe mutche more truly maie wee reply to them, that the temporal
menne aſſembled together at Auſpurg, at Marpurg, at VVormes, at Smalcald, at Baden, at VVeſtminſter,
or any where els, came not together in the name of Chriſte? I require but a man of common
ſenſe to ſitte Iudge in this cauſe. They can not poſsibly bringe any thinge out of the Scriptures,
or auncient Fathers, for maintenance of this their great caſe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Ye builde ouer boldely, M. Hardinge, on Chriſtes promiſes. God is true,
what ſo euer he promiſe: But oftentimes menne are falſe. Chriſte hath promiſed
to be preſent,Pſal. 2. Actor 4. Michaeas. 3. where ſo euer twoo, or three be geathered togeather in his name:
But it appeareth by the woordes of the Prophete Dauid, that Councelles oftentimes
meete togeather againſte God, and againſte his Chriſte. The Prophete Michaeas ſaithe,
Sic dicit Dominus de Prophetis, qui errare faciunt populum meum: Abominantur iudicium,
& omne rectum peruertunt: Super Dominum requieſcebant, dicentes: Nunquid
non eſt Dominus in medio noſtri? Thus ſaithe our Lorde of the Prophetes, that deceiue my
people: They abborre Iudgement: they ouerthrowe al that is right. And yet they reaſte them
ſēlues vpon oure Lorde, ſaienge, Is not oure Lorde in the middeſt emongeſt vs?
                     
                  
                  This is youre defence, M. Hardinge. Whether the VVorde of God be with
you, or againſte you, yet ye ſaie, ye haue ſtil the Sprite of God: and oure Lorde
him ſelfe is in the middeſt emongeſt you.Chryſoſtom. De Sancto & Adorando Spiritu. Auguſt. in Iohā. tractae 46. But this boldneſſe, by Chryſoſtomes
Iudgement, is preſumptuous, and daungerous. And therefore his
counſel is, that if any thing be preſſed vpon vs by the name of the Holy Ghoſte,
ſauinge onely the Goſpel of Chriſte, wee ſhoulde not beleeue it. In like ſenſe S.
Auguſtine ſaithe, Sua illi ſi docere veliut, nolite audire: nolite facere: If they bringe
any Decree or Fantaſie of theire owne, heare it not: Doo it not.
                     
                  
                  
                     Thus the Olde Frenetique, and Fanatical Heretiques, when they founde them
ſelues conuinced by the euident teſtimonies of Goddes VVoorde, they appealed
to the Spirite of God: whiche, they ſaide, euen as you ſaie, euermore aſſiſted
them,
                     Auguſt. Contra 
                           •
                        auſtum Manichae li. 3
                           •
                        . ca. 18. 
                     and coulde not faile them. Hereof S. Auguſtine writeth thus: Videris ergo,
id vos agere, vt omnis de medio Scripturarum authoritas auferatur: & ſuus
cui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      animus author ſit, quid in qua
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Scriptura probet, quid improbet: id eſt,
vt non Authorirati Scripturarum ſubijciatur ad Fidem, ſed ſibi Scripturas ipſe
ſubijciat: Non vt ideò illi placeat aliquid, quia hoc in ſublimi Authoritate
ſcriptum legitur: ſed ideo rectè ſcriptum videatur, quia hoc illi placuit: Ye
ſee therefore, this is youre drifte, that al Authoritie of the Scriptures be remoued: that eche
man maie be leadde by his owne fantaſie, what he liſte, either to allowe in the Holy Scriptures,
or to diſallowe: that is to ſaie, that he ſubmitte not him ſelfe, touchinge his Faithe,
to the Authoritie of the Scriptures: but that he make the Scriptures ſubiecte vnto him:
Not that he wil allowe any thing, bicauſe it is written in that high Authoritie of the Scriptures:
but that he wil thinke it wel written, bicauſe he alloweth it. By meane hereof it
commeth to paſſe, that S.
                      Hilarie writeth, Qui, quae ſcripta ſunt, negas, quid

ſupereſt, niſi vt,Hilari. De Trinitate, li. 9. quae non ſcripta ſunt, probes? For as muche as thou denieſt the
thinges that be written, what remaineth there, but that thou muſte allowe the thinges, that
be not written?
                  
                  Concerninge the Authoritie, and Credite of Councelles, wee ſhal haue cauſe
to ſaie more hereafter. But where ye require, but a man of common ſenſe, to ſitte
as Iudge in this cauſe, it appeareth, that either ye remember not, or els ye weighe
not, that ye immediately ſaid before. For in this ſelfe ſame Chapter ye ſaie, The
people maie not iudge of theire Biſhoppes: and that, as ye tel vs, by Chriſtes
own Doctrine: For the Scholar is not aboue his Maiſter. Yet now ſuddainely, as
hauinge foregotten youre owne woordes, ye cal foorthe the Scholare, yea, and as
it maie be thought, one of the meaneſt of al youre Schole, as a man onely endewed
with common ſenſe, to ſitte in Iudgement ouer his Maiſter.
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge,Actor. 10. Iohan. 3. Extra. De Electi. & Electi potaſtat. Significaſti. Abb. God is no accepter of perſonnes. Goddes Holy Sprite is
not bounde to Councelles, or Companies: but breatheth freely, where it liſteth.
And therefore, as youre owne Doctour Panormitane ſaithe, in Caſes of Religion
the Iudgement of one Simple plaine man ought ſommetimes to bee receiued before
the Iudgemente of the Pope.
               
            
            Here endeth the Fourth
Parte.
         
         
            
            The Fifthe Parte.
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion, 1.
               
                  BVt here,Olde. Nevve. I looke, they wil ſaie, though they
haue not the Scriptures, yet it maie chaunce,
they haue the Auncient Doctours, and the
Holy Fathers with them. For this is a high
bragge they haue euer made, howe that al
Antiquitie, & a Continual Conſent of al ages
dooth make on their ſide: and that al our
caſes be but Newe, and yeſter daies woorke,
and vntil theſe fewe late yeeres were neuer
hearde of. Queſtionleſſe, there can nothing be more ſpitefully ſpoken
againſt the Religion of God, then to accuſe it of Noueltie, as a mater
lately founde out. For as there can be no chaunge in God him ſelfe, ſo
ought there to be no chaunge in his Religion.
               Yet neuertheleſſe, we wote not by what meanes, but we haue euer
ſeene it come ſo to paſſe, from the firſte beginninge, that as often as
God did geeue but ſomme light, & did open his Truthe vnto menne,
though the Truthe were not onely of greateſt Antiquitie, but alſo frō
Euerlaſting, yet of wicked menne, & of the Aduerſaries it was called
Newfangled, and of late diuiſed. That vngraceous, and bloudthirſty
Haman, when he ſought to procure the kinge Aſſuerus diſpleaſure
againſt the Ievves,
                  Eſther. 3. this was his accuſation to him: Thou haſt here
(ſaithe he) a kinde of people, that vſeth certaine nevve Lavves of
their ovvne, but ſtifnecked, and rebellious againſte al thy Lavves.
When Paule alſo began firſte to preache,Actor. 17. and expounde the Goſpel at
Athenes, he was called a tidinges bringer of Nevve Goddes: as
mutche to ſaie, as of a Nevve Religion. For (ſaide the Athenians)
maie wee not knowe of thee, what Nevve Doctrine this is? Celſus
likewiſe, when he of ſet pourpoſe wrote againſte Chriſte, to the ende
he might more ſcornefully ſcoffe out the Goſpel by the name of Noueltie,
VVhat,
                  Origen. Contra Celsum. ſaithe he, hath God after ſo many ages novve at
laſte, and ſo late bethought him ſelfe? Euſebius alſo writeth, that
the Chriſtian Religion from the beginning, for very ſpite, was called

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is to ſaie, Nevve, and Strange. After like ſorte, theſe
menne condemne al our maters, as Strange, and Nevve: but they
wil haue their owne, whatſoeuer they are, to be praiſed, as thinges
of longe continuance.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  They had ſaide ſomme what, if they had proued, that the doctrineA vaine diſtinction. For neither doo vvee cal our Doctrine Nevve. of Chriſte had benne called
nowe by them, who were the profeſſours, and folowers of it. But nowe reportinge that the Gentils,
who knewe not God, as A man, as the Athenians, as Celſus the Ethnike, and ſuche the like, called
the right and true Religion of God, newe: they ſaie nothing to any purpoſe. But let them ſhewe, that
before the comminge of Chriſte, any ſuche Religion was allowed, that was newe: Or that ſithens

Chriſtes incarnation, amonge Chriſtian menne what ſo euer Religion was not ſhunned and reiected
as heretical, whiche was newe. Here are they domme. And yet for ſhewe of learning in a matter
not neceſſarie, they bringe foorth their ſtore, and declare that the doctrine and Religion of truthe
was newe to them, whiche knewe not God nor Chriſte the ſonne of God, whiche no man denieth.
                  Thus al menne of any iudgement maie ſee, how fondly they reaſon. VVeVVee tel you, ye haue loſt the right names of thinges: and cal that Nevve, that in deede is Olde. tel them that al nevve
doctrine nowe in the Churche of Chriſte is naught: and they proue, that infidels haue in the time of
Moſes lawe, and at the firſt preachinge of the Goſpel, impugned Goddes euerlaſtinge truthe with the
odious terme and reproche of newnes. Newe doctrine was good to vs at our firſte conuerſion from infidelitie.
But ſince that we receiued the true faithe from S. Gregorie the Biſhop of Rome,Vntruthe. For the True Faithe of Chriſte had benne planted, and ſtil continued in this Realme foure hundred yeeres; before the comming of this Auguſtine. who conuerted
the Realme of Englande to the faithe by S Auguſtine his legate, and others ſent for that godly
purpoſe: worthely we ſhunne and abhorre al new Goſpels, new faithes, new doctrines, new religions.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The Truthe of God neither is furthered by the face of Antiquitie: nor hindered
by the opinion of Noueltie. For oftentimes the thinge, that in deede is
Nevve, is commended as Olde: and the thinge, that in dede is Olde, is condemned
as Nevve. If Nevvneſſe in Religion in al reſpectes, and euery waie were il,
Chriſte would not haue reſembled his Doctrine to Nevve VVine:
                     Math. 9. Ioh. 13. Luke. 22. Arnobius contra Gentes, li. 2. nor woulde he
haue ſaide to his Diſciples, I geue you a Nevve Commaundemente:
                      Neither
woulde he haue called the Cuppe of Thankeſgeuinge, The Nevve Teſtamente, in his
Bloude. Arnobius
                      ſaithe, Religionis Authoritas non eſt tempore aeſtimanda, ſed
numine: nec quo die, ſed quid colere coeperis, intueri conuenit. Quod Verum
eſt, Serum non eſt: The Authoritie of Religion muſte be weighed by God, and not by
time: It behoueth vs to conſider, not vpon what daie, but what thinge wee beganne to worſhip.
The thinge that is true, is neuer too late.
                  
                  S.Augu. in quaeſt. Noui & Veteris Teſtamenti, quaeſt. 114. Auguſtin. De Ciuita. li. 10. ca. 32. 
                     Auguſtine ſaithe, Quod Anterius eſt, inquiunt Ethnici, falſum eſſe non poteſt.
Quaſi Antiquitas, & Vetus Conſuetudo praeiudicet Veritati: The Heathens ſaie,
The Religion, that was firſte, can not be falſe: As though Antiquitie, and Olde Cuſtome
coulde preuaile againſte the Truethe.
                      Againe he ſaithe, Nec dici debet, quare Modo'? &
quare Serò? Quoniam mittentis Conſilium non eſt humano ingenio penetrabile: Neither
maie we ſaie, Why commeth it nowe? Why commeth it ſo late? For the Counſel of
God that ſente it, is vnſearcheable to the wiſedome of man.
                      Ye ſaie, They were Infidelles
onely, that charged the Religion of Chriſte with Noueltie.
                      And further ye ſaie, Wee tel
them, that al Newe Doctrine nowe in the Churche of Chriſte is naught. Hereto, M. Hardinge,
we ſoone agree. And therefore wel tel you, that youre Nevve Fantaſies,
whiche ye haue painted with the Coloure of Auncientie, and therewith haue deceiued
the worlde, are vaine, and naught. As for vs, wee haue planted no Nevve
Religion, but onely haue renewed the Olde, that was vndoubtedly founded, and
vſed by the Apoſtles of Chriſte, & other Holy Fathers in the Primitiue Churche:
and of this longe late time, by meane of the multitude of your Traditions, and
Vanities, hath benne drowned.
                  
                     Therefore wee maie ſaie with S.
                     Bernardus De vita Solitaria. Bernarde, Nouitatem dico, propter linguas
hominum impiorum: qui, cùm manifeſtum Lumen obnubilare non queunt, de
Solo Nouitatis nomine cauillantur, &c. Sed haec Nouitas non eſt Nouella vanitas.
Res enim eſt Antiquae Religionis: Perfectè fundatae in chriſto Pietatis:
Antiqua Haereditas Eccleſiae Dei: I cal it Noueltie, bicauſe of the tongues of wicked
menne: who being not hable to ſhadowe the manifeſt light of the Truth, finde cauillations
vpon the Onely name of Noueltie. But this Noueltie is no Nevve Vanitie (as
is this late vpſtarte Religion of Rome). For it is a mater of Olde Religion:
of perfite Godlineſſe founded in Chriſte: The Auncient Enheritance of
the Churche of God.Tertullian. De Virginibus velandi 
                     The Olde Learned Father Tertullian ſaithe, Viderint
ergo, quibus Nouum eſt, quòd ſibi eſt Vetus: Haereſes non tam Nouitas,

quam Veritas reuincit.Auguſtine of Englande. Quodcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      contra Veritatem ſapit, hoc eſt Haereſis,
etiam vetus Conſuetudo: Let them therfore take heede, whiche coumpte that thinge
Newe, that in it ſelfe is Olde. Herefie is reproued, not ſo wel by Noueltie, as by Veritie.
What ſo euer thinge ſauereth againſte the Truthe, the ſame is an Hereſie: Yea, although
it be a Cuſtome neuer ſo olde.Ignatius ad Philadelphien. Ignatius ſaithe, Antiquitas mea Ieſus Chriſtus
eſt: My Antiquitie is Chriſte Ieſus. For otherwiſe the Religion of Chriſte at that
time was coumpted
                      Nevve, and in reſpecte of the Ancient Religion of the Heathens,
Vniuerſally, and of al menne was condemned.
                  
                  That Auguſtine, the Monker of Rome, broughte firſte the Faithe into this
Lande, it is vtterly Vntrue. For, as I haue ſaide before, it appeareth plainely by
ſundrie the Ancient Fathers, origen, Tertullian, chryſoſtome, Hilarie, Theodoretus,
Euſebius, and others, that the Faithe of Chriſte had benne vniuerſally
receiued, and perfitely rooted in this Realme many hundred yeeres, before this
Auguſtine the Monke was borne. Indeede he broughte in greate heapes of
ſtrange Nouelties, and superſtitions, as Candels, Candelſtickes, Banners, and
Holy VVater, and other like ſhewes: Whereof the Churche of God had no great
neede. And yet haue the ſame ſithence benne encreaſed by other Newe Diuiſes,
and Vanities, aboue meaſure.
                  But, for as mutche as certaine of M. Hardinges Beaupecres of Louaine
haue lately founde them ſelues talke, and keapte greate Mootes in the behoufe of
theire Auguſtine, the Italian Monke, whom they cal the Apoſtle of Englande,
and wil needes haue to be receiued and honoured, as a Saincte, I haue thought it
therefore good, briefely, and by the waie, to note a fewe wordes touching the ſame.
                  It ſeemeth, they be mutche offended, that ſo vertuous a Man, and ſo Holy a
Saincte ſhoulde be charged with Pride, and Crueltie. With Pride, in ſo diſdeignefully
deſpiſinge his Brethren, the Biſhoppes of this Ilelande of Britaine: With
Crueltie, in procuringe the Deathe bothe of many thouſandes of Chriſtian people,
and alſo ſpecially of the Innocente, and Vnarmed Monkes of Bangor: and al
this, for that they refuſed to receiue him as theire Metropolitane, and to agree
with him in certaine ſmal pointes of the Romaine Religion. Howe be it,
his Pride is wel blaſed by Beda, writinge pourpoſely of the ſame, in that he ſate
ſtil in his Throne,Beda: Septem Britannor. Epiſ. & plures Viri Doctiſsimi. and diſdeigned to riſe vp, and to geue any token of Reuerence
vnto the Seuen Biſhoppes, and other Learned, & graue menne of the Britannes,
makinge theire appearance at his Councel. And therefore they ſaide, they woulde
not hearken to his demaundes, nor take him for theire Archebiſhop, as hauinge
otherwiſe of olde an Archebiſhop of theire owne, to whome they ought theire obedience.
Theire woordes, as they are reported by Beda, were theiſe: Si modo' nobis
aſſurgere noluit,
                     Beda. lib. 2. ca. 2. 
                     quanto' magis, ſi ei ſubdi coeperimus, iam nos pro nihilo conteinner?
If euen nowe be diſdeigne to riſe vp vnto vs, howe mutche more wil hee deſpiſe vs,
and regarde vs as nothinge, when wee ſhal once be vnder his Iuriſdiction?
                     
                  
                  But, to excuſe this Auguſtine of ſhameful Crueltie, leſte he ſhoulde ſeeme to
be acceſſorie to the Murthering of ſo many, and ſo by theire owne Lawes to be Irregulare,
as a man of bloude, they ſaie, He neither enkendled the Warre againſte the
Britaines, nor was preſente at the fight: but was deade longe before. Whiche thinge
alſo they thinke, maie be proued by the expreſſe woordes of Beda. For thus he
ſaithe.Beda eodem loco 
                     Quamuis ipſo Auguſtino iam multo antè tempore ad Coeleſtia Regna ſublato:
Notwithſtandinge Auguſtine him ſelfe, longe before the time of this Warre, were taken
vp into the kingdome of Heauen.
                      For the truthe, and certaintie hereof, it maie pleaſe
thee, good Chriſtian Reader, to vnderſtande, that theiſe laſte woordes of Beda,
concerninge the Deathe of Auguſtine, are manifeſtely forged, and haue benne violently
thruſte into the texte, by a guileful Parentheſis, by them, that ſithence haue

benne aſhamed of his Crueltie,Auguſtine of Englād. and were neuer written by the Authoure, as by
euidente proufes it ſhal plainely appeare.
                  
                     But firſt of al, in an Olde chronicle, written in Frenche aboue twoo hundred
yéeres paſte,
                     Thomas Graie. Auguſtine the inflamer of the VVarre. 
                     by Thomas Graie, yée ſhal finde it recorded thus: Auguſtine,
                      beinge
thus refuſed of the Biſhoppes, and others the Learned of the Britaines, made ſutche complainte
thereof to Ethelberte the kinge of kente, that foorth with he leuied his Power,
and Marched againſte them, and ſlewe them in moſte Cruel wiſe, hauinge (as he ſaithe) no
more regarde of mercie, then a Woulfe hath vpon a Sheepe. Hereby it appeareth, that
this Auguſtine was the inflamer of the Warre, and ſo the cauſer of the ſlaughter.
                  
                  And whereas, by the woordes of Beda, as they be now commonly extant in the
Latine, wée are told, this Auguſtine was deade, long before the Warre beganne,
it appeareth plainely by the true Beda in déede,The true ſtorie of Beda, Tranſlated by Kinge Alfrede. Auguſtine aliue in the time of the VVarre.
                      tranſlated aboue ſeuen hundred
yéeres agoe into the old Engliſh, or Saxon tongue, by Alfredus, or Aluredus then
Kinge of this lande, that the ſame Auguſtine was yet aliue, after the ſame Warre
was ended, & that he afterwarde Conſecrated twoo Biſhoppes, Mellitus, & Iuſtus:
Mellitus, to be Biſhop of London: and Iuſtus, to be Biſhop of Rocheſter. Which
thinges thus declared, it foloweth orderly in the ſtorie, Then (theſe Warres being
ended, & theſe Biſhoppes Conſecrated) aftervvarde died the beloued Father Auguſtine.
After the Warre he died, he ſaithe: and not Before, as they haue ſithence
altered it in the Latine. I trwo, M. Harding, yée are not ſo mutch amazed with the
admiration of your Auguſtine, that yée wil ſaie, he had power to Conſecrate Biſhoppes,
and to vſe his Archiepiſcopal Authoritie, beinge deade.
                  As for theſe woordes, that wée find reported by the Parentheſis, in the Latine,
as written by Beda, (Quamuis Auguſtino iam mùlto anté tempore ad coeleſtia Regna
ſublato) For as mutche as they are quite contrarie to the very courſe, and order of
the ſtorie, and ſpecially for that they are not once touched in the Aunciente Saxon
Tranſlation, ſundrie Copies whereof at this preſente are extante, and to be ſéene,
of ſutche Reuerende Antiquitie, as maie not iuſtely be called in queſtion, therefore
wée haue good cauſe to iudge, that the ſaide woordes haue benne ſithence forced, and
ſhifted in, by ſomme good ſkille, and policie, leſte Auguſtine, ſo holy a man, ſhould
be founde guiltie of ſo greate a Crueltie.An. Dom.
                  
                  
                     596 Auguſt. commeth into Englande.
                     597
                     598
                     599
                     600
                     601 Auguſt, receiueth his Palle.
                     602
                     603
                     604 Auguſt. conſecrateth Mellitus,
and Iuſtus.
                     605 Gregorie dieth. The vvarre againſt
the Britaines: The Saxon Chronicle
of Peterburrough.
                     606
                     607
                     608 Auguſt. dieth: Flores Hiſtoriar.
                  
                  
                     Verily,
                     The Abſtracte of Chronicles vvritten. 
                     in the Olde Engliſhe Chronicle
                      it is recorded,
not onely that this Auguſtine, the Italian Monke, by his
complainte cauſed the King of Kente to arme his people againſt
the true, and Faithful Chriſtians of this Countrie,
then beinge in Wales: or, that he was aliue at the time of ye
battaile, but alſo, that he was him ſelf preſente in perſonne
goeinge towarde the ſame. The woordes be theſe: Auguſtine
came againe, and tolde kinge Ethelberte, that the Britaines
woulde not obeie him. Wherefore the Kinge was wrothe,
and ſente to Elfrede the king of Northumberland to comme
to healpe him, to diſtreſſe the Britaines of VVales. And (Auguſtine)
the Archebiſhop of Canturburie mette vvith
them at Leiceſter.
                     Auguſtine aliue, and in companie vvith the kinges marchinge tovvardes the filde. The King of Leiceſter at that time was called
Brocuale. He beinge afraide of the twoo Kinges, fledde out of the
Lande, and came neuer againe. And the twoo kinges ſeiſed al his
landes, and departed them bitweene them ſelues. And afterward thei went to wardes Wales.
The Britaines heard of them, and ſente menne to them in their ſhirtes, and harefoote, to aſke
mercie. But they were ſo cruel, that they had of them no pitie, &c. Hereby it appeareth.
that this Auguſtine, not onely enkendled this cruel Warre, but alſo was aliue,
and preſent in the Armie.
                  
                  
                     
Therefore, M. Hardinge, it ſhal hencefoorth be good, bothe for you, and for your
Felowes, not to aduenture ſo raſſhely in iudgemente, before yée knowe.
                  Thus mutche briefely, as anweare vnto them, that ſo faine woulde haue their
Auguſtine acquited of Pride, and Crueltie.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 2.
               Wherein thei doo mutche like to the Coniurers, & Sorcerers now
a daies, whiche woorkinge with Diuels, vſe to ſaie, they haue theire
Bookes, and al theire Holy, and hid Myſteries from Athanaſius,
Cyprian, Moſes, Abel, Adam, and from the Archangel Raphael:
to the ende, that their conninge being thought to comme from ſutche
Patrones and Founders, might be iudged the more high and Holy.
After the ſame manner theſe menne, bicauſe they woulde haue theire
owne Religion, whiche they themſelues, and that not longe ſithence,
haue brought foorth into the world, to be the more eaſily, and rather
accepted of fooliſhe perſonnes, or of ſutche, as caſt little, whereabout
they or others doo goe, they are woonte to ſaie, they had it from
Auguſtine, Hierome, Chryſoſtome, from the Apoſtles, and from
Chriſte him ſelfe. Ful wel knowe they, that nothinge is more in the
peoples fauoure, or better liketh the common ſorte, then theſe names.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Nay Sirs, your ſelues maie with more reaſon be likened to Enchaunters, Necromancers, and VVitches.
For as they ſaie, that they haue their Bookes, and their myſteries from thoſe Doctours, and firſte Fathers,
and from Raphael the Archangel, but cannot ſhewe the deliuery thereof by any ſucceſsion from hand
to hande, as for example, who receiued the ſame from Raphael, from Adam, from Abel, &c. and who
kept them from time to time: so ye ſaie alſo, that ye haue your Goſpel, and euery part of your Doctrine
from the Apoſtles, from Chriſte, from the Prophetes, from the Patriarkes, from heauen, from Gods owne
boſome,Iacob. 1
                           •
                        
                      who is Father of lightes. But ye cannot ſhewes vs your lauful succeſsion, by whom, and by whoſe
preachinge, as by handes, it came downe alonge from Chriſte and his Apoſtles vnto you.It laie in the Scriptures, and in the Bookes of the Holy Fathers. VVhere laie
your sacramentary Doctrine hidden bitwene the time of your Prophete Zuinglius, and your Patriarke
Berengarius? Howe, and by what deliuery from hande to hand continewed the ſame thoſe fiue hundred
yeeres? She we vs your succeſsion. VVhere be your Biſhops, where be your Churches?
                  The Doctrine, whiche the Catholikes of our Countrie holde, and profeſſe,Vntruthes impudente. Reade the Anſvveare. as wel touchinge the
bleſſed sacramente, as al other pointes of our faithe, they haue receiued it of theire Biſhops, and they
of their Predeceſſours, by order vntil they reache to S. Auguſtine: S. Auguſtine receiued it of S. Gregorie:
* he of others before him: * and they al one of an other by continual aeſcente vnto S. Peter: who receiued
it of Chriſte: Chriſt of God his Father. * And this Doctrine we finde taught and plainely ſet forth
in the bookes thatVntruthe. For al this is but a ſhevve of emptie names, and nothinge in them. S. Auguſtine, Hierome, Chryſoſtome, Ambroſe, Baſile, Cyprian, Dionyſe, and the other
holy Fathers haue leafte to the Poſteritie. And ſo they be witneſſes of the truth of the Doctrine which
our Biſhops haue taught vs.
                  Preache ye, and crie ye out neuer ſo mutche, make ſo many Lawes in your Parlamentes, as ye liſte,
imbrue your ſwordes in the Bloude of the Catholike Chriſtians, as ye crie for it in your pulpites, yet
ſhal that rocke, whereon we ſtaie, be too harde for you. Neither ſhal ye euer be able to ouerthrowe the
Catholike Churche builded thereupon. For certaine we are, that neither al your power, nor Hel gates
ſhal preuaile againſte it.Matth. 16.
                  
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Marcus Varro was woonte to ſaie, Vtile eſt Ciuitatibus, vt ſe viri fortes, etiamſi

falſum fit,Pretenſe of Antiquitie. Dijs genitos eſſe credant: It is very behoueful for Cities, and Common Weales,
that menne of Valiante courage beleue thē ſelues to be ye Children of ye Goddes, yea although
in deede it be vntrue.
                     Auguſti. De Ciuitate, Li. 3. ca. 
                           •
                        . 
                     Vnto whiche woordes S. Auguſtine addeth theſe: Haec Sententia,
cernis, quàm latum locum aperiat falſitati Ye ſee, howe large a ſcope this ſaieing dooth open
to the Mainteinance of Falſehedde. Many vaine menne, to auance the Nobilitie of
theire bloud, haue fette their petite degrées, ſomme frō
                        
                      Achilles, ſomme frō
                      Aeneas,
ſomme from Hercules, and ſomme from the Arke of Noe. The Heretique Dioſcorus,
to geate ſomme credite to his Doctrine, woulde ſéeme to bringe the deſcente
thereof from al the Ancient Fathers of the Churche. For thus he ſaide in the open
Councel,
                     Concil. Chalced. Actio. 1. Pa. 767. Ego teſtimonia habeo Sanctorum Patrum, Athanaſij, Gregorij, Cyrilli,
in multis locis. Ego cum Patribus eijcior: Ego defendo Patrum Dogmata: Non trāſgredior
in aliquo: Et horum Teſtimonia, non ſimpliciter, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tranſitoriè, ſed in Libris habeo:
I haue the witneſſe of the Holy Fathers, Athanaſius, Gregorius, cyrillus, in many
places. I am throwen foorth with the Fathers: I defende the Fathers Doctrine: I ſwarue not
frō thē in any pointe: I haue theire witneſſe, not barely, nor by the waie, but in theire Bookes.
                  
                  
                     So ſaide the Heretique Eutyches, Ego legi Scripta Beati Cyrilli, & Sanctorum
Patrum,Concil. Chalced. Actio. 1. Pa. 793. Concil. Chalced. Actio. 4. Pa. 877. & Sancti Athanaſij: I haue readde the Bookes of Cyrillus, of the Holy Fathers,
and of Athanaſius. So ſaide the Heretique caroſus, Ego ſecundum expoſitionem
trecentorum decem & octo Patrum, ſic Credo: ſic Baptizatus ſum: Thus doo I beleue, and
thus was I Baptized, according to ye Expoſition of the three hundred, and eighteene Fathers
in the Councel of Nice. Thus y•
                      Arian Heretiques alleged the Authoritie of y• Ancient
Father Origen: thus the Pelagian Heretiques alleged the Authoritie of S.
Auguſtine. As, vpon occaſion, it hath benne ſaide before.
                  
                  Euen with ſutche truthe, M. Hardinge, are you woonte to blaſe the Armes of
your Religion. There is no toie ſo vaine, or ſo fabulous, but ye are hable by your
conninge to bring it lineally, either from Chriſte him ſelfe, or from his Apoſtles,
or from one, or other of the Ancient Fathers. The Biſhop of Sidon in y• Late diete
of the Empiere holden at Auguſta,
                     Anno. 1548. auouched openly that ye had your whole Canon
from the Apoſtles of Chriſte, woord by woord, euen as it is péeuiſhely written
in your Maſſe Bookes. Andreas Barbatius proueth the Antiquitie of y• 
                     Cardinalles
of Rome,
                     1. Regum 2. Polydorus De Inuentorib. Li. 4 Cap. 9. by theſe woordes written in the firſte Booke of the Kinges, Domini
ſunt Cardines Terrae: Et poſuit ſuper eos Orbem: The Corners of the Earth be the Lordes:
and vpon them he hath ſette the world, Abbate Panormitane ſaithe, Cardinalatus eſt
de Iure Diuino: Quia Papa per Sacerdotes Leuiticos intelligit Cardinales: The Cardinalſhip
ſtandeth by the Law of God:
                     
                     Extra, Qui Filij ſint Legitimi. per Venerabilē. Abb. 
                     For the Pope by the Leuitical Prieſtes vnderſtandeth
his Cardinalles.
                     
                     Mutche hereof is alleged before. 
                     Hoſius ſéemeth to ſaie, that Monkes haue theire beginning euen
from the Apoſtles, meaninge thereby, as one of your Companions there doothe,
in fauoure, I trowe, of Religion, that Chriſte him ſelfe vvas the Abbat. For thus
he ſaith,Hoſius in Confeſsione Petricouien. Cap. 88. Copus, Dialo. 2. Pag. 194. 
                     Chriſtus Dux, & exemplar vitae Monaſticae: Chriſte was the Captaine, and
ſamplar of Monkes life.
                      And yet the ſame man afterwarde, as hauinge forgotten his
former dreame, vtterly diſplaceth Chriſte, & geueth the whole honoure hereof vnto
Elias, & Elizaeus: Theſe be his woordes, Elias, & Elizaeus Duces inſtituti Benedictini:
Elias, and Elizaeus were y• Captaines of S. Benettes order,
                      y• is to ſaie, thei were
Blacke Monkes?
                      By like wiſedome ye would ſéeme to fetche your Holy Water
                     
from S. Auguſtine. This was ſommetime a ioily good waie to winne credite, ſpecially
whiles, what ſo euer ye ſaid, y• people was ready to geue you care. So y• olde
Arcades ſaide in commendation of theire Antiquitie, y• thei were a daie, or twoo
elder then the Moone. Saturnus
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . beinge in Italie, for y• he was a ſtranger, & no man
knew, frō whēce he came, therefore was called Filius Caeli, & was thought to come
frō Heauen, Romulus, & Alexander, for that thei were borne in baſtardie, & neuer
knewe theire owne Fathers, therefore to magnifie the nobilitie of theire bloude,
woulde be called the Children of the Goddes: the one of Mars, y• other of Iuppitter.
                  
                  
                     
With ſutche Truthe,Pretenſe of Antiquitie. and Fidelitie, M. Hardinge, your woonte is, to painte
out al the partes, and members of your Doctrine. For, be it neuer ſo vaine, or
childiſhe, or lately diuiſed, yet ye beare vs in hande, that your Predeceſſours receiued
the ſame, as you ſaie, of theire Biſhoppes: and they of others theire Predeceſſours
by order, vntil they reache to your Auguſtine the Monke of Rome, whom
ye haue ful woorthily made a Sainte: your Auguſtine yée ſaie receiued the ſame of
Gregorie: Gregorie of others before him: and they al, one of an other by continual
aſcente vnto S. Peter: and Peter of Chriſte: and Chriſte of God his Father.
                  
                  No Heralde coulde lightly haue ſaide more in the mater. I trowe ye woulde proue
by this Aſcente, and Deſcente, that God the Father made Holy VVater, and ſaid
Maſſe.
                  
                  In deede, as wel herein, as alſo in your emptie names of Auguſtine, Hierome,
Chryſoſtome, Ambroſe, Baſile, Cyprian, Dionyſe, &c. as I tolde you once before,
ye bringe vs onely a vaine ſhewe of painted boxes, and nothinge in them. For in
al theſe Holy Fathers, where finde you either your Priuate Maſſe: or your halfe
communion: or your Accidentes without Subiecte: or the reſte of your like Vanities,
wherewith ye haue ſo longe time deceiued the worlde? Leaue your diſſimulation:
ſet aparte your Confectures, and blinde gheaſſes: and for your credites ſake,
once ſhewe vs theſe thinges in the Ancient Holy Fathers: and ſhew them plainely,
and in déede: that wée maie thinke there is ſomme weight in your woorde.
                  But your owne Gloſe ſpeakinge of the Miniſtration of the Holy Communion,
whiche now in your Churches in a manner is wholy aboliſſhed, ſaith thus:
Hoc Antiquum eſt.
                     De Conſe. Diſt 2. per acta. In Gloſſ. Doc. Tonſtallus, De Euchariſtia. Lib. 1 Pag. 45. Anno. 1215. Eraſm. 1. Corin. 7 
                     Nam hodiè videtur eſſe relictum: This was the Olde order. For, as
it ſeemeth, nowe it is leafte. Doctoure Tonſtal ſaithe, It was no Hereſie to denie
your Tranſubſtantiation, before your late Councel of Laterane. Eraſmus, whoes
iudgement, I thinke, ye wil not refuſe, ſaith thus, In Synaxi Tranſubſtantiationēe ſer
ò definiuit Eccleſia: In the Holy Miniſtration, it was longe, ere the Churche determined
the Article of Tranſubſtantiation. Al this notwithſtandinge, M. Hardinge,
ye bluſſhe not to ſaie, that bothe theſe, and al other your fantaſies, haue benne conueighed
vnto you by moſte certaine Succeſſion, from hand to hand: from your Engliſhe
Auguſtine: from Gregorie: from the Fathers: from the Apoſtles: from
Chriſte: and from the boſome of God him ſelfe.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 3.
               But howe if the thinges, whiche theſe menne are ſo deſirous to
haue ſeeme Newe, be founde of greateſt Antiquitie? Contrariwiſe,
howe if al the thinges wel nighe, whiche they ſo greatly ſet out with
the name of Antiquitie, hauinge benne wel and throughly examined,
be at length found to be but Newe, & diuiſed of very late? Soothely
to ſaie, no man, that hath a true, and right conſideration, woulde
thinke the Iewes Lawes, and Ceremonies to be Newe in deede, for
al Hammans accuſation. For they were grauen in very Aunciente
Cables of greateſt Antiquitie. And, although many did take Chriſte
to haue ſwarued from Abraham, and the Olde Fathers, and to haue
brought in a certaine Newe Religion in his owne name, yet aunſweared
hee them directly: If ye beleeued Moſes, ye vvoulde beleeue
me alſo. For my Doctrine is not ſo Nevve, as you make it.
For Moſes, an Authoure of greateſt Antiquitie, and one, to whom
ye geue al honoure, hath ſpoken of me. S. Paule likewiſe, Though y•
                  
                  Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſte be of many counted to be but New, yet hath
it (ſaith he) a teſtimonie moſt old, both of the Lavv, and of the Prophetes.
As for our doctrine, which we maie more rightly cal Chriſtes
Catholique Doctrine, it is ſo farre of from Newe, that God, who is
aboue al moſt Auncient, and the Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte,
hath leafte the ſame vnto vs in the Goſpel, in the Prophetes, and Apoſtles
woorkes, beinge monumentes of greateſt age. So that noman
can nowe thinke our Doctrine to be Newe, onleſſe the ſame
thinke, either the Prophetes Faithe, or the Goſpel, or els Chriſte him
ſelfe to be Newe.
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 1. & 2.
               And as for theire Religion, if it be of ſo longe continuance, as they
woulde haue menne wene it is, why doo they not proue it ſo by the
examples of the Primitiue Chruche, and by the Fathers, and Councels
of Olde times? Why lieth ſo Auncient a cauſe thus longe in the
duſte, deſtitute of an Aduocate? Fire, and ſwerde they haue had alwaies
ready at hande: but as for the Olde Councels, and Fathers,
al Mum, not a worde. They did ſurely againſte al reaſon, to beginne
firſte with theſe ſo bloudy, and extreme meanes, if they coulde haue
founde other more eaſy, and gentle waies.
               And if thei truſte ſo fully to Antiquitie, and vſe no diſſimulation,
why didde Iohn Clemente a Countrie manne of oures, but fewe
yeeres paſte, in the preſence of certaine honeſte menne, and of good
credite, teare and caſte into the fire certaine leaues of Theodorete
the moſte Auncient Father, and a Greeke Biſhop, wherein he plainely
and euidently taught, that the Nature of Breade in the Communion
is not changed, or aboliſhed, or brought to nothinge? And this
didde he of pourpoſe, bicauſe he thought there was no other copie
thereof to be founde.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Touchinge the matter you haue deuiſed vpon M. Clemente, he dothe not onely denie it in word, that
euer he burnte or otherwiſe deſtroied any leafe of Theodoritus, but alſo declareth by the whole order
of his life, and by ſpecial regard and loue he beareth to the tonge, which that learned Biſhop wrote in,
that he hath euer ben, and yet is farre from the wil to burne or deſtroie any ſcrappe, ſyllable, or letter
of Greeke, mutche more certaine leaues of the learned Father Theodoritus, where any ſutche thinge
was written, as you imagin. Nay, Wel ye haue the trouthe? In very dede he ſaieth, and by ſutche waie,
as a godly and graue man maie auouche a trouth, proteſteth, that he neuer had hitherto any parte of
that booke, neither in Greeke, or in Latine in written hand.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  This reporte was made in the preſence, and hearinge of M. Peter Martyr,
and ſundrie other learned menne, of whom certaine are yet aliue. The reporter
was both a Learned man, and a graue Father, & not longe ſithence a Biſhop in
Englande: who ſaide, he was preſente, and ſawe the thinge donne with his eies.
More to ſaie hereof, I am not hable.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 3.
               Why ſaithe Albertus Pigghius, that the Ancient Father S. Auguſtine
had a wrong Opinion of Original Sinne?
                  Diſ. 27. Quidam Auguſti. De Bono Viduita. Cap. 10. And that he erred,
and lied, and vſed Falſe Logique, as touching the caſe of Matrimonie
concluded after a Vowe made: whiche Matrimonie S. Auguſtine
affirmeth to be perfite in deede, & that it maie not be vndonne againe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     M. Hardinge refuſeth S. Auguſtines Authoritie. VVe neuer tooke our ſelues bounde to any priuate opinion of what ſo euer Doctoure. For al our
faithe is Catholike, that is to ſaie, Vniuerſal, ſutche as not one Doctour aloneThis Vntruth is ouer colde, & vaine For M. Hardinge vvel knovveth, the ſubſtance of his Doctrine ſtandeth not by the Doctoures. but the Vniuerſal number
of Doctoures haue taught, and Chriſten people haue receiued. If in a ſecrete pointe of learninge S.
Auguſtine or S. Cyprian teache ſingulerly, we folowe them not. Mutche leſſe do we binde our ſelues
to mainteine, what ſo euer Albertus Pighius hath written. Our Doctrine of Original ſinne is to be
readen in the fifth ſeſsion of the late Tridentine councel.Sub Paulo. 3. If Pighius diſſent from that, he diſſenteth
from vs. But if he ſtande onely vpon ſome pointe not yet determined by the Churche, his opinion maie
be tollerated vntil the Churche define that queſtion. VVhen you note the pointe, (for there are many
pointes in that Doctrine) then we wil ſhewe you further our minde therein.
                  The mariage, whiche is made after a ſimple Vowe of chaſtitie, ſtandeth in his force, by reaſon
that there is more in mariage, then was in the bare Vowe.Promiſſe made vnto God vvithout Deliuerie A folie of al folies. For in the ſimple vowe there is nothinge
but a promiſe made to God, without any deliuerance of that thinge, whiche was promiſed. But in mariage
the man and woman by preſent acceptation of eche others bonde, do make the matter to extende
beyonde the nature of a promiſe. Therefore if likewiſe the vowe made to God were not a ſimple promiſe,
but alſo a deliueringe of the thinge promiſed: then cannot the mariage folowinge make voide
the vowe, whiche was not onely promiſed, but alſo performed.A Vovve made before the Biſhop, or Abbate, is of more force then a Vovve made before God alone. The performance is, when he that
voweth, doth profeſſe him ſelfe in the handes of his Superiour by taking the habite of ſome Religion,
or by receiuinge holy orders of the Biſhop. For in that ſolemne acte he deliuereth vp al his owne
right and power, ſo that now be is not maiſter of him ſelfe to geue his Body to any perſon in mariage,
or otherwiſe. You ſhoulde knowe by the Lawe of nature, if you woulde conſider it, that if I promiſe
a horſe to one man, and afterwarde promiſe the ſame, and deliuer him to an other: that the
ſeconde man is true Lorde of that horſe, although I haue donne iniurie to him, to whom I made the
firſte promiſe. For the promiſe with the deliuery, is more vaileable to transferre my right in the
horſe, then my promiſe alone. Euen ſo it is a greate ſinne to breake a ſimple Vowe of chaſtitie made
to God.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Howe lightly your Captaine General, Albertus Pigghius, weigheth the Authoritie
of S. Auguſtine, it maie appeare by his woordes. For thus he writeth,
Quòd non ſolùm incerta,Albert. Pigghi. in 1. Controuer. De peccato Originis. ſed etiam falſa ſit Auguſtini Sententia, ita mihi demōſtrari poſſe
videtur: Thus me thinketh, I am hable to proue, that S. Auguſtines Iudgemente herein is not
onely vncertaine, but alſo Falſe. And againe afterwarde in the Concluſion,
                      Quòd
Auguſtini Sententia non ſolùm incerta, ſed etiàm certo' Falſa ſit, ſatis mihi demonſtratum
videtur: That S. Auguſtines Judgemente is, not onely vncertaine, but alſo certainely
Falſe,
                     Alber. Pigghius in eadem Controuerſia. 
                     mee thinketh I haue ſufficiently proued. And againe,
                      Non multùm me mouet
Auguſtini Sententia: Mihi non placet Auguſtini ea de re Definitio, & Sentētia: S. Auguſtines
Judgement dooth not greatly moue me: I like not S. Auguſtines Determination and
Judgemente, touchinge this mater. And againe,
                      Ego omnium, non ſolùm Aduerſariorum,
ſed etiam Catholicorum receptas in Scholis redarguo Sententias: I
doo reproue the Iudgementes,
                     Ruard. Tapper. Lirienſis, Epiſcopus Luſitanus. 
                     not onely of our Aduerſaries, but alſo of the Catholiques allowed
in the Schooles. For theſe cauſes
                      Ruardus Tapper of Louaine, and Lirienſis

                     of Portugale haue namely written againſte Pigghius.Vovve Simple & Solemne. 
                     And for as mutche, as
yee are deſirous to haue the pointe noted, wherein Pigghius ſo mutche miſliketh
S. Auguſtines iudgemente, Petrus à Soto your owne Doctoure noteth it thus,
Pigghius de hoc malè audit,Petrus à Soto, De Natura, & Gratia. quaſi Peccata in nobis Originalia omnin ò inficietur:
Pigghius is il reported of, as a man, that vtterly denieth Original Sinne. Thus
your Doctoures weigh S. Auguſtines Authoritie, lighter, or heauier, as thei liſte.
                  
                  
                     The mater of Marriage after a Vovve is blowen awaie with a ſéely Diſtinction
of a Vovve Simple, and a Vovve Double, whiche yée commonly cal a Solemne
Vovve: and al the ſame is ſubſtantially, & clearely proued by the promiſe,
and deliuerie of a Horſe. Surely, M. Hardinge, a very ſimple Creature, and ſommewhat
inferioure to a Horſe, would hardely be tied to ſutche Diſtinctions. For the
better cleeringe hereof, that ye cal a Simple Vovve, y• is made before God alone:
that Double, or Solemne, that is made in the preſence of the Biſhop, or Abbate.
Nowe, it is plainely confeſſed by your owne Doctours, that your Simple Vovve,
be it neuer ſo Simple, yet bindeth you as ſtreitely before God, as the Double.
                  
                     For Pope Coeleſtinus ſaithe,
                     Extra, Qui Clerici & vouētes. Rurſus. Votum Simplex apud Deum non minùs ligat,
quàm solenne: The Simple Vovve before God bindeth no leſſe, then the Solemne.
And touching the Promiſſe, and Deliuerie of your Horſe, Iohannes Scotus ſaith,
Alia ratio eſt,Scotus in 4. Senten. Diſt. 38. qu. 1. quòd Vouens Solenniter mittit in poſseſsionem illum, cuì Vouet Solenniter:
Vouens autem Priuatè, non: ſed quaſi promittit. Sed haec ratio valet minùs,
quàm ſecunda. Quia omnia, quae intrinſeca ſunt Voto, vt Votum reſpicit actum voluntatis,
per quem obligat ſe vouendo, & transfert Dominium ſuum in alterum, omnia, inquam,
iſta ſunt aequalia hinc inde. Igitur non magis datio hîc, quàm ibi: nec
promiſsio ibi, quàm hîc: An other reaſon, that they vſe, is this: That he, that maketh
a Solemne Vovve, putteth him, to whom he ſo voweth, in poſſeſſion. But ſo doothe
not he, that maketh a Simple Vovve: but onely geueth his promiſſe. This Reaſon is
woorſe, and weaker, then the Seconde. For al thinges, that be of the Subſtance of the
Vovve, (as a Vowe concerneth the Acte of the Minde, whereby the Minde bindeth it ſelfe
by Vowinge, and tranſpoſeth the ownerſhip of it ſelfe vnto an other) al theſe thinges, I
ſaie, are of like vveight, and equal of either ſide. Therefore there is no more
perfourmāce of promiſſe in the solemne Vovve, then in the Simple: nor more
promiſe in the Simple Vovve, then in the Solemne. Thus you ſée, M. Hardinge,
with greate trauaile, and mutche a doo, ye haue founde a difference without
difference.
                     Caietan. in Thom. Secund. Secundae quaſt. 88. Arti. 7. Cardinal Caietan ſaithe, Eiuſdem ſpeciei eſt Tranſgreſsio Voti Solennis,
& simplicis: Et differunt ſolùm ſecundum magis graue, & minùs graue: The
breakinge of a Vovve Simple, and a Vovve Solemne, is of one kinde, or Nature: And
the difference is onely in more greeuous, and leſſe greeuous. Therefore
                      Thomas
of Aquine him ſelfe, the firſte Father, as it appeareth, of this Diſtinction, ſaithe
thus:
                     Thomas in Secund. Secundae, quaeſt. 88. Art. 11. Auguſt. De Bono viduitatis Ca. 10. Videtur, quòd Eccleſia poſsit diſpenſare in Voto Continentiae Solemnizato
per ſuſceptionem Sacri Ordinis: It ſeemeth, that the Churche maie diſpenſe with
a Vowe of Chaſtitie Solemnized by the receiuinge of Holy Orders.
                  
                  And this is it, that S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Qui dicunt, talium Nuptias, non eſſe
Nuptias, ſed potiùs Adulteria, mihi non videntur ſatis acutè, ac diligenter conſiderare,
quid dicant: They that ſaie, the Marriage of ſutche Menne, or Weemen
                      (as haue Vowed
Chaſtitie) is no Marriage at al, but rather Aduouterie, ſeeme vnto me not to conſider diſcreetely,
or aduiſedly, what they ſaie. Thus therefore, M. Hardinge, notwithſtandinge
your Simple, or Double Vovve, S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto you, yee ſpeake
Vnaduiſedly, and Vndiſcretely, and vnderſtande not, what you ſaie. But of this
whole mater, wée haue entreated before more at large.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 4.
               Alſo, when they did of late put in Printe the Auncient Father
Origens woorke vpon the Goſpel of S. Iohn,
                  Liber hodie extat & circumfertur mutilus. why leaſte they quite
out the whole ſixthe Chaptre, wherein it is likely, yea rather of very
ſuertie, that the ſaide Origene had written many thinges concerninge
the Sacramente of the Holy Communion, contrarie to
theſe mennes mindes, and woulde rather put foorthe that Booke
mangled, then ful and perfite: for feare it ſhoulde reproue them and
their parteners of their erroure. Cal ye this truſtinge to Antiquitie,
when ye rente in pieces, keepe backe, maime, and burne the Auncient
Fathers?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  A wiſe man affirmeth nomore then he knoweth: a good man nomore then ſtandeth with Charitie:
a learned mā, in matters of weight, nomore then he can auouche by euidentHereby M. Hardinge ſaketh mutche the credite of his ovvne Learninge. reaſons, ‡ ſure proufes, or
‡ ſufficient Auctorities. This Defender charginge the Catholikes with manglinge of Origen vpon
S. Iohns Goſpell, as though of pourpoſe they had lefte out the ſixth Chaptre, whiche he imagineth to
conteine their Sacramentary doctrine contrary to the Catholike Faithe: for aſmuche as he is vncertaine
hereof, and thereby noteth a greate vntruthe in the ſetters foorthe of that woorke, neither by any
meanes is able to proue the ſame: he ſheweth himſelfe a foole, aſlaunderer, and an vnlearned man.
VVee are like I perceiue, to heare of the faultes they knowe by vs, ſithe that they burthen vs with
that, that they knowe not, and for the ſame can pretende but a ſlender coniecture. But Syr defender,
why complaine you not of the leauinge out of other Chapters, and partes of that woorke, as well as
of the ſixth Chapter?In prolog. 39. Hom. Origenis i
                           •
                         Lucam. For whereas Origen wrote vpon Iohn nine and thirty tomes, as S. Hierome
witneſſeth: the Latine tranſlation Printed in Venis hath but. 32 lackinge the ſeuen laſte tomes. Neither
be all they whole and perfite, but many of them maymed and mangled.
                  VVhat maner a Doctrine of the Bleſſed Sacramente he hath vttered vpon the ſixthe Chapter of
Iohn, and how Catholike he was in that pointe, it appeareth by diuerſe his other woorkes, that you
haue no cauſe to belie him in that you neuer ſawe. For the truthe of Chriſtes Body in the Sacrament,
his teſtimonies be euident.Hom. 13. In Exod. For credites ſake, here will I recite a couple. In one place he ſaithe thus:
Ye knowe whiche haue benne woonte to be preſent at the Diuine Myſteries, how that when ye take
the Body of our Lorde, ye keepe it with all wareneſſe and reuerence, that no whit thereof fall downe,
that nothinge of the conſecrated gifte miſcary. For ye beleue your ſelues to be gilty, and right well
doo ye ſo beleeue, if by negligence ought fall downe. In an other place, writinge vpon the Centurions
woordes ſpoken to Chriſte,Hom. 5. in diuerſo
                           •
                         Euangelij locos. Matth. 8. VVhen (ſaithe he) thou takeſt that Holy meate, and that vncorrupte
deintie, when thou enioieſt that Breadde and Cuppe of Life, thou Eateſt and Drinkeſt the
Body, and Bloudde of our Lorde, then our Lorde entreth vnder they roofe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée laie not in the manglinge of this Anciente Father, as mater of ſufficient
euidence, but onely as a greate coniecture of your Corruption, referringe the
Iudgemente thereof vnto the Reader. Certainely, M. Hardinge, wee haue good
cauſe many waies, to doubte your dealinge: but in nothinge more, then in the
handlinge of the Fathers.Concil. Aphrican. Cap. 105. Ye remember, how wickedly Pope Zoſimus, the better
to coloure his Ambition, longe ſithence corrupted the Nicene Councel. Neither
can ye forgeate, what trifles, and fabulous Vanities yee haue lately ſente vs
abroade vnder the olde ſmooky names of Abdias, Leontius, Amphilochius, Hippolytus,
and Clemens, whom yée ſo ſolemnely cal the Apoſtles Felovve. In

theſe vncleanely conueiances, to any wiſe man there can appeare no ſimple meaninge.
Notwithſtandinge ye thought it good policie, to deceiue the worlde by
any ſhifte, or ſhadowe of Anciente Fathers.
                  What Origen thought of the Woordes of Chriſte in the ſixth Chapter of S.
Iohn,
                     Origen. in Leuiticum, Hom. 7. it is eaſy to coniecture, by that he hath written otherwheres. Vpon the
Leuiticus he writeth thus, Eſt & in Euangelio Litera, quae occidit: Si enim ſecundum
Literam ſequaris illud, quod dictum eſt, Niſi Comederitis Carnem
Filij Hominis &c, ea Litera occidit: Euen in the Goſpel there is a Letter, that killeth:
For where as Chriſte ſaithe, Onleſſe ye eate the Fleaſhe of the Sonne of Man &c, if
ye take the ſame accordinge to the Letter, that Letter killeth.
                      This was Origens iudgemente
of the Sacramente: and the ſame in thoſe daies was counted Catholique.
                  
                     Ye replie:
                     Origen. in Exodum, Homi. 13. 
                     Origen ſaithe,
                      When ye take the Body of our Lorde, yee keepe it with al
warineſſe, and reuerence, that no parte thereof fal downe. And againe, When thou takeſt
that Holy meate,Origen. in Diuerſos Euangelij locos, Homi. 5. then our Lorde entreth vnder thy roofe. Bothe theſe places in my Former
Replie are fully anſweared. But what Catholique Doctrine, M. Hardinge,
can ye pike out of theſe woordes? What Tranſubſtantiation? What Real Preſence?
What Accidentes vvithout Subiecte? Ye wil ſaie, Origen calleth the
Sacramente Chriſtes Body. So doothe Chriſte him ſelfe: ſo doothe Paule: ſo doo
al the Anciente Fathers: bicauſe it is the sacramente of Chriſtes Body. Your
owne Gloſe ſaithe,
                     De Conſecra. Diſt. 2. Hoc eſt. 
                     as it hath benne often alleged, Vocatur Corpus Chriſti, id eſt,
Significat Corpus Chriſti:
                      It is called the Body of Chriſte, that is to ſaie, it Signifieth the
Body of Chriſte. But the people, yée ſaie, receiued it warily, and with reuerence.
So doo they nowe, euen in thoſe Churches, that you moſte miſlike withal.
                  
                  He ſaithe further, When thou receiueſt that Holy Meate, then our Lorde entreth
vnder thy roofe. And what greate mater thinke you to winne hereby? Euen in
the ſame place Origen ſaith, Intrat etiam nunc Dominus ſub rectum credentium duplici
Figura, vel more: Euen nowe the Lorde entreth vnder the roufe of the Faitheful after
twoo manners, or ſortes. For, when the Holy, and Godly Biſhoppes enter into your Houſe,
euen then through them our Lorde entreth.
                      Wil ye conclude hereof, that the Biſhop
is Tranſubſtantiate into Chriſte? Or that Chriſte is Really, and Subſtantially
dwellinge in him? This is an Allegorie, M. Hardinge, or a Myſtical kinde of
Speache, wherein, as you knowe, that Learned Father was mutche delited. The
Roofe, that he meaneth, is not Material, but Spiritual: that is to ſaie, not the Body
of Man, but the Soule: Like as alſo the Comminge, or Entringe of Chriſte into
the ſame is not Bodily, but onely Spiritual.
                  
                     So S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſtin. Quaeſtionum Euangeli. Li. 2. Ca. 33. Auguſt. De Tempore, Sermo. 74. Praedicant Chriſtum, & cum annuntiando venire faciunt
in exhauſta fame viſcera Filij eſurientis: They Preache Chriſte, and by Preachinge, cauſe
him to comme into the Bowelles of the hungry childe, waſted with Famine. Likewiſe againe
he ſaithe of the Centurion,
                      Tecto non recipiebat Chriſtum: Corde recipiebat:
quanto humilior, tanto capacior, tanto plenior: He receiued not Chriſte into his houſe:
he receiued him into his Harte: The more humble, the more roome had he to receiue
him,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Pſalm. 41. 
                     and the fuller he was. So ſaithe
                      Chryſoſtome, Qui vocant Dauid cum Cythara,
intus Chriſtum per ipſum vocant: They that cal in Dauid with his Harpe, by meane
of him cal in Chriſte.
                     Chryſoſtom. in Matth. Hom. 46. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Chriſtus aut ſuſcipitur, aut occiditur apud
nos. Si enim credimus verbis eius, ſuſcipimus eum, & generamus in nobis: Chriſte
either is receiued, or ſlaine within vs. For if wee beleeue his VVoorde, wee receiue him, and
begeate him within vs.
                     Hieronym. ad Paulam De obitu Bleſillae. 
                     In ſutche ſorte S. Hierome writeth vnto Paula, Ad talem
clemens ingreditur Ieſus, & dicit, Quid ploras? Non eſt mortua puella: ſed dormit:
Into ſutche a one Ieſus entreth milde, and gracious, and ſaithe, Why weepeſt thou? Thy
dameſel is not Deade: but lieth aſleepe.
                  
                  This manner of ſpeache, as I ſaide before, is Spiritual, or Myſtical: and maie

not be taken accordinge to the outwarde ſounde of the Letter.
                     Images painted in churches. So ſaithe S. Hierome,
Secundum Myſticos intellectus, quotidiè Ieſus ingreditur in Templum Patris:
Accordinge to the Myſtical vnderſtandinge,
                     
                     Hieronym. in Matth. li. 3. ca. 21. Origen. in Matth. Tracta. 35. 
                     Chriſte entreth dayly into the Temple of his
Father. In this ſenſe Origen ſaithe, Chriſte entreth into our Houſe. Whiche
phraſe, writinge vpon S. Mathevve, he expreſſeth in plainer manner: Tradunt,
& eijciunt ab anima ſua Saluatorem, & Verbum Veritatis, quod erat in eis: They betraie,
and throwe foorth our Saueour from out of their Soulet
                      (as doo al Apoſtates, and
Renegates, that denie the knowen Truthe of God) and they betraie the VVoorde
of Truthe, that was within them.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 1. & 2.
               It is a worlde to ſee, how welfauouredly, and how towardly,
touching Religion, theſe men agree with the Fathers, of whom they
vſe to vaunte, they be their owne good.
               The Olde Councel Eliberine made a Decree, that nothinge,
that is honoured of the people, ſhould be painted in the Churches.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The woordes of that prouincial Councel be theſe: It is thought good, that paintinges be not in
the Chruche:Eliber. Cō
                        cil. Ca. 36. that what is woorſhipped or Adored, it be not painted on Walles. This expreſſe prohition
of paintinge, and that nought be painted in Churche Walles, that is woorſhipped or Adored,
maie ſeeme bothe to preſuppoſe a former vſe of ſuche paintinges, and alſo to allowe the other ſorte
of images. VVhether it doo or no,It forceth not greatly. it forceth not greatly. The ſeuenth general Councell aſſembled at
Nice againſt the Imagebreakers, hath not onely allowed theDeuoute vſe of Images. Deuoute vſe of Images cōmonly vſed in
the Churches of Chriſten people: but alſo condēned al thoſe that throwe them downe, and maineteine
y• contrary opiniō. Now we are taught that a prouinciall Councell ought to geue place to a Generall.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The paintinge of Images in Churche walles was forebidden in the Councel
holden at Eliberis, or Granado in Spaine: Ergo, ſaie you, ſutche Images were vſed
before that Councel. Al this maie wel be graunted without preiudice. But yée
ſée plainely, they were forebidden in that Councel. One ſaithe, Ex malis moribus
bonae Leges ortae ſunt: Of il manners came good Lawes.
                      Menne vſed, yée ſaie, before y•
time to painte Images in Churche walles. But this vſe was naught. And therefore
the Councel Decreed againſt it: & that, as it maie be geathered by the woordes,
for feare of Idolatrie.
                  
                  But you ſaie, the Seconde General Nicene Councel allowed wel the deuoute
vſe of Images. And a General Councel ought to take place before a Prouincial:
For that in a General Councel there are many Biſhoppes: in a Prouincial, there
are but fewe. Thus, I ſée, ye weigh your Religion, not by Truthe, but by Companie.
How be it, this Rule is very looſe, & maie ſoone deceiue you.
                  Good Chriſtian Reader, let no man beguile thée by the coloure of Councelles.
Reade this Seconde Nicene Councel throughout, if yu be hable. Thou wilt ſaie,
there was neuer any Aſſemblie of Chriſtian Biſhoppes ſo vaine, ſo péeuiſhe, ſo
wicked, ſo blaſphemous, ſo vnwoorthy in al reſpectes to be called a Councel. The
bleſſed Biſhoppes there agreed togeather with one conſente, that Images in
Churches are not onely to be allowed, but alſo deuoutely, and reuerently to be honoured,
and that with the ſame Honoure, that is dewe to God him ſelfe. One of
them ſaithe, Venerandas Imagines recipio, & Adoro, & id perpetuò docebo: I receiue,
and woorſhip the Reuerende Images:
                     
                     Concil. Nicenum 2. Actione. 2. 
                     and this wil I teache, while I liue. An other
ſaith, Sacras Imagines perfectè Adoro: qui verò ſecùs conſitentur, eos anathematizo:

                        I doo perfitely Adoure the Holy Images:
                     Adouring of Images. 
                     and I accurſe al them, that holde the contrarie.
                  
                  
                     An other ſaithe,
                     Concil. Nicenum 2. Actio. 4. Non ſant duae Adorationes, ſed vna, Ipſius Imaginis, &
primi Exemplaris, cuius eſt Imago: There be not twoo kindes of Adoration, but one,
dewe as wel to the Image, as to the Paterne of the Image. This Holy Councel, ye
ſaie, decréed againſte Imagebreakers. But the Counſel of God decréeth againſte
Image vvoorſhippers, and Imagemakers.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Conſenſu Euangel. Lib. 1. Cap. 10. 
                     Sic omnino errare meruerunt, qui Chriſtum, & Apoſtolos eius,
non in Sanctis Codicibus, ſed in Pictis Parietibus quaeſierunt. Nec mirum ſi à Pingentibus
Fingentes decepti ſunt: So were they woorthy to be deceiued, that ſought, Chriſte,
and his Apoſtles, not in the Bookes of Holy Scripture, but in Painted Walles. Neither maie
wee marueile, if Painers by Painters were deceiued.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 3.
               The Olde Father Epiphanius ſaith,Epiphan. in Epiſtol. ad Iohan. Epiſcop. Hieroſolymitan. It is an horrible wickedneſſe,
and a Sinne not to be ſuffered, for any man, to ſet vp any Picture in
the Churche of the Chriſtians, yea, though it were the Picture of
Chriſte him ſelfe. Yet theſe menne ſtore al theire Temples, and eche
corner of them with painted, and carued Images, as though without
them, Religion were nothinge woorthe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  To that ye pretende to allege out of Epiphanius, we ſaie, firſt, that although he were of the minde
you make him to be of,Epiphanius but one man. and ſaide, as you reporte of him, yet is he but one man, whoſe ſingular opinion is
not to be preferred before theVntruthe. For the Anciente Fathers make no mention of Images. Iudgemēt of al other ſo many excellent Fathers, and the determination
of the whole Churche.Vntruthe For vvee report him truely, as ſhal appeare. Nowe in deede you miſreporte Epiphanius. For he ſaithe not ſo, as your write.
He calleth not the hauing of the Image of Chriſte, of any Saincte in the Churche an horrible wickedneſſe,
or a ſinne not to be ſuffered: he hath no ſutch wordes.
                  Secondly, what if we ſaie, this place maketh nothinge at al againſte the vſe of Images, and that
Vntruthe For his vvoordes be plaine, Imaginem, quaſi Chriſti, aut Sancti cuiuſdam. he ſpeaketh neuer a woorde againſte the Image of Chriſte, or his Sainctes in the Churche, but onely
againſte one particular Image, whiche he founde hanginge at a Churche dore in a village of Paleſtine
called Anablatha? And ſeing heA childiſhe, and a vaine ſhifte. For Epiphanius ſpeaketh directly againſt al images. ſpeaketh not generally againſte al Images, but againſt ſutche as
that was, which there he noteth by this ſpecial word, Iſtiuſmodi Vela, vailes of this ſorte: he geueth
vs to vnderſtande that he miſliked ſome qualitie or circumſtance of that one Image, and not reproued
theVntruthe. For Images then vvere not commonly receiued in the Churche. common and receiued cuſtome of the Churche in hauing Images in due order. Now, what
circumſtance that was, it dependeth of ſo many particularities. whiche might happen either on the
Images parte, as it is moſte like, or on the peoples parte there inhabitant, and is ſo litle declared by Epiphanius
in that place, that neither we can ſaie any thinge determinately thereof, nor ye ſhould bring
ſutche an obſcure, and vncertaine matter to the disproufe of a veritie alwaies ſo wel in the Churche
acknowledged and practiſed.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  O, how many, and howe prety ſhiftes here be diuiſed, if any woulde healpe, to
ſerue the pourpoſe? One of the late Louanian Cleregie, for that he ſawe, theſe
woordes were cleare, and might not be auoided by any Gloſe, therefore be thought
it the wiſeſt waie, Firſte to bringe the Authoritie,Copus, Dialog. 5. Pag. 692. Copus, Pag. 698. and credite hereof in queſtion,
and to ſaie,2. that Epiphanius neuer wrote any ſutche Epiſtle: Nexte he ſaith, The
ſame Epiſtle was neuer tranſlated by S. Hierome. But, for as mutche as he
ſawe, that his folie herein was open, and eaſy to be controlled, Thirdely he ſaithe,

that the Image,
                     Epiphanius rente the Image &c. that Epiphanius rente in ſunder,3. was not the Image, either of
Chriſte, or of any Chriſtian Saincte, but the Heathen Image of Iuppiter, or
Hercules,
                     4. or ſomma other Idole, he knoweth not what. Fourthly he ſaithe,
The ſaide Holy Father Epiphanius was an Heretique,
                     Copus, Pag. 702. one of thoſe, that were
called Anthropomorphitae,
                     Copus, Pag. 703. whoſe erroure was, That God in his Diuinitie had
the whole ſhape, and proportion of a Man. How be it, this folie far paſſeth al the
reſte. For it behoued thoſe Heretiques moſte of al others, for defenſe of their erroure,
to maineteine Images. And yet it ſeemeth a very vnciuile parte, to condemne
ſo Reuerende, & ſo Godly a Father of ſo groſſe an Hereſie, without prouſe:
and ſpecially ſutche a Father, as hath ſo learnedly written againſte al Hereſies.
Fifthly he ſaithe,Copus. Pag. 703. euen as M. Hardinge here ſaithe,5. 
                     Epiphanius was but a man,
& one man, and his Iudgemente ſingulare, and therefore the leſſe to be eſtéemed.
Laſte of al,Copus, Pag. 706. 707. he ſaithe,6. The ſame Holy Father Epiphanius was a Ievve: and beinge
a Chriſtian, and a Reuerende Father, and a Chriſtian Biſhop, yet notwithſtandinge
maineteined the Religion of the Iewes, and therefore rente in ſunder
the Image of Chriſte,
                     Simeon Metaphraſtes. in deſpite of Chriſte. And for proufe hereof, he allegeth Simeon
Metaphraſtes, a Doctoure as wiſe as him ſelfe.
                  M. Hardinge, for that he imagined, theſe ſhiftes were very vnſauery, & woulde
hardly ſerue, therefore hath diuiſed to conueigh him ſelfe out ſomme other waie.
Firſte he ſaithe, Wée falſiſte this Holy Father, and allege his woordes otherwiſe,
then they be. Secondely he ſaithe, It was not the Image of Chriſte, that Epiphanius
found painted in the Vele, but ſomme other prety thing, he knoweth not
what. Laſtely he ſaithe, Epiphaniusr reproueth not generally al ſutche Veles, ſo
painted, but onely that one Vele, that he founde.
                  
                     For trial hereof,
                     Epiphanius ad Iohan. Hieroſolymitan. Apud Hierony. Tom. 2. 
                     I referre mée ſelf to ye Original. The woordes thereof be theſe:
Inueni ibi velum pendens in foribus eiuſdem Eccleſiae tinctum, atque depictum, &
habens Imaginem, quaſi Chriſti, aut Sācti cuiuſdam. Non enim ſatis memini, cuius
Imago fuerit. Cùm ergo hoc vidiſſem in Eccleſia Chriſti, contra Authoritatem Scripturarum,
Hominis pendere Imaginem, ſcidi illud: & magis dedi conſilium Cuſtodibus
eiuſdem loci, vt pauperem mortuum eo obuoluerent, & efferrent &c. Quaeſo, vt
iubeas Presbyteros eiudem loci praecipere, in Eccleſia Chriſti iſtiuſmodi Vela, quae
contra Religionem noſtram veniunt, non appendi: Decet enim honeſtatem tuam
hanc magis habere ſollicitudinem, vt crupuloſitatem tollat, quae indigna eſt Eccleſia
Chriſti, & populis, qui tibi crediti ſunt: I founde there a Vele hanginge at the entrie
of the Churche, ſtained, and painted, and hauinge the Image, as it were, of Chriſte,
or of ſomme Saincte. For, whoſe Picture it was in deede, I doo not remember. Therefore,
when I ſawe the Image of a man to hange in the Churche of Chriſte, contrarie
to the commaundemente of the Scriptures, I tare it in ſunder: and gaue
counſel to the Wardens of that Churche, that they ſhoulde winde, and burie ſomme poore
body in it &c. I beſeeche you, charge the Prieſtes of that place, that they commaunde,
that ſutche Veles, as be contrarie to our Religion, be no more hanged vp in the Churche
of Chriſte. It behooueth your reuerence to haue care hereof, that this Superſtition, vnmeete
for the Churche of Chriſte, and vnmeete for the people to thee committed, be
remoued. Nowe, iudge you, M. Hardinge, wherein wée haue falſified this
Learned Fathers woordes. You ſaie, He ſpeaketh not one woorde againſte the
                     
Image of Chriſte, or his Sainctes. I beſéeche you then, againſte what other
Image ſpeaketh he?
                     Habens Imaginem, quaſi Chriſti, vel Sancti cuiuſdam. Epiphanius ſaithe plainely, It had the Image, as it vvere, of
Chriſte, or of ſomme Saincte: You ſaie, He founde faulte with that Vele onely, &
not with any other. Once againe, I beſéeche you, telle vs, what had the Image
of Chriſte, or of his Sainctes offended Epiphanius, more then other Images? If
the Image of Chriſte maie not be ſuffered in the Churche of Chriſte, what Image
then maie be ſuffered? What cauſe of difference can you imagine, that any other

Veles ſhould be allowed rather,
                     Images in churches. 
                     then this? Your anſweare is this, VVee cannot ſaie
any thinge determinately thereof. Whereby it appereth, ye woulde faine ſaie ſomewhat,
if ye wiſte what. Yet muſte wée be ouerruled by al and euery your determinations,
yea, although you your ſelfe confeſſe, ye can determinately determine
nothinge.
                  
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge, the Anciente Fathers of the Churche haue longe ſithence
determinately,
                     Lactant. Lib. 2. Ca. 19. 
                     and plainely iudged againſte you. Lactantius ſaithe in plaine
woordes: Non eſt dubium, quin Religio nulla ſit, vbicunque Simulachrum eſt:
                     
Out of al doubte, there is no Religion, where ſo euer there is an Image. Tertullian
ſaithe,
                     
                     Tertullian. De Idololatria. 
                     Idolum tam fieri, quàm coli Deus prohibet. Quanto' praecedit, vt fiat, quod
coli poſsit, tantò prius eſt, ne fiat, ſi coli non licet. Facio, ait quidam, ſed non colo:
quaſi ob aliquam cauſam colere non audeat, niſi ob quam & facere non debeat: Scilicet,
ob Dei offenſam vtrobi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        . Imò tu colis, qui facis vt coli poſsit: God hath forebidden
an Image, or an Idole, as wel to be made, as to be woorſhipped. As farre as makinge
goeth before woorſhippinge, ſo far is it before, that the thinge be not made, that maie
not be woorſhipped. Somme man wil ſaie, I make it: but I woorſhip it not: As though he
durſte not to woorſhip it for any other cauſe, but onely for the ſame cauſe, for whiche he
ought not to make it. I meane bothe waies for Goddes diſpleaſure. Nay rather, thou woorſhippeſt
the Image, that geueſt the cauſe, for others to woorſhip it. Therefore S. Auguſtine,
ſpeakinge of the Image of God the Father,
                     
                     Auguſt. De Fide & Symbolo. Ca. 7. 
                     ſaithe thus, Tale ſimulachrum
Deo fingere, nefarium eſt:
                      To diuiſe ſutche an Image for God, it is abominable.
                  Theodorus the Biſhop of Ancyra ſaithe, Sanctorum Imagines, & Species
ex Materialibus coloribus formati minimè decorum puramus.Citatur in Concil. Nicen. 2. Action. 6. Manifeſtum enim eſt,
quòd vana ſit huiuſmodi cogitatio, & Diabolicae deceptionis inuentum:
Wee thinke it not conueniente, to Painte the Images of Sainctes with Material, or Earthly
colours. For it is euident, that this is a vaine Imagination, and the procuremente of the
deceitefulneſſe of the Diuel.
                  
                  
                     To like yourpoſe writeth Epiphanius, Eſtote memores, dilecti Filij, ne in Eccleſias
Imagines inferatis, neque in Sanctorum Coemiterijs eas ſtatuatis. Sed perpetuò
circumferte Deum in cordibus veſtris. Quin etiam neque in domo communi tolerentur.
Non enim fas eſt, Chriſtianum per oculos ſuſpenſum teneri, ſed per occupationem
mentis:
                      My deere Children, be yee mindeful, that ye bringe no Images into the
Churches, and that yee erecte vp none at the burialles of the Sainctes. But euermore carrie
God in your Hartes. Nay, ſuffer not Images to be, no not in your priuate Houſes. For it is
not lawful, to leade a Chriſtian man by his eies, but rather by the ſtudie, or exerciſe of his minde.
                  
                     For this cauſe Epiphanius ſaithe, The Superſtition of Images is vnfitte
for the Churche of Chriſte.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 4.
               The olde Fathers Origene,
                  Origen. in Leui. Ca. 16. & Chryſoſtome exhorte the People
to reade the Scriptures,
                  Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 2. Idem in Iohā. 31. to buye them Bookes, to reaſon at home
bitwixte them ſelues of Diuine maters: VViues with their Huſbandes,
& Parentes with their Children: Theſe menne condemne
the Scriptures, as deade Elementes, and, aſmutche as euer they
maie, barre the People from them.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     Vntruthe. For the vvhole hereof is true: and no parte falſe. Partely it is true, partely falſe, that you ſaie. Origen exhorteth all, to reſorte to the
Churches in the Holy daies,Homil 9. in Leuit. Cap. 16. and there to heare the woordes of God: and thereof afterwarde to thinke
earneſtly, and to meditate on the Lawe of God, and to exerciſe their mindes in it daie and night, in the
waie, in their houſe, in their bedde, and when they riſe. This holde we withall, and be deſirous, the

                     Ovaine excuſe. Many of your people neuer heare Sermon in al there liues. people beare awaie that the true and Godly Preachers teache them in the Churche,Readinge of the Scriptures and that they
thinke of it, and put it in dayly practiſe of life. For els to what ſerueth all our Preachinge?
                  Chryſoſtome Hom. 2. in Math. ſpeaketh againſt them, whiche contemned the Scriptures, and ſaide,
they were no Monkes, but had wiues and Children, and care of houſeholde. As though it perteined
not to maried men to reade any parte thereof, but to Monkes onely.
                  If in our time the people mighte be induced to reade the Holy Scriptures, with ſuche mindes, for
ſuche cauſes, to ſuche intents and purpoſes onely, as Chryſoſtome requireth: God forbid, we ſhoulde by
any meanes ſtaie them therefrom.M. Hardinges fauourable opinion of the people. But conſideringe the maner of our time, and callinge to due examination
the curioſitie, the temeritie, the vnreuerence, the contempte of all holy thinges, that now all
men may eſpie in the people: if we thinke it not good they be admitted to the readinge of the Scriptures
freely and without any limitation, how ſo euer you and your fellowes iudge of vs, we doubt
not of the accompt, we haue to make of that our meaninge before our Lordes dredfull ſeate of iudgemente.
Now to conclude, we tell you, that you haue miſreported bothe Chryſoſtome, and ſpecially Origen.
For how ſo euer they ſpeake of the readinge, and meditation of the Scriptures, for amendement
of life, verely in the places by you quoted,Manifeſte vntruthe. Reade the Anſvveare. they exhorte not the people to reaſon, and diſpute
of diuine matters amonge them ſelues, ſpecially the huſbandes with their wiues, the parentes with
their children, as you ſaie they doo.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     For as mutche as ye ſaie, parte hereof is true, and parte falſe, I truſte, ye wil
géeue us leaue fréely to vſe the Truthe, vntil ye ſhal finde your ſelfe better hable
to proue the Falſhedde. It ſéemeth not greatly to miſlike you, that the people haue
ſomme little libertie, to reade ſomme ſutche parte of the Scriptures, as you maie
beſte ſpare them, for the orderinge of their liues. Whereby it appeareth, that for
quietinge of their Conſciences in maters of Religion, and cauſes of Truthe, yée
thinke it beſte, they reade nothinge. And this, ye ſaie, ye are hable to anſweare before the
dreadful seate of Goddes Iudgemente. Touchinge the Truthe hereof, to ſaie ſo mutche,
as might be ſaide, it woulde require greate waſte of time. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Si deſit,Auguſt. De Ciuita. Li. 11. Ca. 2. Hieronym. ad Demetriad. De Virginita tuenda. aut ignoretur, quà eundum fit, quid prodeſt noſse, quò eundum fit? If ye haue
not, or know not, what waie to goe,
                     Auguſt. De Tempore, Sermo. 55. 
                     what ſhal it profite you to knowe, whither to goe?
S.
                      Hierome ſaithe, Vt maius eſt, voluntatem Domini facere, quàm noſse, ita prius
eſt noſse, quàm facere. Illud Merito praecedit: Hoc ordine: As it is more, to doo
the wil of our Lorde, then to knowe it: ſo the Knowlege of the ſame goeth before the Dooinge.
In goodneſſe, Dooinge goeth before: in order, Knowinge. Againe S.
                      Auguſtine
ſaithe, Si Scripturas Diuinas aut non legimus ipſi, aut legentes alios non libenter audimus,
ipſa nobis medicamenta conuertuntur in vulnera: & inde habebimus
Iudicium, vnde potuimus habere remedium: If we either reade not the Scriptures
our ſelues, or be not deſirous to heare others reade them, then are our Medicines turned
into vvoundes: and then, vvhere vvee mighte haue had remedie, vvee ſhal
haue Iudgemente. Sutche ſaieinges are common, and ordinarie in S. Chryſoſtome.
Thus he ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Geneſim, Hom. 6. Librum Diuinum accipiat aliquis in manum: conuocatis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
proxìmìs, per Diuina eloquia riget & ſuam mentem, & conuenientium: vt ſic
Diabolicas inſidias effugere valeamus: Let one of you take in hande the Holy Booke:
and let him cal his Neighbours aboute him: and by the Heauenly vvoordes let him water,
and refreaſhe bothe theire mindes,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Geneſ. Homil. 10. 
                     and alſo his owne. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Poterimus &
domi verſantes, ante, & poſt Conuiuium, acceptis in manus Diuinis Libris, vtilitatem
inde capere, & Spiritualem Cibum animae praebere. Beinge at home, we maie bothe
before, and after Meate, take the Holy Bookes in hande, and thereof receiue greate
profite,
                     Chryſoſt. in Geneſ. Homil. 29. 
                     and Miniſter spiritual foode vnto our soule. And againe,
                      Etiam domi vacemus
Diuinarum Scripturarum Lectioni: Euen when wee be at home, let vs beſtowe
our time in readinge the Scriptures.
                  
                     
                     Origen ſaithe, Vtinam omnes faceremus illud, quod Scriptum eſt, Scrutamini
Scripturas: VVoulde God wee woulde al doo, accordingely as it is written, Searche
the Scriptures.Origen. in Eſatam, Homil. 2.
                  
                  
                     But ye ſaie, wee haue miſreported bothe
                      Chryſoſtome, and Origen. For they exhorte
not the people (as you ſaie) to reaſon of Diuine maters emonge them ſelues, ſpecially the Huſbandes
with their VViues, &c. Whether of vs bothe maketh truer reporte, let vs be tried
by
                      Chryſoſtome.Chryſoſt. in Iohan. Homil. 2. Chryſoſtom. in Matth. Homi. 78. 
                     Thus he ſaithe, Neque in hoc tantùm conſeſſu, ſed domi quoque,
Vir cum Vxore, Pater cum Filio, inuicem de his frequenter loquantur: &
vltrò, citro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſuam & ferant, & inquirant ſententiam: Velint
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      hanc probariſsimam
inducere conſuetudinem: Hearken not hereto onely here in the Churche,
but alſo at home, let the Huſbande with the Wife, let the Father with the Childe, talke
togeather of theſe Maters: and, bothe to, and fro, let them bothe enquire, and geeue theire
Iudgementes: And, woulde God they woulde beginne this good Cuſtome.
                  
                  Here haue you, M. Hardinge, the Huſbande communinge of Diuine maters
with his VVife: and the Father with his Childe. Therefore ſo vnaduiſedly to
ſaie, wée haue miſreported this Holy Father, it was of your parte a miſreporte.
                  
                     Likewiſe S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. in Epiſit. ad Coloſs. Ca. 3. In illud: Verbum Dei habitet in vobis. Hieronym. in pſalm. 133. Hic oſtenditur, verbum Chriſti, non ſuffiele
                        •
                     ter,
ſed abundanter, etiam Laicos habere debere: & docere ſe inuicem,
vel monere: Here wee are ought, that euen the Laie menue oughte to haue the
VVoorde of God, not onely ſufficiently, but alſo obundantly: and one to inſtructe, and to
warne an other, Againe he ſaithe,
                      Solent & Viri, ſolent & Monachi, ſolent & Mulierculae
hoc inter ſe habere certamen, vt plures ediſcant Scripturas: Bothe Maried
menne, and Monkes, and Wiues, commonly haue this contention emonge themſelues, vvho
maie learne moſte Scriptures.
                  
                     To conclude,
                     Theodoretus De Corrigen. Graecor. affectib. li. 5. Theodoretus ſaithe thus, Paſsim videas noſtra dogmata non ab
ijs ſolùm tenèri &c. Ye maie commonly ſee, that our Doctrine is knowen, not onely of
them, that are the Doctours of the Churche, and the Maiſters of the people, but alſo
euen of the Tailers, and Smithes, and VVeauers, and of al Artificers: Yea, and
further alſo of VVeemen: and that, not onely of them, that be Learned, but alſo of Labouringe
VVeemen, and Sevvſters, and Seruantes, and Handemaìdes. Neither
onely the Citizens,De Diuina Trinitate, rerum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         omnium Creatione diſſertantes. 
                     but alſo the Countriefolkes doo very wel vnderſtande the ſame. Yee
maie finde, yea, euen the very Dichers, and Deluers, and Covvheardes, and Gardiners
Diſputinge of the Holy Trinitie, and of the Creation of al thinges.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 4. & 5.
               The Auncient Fathers,Cypria, Epiſ. 11. Lib. 1. 
                  Cyprian, Epiphanius, and Hierome
ſaie, for one, who perchaunce hathe made a Vovve,
                  Epiphan. contra Apoſtolicos, haereſ. 61. to leade a ſole
life, and afterwarde liueth vnchaſtely, and cannot quenche the
flames of luſte,Hieronym. ad Demetriadem. Auguſt. De Bono viduita. Ca. 10. it is better to marrie a Wife, and to liue honeſtly
in wedlocke. And the Olde Father Auguſtine iudgeth, the ſelfe
ſame Mariage to be good & perfite, & that it ought not to be broken
againe. Theſe menne, if a man haue once bounde him ſelfe by a
Vovve, though afterwarde he burne, keepe queanes, and defile him
ſelfe with neuer ſo ſinful, and deſperate a life, yet they ſuffer not that
perſone to marrie a Wife: or, if he chaunce to marrie, they allowe
it not for Marriage. And they commonly teache, It is mutche better,
and more Godly to keepe a Concubine, or an Harlotte, then to
liue in that kinde of Marriage.
               
               
                  
The Olde Father S. Auguſtine complained of the Multitude of
vaine Ceremonies,
                  Auguſtin. ad Ianuar. Epiſt. 118. wherewith he euen then ſawe mens mindes and
Conſciences ouercharged: Theſe menne, as though God regarded
nothinge els but their Ceremonies, haue ſo out of meaſure increaſed
them, that there is now almoſte none other thinge leafte in their
Churches, and places of praier.
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Al that M. Hardinge hath here to ſaie,In the 2. Darte. 8. Chapter, 1. Diuiſion: and, 2. Parte. 17. Chap. 1. Diuiſion. hathe benne bothe alleged, and alſo
fully anſweared before in a place more conueniente.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 5.
               Againe, that Olde Father S. Auguſtine denieth it to be lawful for
a Monke, to ſpende his time ſlouthfully in Idleneſſe, &, vnder a pretenſed,
and countrefeite Holineſſe, to liue al vpon others. And who ſo
thus liueth, the Olde Father Apollonius likeneth him to a Theefe.
Theſe menne haue (I wote not whether to name them Droues, or
Heardes of Monkes) who for al that they doo nothinge, nor yet once
intende to beare any ſhewe of Holineſſe, yet liue they not onely vpon
others, but alſo riot lauiſhly of other folkes laboures.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     But S. Auguſtine calleth it vvoorſe then Idleneſſe. VVee doo not mainteine, that a Monke ſhoulde liue idly. But wee reproue you for accountinge
the Seruice of God Idleneſſe. Neither is that the thinge onely whiche ye can alleage in Defence of
that your Brethren haue donne to Monaſteries in the Countries where your Goſpel proceedeth. For ye
haue remoued not onely ſuche Monkes as were proued idle, but all Monkes generally, that would ſerue
God accordinge to that vowe, which they made vnder theAs though Chriſtes Rule vvere loſte, or vvere not ſufficiente. approued rule of S. Benedicts, S. Auguſtine,
S. Francis, S. Dominicke, or of any other. You ſaie, we haue Droues and Heardes of Monkes, thereby
ſignifieinge, they are beaſtes rather then men: VVhereas S. Auguſtine calleth them Seruos Dei, the
Seruantes of God, in that very woorke, whiche you alleage.
                  Sith that our Monkes (I meane all religious men) ſerued the Aulter, and were appointed to Preach,
Miniſter the Sacramentes, and beſtowe their time in Praier for their owne infirmities, and for the
Sinnes of the people:Vntruthe, plaine contrarie to S. Auguſtine. by the doctrine of S. Auguſtine,De opere Monachor. Cap. ar. they are not bounde to labour, as they, who for
ſo winge ſpirituall thinges to the behofe of others, may reape their temporall thinges to their owne
neceſſary ſuſtenance.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Monkes, ye ſaie, be Goddes Seruantes: and Monkes life is the Seruice of God. And herein
ye vſe ſutche earneſt talke,
                     Auguſt. De Opere Monachor. Ca. 12. 
                     as though, if the whole generation of Monkes were
remoued, God ſhould ſit without Seruice. In deede S. Auguſtine ſhewinge vs,
                     Auguſt. De Sermone Domi. in Monte.
                     what good Seruice the Monkes of his time did vnto God,
                     Eodem loco. Auguſtin. De Opere Monachor. Ca 22. 
                     ſaithe thus: Iſti non
Deo ſeruiunt, ſed ſuo ventri: Theſe Monkes ſerue not God: they ſerue their bellies.
Againe he ſaithe,
                      lactantia 
                        •
                     ò eſt periculoſior, quò ſub nomine 
                        •
                     eruitutis Dei decipit:
Hypocriſie, or vountinge of Holineſſe is the more dangerous, for that it deceiueth vs vnder
the name of Goddes Seruice. Againe he ſaithe, Fallit doloſa imagine Sanctitatis:
It deceiueth vs by the deceiteful countenance, or Image of Holineſſe
                           •
                         
                        Againe,
touchinge theſe
                      Monkes, he ſaith, Non apparet, vtrùm ex propoſito Seruitutis
Dei venerint, an vitā inopem, & laborioſam fugientes, vacui paſcì, & veſtirl voluerint:
Wee cannot tel, whether they became Monkes for pourpoſe to ſerue God, or els beinge

weary of their poore,
                     Monkes. Goddes Seruice. 
                     and paineful Life, were rather deſirous to be feadde, and clothed dooinge
nothinge. And therefore he calleth the
                      Almouſe, that thei geatte, Sumptus lucroſae
egeſtatis:Auguſtin. De Opere Mona
                           •
                        hor. Ca. 28. & Simulatae pretium Sanctitatis: The charges of gaineful pouertie:
and the price of feined Holineſſe. Againe he ſaithe, Venalem circumferunt
Hypocriſim: They carrie their Hypocriſie aboute to ſale.
                  
                  
                     S. Hilarie ſpeakinge of the ſame kinde of Holy People,
                     Auguſtin. De Opere Monachor. Ca. 31. 
                     ſaith thus, Conuiuia
ſub obtentu Religionis ſumptuoſa ſectantur.Hilari. in pſalmum. 52. Apothecas ſuas inutili Religioſorū
obſequio defendunt: de quibus Scriptum eſt, Comedentes domos viduarum. Etiāſi
Dominum ſe credant inuocare, tamen audient, quod eſt in Euangelio, Scimus quia peccatores
Deus non audit: Vnder the colour of Holineſſe, they ſeeke for deinty and coſtely
fare: They maineteine their ſtoarehouſes by the vnprofitable seruice of Religious
people:Matthae. 23. 
                     of whome it is written, They deuoure vp poore VVidovves houſes. Although
thei thinke, they ſerue God, yet the ſame anſweare ſhalbe made them, that is written
in the Goſpel,
                     Iohn. 9. VVee knovve that God geeueth no eare to Sinners. Vpon theſe
woordes of the Goſpel,Luke. 19. Selle al, that thou haſte, and geeue it to the poore, and
comme, and folovve mee,Matthae. 18. 
                     Your very Ordinarie Gloſe ſaithe thus, Bene operando:
non mendicando: Folovve me in vvel dooinge: nor in begginge.
                  
                     Wee graunte, y• Seruice of God maie not rightly be called Idleneſſe. But what
if S. Bernarde ſaíe of your Monkes,Bernardus in Cantica Cantl. Hieronym. ad Euſtochium. Serui Chriſti, ſeruiunt Antichriſto: They
pretende Chriſtes Seruice, and ſerue Antichriſte. For where did God euer require
you to doo ſutche Seruice? S. Hierome ſaithe of them, In ſtatu ſeruili, & abiectionis
eſſe abhorrent. Laborare recuſant prae pigritia: Mendicare erubeſcunt validi: quia nihil
daretur eis: They are lothe to be abiectes, and in ſeruile ſtate. For Idleneſſe they wil
not laboure: And to begge they are aſbamed. For, beinge valiaunt, and luſty people, noman
woulde geue them any thinge.
                     Auguſtin. De Opere Monachor. Ca 22. 
                     Likewiſe ſaithe S. Auguſtine, Tanquam Conſeruatricem
Euangelij praedicant pigritiem:Auguſtin. eodem Capite. 
                     They ſpeake mutche of their Idleneſſe,
as if it were the Keepe, and Caſtle of the Goſpel. Againe he faithe,
                      Contingit eis,
quod in viduis iunioribus indiſciplinatis cauendum Apoſtolus dicit: Simul & otioſae
eſse diſcunt: non ſolùm autem o tioſae, ſed & curioſae, & verboſae, loquentes quae non
oportet: The ſame thinge happeneth vnto them, that S. Paule ſpeaketh of yonge Widowes
liuinge out of order: They learne to be idle: and not onely idle, but alſo curtous, and ful of
woordes, ſpeakinge ſu
                           •
                        che thinges, as are not meete. Thus yée ſée, M. Hardinge, that
this pretenſe, and coloure of
                      Goddes Seruice hathe oftentimes of the Anciente
Fathers benne called Idleneſſe.
                  
                  Ye ſaie, Monkes now Serue the
                      Aultare, and Miniſter Sacramentes: and therefore
are not bounde to Bodily laboure. This is a faire coloure to ſhadowe their Idleneſſe. For
who euer hade Monkes to Serue the Aultare: or gaue them Authoritie to Miniſter
Sacramentes? What Doctour? What Father? What Anciente Councel? In
olde times it was not lawful for a Monke to be a Prieſte. S. Gregorie ſaithe,
Nemo poteſt Eccleſiaſticis Officijs deſeruire,
                     16. Quaeſtion. 1. Nemo. 
                     & in Monaſtica Regula ordinatè perſiſtere:
No man can ſerue the Eccleſiaſtical Office, and orderly keepe the Rule of Monkerie.
                     
                     16. Quaeſtion 1. Monachus.
And S. Hierome ſaithe,16 Quaſt. 1. Alia cauſa. 
                     Monachus, non Docentis, ſed Plangentis habet
officium: A Monkes office is, not to Preache, but to Mourne.
                     
                     Gloſſa. Againe he ſaithe,
Alia cauſa eſt Monachi, alia Clerici: Clerici Oues paſcunt: Ego Paſcor: The ſtate
of a
                      Monke is one thinge, and the ſtate of a Prieſte is an other. Prieſtes Feede the Flocke: I
(beinge a Monke) muſte be fedde.
                      Whereupon the Gloſe ſaithe, Ego Paſcor Sacramentis
ipſorum: I am fedde with the Sacramentes of the Prieſtes.
                      Whereby it is euidente,
that the Monke him ſelfe had no Authoritie, to Miniſter Sacramentes,
no not ſo mutche as priuately to him ſelfe. But, touchinge Bodily laboure, S.
Hierome ſaithe,Hieronymus ad Ruſticum: Et in vita Hilarionis. This was holden as a Lawe emonge the Monkes in Aegypte,
that who ſo woulde not laboure, ſhoulde not eate.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     And S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Monkes. Bodily laboure. 
                     as it is alleged in his name, Nihil Dei Seruis peius
eſt otioſitate.Auguſtin. ad Fratres in Eremo. Sermo. 1. Auguſtin. De Opere Monac
                           •
                        oar. Ca. 23. Operentur ergo in nomine Domini: Vnto the Seruantes of God there is nothinge
woorſe then Idleneſſe. Let them woorke therefore in the name of our Lorde.
                  
                  
                     Of ſutche Idle Monkes S. Auguſtine ſaith, Iſti manus otioſas, & repoſitoria
plena habere volunt: Theſe Monkes wil haue Idle handes, and ful Cellers. A learned
Father was woonte to ſaie, by the reporte of
                      Socrates, A Monke, that labo
                           •
                        
                        reth
not with his handes, maie be reſembled vnto a Theefe. S.
                      Bernarde ſaithe, Reſtat,
vt ſint in laboribus Daemonum, qui in laboribus hominum non fuerunt: They muſte
needes be in the trauailes of Diuels,
                     Hiſtoria Tripartita, Lib. 8. Ca. 1. Bernardus in Pſalm. 72. Auguſtin. De Opere Monachor. Ca. 28. 
                     that were not in the trauailes of menne.
                  
                  
                     Of theſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Diabolus tam multos Hypocritas ſub habitu
Monachorum vſquequaque diſperſit: Sutche a number of Hypocrites hath the Diuel
ſcattered abroade euery where, vnder the coloure of Monkes.
                  The firſte Suppreſſours of Monaſteries within this Realme, in our memorie,
were twoo of your déereſt frendes, Cardinal VVoulſee, & Doctoure Fiſher,
the Biſhop of Rocheſter:Theodoretus, Lib. 4. Cap. 11. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      either of them wel warranted thereto by the Authoritie
of the Pope. Longe before that time, the Godly Learned Biſhop Letoius ouerthrewe,
and burnte the Meſſalians Monaſteries, and ſaide they were Dennes
of Theeues: and, as Theodoretus reporteth, chaſed the VVouues awaie from
the Folde.
                  
                  
                     Of late yéeres, ſundrie of the Cardinalles of Rome, emongeſt whome alſo
was Cardinal Poole, beinge ſpecially appointed in Commiſſion by Pope Paulus
3. to viewe the diſorders, and deformities of the Churche, returned their anſweare
in this ſorte:
                     Concil. Tomo. 3. Con. Delectorum Cardinali. Pag. 822. Alius abuſus corrigendus eſt in Ordinibus Religioſorum: quod
adeo multi deformati ſunt, vt magno ſint ſcandalo Saecularibus, exemplo'
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      plurimum
noceant. Conuentuales ordines abolendos eſſe putamus omnes: An other Abuſe
there is to be Reformed in the Orders of Monkes, and Freers. For many of them are
ſo vile, that they are a ſhame vnto the Se
                           ••
                        lares: and with their example doo mutche il. As
for Conuentual orders, vvee thinke it good, they be al aboliſhed.
                  This, M. Hardinge, was the Iudgemente of your owne frendes. And therefore
ye haue the leſſe cauſe to be offended with the ſuppreſſinge of Abbies. For your
owne déere Catholique Fathers partely haue ſuppreſſed thē them ſelues, & partely
haue conſented vnto the ſame.Concil. Tom. 2. Pag. 1000. Operis Tripart. Li. 3. Cap. 3. In the Booke called Opus Tripartitum, ioined
vnto the Councel of Laterane, it is written thus: Totus ferè Mundus obloquitur,
& Scandalizatur de tanta multitudine Religioſorum Pauperum, qui introierunt in
Mundum: VVelneare the whole worlde crieth againſte, and is offended for ſo greate a multitude
of begginge Monkes, and Freeres, that are entred into the VVorlde.
                     
                  
                  
                     Therefore was this Decrée publiſhed in the Councel of Laterane,Concil. Lateran. Sub Innocen. 3. Ca. 13. Ne nimia
Religioſorum diuerſitas grauē in Eccleſiā Dei offenſionem inducat, firmiter prohibemus,
ne quis de coetero Nouam Religionem inueniat: Leſte ouer greate diuerſitie of Religious
folke bringe greate offenſe into the Churche of God, wee doo earneſtly forbidde, that
from hencefoorthe no man diuiſe any Newe Religion. Damaſus, ſpeakinge of the
order of them,
                     Diſt 68. Chorepiſcopi. 
                     that were called Chorepiſcopi, ſaithe thus, Vnde iſte Tertius Ordo
proceſſerit, ignoramus: & quod ratione caret, extirpare neceſſe eſt: From whence
this Thirde Order is comme, wee cannot tel. And the thinge that wanteth reaſon, muſte needes
be taken vp by the rootes.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 6.
               The Olde Councel at Rome decreed,Concil. Rom. ca. 3. that no man ſhould comme
to the Seruice ſaide by a Prieſte wel knowen to keepe a Concubine.
Theſe menne let Concubines to ferme to their Prieſtes, and yet

conſtreigne men by force,A Prieſte keepinge a Cōcubine againſte theire wil, to heare theire curſed
paltry Seruice.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     Vntruthe. For it is eaſy to be founde. VVe finde no ſutche Canon in the olde Romaine Councels.Diſt 25. Ca. Nullus. Your allegations noted in the margent
be falſe for the more parte, as your Doctrine is. Yet finde we that Nicolaus and Alexander Popes haue
willed no man to heare the Maſſe of that Prieſte, whom he knoweth vndoubtedly to kepe a Concubin
                        •
                     .
Sutche vviſe menne be the Proctours of filthineſſe. But wiſe men in the Lawe thinke onely that to be an vndoubted knowledge, when either the iudge
hath by open ſentence publiſhed ſutche a man to kepe a Concubine, or the facte it ſelfe is notorious.
                  
                     Vntruthe, notorious, & manifeſte to the worlde. The B. of Argentine hath a Florene by the yeere of euery Prieſte, that keepeth a Concubine: and if ſhee beare a childe, he hathe foure. VVhereas you ſaie, we let Concubines out to ferme to our Prieſtes, it is meete for you to ſaie
it, becauſe it is falſe and ſlaunderous.Vntruthe. Reade the Anſvveare. Neither was euer any man, or at this daie is driuen to heare
his Maſſe, who kepeth a Concubine. For if he wil take vpon him to proue any Prieſte to kepe a Concubine,
him ſelfe non beinge ſo infamous, as he maie not ſtande in iudgemente, it is certaine, he ſhal be
hearde. If he cannot proue it, then is not he out of doubte by order of Lawe, that this Prieſte kepeth a
Concubine, and therefore he is bounde, as other Chriſtian people be, to heare his Maſſe.
                        Vntruthe. For Pope Hildebrande ſaithe, Benedictio eorū vertitur in maledictionem. Concit. Roman. ſub Nicolao. 1. Concil. To. 2. pa. 795. Anno, 880. Zacharias pp. in Epiſt. ad Bonifa. Diſ. 40. Non nos, In Gloſſa. VVhiche is no
ſacrilege as your ſacrilegious heart thinketh, and blaſphemous tonge vttereth, but the bleſſed and holy
ſacrifice, whiche Chriſte made at his laſte Supper.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  If it had pleaſed you, better to haue peruſed your Bookes, ye mought ſoone haue
found theſe ſelfe ſame woordes in the Councel of Rome, holden there vnder Pope
Nicolas the Firſt: Whiche, although it be not ſo olde, as maie be compared with y•
Ancient Fathers Councelles, yet it is elder then ſomme partes, & brāches of your
Newe Religion. To like pourpoſe writeth Pope Zacharie, Quis ſapiens iudicabit,
eos eſſe Sacerdotes, qui nec à Fornicationibus abſtinent? What wiſe man wil recken them
to be Prieſtes, that abſteine not ſo mutche as from Fornication?
                      If no wiſe man can iudge
them to be Prieſtes, what man then is he, that wil authorize them to Miniſter Sacramentes?
                  
                  
                     Nowe of the other ſide, M. Hardinge, conſider you the Common, and ordinarie
practiſe of your Churche of Rome. Firſte, touchinge the Pope him ſelfe, your
Gloſe ſaithe, Facta Papae excuſantur, vt Adulterium Jacob: The Popes dooinges
(or
                      Aduouteries) are excuſed, as the Aduouterie of Jacob. And againe,
                      Communiter
dicitur, quo'd pro Simplici Fornicatione quis deponi non debet: cùm pauci ſine
illo vitio inueniantur: It is commonly ſaide, that a man maie not be depoſed, or depriued
for Simple Fornication:
                     Diſt. 81. Maximianus, In Gloſſ. Diſt 32. Nullus. 
                     For as mutche as fewe (Prieſtes) be founde without that faulte.
                     
                  
                  
                     Againe, whereas the woordes of the Decree are theſe, Nullus audiat Miſſam
Preſbyte
                        •
                     , quem ſcit Concubinam indubitanter habere: Let noman heare the Maſſe of
that 
                           •
                        neſte, whom he vndoubtedly knoweth to keepe a Concubine, The Cloſe vpon the
ſame ſaithe thus, Hic Canon quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fuit latae Sententiae: Sed hodiè non eſt: This
Decree in olde times ſtoode as a ruled caſe: but now is it not ſo. Ideo licet notoria ſit Fornicatio,
tamen non eſt propter eam abſtinendum ab officijs Preſbyterorum:
And therefore, although the Fornication be notoriouſly knowen, yet maie wee not therefore
refraine from the Seruice of the Prieſte.
                  
                  
                     Hereunto very wel agréethe the Gloſe vpon Othoes Legantines:De Concubinis Clericor. remouendis. Licet ad profligandum. Quid ergo ſi
Sacerdos mueniatur coire cum muliere? Reſpondeo: Adhuc dicitur occultū: nec propter
hoc debet cum vitare in publico, niſi aliter Conuincatur: What if a man find the
Prieſte in the m
                           •
                        uoure with a woman? I anſweare: Al that notwithſtandinge, the faulte is
pr
                           ••
                        e. Neither maie a man therefore aouid y• Prieſtes Seruice, onleſſe he be otherwiſe co
                           ••
                        cted.
                  
                  
                     And againe, in the ſame Gloſe vpon theſe woordes, Qui publicè detinet Concubinas:
it is noted thus,
                     Gloſſa in cūdem titulum. Tu dic Publicè, quando multitudini ſe patere non expauet. Secùs
ergo, ſi ſecretè intra domum propriam, vel alienam detineat hanc Concubinam.

Nam tunc poenam huius Conſtitutionis non incurret.A Prieſte keepinge a Cōcubine Dom us enim rem
ſecretam, non aūt publicam denotat: By this word Openly, vnderſtand thou, If he be
not afraide, leſte the world eſpie him. Therefore it is otherwiſe, if he keepe the ſame Concubine
ſecretely, whether it be in his owne houſe, or in ſomme other mannes. For then he is
not vvithin the daunger of this Lavve. For a houſe betokeneth a thinge to be Secrete,
and not open.
                  By this fauourable, and gentle Conſtruction, onleſſe the Prieſte kéepe his woman
openly in the Marketplace, he is without al daunger of Lavves, and Canons:
and wee maie not refraine to heare his Seruice.
                  
                     It is no Sacrilege, you ſaie, but the Bleſſed, and Holy Sacrifice. Hereto I maie
anſweare with the woordes of S. Auguſtine:Auguſti De Ciuitat. Li. 2. Ca 4. Quae ſunt Sacrilegia, ſi illa erant Sacra?
Aut quae Inquinatio, ſi illa Lauatio? What is Sacrilege, if this be a Sacrifice? Or, what
is ſtaininge, if this be waſſhinge? Verily your owne
                      Pope Hildebrande hereof writeth
thus:
                     Diſt. 81. Si qui. Imperamus vobis, ne eorum Officia, Orationes, & Cu
                        •
                     tus audiatis Quia Benedictio

                        •
                     orum vertitur in Maledictionem, & Oratio in Peccatum: Teſtante Domino per
Propheram, Maledicam Benedictionibus veſtris. Qui vero huic Saluberrimo praecepto obedire
noluerint, Idololatriae poenā incurrent: Wee commaunde you, that you heare neither
theire Offices, nor thire Praiers, nor theire Seruice. For theire Bleſſinge is turned into
Curſinge, and theire Praier into Sinne: As the Lorde him ſelfe witneſſeth by the Prophete: I
wil curſe your Bleſſinges, ſaithe the Lorde. And who ſo euer wil not obeie this wholeſome
Commaundemente, he ſhal fal into the paine of Idolatrie. Iudge yee nowe, M. Hardinge,
whether this be Sacrilege, as wée ſaie: or, as you ſaie, a Bleſſed, and an Holy
Sacrifice.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 7.
               The Olde Canons of the Apoſtles commaunde, that Biſhop to
be remoued from his Office, whiche wil bothe ſupplie the place of a
Ciuil Magiſtrate, and alſo of an Eccleſiaſtical perſon. Theſe menne
for al that, bothe doo, and wil needes ſerue bothe places. Nay rather,
the one office, whiche they ought chiefely to execute, they once
touche not: and yet no body commaundeth them to be diſplaced.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If we ought to ſticke at any one certaine worldely buſines,Vntruthe impudente aboue meaſure. For it vvas not vnſemely for Chriſtes Apoſtles to be married. whiche maie ſeme vnſemely for a Biſhop
or a Prieſt, as too baſe for his dignitie, and too much hinderance to his vocation, vndoubtedly mariage
is of that ſorte.1. Cor. 7. VVhom maie we better credite for this caſe, then S. Paule?S. Paule ſpeaketh thus, not only of Prieſtes, but alſo of euery priuate Chriſtian man. He that is without
a wife (ſaith he) is careful for the thinges that be of our Lorde, howe he maie pleaſe God. But he that
is coupled with a wife, is careful about the thinges, whiche are of the worlde, and is diuided.
                  But with our fieaſhely Miniſters, this buſines is not fleaſhely, and worldly at al, but altogeather
ſpiritual, bicauſe theire ſpirit is wholly occupied therein.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Chriſte thought ſo litle hinderance to be in Marriage towardes the Preaching
of the Goſpel,
                     Ambro. 2. Cor. 11. that of his twelue Apoſtles he choſe eleuen, that were married. So
S. Ambroſe ſaithe, as it is alleged before: Apoſtoli omnes, exceptis Iohanne, &
Paulo, Vxores habuerunt: Al the Apoſtles had Wines, ſauinge onely S. Iohn, and S.
Paule.
                  
                  
                     But ye ſaie, VVith our fleaſhely Miniſters▪ this buſineſſe is not fleaſhely, but altogeather
                      Spiritual:
bicauſe: theire Sprite is wholy occupied therein. It pitieth me, M. Hardinge, to
ſee you ſo vainely to be ſtowe your
                      Spiritual Cogitations. Matrimonie is Goddes

                     ordinance.
                     Matrimonie chaſte, and pure. 
                     God neuer ordeined Man to liue in villanie, and filthineſſe. S. Paule
ſaithe,
                     Hebrae. 13. Matrimonie is honourable in al menne (as wel in Prieſtes, as in others)
and the bedde vndefiled. But Aduouterers, and Fornicatours the Lorde him
ſelfe vvil iudge.Roman. 8. 
                     And againe, writinge vnto the Married people of Rome, he
ſaithe, Vos non eſtis in Carne, ſed in Spiritu: You are not in the Fleaſhe, but in the
Sprite. They were Married, and liued in the Lavves of Marriage: Yet S.
Paule ſaithe, They were not in the
                      Fleaſhe, but in the Sprite.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Bono Coniugali. Ca. 11 Origen. in Epiſt. ad Roma. Ca▪ 12. Sancta ſunt etiam Corpora Coniugatorum, Fidem ſibi, &
Domino ſeruantium: The Bodies of married people, keeping faith bothe to them ſelues,
did to the Lorde, 
                           ••
                        e Cleane, and Holy. Origen ſaith, Non ſolum virgines, aut Contine
                        •
                     tes,
offerunt Copora ſua Hoſtiam Sanctam: Not onely Virgins, or others that liue
in Single Life (but alſo
                      Married folkes) offer vp theire Bodies a Holy Sacrifice. Chryſoſtome
ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom ad Hebrae. Hom. 57. Sanctificationem Paulus vocat Pudicitiam, & Temperantiam
Coniugalem: The honeſte Chaſtitie, and Temperance, that is bitweene Man, and VVife,
S. Paule calleth Holineſſe. And againe, Carent Culpa Nuptiae, nec à Virtute quicquam
prohibent
                        •
                      Marriage is voide of faulte: and is no hinderance vnto vertue.
                  
                  Hereof wée haue ſpoken before more at large. But touchinge the Chaſte life of
your Spiritual Cleregie, M. Hardinge, as ſundrie your owne frendes haue recorded,
and as the whole worlde is wel hable to iudge, it is nothinge els, but a Spiritual
filthineſſe.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 8.
               The Olde Councel of Gangra commaundeth, that none ſhoulde
make ſutche difference bitweene an Vnmarried Prieſte, and a Married
Prieſte, as to thinke the one more holy, then the other for
Single Lifes ſake. Theſe menne put ſutche a difference bitweene
them, that they ſtreight waie thinke al theire Holy Seruice to be
defiled, if it be donne by a good, and honeſt man, that hath a Wife.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  It was not for your pourpoſe, Sirs, to vſe true dealinge, and to alleage the woordes as they are in
that olde Councel. For they ſpeake of anVntruthe, fonde, and peeui
                           •
                        he. For this vvoorde, External, is not once named in al that Coūcel. external Sacrifice,The Councel of Gangra neuer once named the Maſſe. whiche the Churche calleth the Maſſe.
The ſame it behoued you to diſſemble,C
                           ••
                        . 4. leſte ye bewraied your cauſe. The woordes be theſe: If any man
make a difference of a Prieſte, who hath benne married, is though when he ſacrificeth, a man might
not communicate with his oblation, be he accurſed. Thoſe fathers ſpeake euidently of a Prieſte, who
hath ſometime ben maried, that is to ſaie, before his Prieſthode.Vntruthe ſo impudente, that I marueile, M. Hardinge can reporte it vvithout bluſsinge. Chryſoſt. ad Hebrae. Homil. 17. For after Prieſthode, it was neuer
bearde ſithens the time of Chriſte, that any Prieſte might marie by the Lawe either of the Greeke, or of
the Latine Churche. VVe therefore condemne the mariages of Prieſtes, whiche be made after the takinge
of holy orders, and ſaie, that he is no good and honeſte man, but an inceſtuous Aduouterer, that
marieth afterwarde.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  To anſweare al your trifles, M. Hardinge, it were too longe. Wée refuſe not
the names of Oblation, or Sacrifice. Wée knowe, that the Holy Miniſtration is
Commonly ſo called by the Aunciente Fathers: For that, as Chryſoſtome ſaith,
it is the Memorie, the Remembrance, the Samplare, the Token of that one Sacrifice,
that Chriſte once offered in his Body vpon the Croſſe.Hoc Sacrificium exēplarilliuseſt. Magis Recordationem Sacrifici
                           •
                         operamu
                           •
                        . Howe be it, the reaſon
hereof, that ye would ſéeme to wreaſt out of y• 
                     Greeke woorde, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
is very ſimple, and bewraieth in you, either wante of ſkil, or greate corruption.
For, beinge learned in the Greeke tongue, ye muſte néedes knowe, that

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     ſignifieth not a Sacrifice,Mariage in Prieſthoode. 
                     but a Miniſterie, or publike Seruice. Plutarchus
ſaithe thus, Lictores, quaſi Litores dicebantur, quo'd eſſent 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     Hereby it appeareth,
                     Plutarchus in Romulo. Alexander ab Alexandro. Pachymeres: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Roman 13. Actor. 13. Chryſoſt in Acta Homil. 27. 
                     that
the Common Hangeman of the Cittie was called 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and his office 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
Whiche, I trowe, M. Hardinge, yee would not haue to be called a Sacrificer,
& a Sacrifice. Pachymeres, in his Annotations vpon Dionyſius. ſaith thus: 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
appellat Diaconos, aut eos, qui nunc Hypodiaconi appellantur: He c
                           •
                        lleth them,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that are called Deacons, or Subdeacons, S. Paule, ſpeaking of Kinges,
& Ciuile Princes, ſaith, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , aut Miniſtri Dei ſun
                        •
                      
                     I recken
ye wil not ſaie, that either Deacons, or Subdeacons, or Kinges, or Princes had
Authoritie to Miniſter the Holy Communion, or, as you ſaie, to offer vp the Daily
Sacrifice. Where as S. Luke ſaithe, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Miniſtrantibus illis;
Chryſoſtome demaundeth this queſtion, Quid eſt Miniſtrantibus, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     He anſweareth, Praedicantibus. Whereby it appeareth, that the Apoſtles Sacrificinge,
was theire preachinge. It had benne ouer mutche va
                           •
                        itie, to note theiſ
                           •
                        
thinges, had not your vaine quarrel geuen the occaſion. Certainely there is no
mention in the ſaid Councel of Gangra either of your Maſſe, or of your External
Sacrifice.
                  
                     After Prieſthood, ye ſaie, it vvas neuer heard ſithence the time of Chriſte,
that any Prieſte might Marrie by the Lavve, either of the Greeke, or of the
Latine Churche. This warrant were vndoubtedly true, if euery your woord were
a Goſpel. But what if your owne Gloſe, that is to ſaie, the very Ground, & mother
of your Diuinitie, ſtand againſt you, & ſaie, Ye warrante vnwiſely, or, if that miſlike
you, vnaduiſedly, ye knowe not what? Verily, vpon the Popes owne Decrees
ye ſhal finde it noted thus:Diſt 31. Aliter: In Gloſſa. Nicephorus, Li. 10. a. 10. Nicephor. Li. 9. Ca. 17. 
                     Multi ex hac Litera dixerunt
                           •
                         qu
                           •
                        d Orientales poſſunt
contrahere in Sacris Ordinibus? Of theſe woordes many haue geathered, that y• Prieſtes
of the Eaſte Churche maie marrie, being within Holy Orders. Nicephorus ſaith, that Eupſychius,
being a Prieſte at Ceſaria in Cappadocia married a Wife a litle before
that he was Martyred. The like he ſéemeth to write of Apollinaris the Elder, that
beinge a Prieſte, Married a Wife at Laodicea.
                  
                  
                     In the Councel holden at Ancyra there is a Canon written thus, Diaconi,
quicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ordinantur,Concil. Ancyranum. Canon. 9. ſi in ipſa Ordinatione proteſtati ſunt, & dixerunt, velle ſe coniugio
copulari, quia ſic manere non poſſunt, hi, ſi poſtmodùm vxores duxerint, in Miniſterio
maneant, proptereà qu
                        •
                     d 
                        •
                     is Epiſcopus licentiam dederit: Deacons, that receiue
orders, if at the time of theire admiſſ
                           •
                        on, they make proteſtation, and ſaie, they wilbe married,
for that they cannot otherwiſe contine we, if they aftervvarde Marrie, let them remaine
in the Miniſt
                           •••
                        : for that the Biſhop hath already diſpenſed with them.
                  
                  Chryſoſtome,Chryſ. in Epiſt 1. ad Tim. Hom. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                     ſpeaking of the Marriage of Biſhoppes, ſaithe thus, Quamuis
Nup
                        •
                     ae plurimum difficultatis in ſe habeant, ita tamen Aſſumi poſſunt, vt perfectiori
vit
                        ••
                      
                     
                        ••
                     pedimento non ſint: Notwithſtanding Marriage haue in it mutche trouble, yet ſo it
maie be Taken, that it ſhalbe no hinderance to perfite life. He ſaith, Marriage maie be
                      Taken,
or choſen:Eraſmus Contra Bedam. Pag. 197. Cornel Agrippa contra Louanien. Artic. 18 Diſt. 8 4 Ci
                           •
                        n in prae
                           •
                        ertio. In Glo
                           ••
                        a. Cat
                           ••
                        n in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                     And he ſpeaketh namely of the Marriage of Prieſtes, & Biſhoppes.
                  
                  Eraſmus ſaithe, The Prieſtes of the Greeke Churche this daie, notvvithſtanding
theire Orders, Marrie Wiues. The like writeth
                      Cornelius Agrippa againſt
the Louanians. Your owne Gloſe vpon y•
                      Decrees▪ 
                     as I haue alleged before, noteth
thus, Dicunt qu
                        •
                     d olim Sacerdotes poterant contrahere, ante Siriciū: Thei ſaie, that in olde
times, before Pope Siricius, it was Laweful for Prieſtes, to contracte Matrimonie.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe Cardinal Cai
                        •
                     tane ſaith, Nec ratione, nec Authoritate probari poteſt,
qu
                        •
                     d, abſolut
                        •
                      loquendo, Sacerdos peccet, contrahēdo Matrimonium: It cannot be proued,
neither by Reaſon, nor by Authoritie, ſpeakinge abſolutely, that a Prieſte offendeth God in
Ma
                           •••
                        nge a Wife. So likewiſe ſaithe
                      Anſelmus in a Dialogue bitwéene the
Maiſter, and the Scholare, touchinge theſe maters: Defideramus certifica
                        •
                     i tua Sotione

ſuper Vulgari in toto Orbe quaeſtione,Anſelm. In Dialog. Inquiſitione Prima. quae ab omnibus pené quotidié ventilatur, &
adhuc lis indiſcuſſa celatur, Scilicer, An liceat Preſbyteris, poſt acceptum ordinem
Vxores ducere: Wee are deſirous by your Anſweare to be certified, aboute this Common
queſtion, that is nowe toſſed through the worlde, and as yet lieth vndiſcuſſed, I meane,
vvhether a Prieſte, beinge vvithin Orders, maie Marrie a VVife. Hereby it appeareth,
that in the time of Anſelmus, whiche was aboue a thouſande yéeres after
Chriſte, this mater laie in queſtion, and was not yet diſcuſſed.
                  
                  If ye knewe theſe thinges before, M. Hardinge, ye were to blame, to diſſemble
them: if ye knewe them not, ye were to blame to controlle them. I doubt not,
but it maie appeare by theſe fewe, that ſithen
                        •
                     e the time of Chriſtes Reſurrection,
ſundrie Prieſtes, beinge within Holy Orders, haue married Wiues: and that, not
onely in the Gréeke Churche, but alſo in the Churche of Rome.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 9.
               The Auncient Emperoure Iuſtinian commaunded,In Nouel. Conſtit. 123. that in the
Holy Adminiſtration, al thinges ſhould be pronounced with a cleare,
lowde, & treatable voice, that the people might receiue ſomme fruite
thereby. Theſe menne, leſte the people ſhould vnderſtand them, numble
vp al theire Seruice, not onely with a drowned, & hollow voice,
but alſo in a ſtrange, and Barbarous tongue.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Iuſtinian the Emperour willeth praiers at the holy oblation, (which theſe Defenders here tranſlate
adminiſtration, as beinge aſhamed of theire owne Authore, becauſe they holdeVntruthe, fonde, and peeuiſhe For Iuſtiniā ſpeaketh not of any Sacrifice of the Maſſ▪
                      againſte the ſacrifice
of the Maſſe) to be made not in ſilence, but with an audible voice. Not meaninge as though praiers
made in ſilence were vnfruitful to the people, as theſe men woulde make vs beleue. And therefore
they corrupt his woordes, as what thinge do they not corrupt, that commeth vnder theire handes?
They ſaie Iuſtinian made that Lawe, Vt fructus ex ea re aliquis ad populum redire poſſet, that
ſomme fruit might come thereof to the people,In nouell. Conſtitut. 
                           •
                        3. as who ſhoulde ſaie,
                        Vntruthe. For S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Quid prodeſt loquutionis integritas, quam non ſequitur intellectus audientis. no fruite were like to come, if
praier were made in ſilence. But what ſaithe Iuſtinian? His woordes be, Quó maiore exinde deuotione
in depromendis Domini Dei laudibus audientium animi efferantur. To thintent the
mindes of the hearers maie thereby with the more deuotion be lifted vp in ſettinge forth the praiſes
of our Lorde God. He ſaithe, that the lowde voice helpeth to more deuotion, he ſaieth not, to ſome fruit,
but, with more deuotionVntruthe, notorious, & contrarie to theire ovvne principal poſition, Ignorance is the Mother of deuotion. Some fruit is alwaies had euen by ſecrete praier, and more fruit ſometime,
then by lowde praier.
                  Two faultes then are committed, or rather two lies made in Iuſtinians woordes: one, that for oblation,
thei tourned adminiſtration, whiche falſehede M. Iewel vſeth in his printed Sermon, and in his
replies to M. D. Cole. VVhether he be alſo gilty of this? An other fault is, that for more deuotion, they
put ſome fruite. The third lie is, in that they ſaie, we do whiſper al our Seruice, ſo is the Latine, albeit
this good Lady liketh better the terme of mumblinge.Vntruthe For M Hard. ovvne Councelles expreſſe it by theſe vvoordes, Inſuſurrare, and Murmurare. I wene fewe who haue the ſenſe of hearing▪
wil ſaie with them, that the ſinginge of Pſalmes, Hymmes, Epiſtle, Goſpel, Grailes, Offertories, Preface▪
and ſutche like Seruice vſed in the Catholike Churche, is whiſperinge, or numblinge. The fourth lie is,
where they ſaie, we do it ſo, leſte the people ſhoulde vnderſtande vs.Vntruthe, and a gloſe contrarie bothe to the texte, and alſo to the cōtinual practiſe of the Churche of Graecia. VVe wiſhe, that al the people vnderſtoode
al our praiers. But we thinke it not conuenient, in a common prophane tongue, to vtter high
myſteries Therefore we wiſhe, they would learne theMyſtical tongue. A Myſtical folie of al folies. myſtical tongue, and gladly do we teache their
children the ſame. S. Dionyſe the Areopagite ſcholer to S. Paule, teacheth Timothe, and in him al vs,
Communicare ea quae vim perficiendi habent, cum ijs, qui perficiunt, to communicate thoſe
thinges, whiche haue power to make men perfite, with them, who make men perfite: ‡ that is to ſaie,
to publiſhe prieſtly office of Conſecration, (for nothinge maketh vs more perfite) amonge them onely,
who are Prieſtes, and not amonge others.
                  
                     
Laſte of al the fifth lie is to ſaie,Praier in a ſtrange to tonge. that we pronounce our ſeruice, and our myſteries in a barbarous
tōgue.A 
                           〈◊〉
                         For S. Paule ſaithe. The tongue is Barbarous, that is not knovven. As though the Latine tongue were barbarous, and not rather euery vulgare tongue. That tongue
is moſte barbarous, whiche is moſte vſed of the vulgare ſorte, moſte priuate? moſte vnknowen in
respecte of alA ſolemne Decree vvithout ſenſe. VVhen Englande commeth to haue a ſeruice of theire owne, a tongue of their owne in
Churches, and hath a Churche of theire owne beſide the whole, then haue they loſte theire parte with
the Catholike Churche, whereunto God reſtoare it againe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  O M. Harding, wée corrupte not ſutche thinges, as comme vnder our handes.
The worlde ſéethe, that is your Ordinarie, and peculiare practiſe: It is not oures.
Yée dubbe vs bothe here, and elſwhere, with your lies vpon lies. Sutche is the
Ciuilitie, and Courteſie of your ſpeache. Yet hitherto wée haue not redubbed you
with any one lie. Sobrietie, and modeſtie rather becommeth them, that ſpeake of
God.
                  
                  
                     Firſte,
                     Iuſtinian. Impe. Authen. Conſtit. 123: VVee commaunde al Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes to Miniſter the Holy Oblation. &c. not vnder ſilēce, but with a lowd voice, &c. that the hartes of the Hearers maie be ſturred to more deuotion, &c. 
                     ye ſaie, VVee haue corrupted
                      Iuſtinians woordes. And yet, yée knowe, wée
alleged onely
                      Iuſtinians meaning, and otherwiſe not one of al his woordes. Ye ſaie,
Iuſtinian meante not, as though praiers made i
                           •
                         ſilence were vnfruiteful to the people. For ſomme
Fruite, ye ſaie, there is al waies had euen by ſecrete, and vnknowen Praier: But what fruite, or
howe mutche, or howe ye knowe it, or can aſſuere it, ye ſpare to tel vs. Yet S.
                      Auguſtine
ſaithe, Quid prodeſt locutionis integritas, quam non ſequitur intellectus audientis?
Cùmloquendi omninò nulla fit cauſa, ſi, quod loquimur, non intelligunt, propter
quos, vt intelligant, loquimur: What profite is there in ſpeache, be it neuer ſo perfite, if the
vnderſtandinge of the hearer cannot attaine it? For there is no cauſe, why wee ſhould ſpeake
at al, if they vnderſtande not, what wee ſpeake, for whoes ſake we ſpeake, that they maie vnderſtande
vs. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Mens mea ſine fructu eſt: Hoc ait, quando id,
quod dicitur, non intelligitur: My minde is without fruite: This the Apoſtle S. Paule
ſaithe, when the thinge, that is ſpoken, it not perceiued. And againe,
                      Si intellectum
mēns remoueas, nemo aedificatur audiendo, quod non intelligit: Set aparte the vnderſtanding
of the Minde: And noman hath fruit, or profite of that thing, that he perceiueth
not. Likewiſe againe he ſaith,
                      Quid opus eſt iubilare, & nō intelligere iubilationē:
vt Vox noſtra ſola iubilet,Augu. De Doctrina Chriſtiana, Lib. 4. Ca. 10. & Cor non iubilet? Sonus enim Cordis intellectus eſt:
What needeth vs to ſinge, if wee vnderſtande not, what wee ſinge: to ſinge with our voice,
and not with our Harte? For Vnderſtandinge is the ſounde, or voice of the Harte.
                  
                  
                     Theſe woordes,
                     Auguſt. De Trinitate. Li. 14. Ca. 16. 1. Cor. 14. VVhiſperinge, and Mumblinge, miſlike you mutche. Yet
your owne frendes, intreatinge hereof, haue often vſed the ſame woordes. In your
late Councel of Colaine it is written thus, Vt Preſbyteri Preces non tantùm Ore
Murmurent,Auguſt in Geneſia ad Literam. Lib. 11. Cap. 8. Aug. in Pſal 59. Concil. Colonien. Cap. 5. Anno. 1536 Regino. 2. Concilio Nannet
                           ••
                        . ſed etiam Corde Perſoluant nunquam à manibus eorum Liber Legis, hoc
eſt, Biblia deponatur: That the Prieſtes not onely Mumble vp theire Praiers, but alſo pronouace
them from theire hartes, Let the Booke of the Lavve, that is to ſaie, the Bibl
                        •
                     ,
neuer be ſaide from theire handes. Likewiſe
                      Regino reporteth the woordes of the
Councel of Nantes, Ridiculum eſt, muris, aut parietibus Infuſurrare ea, quae ad populum
pertinent: It is a preuſhe thinge, to vvhiſper thoſe thinges to the walles, that pertei
                           •
                        e
vnto the people.
                  
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge, whether it be VVhiſperinge, or Mumblinge, or by
what ſo euer name els it ſhal pleaſe you to cal it, that good Emperours Commaundement,
& meaninge was, that ye ſhoulde ſo vtter al thinges in the Congregation,
Diſtinctely,
                     Authen. Conſtitu 123. Augu. in Pſal. 18. 
                     and Plainely, with lowde, and Open Voice, that the people
might vnderſtande you, and anſweare, Amen. Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Nos, qui in Eccleſia Diuina eloquia cantare didicimus, ſimul etiam inſtare debemus, eſſe
quod Scriptum eſt, Beatus populus, qui intelligit iubilationem. Proinde, Chariſſimi,
quod Conſona voce cantauimus, ſereno etiam Corde noſſe, & tenere debemus:

                     Wee, that haue learned to ſinge in the Churche the Heauenly woordes of God,
muſte alſo endeuoure to be that thing, that is written, Bleſſed is the people, that vnderſtandeth,
vvhat they ſinge. Therefore dearely beloued, that wee haue ſonge togeather
with iuneable voice, we ought alſo to knowe, and ſee with pure harte. S. Ambroſe, declaringe
the Eccleſiaſtical order of his time,
                        Ambro. Hexamer. Li. 3. Cap. 5. ſaith thus, Reſponſorijs Pſalmorum,
Cantu Virorum, Mulierum, Virginum, Paruulorum, conſonus vndarum fragor
reſultat: With the anſwearinge of Pſalmes, and with the Singinge togeather of
Menne, Wemen, Maides, and litle Children, the Churche ſoundeth, as if it
vvere the daſſhinge of the Sea.
                  
                     To like pourpoſe Leo ſaithe,
                     Leo, De leiunio Septimi Menſis, Sermo. 3. Totius Eccleſiae vna eſt Oratio, & vna Confeſsio:
The whole Churche hath one Praier, and one Confeſsion.
                  
                  That ye allege out of Dionyſius, is vaine, and Childiſhe, as is the reſte of
your talke, and quite contrarie to the Authours minde, and therefore not woorthy
to be anſweared. For Dionyſius ſaith not, as you haue imagined, M. Harding,
that the Prieſte ſhoulde talke alone in his Myſtical vnknovven Tongue, as a
ianglinge Cymbal without ſenſe: but rather telleth you, that, by his order, the
Prieſte, and the vvhole People ſhoulde ſinge togeather. Theſe be his woordes,
Percipiens ipſe,
                     Dionyſius, Ca. 3. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     & alijs tradens Diuinam Communionem, poſtremò deſinit in Gratiarum
actionem, vnà cum tota Eccleſiae multitudine: The Prieſte bothe receiuinge him
ſelfe the Holy Communion, and alſo deliueringe the ſame vnto others, laſte al endeth
with thankes geuinge, togeather vvith al the vvhole multitude, or Companie of
the Churche.
                  
                  Ye ſaie, VVee wiſſhe the people woulde learne the Myſtical Latine tongue: and gladly
doo wee teache theire Children the ſame. Ye ſaie, The Myſtical Latine tongue. O vaine
man, and more vaine, then vanitie it ſelfe: Why ſeeke you ſo fondely to deceiue
Gods people? Who euer taught you theſe kindes of Myſteries? what Scripture?
what Councel? what Doctoure? what Father? Howe knowe you, that the Latine
tongue, that euery Childe maie ſo commonly, and ſo eaſily vnderſtande, ſhould be
ſo Myſtical? It were a greate Myſterie, to reache the bottome of your Myſteries.
S. Paule calleth you,1. Cor. 4. not the Hiders, or Couchers, but the Diſpenſers, and Stevvardes
of Goddes Myſteries. Your Myſtical policie is, to leade Goddes people
through Myſte, and Darkeneſſe. Ye wiſſhe, the people woulde learne the Latine
tongue, whiche you cal Myſtical. No doubte, a woorthy, and a learned wiſſhe. Ye
might as good cheape, & as wel haue wiſſhed, that al the whole people, of al Countrie,
would learne to ſpeake Greeke, & Hebrevve. But your meaninge is, y• vntil
al the Plovvmenne, and Artificers, and Labourers of the Worlde be hable to vnderſtande,
and to ſpeake your Myſtical Latine tongue, thei maie not in any wiſe
he allowed, to vnderſtande any parcel of theire Praiers.
                  
                     Lactantius,
                     Lactan. Lib. 5. Ca. 20. 
                     ſpeakinge of the ſuttle practiſes, & policies of the Heathens, ſaithe
thus, Hinc Fida Silentia inſtituta ſunt ab hominibus callidis: vt neſciret populus, quid coleret:
                     
Therefore truſty ſilence, and ſecreſie was appointed by ſuttle, and falſe faitours: that
the people (ſtil beinge blinde) ſhoulde neuer knowe, what they worſhipped.
                  
                     This is not the Myſterie of the Kingedome of Heauen:
                     Matth. 13. 2. Theſſ. 2. Apoc. 17. 
                     It is rather the Myſterie
of iniquitie: The ſame Myſterie, y• S. Iohn mentioneth in his Reuelations:
In Fronte eius Nomē ſcriptum eſt, Myſterium: Babylon Magna, Mater Abominationū,
& Fornicationum Terrae: A Name was writtē in her Forehead, a Myſterie: Greate Babylon,
the Mother of the Abominations, and of the Fornications of the Eathe. Of theſe Holy
Myſteries, your Latine tongue, as ye haue vſed it, maie wel, and iuſtely be called
Myſtical.
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe of your Fathers in Olde time,
                     Hieron. in Epiſt. ad 
                           •
                        pheſ. Cap. 5. Hieronymus ad Theodoram. De Domo Dei Secnam fecere
Populorum: Of the Houſe of God they haue mode a ſtage plaie of the people. And ſpeakinge
of the
                      Valentinian Heretiques he ſaith, Barbaro ſimplices quoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      terrent ſono,

vt, quod non intelligunt, plùs mirentur: With a Barbarous vnknowen ſounde of
wordes the
                           •
                         feare the ſimple, that, what ſo euer thei vnderſtand not, thei maie the more eſteme,
and haue in reuerence.
                  
                  But the Latine tongue, ye ſaie, is not Barbarous: and therein, as your woont
is, ye haue noted a woonderful great Lie in our Apologie. Yet vnto S. Paule, that
tongue ſéemeth Barbarous, that is vnknowen vnto the hearer. Thus he ſaithe,
Niſi ſciero vim vocis,
                     1. Cor. 4. 
                     ero illi, qui loquitur, Barbarus: & ille, qui loquitur, mihi Barbarus:
Onleſſe I vnderſtande the power, or meaninge of the woordes, I ſhalbe
                      Barbarous to him,
that ſpeaketh: and he that ſpeaketh (in what tongue ſo euer he ſpeake) ſhalbe Barbarous
vnto me.
                     
                     Artic. 3. Diui. 3. Ludoui. Viues De Traden. Diſciplinis, Lib. 3. Fol. 97. Hereof I had occaſion to ſaie ſomewhat in my Former Replie. S. Auguſtine
ſaithe, Mallet quiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         cum Cane ſuo verſari, quàm cum homine ignotae linguae:
Any man woulde rather dwel with his Dogge, then with a man of an vnknowen tongue.
                     
                  
                  
                     To conclude, ye ſaie, VVhen
                      Englande commeth to haue a Seruice of theire owne, and
a Tongue of theire owne in Churches, then haue they loſte theire parte with the Catholique Churche.
Here, M. Hardinge, a litle more reaſon woulde haue geuen ſomme credite to your
woordes. For, as touchinge the
                      Publique Seruice of the Churche, I beſeeche you, euen
in your owne time of Barbarous blindneſſe, what Seruice had the Churche
of Englande, but peculiare, and Special to her ſelfe? Touchinge the varietie of
Tongues S. Auguſtine ſaith,
                     Auguſti. Aduer. Iudeos, Oratio. 4. Aſtitit Regina à dextris tuis in veſtitu deaurato, circundata
varietate. Vbi ſignificatur Linguarum varietas in omnibus Gentibus: quarum
tamen vna eſt intùs, & Simplex Fides: The Queene ſtoode at thy right hand, appareſled
in Cloth of Goulde, adourned with varietie. Here by is Signified the Diuerſitie of
Tongues in al Nations: The Faithe whereof, that lieth within, is one, and ſimple. Likewiſe
againe he ſaithe,
                     
                     Aug. in Pſal. 44. Veſtius Reginae huius quis eſt? Et pretioſus, & varius eſt: Sacramenta
Doctrinae in Linguis omnibus varijs. Alia Lingua Aphricana: alia Syra: alia
Graeca: alia Hebraea: alia illa, & illa. Faciunt iſtae Linguae varietatem veſtis Reginae huius.
Quomodò autem omnis varietas veſtis in vnitate concordat, ſic & omnes Linguae
ad vnam Fidem, In veſte varietas ſit: ſciſſura non ſit. Ecce varietatem intelleximus
de Diuerſitate Linguarum: & Veſtem intelleximus propter Vnitatem: What is this
Queenes apparel? It is pretious, and ful of varietie: The Myſteries of Doctrine in al ſundrie
Tongues. There is one Tongue of Aphrica: an other of Syria: an other Greeke: an other
Hebrewe: an other this, an other that. Theſe Tongues make vp the varietie of the Queenes
apparel. But as al the varietie of colours in the apparel agreeth in Vnitie: euen ſo al Tongues agree
in one Faithe. Let there be Varietie in the Apparel: But rente, or cutte there maie not be.
Behold, by the Varietie, wee vnderſtande the Diuerſitie of Tongues: and by the Apparel,
wee vnderſtande the Vnitie (of y• Churche).Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 6. 
                     Againe he ſaith, Diſtant inter ſe Linguae: Sed
Linguarum diſtantiae non ſunt ſchiſmata: Tongues are diuided one from an other: But
the Diuiſion of Tongues is no Schiſme, or Diuiſion in Religion.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 10.
               The olde Councel at Carthage commaunded that nothing ſhould
be read in Chriſtes Congregation, but the Canonical Scriptures:
theſe menne reade ſutche thinges in their Churches,Concil. Cartha. 3. as them ſelues
knowe for a Truthe to be ſtarke Lies, and fonde Fables.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  A man were better, I aſſure thee, good Reader, to make two newe Bookes, then to correcte one ſo
ful of lies and falſefied places,Concil. Cartha. 3. c. 47. as this Apologie is.Vntruth. For, if this Old Coū
                        cel be falſified, it vvas falſified tvvelue hundred yeeres agoe, in the Councel of Hippo. This olde Councel of Carthage is newely falſefied
by our new Cleregie. The wordes of the Councel are theſe. Palcuit, vt praeter ſcripturas Canonicas

nihil in Eccleſia legatur ſub nomine Diuinarum Scripturatum:
                     Scriptures onely to be read in Churches It hath ſemed good vnto
vs, that beſides the Canonical Scriptures, nothinge be read in the Churche vnder the name of the holy
Scriptures. They leauinge out theſe foure woordes, ſub nomine Diuinarum Scripturarum, Vnder
the name of Diuine Scriptures, woulde beare men in hande, the Councel willed nothinge to be read
in the Churche, beſides the holy Scriptures. Are not theſe truſty men to whom ye may committe the
charge of your ſoules for your faith and ſaluation?
                  It foloweth in the ſame decree, Liceat etiam Legi paſsiones Martyrum, cùm anniuerſarij
dies celebrantur: Let it be lawful alſo for the Martyrdomes of Martyrs to be read, when theire yerely
feſtes are kept. And yet dare they not onely to ſaie, nothing muſt be read beſides the Scriptures, but
alſo to alleage that very place for that ſpecial lie, whiche ſaithe the contrary. Looke in the Booke thy
ſelfe good reader, and ſee how falſely they handle ſo holy matters.Vntruthe. For it is cōfeſſed by the beſte of M. Har. ovvne ſide. An other lie is, when they ſaie, we
reade thoſe thinges in the Churche, whiche our ſelues knowe to be ſtarke lies, and funde fables. VVhen
they cannot them ſelues ſhewe that we haue any ſutche, it is a vaine lieing rhetorike to ſaie, we doubt
not of it, or knowe it our ſelues for a truthe. I wonder not if they bluſhe not in belieng vs, who haue
belied ſo many Scriptures, Councels, and fathers.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It ſtandeth wel with your Truthe, M. Hardinge, ſo often to charge vs with
Lies, & Falſehedde. I truſte it wil appeare, ye had no great cauſe, to keepe ſo great
reuel vpon ſo poore a Conqueſte. In deede theſe woordes be not founde in the thirde
Councel of Carthage. Yet are they founde in the Councel of Hippo, whiche
is the Abbridgemente of the thirde Councel of Carthage, as it appeareth by the
Title of the ſame: Concilij Hipponenſis Abbreuiationes factae in concilio carthaginenſi
Tertio.
                  
                  The woordes of the Councel of Hippo, and, for ſo mutche, alſo of the thirde
Councel of Carthage,
                     Concil. Hippo, Cap. 38. be theſe: Scripturae Canonicae in Eccleſia legendae quae
ſunt: & praeter quas alia non legantur: The Scriptures Canonical, whiche are to read
in the Churche: and beſides whiche nothinge els maie be read.
                      Here haue you, M. Hardinge,
the plaine woordes of the Councel of Hippo, abberidged out of the thirde Councel
of Carthage, That nothinge maie be read in the Churche, but onely the Canonical
Scriptures. Iudge you therefore, howe iuſte cauſe ye had, ſo vnaduiſedly, for I
vate not to ſaie, ſo vnlearnedly, to charge the Apologie with Lies, and Falſehedde.
                  
                     Hereto maie wée adde the like Decrée of the Councel holden at Laodicea:
Sabbatjs Euangelia cum alijs Scripturis legenda eſſe cenſemus:Concil. Laodice. Cap. 16. 
                     Wee agree that the Goſpel,
with others Scriptures, be read vpon the Saboth daie. If theſe woordes ſéeme not
ſufficiente,
                     
                     Concil. Laodice. Cap. 59. 
                     it foloweth further in the ſame Councel, Non oportet Libros, qui ſunt extra
Canonem, legere, niſi ſolos Canonicos Veteris, & Noui Teſtamenti: We maie
not reade any Bookes, that be without the Canon, but onely the Canonical Bookes of
the Olde, and Nevve Teſtamente.
                  
                     To like effecte Chryſoſtome ſaith,
                     Chryſ. in Matth. Homi 38. Ideò Chriſtus meuſas nummulariorum euertit:
Significans quòd in Templo Dei nō debent eſſe nummi, niſi Spirituales, id
eſt, qui Dei imaginem habent: Therefore Chriſte ouerthrewe the Exchangers bakes:
Meaninge thereby, that there maie be no Come in the Churche, but onely Spiritual, that is to
ſaie,
                     Chryſo. in Acta, Homil. 19. 
                     that beareth the Image of God. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Lectorum officium erat, in Eccleſia,
Sacra Legere ex Scriptis, vel Prophetarum, vel Apoſtolorum: It was the Readers
office, to pronounce holy thinges vnto the people, out of either the Apoſtles, or Prophetes.
                  Eraſmus ſaithe,
                     Eraſin. in Hiero. de Eccle. Scriptarib. Efrem. Apparet, non niſi Apoſtolicas Literas olim Legi ſolitas in Templis,
aut certè Vitorum Apoſtolicae Authoritatis: It appeareth, that in olde time, nothinge
was vſed to be read in the Churches, but onely the Apoſtles Writinges: or at leaſte the Writinges

of ſutche others,
                     Scriptures onely to be read in Churches 
                     as were of Apoſtolical Authoritie. Likewiſe ſaithe
                      Abbas Anſigiſus,
reportinge the Eccleſiaſtical Decrees of the Frenche Kinges, Levves,
& Charles: In Templis tantùm Canonici Libri, id eſt, Sacrae Literae legantur:
Let there he read in the Churches onely the Canonical Bookes,
                     Anſigiſus, Lib. 1. Cap. 19. Impreſſus Pariſijs Anna. 1550. 
                     that is to ſaie, the Holy Scriptures.
                  
                  
                     An other lie, Ye ſaie, is this, when they ſaie, wee reade thoſe thinges in the Churche, whiche our
ſelues knowe, to be ſtarke lies, and fonde Fables. For trial hereof, wee ſhal not néede
to trauaile far. Your owne Bookes, and Legendes are prouſe ſufficiente.
                  Eraſmus thereof ſaithe thus,
                     Eraſin. in Annotation. in Hieronym. De Eccleſiaſticus Scrip. Hodiè quorumlibet ſomnia, imò mulietcularum
Deliramenta leguntur inter diuinas Scripturas: Nowe a daies euery fooles
Dreames, yea very wee mennes doctinge fanſies are read with the Holy Scriptures.
                  
                  Likewiſe ſaithe Polydore Vergil: Multorum Diuorum vitas recitant, tametſi
parùm ad Fidem Scriptas:
                     Polydor. Vergil. in Oration Dominicam. 
                     They reade many Sainctes Liues, although not written
accordinge to Truthe. Ludouicus Viues,
                      writtinge of your Legenda Aurea,
whiche was the Mother of al your deuoute Eccleſiaſtical ſtories, or Fables, ſaithe
thus, Neſcio, cur Aurea dici debeat, cùm ſcripta ſit ab homine ferrei oris, & plumbei
Cordis, & pleniſsima ſit impudentiſsimis Mendacijs: I ſee no cauſe, why it ſhoulde
be called the
                      Goulden Legende, ſeeinge it was written by a man of an iron face, and a ledden
harte, and is freight ful of moſt ſhameleſſe lies. If ye knewe not theſe thinges,
M. Hardinge, your frendes wil thinke, ye knowe nothinge. Sutche Truthes yée
reade, and publiſhe deuoutly, and ſolemnely in your Churches. Yet maie wée neither
ſaie, nor thinke, yée mocke the people.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 1.
               But if there be any, that thinke, theſe aboue reherſed Authorities
be but weake and ſelender, bicauſe thei were decreed by Emperours,
& certaine petite Biſhoppes, and not by ſo ful, & perfite Councelles,
takinge pleaſure rather in the Authoritie, and name of the Pope: let
ſutche a one knowe, that Pope Iulius doothe e
                     •
                  idently forebidde,
that a Prieſt in miniſtring the Communion, ſhould dippe the Bread
in the Cuppe. Theſe menne contrarie to Pope Iulius Decree,
diuide the Breade, and dippe it in the wine.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye maie be ſure, many men thinke this your homely ſtuffe not onely weake and ſlender, but alſo corrupt,
venemous, and lothſome. But nowe by like, ye wil amende your faulte. But how? Surely by going
from very euil to as bad or worſe, if ye can do worſe, then hitherto ye haue donne. Iulius the Pope (ſaie
ye) doth euidently forbidde, that a Prieſte in Miniſtringe the Communion, ſhoulde dippe the Breade in
the Cuppe Nowe verely your former fault of lieing is wel amended. For where before ye beſt out, caſt
in, or changed ſome of thoſe wordes, whiche ye pretende to alleage, nowe ye make euery whit newe
of your owne. VVhere hath Iulius theſe woorde? I ſpeake not of your falſe alleaging of places in your
Bookes margent. I forgeue you the puttinge of Cum enim nemo, in ſtede of cum omne. Theſe be
ſmal and ſlipper faulies, which if thei were alone might be wincked at in ſuch ſlipper merchātes, as ye
are. But let vs heare, what Pope Iulius ſaith. Alios quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         audiuimus intinctā Euchariſtiā populis
pro complemēto cōmunionis porrigere, VVe haue hearde alſo of others, who geue to the people
the Euchariſte dipped, or ſtiped, for makinge vp of the Communion. It is to be vnderſtanded, that
whereas Chriſte, gaue the bleſſed Sacrament of the Aulier to his Apoſtles, he gaue it vnder both kindes.
And when the Prieſtes in ſome countries, either for lacke of wine at al times ready, either for ſomme
priuate fanſie, vſed to dippe or ſtipe the ſacred body of our Lord vnder forme of Breade in the conſecrated

bloude,Communion vnder one kinde. and ſo to geue it to the people: Pope Iulius findeth faulte therewith, for that neither
Chriſte ordeined ſo, nor the Apoſtles lefte ſutche order to the Churche. So that Iulius meaneth nothinge
els, but to reproue and reforme that vſe of dippinge or ſtiping the one kind in the other in the Adminiſtration
of the Communion vnto the people. Reade the place, who liſteth, he ſhal finde the ſame ſenſe
more largely vttered a litle after.
                  But what ſenſe make theſe Defenders a Gods name? They ſaie, Iulius forebiddeth the Prieſte, ne
dum peragit myſteria, panem immegat in Calicem, that in miniſtringe the communion, (ſo the
lady tourneth) he ſhoulde dippe the Breade in the Cuppe. There is no ſutche word in the wholde decree.
Iulius nameth Euchariſtiam: they cal it Breade. Iulius hath,A fonde Vanitie. For if he forbidde the Prieſte to dippe the Sacramente, and to deliuer it, then he forebiddeth the Prieſte to dippe the Sacramente. 
                     intinctam porrigere populis, that no
Prieſte ‡ geue the Sacrament dipped to the people: they, leauing out, geuing it to the people, ſaie he forbad
the Prieſte to dippe it. They leaue out alſo the chiefe cauſe of the whole, whiche is pro complemento
communionis, for making vp of the communion. For he for ebiddeth to geue vnto the people
onely the cōſecrated hoſte dipped in the Chalice, as though it were the whole Cōmunion, noleſſe then if
the Bloude were geuen aparte. Theſe men (ſaie they) contrary to the decree of Pope Iulius, diuide the
Bread, and dippe it in the wine. VVe in the Maſſe breake the hoſte in three partes, not withoutTheſe Myſtical Significations, be Myſtical folies. Reade the Anſvveare. ſignification
of a Myſterie: two we receiue aparte: the thirde we put into the Chalice, and receiue it togeather
with the bloude. VVhal haue ye to ſaie againſte this?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Euery parte hereof is largely anſweard in my Former Replie to M. Hardinge.
True it is, the faulte, that Iulius here findeth in Dippinge, and Miniſtring
the Sacrament, agréeth not fully with the preſent diſorders of the Churche
of Rome. Yet notwithſtanding, in condemning the one, he muſte néedes condemne
the other. Ye ſaie, wée leaue out theſe woordes, Intinctam porrigunt Euchariſtiam
populis: They dippe the Sacramente, and deliuer the ſame vnto the people.
                      And againe
theſe woordes, Pro complemento Communionis: For the accompliſhemente of the
Communion.
                      The more matter wée haue leafte out, the more haue wée conceled
your faultes: and ſo mutche y• more are you beholden to vs. For what meante you,
M. Harding, to mention any of al theſe woordes? What néeded you to burthen your
ſelfe with moe Abuſes, and ſo mutche to bewraie your folie?
                  
                     Iulius ſaithe, They dipped the Sacramente into the Cuppe, and deliuered it vnto
the people:
                      You dippe the Sacramente, as they did: but vnto the people ye géeue
nothinge. Iulius ſaithe, They meante by dippinge to make it a ful, and a perfite
Communion: Contrariewiſe, you defraude the people of the Holy Cuppe, and
deliuer them onely the Halfe Communion, And therefore ye are mutche more
blame woorthy, then euer were they, whom Iulius reproued. For they offended
onely of Simplicitie: and you of wilfulneſſe.
                  But touchinge the matter it ſelfe, the faulte, that wée finde with you, and
the faulte, that Iulius founde with others your Predeceſſours, is al one. You dippe
the Breade into the Cuppe: & ſo did they. They brake Chriſtes Inſtitution: and ſo
doo you. And therefore Iulius ſaide vnto them, Hoc quàm ſit Apoſtolicae, & Euangelicae
Doctrinae cōtrarium, & conſuetudini Eccleſiaſticae aduerſum, non difficilè ab ipſo
Fonte Veritatis probatur, à quo ordinata ipſa Sacramentorum Myſteria proceſſerunt:
Howe far contrarie this is to the Apoſtolical, and Euangelical Doctrine, and to the Cuſtome
of the Churche, it is eaſy to proue by the Fountaine of the Truthe, by whom the Myſteries
of the Sacramentes were ordeined, and from whom they firſte proceeded.
                     
                  
                  Ye thinke the mater wel diſcharged, for that ye deliuer not the Sacramente
ſo dipped vnto the people, but miniſter it onely vnto your ſelfe. Here by the waie,
it were a mater of ſkil, to vnderſtande, by what Authoritie, either of scripture, or
of Councel, or of Doctoure, it maie appeare, that it is lawful for the Prieſte ſo to

vſe and receiue the Sacramente,Communion vnder One kinde. and vnlawful for the people. If the people maie
not as ſafely, and as lawfully ſo receiue the Sacramente, as maie the Prieſte,
wherefore thē are theſe woordes written in your Maſſe Bookes, euen in y• 
                     Canon,
& Secretes of your Maſſe? Haec Sacroſancta Commixtio Corporis, & Sanguinis
Domini noſtri Ieſu Chriſti fiat mihi, & omnibus ſumentibus ſalus animae & Corporis,
This Holy minglinge of the Body, and Bloude of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, be vnto me, and
vnto al, that receiue it, the health of Soule and Body.
                      Verily theſe woordes, Omnibus
ſumentibus, cannot by any ſhifte poſſibly be expounded of One Onely Prieſte, but
muſte néedes be extended vnto the people.
                  Yée woulde faine tel vs of certaine ſpecial Myſteries, that ye haue founde out
in y• 
                     Breakinge of the Sacramente,
                     Daniel. 2 Senten. Lib. 4. Diſt. 12. if ye wiſte, what thei were. But ye are in caſe,
as ſomm
                        •
                     time was Nabuchodonozor: Yee are not hable wel to tel vs your own
dreame. Sammetime ye ſaie, The Breade is broken: ſommetime ye ſaie, The Accidentes
remaine alone by Miracle, and they are broken: Sommetime ye ſaie,
Chriſtes Immortal, and Impaſsible Body it ſelfe is Broken: Sommetime ye
ſaie, Our eies be deceiued, and nothinge is broken.
                  
                  Againe (yee ſaie) the Firſt péece ſignifieth the Chruche trauailing in the world:Durandus Li. 4. Cap. 53.
The Seconde ſignifieth the Bleſſed Sainctes in Heauen: the Thirde ſignifieth the
Soules in Purgatorie.
                     De Conſe. Diſt. 2. Triforme. But Pope Sergius, the Father of theſe fantaſtes, conueieth
his Myſteries an other waie. For the Firſte portion, ſaithe he, ſignifieth
Chriſtes Body after his Reſurrection: The Seconde, chriſtes Body vvalkinge
on Earthe: The Thirde, Chriſtes Body in the Graue. Theſe, M. Hardinge, be
your Holy Significations, & Special Myſteries. With ſutche folies, and Myſtical
vanities ye mocke the world. In Olde times the Breade was not broken, to buſie
mennes heades with Significations,Artic. 11. Diui. 3. Augu. Epiſt. 59. but onely to be deliuered to the people: as
in my Former Replie, I haue declared more at large. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Panis
benedicitur, & Sanctificatur, & ad diſtribuendum Comminuitur: The Bread is Bleſſed,
and Sanctified, and broken into peeces, to the ende it maie be deliuered.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 2.
               
                  Pope Clement ſaithe, It is not lawful for a Biſhop to deale with
Bothe Swerdes: For if thou vvilt haue bothe, ſaith he, thou ſhalte
deceiue bothe thee ſelfe, and thoſe, that obeie the. Nowe a daies
the Pope chalengeth to him ſelfe Bothe Swerdes, and vſeth bothe.
Wherefore it ought to ſeeme leſſe marueile, if that haue folowed,
whiche Clemente ſaithe, that is, that he hath deceiued bothe him
ſelfe, and thoſe, vvhiche haue geeuen eare vnto him.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If theſe felowes had not ſworne to belie al the worlde for maintenance of theire newe Goſpel,
they woulde at this time at leaſte haue made a true reporte of S. Clementes woordes. S. Clement ſpeaketh
not of two ſwordes. The palace truely alleaged hath thus:Theſe vvordes are partely Clementes, partely S. Bernardes. 
                     Si mundialibus curis fueris occupatus,
& teipſum decipies, & eos qui te audiunt. If thou be occupied in worldely cares,
thou ſhalt bothe deceiue thy ſelfe, and thoſe that liſten to thee. The Authoure of this Apologie, hauinge
ſpite at the Church, whiche is Chriſtes folde, and at the Pope, the heade Shepherde, enuieing at his auctoritie,
forgeth a lie vpon S. Clement, making him to ſaie, Si vtrunque habere vis, if thou wilt haue
bothe ſwordes, thou ſhalt bothe deceiue thy ſelfe, and thoſe that obeie thee.Fonde and child 
                           •
                        he. As though a Biſhop maie haue the Tempord 
                           〈◊〉
                        , aud 
                           •
                        xecute a Temporal office, vvithout vvo
                           •
                        ldly cates. VVhereas Clemente ſpeaketh
no word of the two ſwordes, but of worldly cares, where with what Biſhop ſo euer is entangled,
ſhal (as he ſaithe) deceiue both him ſelfe, and others that harken to him. For whiche cauſe theſe Defenders

being coupled with yoke fellowes in pretenſed wedlocke,Bothe Svveerdes in one hande. which ſtate wrappeth a man in worldly
cares,1. Cor. 7. becauſe ſutche a oneVVhat cares haue thei that keepe Concubines? careth for the thinges of the worlde, howe to pleaſe his wife, and is
diuided, as S. Paule ſaithe: it muſt needes folowe, that hauing taken the office of ſuperintendentes, and
charge of Soules vpon them.Eleuen of the Tvvelue Apoſtles, and many Holy Fathers, and Biſhoppes vvere Married: and yet deceiued not &c. they haue deceiued them ſelues, and dayly doo deceiue ſo many as heare
them, and folow their falſe Doctrine.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  O what a pleaſante grace M. Hardinge hath, to talke of Lies? A man woulde
thinke, it were ſomme good parte of his ſtudie. In this place twoo ſundrie Authorities,
the one of Clemens, the other of S. Bernarde, I knowe not, by what erroure,
were ioined in one, and bothe alleged, and ſet foorthe vnder the name onely
of Clements. I graunte, There was herein an ouerſight: But Lie, or Falſhedde
there was none.
                  
                     The woordes of Clemens are,
                     Bernard. De Cō
                        ſideration. Li. 2. 
                     as you reporte them. The woordes of S. Bernarde,
written vnto Pope Eugenius, are theſe: Planum eſt, Apoſtolis interdici Dominatum.
I ergo tu, & tibi vſurpate aude, aut Dominans Apoſtolatum: aut Apoſtolus
Dominatum. Planè ab alterurto prohiberis. Si vtrun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſimiliter habere velis, perdes
vtrun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     : It is plaine, that vnto the Apoſtles of Chriſte, Lordeſhip, or Temporal
Princehoode is forebidden. Goe thou thy waie therefore (thus he ſaithe to the
                      Pope)
and dare thou to vſurpe, either the Apoſtleſhip, beinge a Lorde: or a Lordeſhip, beinge an Apoſtle.
From one of them vndoubtedly thou arte forebidden. If thou vvilt indifferently
haue bothe, thou vvilt loſe bothe.
                  
                     Of ſutche, S.
                     Hieronym. in Sophoniam. Ca. 1. Hierome writeth thus, Militantes Chriſto, obligant ſe negotijs Saecularibus,
& eandem imaginem offerunt Deo, & Caeſari: Beinge the Souldiers of
Chriſte, they binde them ſelues to worldly affaires, and offer vp one Image to God, and Caeſar.
In the
                      Canons of the Apoſtles it is written thus,
                     Canon. Apoſto. Canon. 80. Mathae. 10. Non oportet Epiſcopum, aut
Presbyterum, ſe Publicis Adminiſtrationibus immittere: ſed vacare, & cōmodum ſe praebere
vſibus Eccleſiaſticis. Nemo enim poteſt duobus Dominis ſeruire: A Biſhop,
or a Prieſte maie not entangle him ſelfe with worldly Offices: but be at reaſte, and ſhewe him
ſelfe meete for the vſe of the Churche. For noman can ſerue twoo Maiſters. Yet the
                      Pope
this daie claimeth the righte of Bothe Svverdes,De Maiorita. & Obedient. Vnam Sanctam. Paralipomena Viſpergenſis. 
                     not onely of the Spiritual, but
alſo of the Temporal. And Pope Bonifacius 8. in the Greate Iubilee, and in the
open ſighte of the worlde, when he had one daie ſhewed him ſelfe in his Pontificalibus,
apparelled in Proceſſion as a Biſhop, the nexte daie he put vpon him the
Emperours Roabes of Maieſtie, & had the Emperial Crovvne vpon his heade,
and the Sw
                           •
                        rde naked. and glitteringe borne before him.
                  
                  
                     As for Pope Clemens, his Canon is eaſily ſhifted by a prety Prouiſo. For
thus ſaithe your Gloſe touchinge the ſame,
                     Extra de Iureiurando, Etſi Chriſtus. In Gloſſa. Ceſſante cauſa, ceſsat effectus. Verbi
cauſa, Prohibetur, ne Presbyteri gerant tutelas, hac cauſa, vt meliùs vacent Diuinis Officiis.
Haec cauſa finalis eſt. Vnde, ceſſante hac cauſa, ceſſat effectus. Vnde, ſi non vacent
Diuinis Officiis, poterunt gerere tutelas: The cauſe endinge, the Effecte endeth too.
For example: The Lawe commaundeth, that a Prieſte ſhal not be charged vvith the
VVardeſhip of a Childe in his nonage. The cauſe hereof is this, that he maie the better
applie his Diuine Seruice. This is the Final Cauſe. This cauſe remoued, the Effecte geeueth
place. Therefore if the Prieſte folowe not his Diuine Seruice, then he maie haue y• Wardeſhip
of a Childe. Euen ſo, if the
                      Pope doo not the Office of a Biſhop, then maie he
be a Temporal Prince. But by theſe meanes it commeth to paſſe, euen as clemens
ſaithe, He deceiueth bothe him ſelfe, and alſo them that heare him.
                  Touchinge this vaine obiection of the charge,Part. 5. Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 7. And Part. 2. Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 2. and cares of Marriage, it is fully
anſweared before, in a place more conueniente.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 3.
               Pope Leo ſaith, Upon one daie it is lawful to ſaie but one Maſſe
in one Churche: Theſe menne ſaie daiely in one Churche commonly
tenne Maſſes, twentie, thirtie, yea often times moe. So
that the poore gafer on can ſcante tel whiche waie he were beſte to
turne him ſelfe. Pope Gelaſius ſaithe, It is a wicked deede, and ſubiecte
to Sacrilege in any man, to diuide the Communion, and,
when he hath receiued one Kinde, to abſteine from the other. Theſe
menne, contrarie to Goddes VVoorde, and contrarie to Pope Gelaſius,
commaunde, that one Kinde onely of the Holy Communion
be geeuen the people: and by ſo dooinge, they make their Prieſtes
gilty of Sacrilege.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     A ſolemne fanſie. They muſte needes be vviſe mē
                        
                           •
                        e, that ſo vvil thinke. There is no ſmall number of men, whiche are moued to ſuſpecte, that this Apologie was deuiſed
by ſome Catholike man, intendinge to mocke this newe Cleregie of Englande, and to put them quite
out of eſtimation and credite.Here M. Hard. confeſſeth, that he, and his Felovves can ſette foorthe lies. And to that very ende this innumerable companie of Lies to them ſeemeth
of pourpoſe to be ſet out. For no man hauinge his fiue wittes woulde thinke good, for mainetenance
of his owne parte, to affirme ſo many thinges, the contrary whereof to his greate diſcredite
and ſhame,In Epiſt. ad Dioſcorum Alexandrinum. by ſearche is eaſely founde.Vntruthe manifeſte. Reade the Anſvveare. Articul. 13. Diuiſion. 4. Leo ſaithe cleane contrary to that is here in his name auouched,
that when ſo euer a newe multitude filleth the Churche, ſo as all cānot be preſent at the Sacrifice
at once, that the Oblation of the Sacrifice be without caſtinge any doubte done againe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  I beſeeche thée, Gentle Reader, for ſhortneſſe ſake, & for thy better ſatiſfaction
herein, to conſider my anſweare made hereunto in my Former Replie to M. Hardinge.
Uerily Leo ſpeaketh not one woorde, either of Priuate Maſſe, or of Sole
Receiuinge, or of any other like Superſtitious, and yéeuiſhe vanitie: but onely of
the General Communion of the whole Churche. His Counſel therefore vnto
Dioſcorus is, that if vpon occaſion of reſorte, the multitude of Communicantes
were ſo greate, that they coulde not haue conuenient coume in the Churche, to receiue
al togeather at one Communion, then the Prieſte, after he had miniſtred
vnto the firſte Companie, and had willed them to departe foorthe, and géeue place
to others, and ſawe the Churche repleniſhed againe with a newe Companie of aftercommers,
ſhoulde without feare, or remorſe of Conſcience beginne the whole
Communion againe, and ſo miniſter vnto them, as he had donne vnto the foremet.
More then this oute of Leoes woordes cannot be geathered.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 1.
               But if they wil ſaie, that al theſe thinges are woorne nowe out of
vre, and nighe deade, & perteine nothinge to theſe preſente times, Yet
to the ende al folke maie vnderſtande, what Faithe is to be geeuen to
theſe menne, and vpon what hope they cal togeather their General
Councelles, let vs ſee in fewe woordes, what good heede they take
to the ſelfe ſame thinges, which thei thē ſelues, theſe very laſt yeres,
(and the remembrance thereof is yet newe and freaſhe) in their owne
General Councel, that they had by order called, haue decreed, and
               
                  
                  Againe he ſaithe,
                  Summus Sacerdos. 
                  ſpeakinge likewiſe of any one Biſhop, Vidiſti Summum
Sacerdotem Interrogantem,Ambroſ. De ijs qui initiantur. Ca. 3. 
                  & Conſecrantem: Thou ſaweſt the
                   Higheſt Prieſte
examininge the people, that was to be Baptized, and Conſecratinge the Water.
               
               I leaue out ſundrie other like Authorities of Origen, of Lactantius, of Athanaſius,
of Leo,
                  Euagrius Lib. 3. Cap. 32. of Victor, of Meltiades, and of others. Euagrius calleth
Euphemius, and Gregorius the Biſhop of Antioche, Summos Sacerdotes,
The Higheſte Prieſtes.
                  
                  Ruffinus. Lib. 2. Cap. 23. 
                  Ruffinus calleth Athanaſius, the Biſhop of Alexandria,
Pontificem Maximum: The Greateſt, or Higheſte Biſhop.
                   By theſe, I truſte, it
maie appeare, that the Title, or Dignitie of the Higheſt Prieſtehoode, was general,
and common to al Biſhoppes, and not onely cloſed vp, and morteſed onely
in the Pope.
               
               
                  Biſides al this,
                  Auguſtin. Epiſ. 162. 
                  ye bringe vs a Woorde, yee ſaie, of Greater ſounde:
                   In Romana
Eccleſia ſemper viguit Apoſtolicae Cathedrae Principatus: In the Romaine Churche
the Princehoode of the Apoſtolike Chaire hath alwaies floriſhed. In deede,
                   Princehoode,
and Apoſtolike, be ioily large woordes, and carrie greate ſounde. And
faine woulde yee haue, the Biſhop of Rome ſhoulde be a Prince. Notwithſtandinge,
in the Councel of Aphrica it was decreed thus,
                  Diſt. 99. Primae Sedis. Primae Sedis Epiſcopus non
appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum: Let not the Biſhop of the Firſte See be called the
Prince of Prieſtes.
               
                  But what if the ſounde of theſe woordes weighe no heauier, then the former?
Or, what if this woorde, Princehoode, be nomore peculiare to the Pope, then is
the other of Higheſt Prieſthoode? Paulinus, writtinge vnto Alypius, not the
Greate Biſhop of Rome, but the poore Biſhop, as I remember, of Tagaſta, ſaithe
thus,
                  Inter Epiſtolas Auguſtin. Epiſ. 35. Deus in Ciuibus Ciuitatis ſuae Principalem te cum Principibus populi ſui,
Sede Apoſtolica collocauit: God hath placed thee emongeſt the Citizens of his Cittie, in
the Apoſtolique See, beinge a Principal, or a Chiefe with (other Biſhoppes, that
is to ſaie, with) the
                   Princes of his people: Here haue you founde the Princehoode
of the See Apoſtolique, not onely in Rome, but alſo in the poore Cittie of Tagaſta.
Likewiſe S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                  Chryſotom. De Orando Deum. Li. 1. Ad orandum nos aſsiduè prouocat (Paulus)
Apoſtolorum Princeps: Paule the Prince of the Apoſtles calleth vpon vs, to be
al waies praieinge. So ſaithe S.
                   Gregorie, Paulus obtinuit totius Eccleſiae Principatum:
Paule obteined the Princehoode of the whole Churche.
                  Gregor. in 1. Regum, Ca. 10. Li. 4. Ca. 4. 
                  So ſaithe Leo,
Iuuenalis Epiſcopus, ad obtinendum Paleſtinae Prouinciae Principatum, &c. Biſhop
Iuuenal, that he mighte obteine the Princehoode of the Prouince of Paleſt
                        •
                     e, &c.
Briefely your owne ſingulare Doctoure
                   Amphilochius writeth thus.
                  Leo Epiſ. 62. Amphilochius. 
                  not of the
Pope, but of S. Baſile the Biſhop of Caeſarea: Additus eſt Principibus Sacerdotum
Magnus ipſe Princeps Sacerdotum: Baſile, beinge deade, was laide with other
Biſhoppes the Princes of Prieſtes, beinge him ſelfe the Greate Prince of Prieſtes.
It was greate folie therefore M. Hardinge, theſe Titles thus lieinge in Common,
to encroche the ſame onely to the Pope. Notwithſtandinge, ye ſaie, Thus nowe til
then. Verily, when the
                   Pope him ſelfe ſhal beginne to conſider, and to weighe your
pleadinge, then wil he ſaie, he had a very vnſkilful Proctoure.
               For anſweare to the reſte,Articul. 4. Diuiſi. 30. & 32. I remit you to my Firſte Replie.
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 2.
               Whiche of the Anciente Fathers, or Doctours euer ſaide, that
bothe the Svverdes are committed vnto you?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Let S. Bernarde, Writinge to a Pope, anſweare for the Pope.Vntruthe. For his Authoritie is not ſufficient, as it ſhal appeare. He is a ſufficient witneſſe. VVhere
your ſelfe doo alleage him muche againſt the Pope, you can not by the lawe iuſtly refuſe him, ſpeaking

for the Pope.Bothe Svverdes. The ſpirituall ſwoorde you denie not, I trowe. Of the Temporall ſwoorde belonginge alſo
to the Pope,Bernard. De Conſidera. Lib. 4. thus ſaithe S. Bernarde to Eugenius. He that denieth this ſwoorde to be thine, ſeemeth
to me, not to conſider ſufficiently the woorde of our Lorde, ſaieinge thus (to Peter thy Predeceſſour)
Put vp thy Svverde: Ergo, The Pope hathe bothe Svverdes: A ſimple Argumente. Put vp thy swoorde into the ſcaberde. The very ſame then is alſo thine to be drawen foorthe perhaps
at thy becke, though not with thy hande. Els if the ſame belonged in no wiſe vnto thee, where
as the Apoſtles ſaide, Beholde there be twoo swoordes here: Our Lorde woulde not haue anſweared,
It is ynough, but, It is too muche. So bothe be the Churches, the ſpirituall swoorde, and the materiall.
But this is to be exerciſed for the Churche, and that of the Churche. That by the hāde of the Prieſte, this
of the Souldier, but verily at the becke of the Prieſte, and commaundement of the Emperoure. Thus.
touchinge the Popes bothe swoordes, you are fully anſwered by S. Bernarde.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     The Pope hath power to claime Authoritie without ſhame. Emongeſt others
his vnaduiſed,
                     Diſt. 22. Omnes. 
                     and vaine Woordes, thus he ſaith: Chriſtus Beato Petro, Vitae Aeternae
Clauigero, Terreni ſimul & Coeleſtis Imperij iura commiſit: Chriſte hathe committed
vnto Peter, the keiebearer of Euerlaſtinge Life, the right bothe of the VVorldly,
and alſo of the Heauenly Empiere: That is to ſaie, The Pope is Emperoure
bothe of Heauen,
                     Paralipom. Vrſpergenſis. 
                     & of Earthe. And therefore Pope Bonifacius 8. as it is ſaide before,
in the ſight of the worlde, ware the Crovvne Emperial on his heade, & commaunded
the naked svverde to be borne before him: & Proclamation to be made,
Ecce duo Gladij hic: Beholde here are the twoo Swerdes. I meane the ſame
                      Pope Bonifacius,
of whom it is written,
                     Carion. 
                     He entred as a Foxe: He reigned as a Woulfe: he died
as a Dogge. Hereof it is written in
                      concilio Vangionum, Vtrun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , & Imperium,
& Pontificatum,Auentinus. ſicuti Decij, & Falſorum Deorum Cultores factitare cōſueuerunt, vſurpat:
The Pope wronge fully vſurpeth bothe togeather, as wel the VVorldly Empiere, as
the Biſhoprike, as Decius, and the woorſhippers of Falſe Goddes were woonte to doo.
                  
                  
                     Yet S. Bernarde ſaithe, The Pope hath Bothe Svverdes: But S. Bernardes
Authoritie in this caſe is but ſimple. He liued Eleuen hūdred yéeres after Chriſtes
Aſcenſion, in the time of Kinge Henry the Firſte, the Kinge of Englande, in the
middes of the Popes route, and Tyrannie. How be it, touchinge his Iudgemente,
and Credite herein, let vs rather heare one of your owne Doctours. Herueus therfore
ſaithe thus,
                     Herueus De Poteſtate Papae, Cap. 18. Bernardus ponit, quòd Papa habet Gladium Materialem in nutu.
Sed iſtud, cum hoc, quòd non eſt magnae Authoritatis, magis eſt cōtra eos, quàm
pro eis: Bernarde ſaithe, that the Pope hath the Material, or Temporal Swerde at his
commaundement. But this ſaieinge of Bernardes, biſides that it is of ſmal force, maketh
alſo more againſte them,
                     Herueus De Poteſtate Papae, Cap. 18. 
                     then with them. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Vnum iſtorum Gladiorum
Petrus non teugit, ſcilicet, Saecularem, qui ſuus non erat: The one of theſe
tvvo Svverdes. Peter neuer touched: I meane the VVorldly, or Temporal Svverde:
For that Swerde was none of his.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ye maie finde it written in your owne Decrees, vnder the name of
S.
                     Diſt. 10. Quoniam idem. Cyprian, Chriſtus actibus proprijs, & dignitatibus diſtinctis, Officia Poteſtatis vtriuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
diſcreuit: Chriſte (hath not committed
                      Bothe theſe Svverdes to one mannes
hand, but) by ſeueral Dueties, and ſundrie Dignities, hath ſeuered ye Offices of either Power.
Whereupon your owne Gloſe ſaithe thus, Ergo, eſt Argumentum, quòd Papa
non habet vtrun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Gladium: This therefore is a proufe, that the Pope hath not
Bothe the svverdes.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 3.
               Whiche of the Anciente Fathers euer ſaide, that you haue Authoritie,
and righte to calle Councelles?
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVho hath authoritie to commaunde the partes of the body,To calle Coūcelles. but the head?Vntruth great and manifeſt. for this vvas yet neuer proued. And that the Pope
is head, where it is amply declared, ye hearde euen nowe. VVhere you aſke, whiche euer ſaide, that
the Pope hath authoritie to cal councelles, if you knowe not ſo mutche,Vntruthe. For Socrates ſaithe not ſo. We tel you, that Socrates the
writer of the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtorie ſaithe ſo, not ſpeaking in his owne perſon, but reportinge an olde
rule of the Churche in theſe woordes.Hiſto. Triparti. li. 4. Cap. 9. 
                     Sed ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Iulius interfuit maximae Romae praeſul, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
in locum ſuum aliquem deſtinauit, cùm vtique regula eccleſiaſtica iubeat, non oportere
praeter ſententiam Romani Pontificis
                     Vntruthe, ſtanding in falſe Tranſlation. Reade the anſvveare. 
                     concilia celebrari. But neither Iulius the biſhop of
greate Rome was preſent, (at the councel of Antiochia) neither ſent he any man in his place, where
as the eccleſiaſtical rule commaundeth, that without the aduiſe and wil of the Pope of Rome no councels
be kepte. And, as Socrates witneſſeth of the calling of councels, ſo doth Sozomenus witneſſe
of the thinges doone in them.Lib. 3. ca. 10. 
                     Cum ſacerdotali lege conſtitutum ſit, pro irritis haberi debere,
quae praeter ſententiam epiſcopi Romani geruntur. VVhere as (ſaithe he) it hath benne ordeined
by a lawe of Biſhoppes, that what thinges be doone (in any councel) beſides thaduiſe and wil of
the biſhop of Rome, they ought to be taken for none, and voide. If you wil ſee more for this authoritie
of calling councels, reade Reſcriptum Iulij Papae contrà Orientales: Epiſt. Athanaſij &
Aegyptiorum Pontificum ad Foelicem Papam. This matter is alſo fully anſweared.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here hath M. Hardinge brought in a ſhewe of greate Authorities withoute
ſenſe. For anſweare whereof, it maie pleaſe thee, Gentle Reader, to conſider the
fourth Article of my Former Replie.Articulo. 4. Diui. 26. Notwithſtanding, emongeſt al theſe wordes
of Pope Iulius, Socrates, Caſſiodorus, and forged Athanaſius, there is not one
woorde of power, and Authoritie to calle Councelles. Onely thus mutche they
ſaie,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Regula Iuris. 
                     No Decree maie paſſe in Councel without the agreemente and conſente of the Biſhop
of Rome: for that he was one of the Foure Principal Patriarkes, and oughte to
haue his voice there, as wel as others. It is a Principle ruled in Lawe, Quod omnes
tangit, ab omnibus debet approbari: That toucheth al, muſte be allowed by al.
                     
                  
                  
                     But, leſte you ſhoulde thinke, this was the Popes onely prerogatiue, and belonged
to none other biſides him, the ſame Socrates writeth the very like wordes
as wel of the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, as of the Pope. Thus he ſaithe, Et
hoc fecerunt,Socra. li. 7. ca. 28. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . contemnentes Legem, qua cauetur, ne quis eligatur praeter ſententiam
Epiſcopi Conſtantinopolitani: Thus did they, not regardinge the Decree, whereby order
was taken, that no Biſhop ſhould be choſen without the conſente of the Biſhop of
Conſtantinople. Yet maie not M. Hardinge conclude hereof, that therefore
the Biſhop of Conſtantinople had Authoritie to calle Councelles.
                  Aeneas Syluius, that afterwarde him ſelfe was Pope, named Pius the Second
writeth thus, His Authoritatibus mirum in modum putant ſe armatos, qui negant,
Concilia fieri poſſe ſine conſenſu Papae. Quorum ſententia ſi, vt ipſi volunt,
inuiolata perſiſtat, ruinam ſecum Eccleſiae trahit: They that ſaie, no Councel maie
be keapte without the conſente of the Pope, thinke them ſelues marueilouſly fenſed by theſe
Authorities.
                     Aeneas Syluius De Concil. Baſi. lib. 1. 
                     But if theire ſaieinge holde, and take place, as they woulde haue it, it vvil
dravve vvith it the decaie, and ruine of the Churche.
                  The Foure firſt greate Councelles, of Nice, of Epheſus, of Chalcedon, of
Conſtantinople, and the reſte, as it ſhal afterwarde more largely appeare, were
alwaies called by the Emperours, and not by the Pope. As for the Pope, he hadde
not yet the whole worlde at his commaundemente, nor any ſutche Vniuerſal Authoritie,
to calle Councelles: but rather was commaunded him ſelfe, as other
Biſhoppes were, by the Emperours Authoritie, to comme to Councelles.
                  
                  
                     Therefore, where you woulde conclude thus, The Pope was Head of the
                     
Churche:The vvhole vvorlde is the Popes Dioceſe. Ergo he had Authoritie to calle Councelles: Wee maie rather, and
mutche better turne youre tale backewarde, and ſaie thus, The Pope hadde no
Authoritie to calle Councelles: Ergo, he vvas not Headde of the Churche.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 4.
               Whiche of the Auncient Fathers, or Doctours euer ſaide, The
vvhole vvorlde is but your Dioceſe?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  He that ſaide to Peter,Ioan. 22. fede my Lambes, and, fede my Shepe,God knovveth here is a ſheepiſhe reaſon. whiche Lambes and ſhepe al
Chriſten menne be through the worlde.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     The Canoniſtes, that is to ſaie, the Popes Pages of Honoure, haue not
doubted to infeaffe their Maiſter with the poſſeſſion of al the worlde. One ſaithe
thus,
                     Extra, de Appellation. Vt debitus. In Gloſs. Extra. De ſtatu Regularium. periculoſo In Gloſs. Extra. de Poenis. Foelicis. In Gloſs. Extra De Cōceſs. Praebendae, & Eccleſiae non Vaecantis. Quia diuerſitatem. Abb. Ceremoniar. li. 1. Fran. Zarabella. Dominus Papa eſt Ordinarius omnium hominum: Oure Lorde the
Pope is the Ordinarie, or Biſhop of al menne. An other ſaithe,
                      Papa totius mundi
obtinet Principatum, The Pope hath the Princehoode of al the worlde. An other
ſaithe,
                      Papa eſt Epiſcopus totius Orbis: The Pope is the Biſhop of the whole worlde.
An other ſaithe,
                      Papa etiam ceſſante negligentia Praelatorum, poteſt conferre
beneficia totius Oribis: Quia ipſe eſt Ordinarius totius mundi. Though there be
no defaulte, or negligence in any Biſhop, yet maie the Pope beſtowe the benefices of al the
worlde: For that he is the Biſhop of al the worlde. Therefore when the
                      Chiefe Deacon
inueſteth, or enrobethe the Pope at his Conſecration, he ſaithe vnto him,
Ego inueſtio te de Papatu, vt praeſis Vrbi, & Orbi: I do inueſte thee with the Popedome,
that thou maiſte rule bothe the Cittie, and the worlde.
                  
                  
                     Of this infinite Ambition, and inordinate tyrannie manie good menne
haue often complained. Franciſcus Zarabella, beinge him ſelfe a Cardinal of
Rome, ſaithe thus: Ex hoc infiniti ſequuti ſunt errores: Quia Papa occupauit omnia
iura inferiorum Eccleſiarum: Et niſi Deus ſuccurrat ſtatui Eccleſiarum, Vniuerſa Eccleſia
periclitatur: Hereof haue enſued infinite errours: for that the Pope hathe inuaded
the right of al inferiour Churches. And onleſſe God healpe the ſtate of the Churches, the
Vniuerſal Churche is in ieoperdie.
                     Anna in Hiſtoria Graeca: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Hiſtor. Eccleſiaſt. lib. 1. cap. 6.
                  
                  
                     The learned Lady Anna Daughter vnto the Emperoure Alexius, and Irene,
in her Storie, that ſhe wrote in Greeke, emonge many other thinges to like pourpoſe,
writeth thus: Papa eſt Dominus totius Mundi, quemadmodum Latini quidem
putant, & praedicant: Eſt enim etiam haec pars quaedam illorum inſolentiae. The
Pope is the Lorde of al the worlde, as the Latines thinke, and ſpeake of him. For this is a
peece of theire Ambition.
                  
                  
                     This hath benne the late wanton Claime of the Popes Canoniſtes.Athana. Ad ſolitariam Vitam agentes. 
                     Otherwiſe
the Ancient Learned Fathers haue euermore bounded, and limited the Pope
within his owne particular Iuriſdiction. Ruffinus ſaithe, the Fathers in the
Councel of Nice,Sozomen. lib. 6. ca. 23. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Hieronymus ad Euagrium. 
                     appointed the Pope to ouerſee the Churches of his ovvne Suburbes:
Vt Romanus Epiſcopus Suburbicarum Eccleſiarum ſollicitudinem gerat.
Athanaſius ſaith, Roma eſt Metropolis Romanae ditionis: Rome is the Mother
Churche (not of al the vniuerſal worlde, but) of the Romaine (particulare) Iuriſdiction.
The Biſhoppes in the
                      Councel of Rome write thus to the Biſhoppes
of Illyricum, Par eſt, omnes qui ſunt in Orbe Romano, Epiſcopos conuenire: It is
conuemente, that al the Biſhoppes, that be within the Iuriſdiction of Rome, ſhoulde accorde
togeather. S Hierome ſpeakinge of the vſage, and order of the Churche of Rome,

                     ſaithe thus,
                     Al receiue of the Popes fulneſſe. Quid mihi profeis Vnius Vrbis Conſuetudinem? What allegeſte thou me
the Cuſtome of one Cittie? So mutche he abbridgeth the
                      Popes Iuriſdiction, that he
extendeth it, not vnto the Liſtes, & endes of al the worlde, but reſtreineth it only
to the limites of one Cittie.Hierony. ad Euagrium. Hieronymus aduerſus Vigilantium. 
                     Likewiſe againe, ſpeakinge of the Biſhop of
Rome, he ſaithe thus, Non ſolùm Vnius Vrbis, ſed etiam totius Orbis errant Epiſcopi:
Then not onely the Biſhop of One Towne (whiche was the
                      Biſhop of Rome) but
alſo the Biſhoppes of al the worlde are deceiued.
                  
                  
                     Thus therefore writeth Gennadius, togeather with the Councel of Conſtantinople,
vnto the Biſhop of Rome,Gennadius ad omnes Metropolitanos, & ad Papam Roman. Curet Sanctitas tua Vniuerſas tuas Cuſtodias,
tibi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſubiectos Epiſcopos: Let youre Holineſſe ſee vnto (not al the whole worlde,
but) al your owne charge, and ſutche Biſhoppes, as he ſubiecte vnto you.
                  
                  By theſe fewe we ſee, the Biſhop of Romes power was, not Vniuerſal or
infinite, ouer al the Churches, and Kingedomes of the worlde: but certaine, and
limited within his owne particulare Iuriſdiction.
                  
                  As for the reaſons, yee vſe for proufe hereof, I marueile, ye would euer trouble
the worlde with ſo Childiſhe folies. Chriſte ſaide vnto Peter, Feede my ſheepe:
Ergo, ſaie you, the vvhole vvorlde is the Popes Dioceſe. A good Sheepe
woulde haue made a better Arguments.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 5.
               Whiche of the holy Ancient Fathers euer ſaide, that al Biſhoppes
haue receiued of youre fulneſſe?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Beſides others, ſo hathA ſimple Authoritie. S. Bernarde ſaide in his booke de conſideratione ad Eugenium.
VVhere he ſaithe, that he is called in plenitudinem poteſtatis, into the fulnes of power.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     There is no folie ſo vaine, but by ſome ſhift maie be mainteined. In your Gloſe, M.
Hardinge,
                     Clemen. li. 5. De Haereti. Ad veſtrum, In Gloſs. Petrus de Palude, de Poteſtate Papae. 
                     it is written thus: Omnes ſubiecti ſunt motioni Papae, & ſunt in illo, quaſi
Membra de Membro: Al men are ſubiecte vnto the Popes wil, and are in him as mēbers of a
member. An other ſaithe,
                      Eccleſia non habet Poteſtatem aliquam Iuriſdictionis, niſi à Petro:
The Churche hath no Power of Iuriſdiction, but onely from Peter. And againe,
A Petro, poſt Chriſtum, Spiritualis Gratia, & Poteſtas deriuatur: Nexte after
Chriſte, Spiritual Grace, and Power is deriued from Peter. And therefore an other of your
Doctours ſaithe:
                     
                     Petrus de Palude, de Poteſtate collata Apoſto. Durandus, li. 2. De Miniſtris & Ordinib. Auguſti. de Trinita. li. 15. ca. 26. Omnes Epiſcopi deſcendunt à Papa, quaſi Mēbra à Capite: &
de eius Plenitudine omnes accipiunt. Al Biſhoppes are deriued from the Pope, as
Members from the Head: and al they receiue of his fulneſſe: that is to ſaie, Power of his
Power, and Grace of his Grace. Al theſe vanities M. Hardinge thinketh, maie be
wel borne out by two bare woordes of S.
                      Bernarde.
                  
                     But S. Auguſtine, many hundred yeeres before Bernarde was borne, wrote
thus: Nos quidem accipere poſſumus hoc donum pro modulo noſtro: Fundere autem
illud ſuper alios non poſſumus. Sed, vt hoc fiat, Deum ſuper eos, à quo hoc efficitur, inuocamus:
In deede we maie receiue the gifte of God accordinge to our portion: but to poure
the ſame vpon others, we are not able. Notwithſtanding, in theire behalfe wee cal vpon God,
that is the worker hereof, that he wil doo it.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 6.
               Whiche of al the Ancient Doctours euer ſaide, that al Power

is geuen to you,Al povver geeuen to the Pope. as wel in Heauen, as in Earthe?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     Vntruthe, vndiſcrete, and impudent. For no Ancient Doctour or Father euer vttered ſo fonde vvoordes. Al they whiche ſpeake of the miniſterial Power, whereby vnder Chriſte the militant Churche
by him is gouerned. But if you meane abſolutely, as youre woordes ſeeme to ſounde, ſo no diſcrete
Catholike man euer ſaide or thought.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Here, by a prety diſtinction, of Povver Abſolute, and Povver not Abſolute,
Chriſte, and his Vicare are ſet togeather to parte tenures. Howe be it, what
manner of Povver it is,
                     Extra, De tranſlatione Epiſcopi. Quāto. Hoſtien. In Concil. Lateran. ſub Leone. 10. Seſsione. 10. 
                     that the Pope claimeth, his owne Proctours, and Counſellers
can tel vs beſte. Cardinal Hoſtienſis ſaithe, Excepto peccato, Papa poteſt,
quicquid Deus ipſe poteſt: Sinne onely excepted, the Pope hath Power to doo,
what ſo euer God him ſelfe can doo. Stephanus the Biſhop of Patraca, in youre
late Councel at Laterane in Rome, ſaithe thus, In Papa eſt omnis Poteſtas ſupra
omnes Poteſtates, tam Coeli, quàm Terrae: Al Power is in the Pope aboue al
the Powers, as wel of Heauen, as of Earthe.
                  
                  
                     And,
                     Citatur in eodē Concil. Lateran. 
                     to make the mater plaine, youre owne Bernarde him ſelfe ſaithe, Tibi
data eſt omnis Poteſtas: in qua, qui totum dicit, nihil excludit: Al manner of Power
is geeuen to thee: He that ſaithe, Al, excepteth nothing.
                  
                  
                     And,
                     Extra, de Cōſtitutionibus, ca. 1. Abbate Panormitane ſaithe, Plenitudo Poteſtatis ſuperat omnem Legem
poſitiuam: Et ſufficit quòd in Papa ſit pro Ratione Voluntas: The fulneſſe of Power
paſſeth al Poſitiue Lawe: and it is ſufficiēt in the Pope, that Wil ſtande inſtede of Reaſon.
                  
                  This is that Power, that M. Hardinge here hathe ſo cloſely conueied in,
vnder the Cloude of his Diſtinction.
                  
                     But,
                     Baldus. Baldus, that by experience ſawe the practiſe hereof, ſaithe thus: Haec
Plenitudo Poteſtatis, eſt Plenitudo Tempeſtatis: This Fulneſſe of Power, is a Fulneſſe
of Tempeſte.
                  
                  
                     An other of youre Doctoures ſaithe:
                     Herueus, De Poteſta. Papae. ca. 18 
                     Bernardus nullam Poteſtatem ponit in Papa,
quam non ponit in Praelatis inferioribus: licet in Papa ponat Summam: Bernarde alloweth
no Povver vnto the Pope, but he alloweth the ſame to other inferioure Biſhoppes: Notwithſtandinge,
he alloweth the greateſt Povver vnto the Pope.
                     Bernard. De Conſideration. li. 3. 
                     S. Bernarde him ſelfe
ſaithe to like pourpoſe, Sic factuando probatis, vos habere plenitudinem Poteſtatis: Sed
Iuſtitiae fortè non ita. Thus dooinge, and dealinge, yee ſhewe youre ſelfe to haue the Fulneſſe
of Power: but perhaps not likewiſe the Fulneſſe of Iuſtice.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 7.
               Whiche of the Ancient Fathers euer ſaide, that neither Kinge,
nor Prince, nor the whole Cleregie, nor al the people togeather are
hable to be Iudges ouer you?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     VVorthy reaſons. VVhat Shepe ſhalbe iudges ouer their ſhepherde? For as the Fathers of the moſte ancient Councel
of Sinueſſa ſaide, in the cauſe ofThis Marcellinus being Pope, had committed open Idolatrie, in making Sacrifice 
                           •
                        nto Diuelles. Marcellinus the Pope, Nemo vnquam iudicauit Pontificem:
No man euer iudged the Pope, nor any Prelate his highe Prieſte. Quoniam prima ſedes non iudicabitur
à quoquam: * becauſe the firſt See ſhal not be iudged of any body.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     In theſe twoo pointes ſtandeth the Popes Garde of truſte, and the keepe, and
Caſtel of al his Power. Firſte, the Churche of Rome, what ſo euer waie ſhe take,
can neuer erre: Nexte, the Pope, what ſo euer he doo, maie neuer be called to any

reckening.
                     The Pope vvithout Checke. 
                     One of your Doctours ſaithe thus: Omne factum Sanctiſsimi Patris interpretari
debemus in bonum. Et fiquidem fuerit furtum, vel aliud ex ſe malum, interpretari
debemus,Iohan, De Pariſijs, De Poteſta. Regia, & Papali. quòd Diuino inſtinctu fiat: Wee muſte expounde euery acte of the Holy Father
for the beſte. And if it be thefte, or any other thinge, that of it ſelfe is euil (as Aduoutrie,
or Fornication) we muſte thinke, it is donne by the ſecrete inſpiration of God. An
other ſaithe,
                      Si Papa innumerabiles populos cateruatim ſecum ducat mancipio Gehennae,
cum ipſo plagis mulus in aeternum vapulaturos,Diſtinct. 40. Si Papa. huius culpas arguere praeſumat
mortalium nullus: If the Pope drawe infinite Companies of people by heapes togeather
with him ſelf into Hel, to be pouniſhed with him with many ſtripes for euer, yet let no Mortal
man preſume to reproue his faultes.
                  
                  
                     An other ſaith,
                     9. Queſti. 3. Cunctae. Papa ſolutus eſt omni Lege Humana: The Pope is exempted
from al Lawe of Man. An other ſaithe,
                      Sacrilegij inſtar eſſet, diſputare de facto Papae.
Facta Papae excuſantur, vt homicidia Samſonis: vt furta Haebraeorum: vt adulterium
Iacob:Diſt. 40. Non nos. In Gloſs. 
                     It is a ſinne, as greate as Sacrilege, or Churche robbinge, to reaſon of any of the
Popes dooinges. For his Actes are excuſed, as Samſons Murders: as the Ievves Robberies:
and as the Aduouteries of Iacob.Petrus de Palude. de Poteſta. Papae. Arti. 4. 
                     An other ſaithe, Nec Totus Clerus, nec totus
Mundus poteſt Papam iudicare, aut deponere: Neither al the Cleregie, nor al the whole
Worlde, maie either Iudge, or Depoſe the Pope. And againe, Papa in nullo caſu,
quamdiu eſt Papa,Idem eodē loco. propter quodcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      crimen poteſt deponi, nec à Concilio, nec à
rota Eccleſia, nec à toto Mundo: The Pope, while he is Pope, cannot in any caſe, for any
offenſe by him committed, be depoſed, neither by the General Councel, nor by al the Churche,
nor by the whole worlde.
                  
                  
                     And al this they are wel hable to proue by good ſubſtantial Authoritie of the
Scriptures.
                     In Epiſtola Nicolai Papae: Inter decreta Adriani Papae. Diſt. 21. Inferior. Herueus De Poteſt. Papae. ca. 20. Concil. Tomo. 1. In purgatione Sixti. 
                     For thus they reaſon, The Scholare is not aboue his Maiſter: The
Seruant is not aboue his Lorde: And againe, The Axe boaſteth not it ſelfe againſt
the Carpēter, that hevveth vvith it: Ergo, no man maie accuſe the Pope.
                  
                     Therefore, an other of youre Doctours ſaithe: Iudicare de factis Papae, hoc aliqui
dicunt eſſe, Tangere Montem, & ponere os in Coelū: To Iudge of the Popes deedes,
this, ſomme menne ſaie, is to touche the Holy Mounte (wherein God gaue the Lawe, &
ſhewed him ſelfe to Moſes) and to ſet the face againſt the Heauens. And the
                      Pope him
ſelfe ſaithe, It is the Sinne againſte the Holy Ghoſt, whiche ſhal neuer be forgeuen, neither in
this worlde, nor in the worlde to comme.
                     
                  
                  
                     Thus maie the Pope depoſe Kinges, and Princes, and trouble the whole ſtate
of the worlde, and doo what he liſte, without Controlmente. Yet maie no man
dare ſaie vnto him, Sir vvhy doo ye ſo? Therefore the Accuſers of Pope Symmachus
ſaide in the preſence of King Theodoricus, Papa iactat, ſe vnà cum docendi
Poteſtate,Ennodius. accepiſſe licentiam peccandi: The Pope maketh his boaſte, that togeather with
the Power of teachinge, he hathe receiued free libertie to doo il.
                  
                  
                     Pope Marcellinus,
                     Concil. Tomo. 1. In Marcellino. whoſe name ye haue alleged, out of the Councel of Sinueſſa,
for defence hereof, was an Apoſtata,
                      & had foreſaken Chriſte, and being Pope
in Rome, had made Sacrifice vnto Diuels. Al this notwithſtandinge, ye ſaie, no
mortal man might accuſe him. Thus hath the Pope a Special Prerogatiue, and
Premunire, to forſake Chriſte, and to committe open Idolatrie, and to geeue Honour,
and Sacrifice vnto Diuels, without Controlmente.
                  
                     Yet S.
                     Gala. 2. Cyprian. Ad Quirinum. Paule accuſed S. Peter, euen vnto his face, in the preſence of many.
And S. Cyprian ſaithe, Petrus ſe non Vindicauit, ſeu aliquid inſolenter aſſumpſit, vt
diceret, ſe Primatum tenere, & obtemperari ſibi à nouellis, & poſteris oportere.
Peter (being thus checked openly by S. Paule) neither reuenged him ſelfe, nor tooke
any thinge proudely vpon him, as to ſaie, that he had the Primacie, or that others, that were but
Nouices,
                     Nicephor. li. 17. cap. 26. 
                     and aftercommers (as Paule was) ought be obediente vnto him. Mena, the Biſhop
of Conſtantinople, iudged, and Excommunicated Pope Vigilius. The Biſhoppes

of the Eaſte Churche Iudged,
                     The Emperour receiueth his povver of the Pope. 
                     and Excommunicated, and depoſed Pope Iulius.
One of youre Doctoures ſaithe, Si Papa committat crimen Depoſitione dignum, debet
puniri, ac ſi eſſet vnus ruſticus: If the Pope committe an offence, where fore he ſhoulde iuſtly
be depoſed, he ought to be pouniſhed, as if he were a Clowne of the Countrie. Your
neighbours of
                      Leodium,Sozomenus, li. 3. cap 11. 
                     in their Epiſtle againſte Pope Paſchalis, write thus:
Remoto Romanae Ambitionis typho, cur de grauibus, & manifeſtis, non reprehendantur,
& corrigantur Romani Epiſcopi?Felinus in Repertorio. Dignitas. Qui reprehendi & corrigi non vult, pſeudo
eſt, ſiue Epiſcopus, ſiue Clericus: Settinge aparte the Pride of Romiſhe Ambition,
the Crimes beinge greate, and manifeſte, why maie not the Biſhoppes of Rome bothe be
reproued,
                     Concil. Tomo. 2. Epiſt. Leodien. contra Paſchalem Pap. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     and alſo corrected? He, that fleeth rebuke, and correction, is a falſe man, whether he
be Prieſte, or Biſhop.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 8.
               Whiche of the Ancient Fathers euer ſaide, that Kinges, and Emperours,
by Chriſtes wil, and Commaundemente, receiue their Authoritie
at your handes?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat is to be anſwered hereto,There maie you finde nothinge to proue nothinge. you maie gather of that is alleaged before out of S. Bernard,
ſpeaking of bothe ſwordes.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  It is euident by the recorde, and general conſente of al Ancient Writers, that
the Pope hath neither poſſeſſion, nor foote of Landes, nor Houſe to dwel in, nor
the name of Vniuerſal Biſhop,
                     Nicephor. li. 7. cap 46. nor Chartar, nor Libertie, nor Iuriſdictiō, but that
he hath receiued, either of the French kinges, or of the Emperours. Yet would he
now beare y• world in hande,Cariō. in Bonif. 3 Sabellicus in Phoca. yt the Emperoure hath nothing, neither Landes, nor
Honour, nor Power, nor Right, nor Swerd, nor Iuriſdiction, but onely from him.
If any man doubte hereof, biſides other teſtimonies of Antiquitie, lette him reade
that moſte vaine, and Childiſhe Donation, that the Pope him ſelfe hathe forged,
vnder the name of the Emperoure Conſtantine.
                     Ambroſi. In Lucam. li. 9. ca. 20. 
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Si non vis eſſe
obnoxius Caeſari, noli habere, quae ſunt Mundi. Si habes diuitias, obnoxius es Caeſari:
If thou wilte not be ſubiecte to the Prince, then poſſeſſe not the thinges, that be of the worlde:
If thou have worldly riches,
                     
                     Auguſt. In Iohannem, Citatur in Epiſt. Leodi
                           •
                        n. contra Paſchalē Concil. Tomo. 2. Citatur ab Illyrico inter Teſtes veritatis. Pa. 102. 
                     then arte thou ſubiecte vnto the Prince.
                      Likewiſe S. Auguſtine,
Dices, Quid mihi, & Regi? Quid tibi ergo, & poſſeſſioni? Per Iura Regum
poſseſſiones poſſidentur: Thou wilt ſaie, what haue I to doo with the Prince? What then
haſte thou to doo with Landes? For poſſeſſions are holden
                      (not by the Popes righte, but)
by the right of Kinges, and Princes.
                  
                  Charles the Frenche kinge, Neuewe to Charles the Greate, wrote thus vnto
Pope Adrian: Imperatores ius diſtinguendorum negotiorum Epiſcopis Sanctis iuxta
Diualia Conſtituta permiſerunt: non autem Epiſcoporum Villici extiterunt:
Emperoures, by their Commiſſions vnder their greate Seales, haue graunted vnto Biſhoppes
Authoritie to heare cauſes: but they them ſelues were neuer Stewardes, or Bailifes vnto Biſhoppes.
One of your owne late Doctours ſaithe,
                     
                     Herueus De Poteſt. Papae. ca. 18. Papa habet gladium (Ciuilem)
ex Commiſsione, & permiſsione Principis: The Pope hathe the Temporal
Svverde, or Ciuile Iuriſdiction, by the Commiſſion, and Sufferance of the Prince. Therfore
it ſeemeth greate folie to ſaie, The Prince hath his ſvverde, or Iuriſdiction
onely by the Commiſſion of the Pope.
                  
                     Youre owne Barbarous Gloſe ſaithe,
                     Extra. De Maiorita. & Obedt. Vnam Sanctam. In Gloſs. Imperator in temporalibus habet Poteſtatem
à ſolo Deo. Et imperium fuit, antequam Apoſtolatus eſſet. The Emperoure
in Temporal thinges hath his Authoritie (not from the
                      Pope, but) from God onely.
And the Empiere was, before the Apoſtles were. Againe, Imperator non habet gladium

à Papa:The Emperour receiueth his povver of the Pope. Sed Imperium eſt à ſolo Deo. The Emperoure hath not his Swerde
of the Pope: but the Empiere is onely from God. Againe,
                      Ex ſola electione Principum,
dico, verum eſſe Imperatorem, antequam confirmetur à Papa: I ſaie, that
the Emperoure is a very righte, and perfite Emperoure, by the onely Election of the
Princes,
                     Diſt. 96. Cum ad Verum. In Gloſs. 23. quae. 4. Quaeſitum. 
                     yea, before he be confirmed by the Pope.
                  
                     What ſhal we neede moe witneſſes? Youre very Ceremoniarie of Rome
ſaithe thus, Hoc affirmamus, ante Carolum Magnum, neminem Imperij Romani
Coronam ex Manu Romani Pontificis Romae ſuſcepiſſe: Thus we ſaie, that before the
Emperoure Charles the greate (that is, for the ſpace of eight hundred yeeres after Chriſte)
no man euer receiued the Crowne of the Romaine Empiere at Rome,
                     Diſt. 96. Cum ad verum. In Gloſs Ceremonia. li. 1. Section. 5. ca. 7. Bernardus De Conſiderat. li. 2. 
                     by the Handes of the
Biſhop of Rome. S. Bernarde hereof thus writeth vnto the Pope: Eſto, vt alia quacun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
ratione hoc tibi vendices: non tamen Apoſtolico iure: Nec illud tibi dare,
quod non habuit, Petrus potuit: Be it, that ye claime this right by ſomme other meanes,
Yet by the Apoſtles right ye cannot claime it: Neither coulde Peter geeue you that right, that
he himſelfe neuer badde.
                  
                  
                     The Emperoure Ludouicus the fourth ſaithe thus:
                     Paralipomena Vrſpergen. in Ludouico. 4. Mea Poteſtas non pendet
à Papa, ſed à Deo immediatè. Et vanum eſt, quod dici ſolet, Papam non habere
Superiorem: My Power hangeth not of the Pope, but immediatly of God alone.
And it is but a peeuiſhe vaine tale, that they ſaie, the Pope hath no Superioure.
Iohannes Maior ſaith,
                     Iohan. Maior. 4 Senten. Diſt. 20, quae. 2. Bonifacius Octauus multùm apparenter definiuit, quòd Romanus
Pontifex eſt ſupra Reges in Temporalibus: quod tamē oculatiſſimi Theologi
dicunt eſſe falſum: Pope Bonifacius. 8. hath concluded with greate ſhewe of reaſon,
that, euen in Temporal Cauſes, the Pope is aboue Kinges. But I maie tel you, the VViſeſt
Diuines ſaie,
                     Iohan. De Pariſijs, De Poteſta. Regia, & Papali, cap. 5. 
                     it is but a falſe tale. Iohannes de Pariſijs ſaithe, In Temporalibus,
Poteſtas Saecularis maior eſt Poteſtare Spirituali, nec, quoadiſta, eſt ei ſubiecta in aliquo:
In Temporal Cauſes, the Temporal Power is greater then the Spiritual Power, and, touchinge
the ſame, is not ſubiecte to it in any pointe. Herueus ſaithe, Si Imperator habet Poteſtatem
ſuam immediatè à Papa, Ergo, Imperator eſt Miniſter Papae: If the Emperoure
receiue his Power immediately from the Pope,Herueus De Poteſta. Papae. ca. 19. 
                     then is the Emperoure the Popes Seruante.
                  
                  Al theſe Authorities notwithſtandinge, the Pope him ſelfe ſaithe, The Emperoure
hath no right, nor Authoritie, but onely of him. And, touchinge the laſte Obiection
of Herueus, that ye 
                     Emperoure ſhould be the Popes Seruant, he thinketh, it maie
be wel admitted without any greate inconuenience. For thus ſaithe one of his
Priuie Counſel,Diſt. 98. Si Imperator. In Gloſ. 
                     Iſte Romanus Imperator, eſt Procurator, & Defenſor Romanae Eccleſiae.
This Romaine Emperoure is
                      (nothinge els, but) the Proctoure, and Steward of
the Churche of Rome.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Iohannes de Pariſijs, Dicunt, quòd ſolus Papa eſt Verus
Dominus Temporalium:Iohan. De Pari. De Poteſt. Regia & Papali. ca. 5. ita vt poſſit auferre ab alio, quod aliâs ſuum eſt: & tenet
factum eius, licet peccet. Sed Praelati coeteri, & Principes, non ſunt Domini,
ſed Tutores, Procuratores, & diſpenſatores: They ſaie, that onely the Pope is the
right Lorde of Temporal Poſſeſſions: ſo, that he maie put any man frō his owne. And although
he offende in ſo dooinge, yet his dooinge taketh place. But other Biſhoppes, and Princes, be not
Lordes, but Ouerſeers, Bailifes, and Stewardes.
                  
                  
                     Therefore Pope Adrian namely thus auanced him ſelfe aboue the Emperoure
Fredericus. 1. Imperator per nos imperat: Vnde haber Imperium. niſi à nobis?Auentinus. Ecce in
Poteſtate noſtra eſt, vt demus illud, cui volumus: Proptereà conſtituti ſumus à Deo ſuper
Gentes, & Regna: vt deſtruamus, & euellamus, & aedificemus, & plantemus: By meane
of vs, the Emperoure is Emperour: For, whence hath he his Empiere, but of vs? Beholde,
it is in our hande, to beſtowe the Empiere, vpon whome we liſte. And to that ende are we placed
by God, ouer Nations, and Kingdomes: that we ſhould deſtroie, and plucke vp, and builde,
and plante. Sutche proude vauntes the
                      Pope maketh of him ſelfe, without either
ſhame of the worlde, or feare of God.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 9.
               Whiche of the Anciente Learned Fathers,The Pope aboue the the Emperoure. with ſo preciſe, and
Mathematical Limitation, euer ſurueied, and determined you to
be ſeuentie, and ſeuen times greater then the Mightieſt Kinges?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Some mery felowe,Clemēs Cō. Apoſto. li. 2, Cap. 34. Nazianzen. Ad popul. Nazianzen. De Maiori. & Obedien. Solitae. or other,A pleaſant Mathematical Diuinitie whiche thought he might be bolde to ſpeake Mathematically, ſo he
kepte him ſelfe within compaſſe, and without iuſte reprehenſion. For where as the ſpiritual power
ſo farre paſſeth the Temporal, as the Soule doth excelle the Body, and the Heauens ſurmounte the Earth,
as S. Clement ſaithe, and Gregorie Nazianzene:By this reaſon, euery ſimple poore pariſhe Prieſte is ſeuentie, and ſeuen times greater then the Emperoure. you ſhoulde not ſo greatly be offended with the
ſeuenty and ſeuen times greater dignitie, and we neede not condemne him as an Heretike, whiche
woulde be pleaſaunt in his algoriſme, eſpecially Ioannes Andreae in the ſame place referring the mater
to the Aſtronomers.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Somme Mery felovve, I vvarrante you, ye ſaie. And thus, nowe in mirthe,
nowe in ſadneſſe, ye haue of longe time mockte the worlde, and forced Kinges and
Emperours to be your ſelaues.Iohan. Andreae. Clemens. As for youre Newe Doctours, Iacke of Andrevve,
and Sir Clement, as you euermore cal him, the Apoſtles felovve, we weighe them
none otherwiſe, then they be worthy. But, touching Gregorie Nazianzene, it is
true, that he ſaith, The Truthe, and Might of Goddes Worde infinitely paſſeth al wordly
Power. But what maketh al this for the Pope, that walloweth onely in his Temporalties,
and worldly cares, and as wel in Preachinge Goddes Woorde, and Miniſtring
the Sacramentes, as alſo in other Spiritual exerciſes, is as farre inferioure
to any meane Prieſte, as the Earth is inferioure to the Heauens?
                  
                     Howe be it, that it maie appeare, what prety Mirthe ye haue made herewith,
one of youre owne Felowes ſaithe thus:
                     Herueus De Poteſta. Papae ca 11. Eccleſiaſtici debent iudicare per contemptibiles,
id eſt, per Laicos, Secundum tenorem, & debitum Terreni Iuris: The Eccleſiaſtical
Officers, or Biſhoppes, ought to iudge by them, that be Vile, and Contemptible, that is to
ſaie, by the Laie Magiſtrates, according to the tenoure, and order of the Temporal Lavve.
Here in your Mirthe, and pleaſance, in compariſon of your ſelues, ye cal Princes,
and Temporal Magiſtrates, Vile, and Contemptible.
                  
                     Againe,
                     Herueus De Poteſta Papae. ca. 12. 
                     ye ſaie, Patet, Regnum, ſiue Regimen Regale non eſſe acceptum
à Deo. Sed ipſum ſolùm permiſit indignatus. Et magis eſſet acceptum Deo,
quòd per ſolum Papam Mundus in omnibus regeretur: It is plaine, that the ſtate
of kingedome, or kingely gouernement came not from God. For God onely ſuffered
it in his anger. And it were more acceptable vnto God, that the whole world were in al
thinges gouerned by the Pope alone. It were good, ye ſhould tel vs, whether ye ſpeake
this onely in
                      Mirthe, and Game, or els in earneſte, and good ſadneſſe.
                  
                  Verily, when yee ſo proudely compare the Pope to the Sonne, and the Emperoure
to the Moone, youre meaning is, that, as the Moone hathe no light, but
onely from the sonne, ſo the Emperoure hathe no Authoritie, but onely that he
receiueth from the Pope.
                     Iſidorus in Gloſ. in Geneſim. Herueus, De Poteſta. Papae. ca. 13 Notwithſtandinge, in this compariſon, Iſidorus youre
owne Doctour ſaithe, yee are ſowly ouerſeene. For thus he writeth, Per Solem
intelligitur Regnum, & per Lunam intelligitur Sacerdotium: By the Sonne, is
meante Kingely Dignitie, and by the Moone, is meante Prieſthoode. Now therefore
Iacke Andrevve, youre mery man, by this reckening maie caſte youre coumptes
backewarde, & ſaie, The Emperoure is ſeuentie, and ſeuen times greater, then the Pope.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 10.
               Whiche of the Anciente Fathers euer ſaide,Conſtantines Donation. that more ample Authoritie
is geeuen to you, then to the reſidue of the Patriarkes?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     A vvhole heape of Vntruthes and forgeries hudl
                           •
                        d togeather. The Fathers of the Nicene councel, by witnes of ‡ Iulius the firſte, who then liued. ‡ and
thoſe of the Councel of Sardica, ‡ Athanaſius, and the Biſhops of Aegipt, Thebaida, and Lybia, and the
Fathers of certaine other Councelles.
                  Aboue al other moſte ſpecially the firſte Chriſtian EmperoureVntruthes, vvithout any vvorde or ſhevve of truthe. Conſtantine the great. VVho being
fully inſtructed of the moſte godly and learned Biſhops of his time, * what authoritie the ſucceſſour
of Peter, had by * commiſsion of our Sauiour Chriſt, thought good by his * Emperial Commaundemente
and decree, to confirme, ratifie, and for his own perſone to yelde vntoVntruthe. For Sylueſter vvas dead long before theſe maters are imagined to be donne. bleſſed Sylueſter then Pope, and
to his ſucceſſours Biſhoppes of Rome, the ſame Authoritie, and Superioritie, not onely ouer Biſhoppes and
Patriarkes, but alſo Power and Honour, higher and greater, then that of Kinges, and Emperours.
The wordes ofThis ſolemne Decree is nothinge els, but a ſolemne folie. his ſolemne decree in that behalf made, are theſe, whiche as they are found in ſundrie
other Greeke writers, ſo moſte plainely inFor ſhame: hath the Pope none other Recorde to proue his Chartar by, but onely one poore, hungrie, forged Grecian, that neuer ſavve Rome? Matthaeus Hieromonachus. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . VVhiche
in oure tounge is this mutche to ſaie. VVe geeue in decree and commaundemente to al Lordes, and
to the Senate of our Empire, that the Biſhop of Rome, and the ſucceſſour of S. Peter chiefe of the
Apoſtles, haue Authoritie and Power in al the worlde more then that of the Empire is, and that he
be honoured and worſhepped more then the Emperoure, and that he be Head of the foure Patriarchal
ſeates, and that thinges apperteininge to the right faithe, be of him iudged and determined. Iuſtinian
the Emperour likewiſe made an expreſſe decree, that the moſte holy Pope of the elder Rome (for
theſe be his very woordes) be taken, accordinge to the determinations of the holy councels, to be the
Firſte, and principal in Councelles, vve confeſſe: But Lorde and Maiſter of al other Patriarkes, that vvoulde be proued. firſte and principal of al Biſhoppes. It were not hard to alleage mutche more for proufe hereof,
of good and ſufficient authoritie: but in a matter not doubtfull this may ſuffiſe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  This is a folie of al folies. Yet is there no folie ſo greate, but by wordes and
countenance it maie be maineteined. It ſhameth, me to beſtowe woordes herein:
and ſo mutche the more, for that you ſaie, the caſe is ſo cleare, and out of doubte.
I aſſure you, M. Harding, of al other your innumerable Louanian vanities, concerning
the practiſe of the Churche, & ſtorie of time, this one vanitie is y• 
                     vaineſt.
                  
                  But leſte any man, by Simplicitie, or Ignoraunce ſhoulde be deceiued, not vnderſtanding
the Myſteries of this Donation, or Chartar, by the iudgemēt of your
owne Doctours,Herueus de Poteſtate Papae, Cap. 19. the meaninge thereof is this: Volunt aliqui quòd ratione huius
Doni, Papa eſt Imperator, & Dominus Mundi: & quòd poteſt Reges inſtituere,
& Deſtituere, ſicut Imperator: Somme thinke, that by force, and vertue of this Donation,
                        
the Pope is the Emperoure, and the Lorde of the VVorlde: And that hereby
he hath Power bothe to ſet vp, and alſo to put downe Kinges, as an Emperoure.
                     
                  
                  The Fable hereof is ſo peeuiſhe, that the wiſeſte, and beſte learned of youre
very frendes, Platyna, Cardinal Cuſanus, Marſilius Patauinus, Laurentius
Valla, Antoninus Florentinus, Otho Friſingenſis, Hieronymus Paulus Catalanus,
Volaterranus, Mullinaeus, and others haue openly reproued it vnto the
worlde, and haue written againſte it, and are mutche aſhamed of youre folies.
                  And, to allege one in ſteede of many, Cardinal Cuſanus hereof hath written
thus: Donationem Conſtantini diligenter expendens, reperi ex ipſamet Scripture.
                     
manifeſta argumenta Confictionis & Falſitatis:Conſtantines Donation. 
                     Aduiſedly weighinge this Donation,
or Graunte of conſtantine,Nicolaus Cuſanus, de Concordantia Catholica, lib. 3 cap. 2. Ni. Cuſa. eodem loco. (whereby the Pope claimeth al his Temporal
power) euen in the penninge thereof, I finde manifeſte tokens of falſehed, and forgerie.
                     
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe, Sunt, meo iudicio, illa de Conſtantino, Apocrypha: Sicut
etiam fortaſsis quaedam alia longa, & magna ſcripta Sanctis, Clementi, & Anacleto
Papae aſcripta. Ipſae enim Epiſtolae, applicatae ad tempus illorum Sanctorum,
ſeipſas produnt: By my iudgement theſe Chartars of Conſtātine are forged: as perhaps
are alſo other lo
                           •
                        ge, and greate Letters, that beare the name of S. Clemente, and
Pope Anacletus. For the Letters them ſelues, applied vnto the time of theſe Holy Fathers,
betraie them ſelues.
                  
                  
                     Againe,
                     Diſt. 98. Conſtantinus. 
                     the ſame graunte of Conſtantine, euen in Gratian the Popes owne
Regiſter, is founde onely in the Palea, and not in the Original allowed texte. And
in many Olde Bookes, that haue no Gloſe, it is not founde. And in the
Gloſe vpon the ſame it is noted thus, Palea iſta non legitur in Scholis: in qua continetur
Priuilegium,Gloſa 
                           •
                        odē loco. quod Conſtantinus conceſſit Romanae Eccleſiae: Scilicet, vt
Primatum inter omnes Eccleſias obtineret: This patche is not read in the
Scholes: wherin is conteined the Priuilege, that Conſtantinus the Emperour graunted
to the Churche of Rome: that is to ſaie, that the ſaide Churche ſhould haue the Soueraintie
ouer al Churches.
                  
                  
                     And,
                     Pius. 2. in dialog. 
                     to put the mater oute of doubte, euen Pope Pius him ſelfe thereof ſaithe
thus, Dicta palea Conſtantinus, falſa eſt: The ſaide, that ſo beginneth, Conſtantinus,
is ſtarke falſe.Felinus de Maioritate & Obedien. Solitae. Colum. 3. 
                     Whereunto Felinus your canoniſte addeth theſe
woordes: Et inuehit contra miſeros Legiſtas, qui laborant in diſputando, an
valuerit id, quod nunquam fuit: And the ſame Pope Pius rageth earneſtly againſte
the poore Lavviers, for that they take ſutche paines to reaſon, whether that thinge maie be
good, and auailable in Lawe, that neuer was made.
                  
                  
                     And againe, the ſame Doctoures,
                     In vita Sylueſtri. Herueus de poteſta. Papae. ca. 19▪
                      
                     that woulde ſeeme moſte frendely and fauourably
to ſpeake of this Donation, by their owne iudgemente, doo quite condemne
it. For thus they ſaie, In, Donatione illa audita eſt Vox Angelorum
in aëre dicentium, Hodiè Venenum effuſum eſt in Eccleſiam: At the time of the
Confirminge, and paſſinge of this Donation, there was a Voice of Angelles hearde in the aire,
ſaieinge, This daie Poiſon is powred into the Churche.
                  
                  Briefely, to touche ſomme parte of the Contentes, and Subſtance of the ſame,
the fooliſhe Body, that forged it, was ſo ſimple, that he knewe not, whether
Conſtantinople ſtoode in the 
                        •
                     aſte from Rome, or in the Northe: Whether Byzance
were a Cittie, or a Countrie: Whether the Emperial Diademe were made
of Silke, or of Goulde. He telleth a tale of the Patriarke of Conſtantinople,
that he ſhould be 
                        •
                     oner, and buxom to the Biſhop of Rome: and yet at that time,
when, as he imagineth, this Graunte was made, the Cittie of Conſtantinople
was not builded, nor and ſutche name as yet knowen in the worlde.
                  
                     And yet is the Marginal Gloſe hereupon, as good, and as ſubſtantial, as the
Texte.
                     Concil. Tomo. 1. pag. 227. 
                     For, where as the Texte ſaithe, Contradimus Beato Sylueſtro phrygium
noſtrum, id eſt, mitram: Wee deliuer vnto Bleſſed Sylueſter our phrygium, that
is to ſaie, our Miter, there ſhal you finde this prety note in the Margine,
                  Nota,Phrygium. quo'd Phrygium factum eſt ex pennis pauonum: Marke wel, that this
Phrygium, or Miter, was made of a Pecockes taile. No doubte, a worthy gifte for an
                     
Emperoure: and a meete Miter for a Pope. But, as I ſaide before, it 
                           ••
                        ameth
me, in ſo Childiſhe a Fable, to ſtande ſo longe.
                  
                  As for youre Greeke Doctour Hieromonachus, he ſhalbe ſtalled togeather
with youre Clemens, Leontius, Amphilochius, and other like youre worthy

and Weightie Doctours.
                     Conſtantines Donation. For ſhame, what ſhoulde ye bringe vs this one ſely
poore Greeke witneſſe, whoes name yee neuer hearde before, to teſtifie of
Grauntes and Conueiances made in Rome? Can youre Pope finde out neither
Councel, nor Doctour, nor Father, nor any other Writer of likely recorde,
to healpe him in ſo greate a caſe, but onely one poore raſkal Graecian, that knewe
no more of the mater, then you youre ſelues? It bewraiethe the needineſſe of
youre cauſe. He that durſte ſo lewdely to falſifie ſutche a Graunte, thereby to
intrude him ſelfe into the poſſeſſion of the Empiere, woulde not bluſſhe to falſifie
ſomme Beggerly Witneſſe, to auouche the ſame.
                  Nowe, where yee woulde ſeeme to ſaie, the other Foure Patriarkes ſtoode
euermore at the Commaundemente of the Biſhop of Rome: not onely the ſaide
three Patriarkes, whiche neuer neither yeelded, nor knewe any ſutche Obedience,
but alſo the general practiſe of the worlde wil ſoone reproue you.
                  Nilus a Greke VVriter ſaithe,Nilus De primatu Romani Pontificis. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Vt liquidi
                        •
                     s appareat, Papam non imperare alijs
omnibus Epiſcopis, legatur Sextus Canon Synodi Nicenae, quo diſertè praecipitur,
vt alijs Eccleſiis Alexandrinus, alijs Romanus, alijs Antiochenus praeſit: Vt
non liceat alteri, alterius prouinciam inuadere: That it maie wel and plainely appeare,
that the Pope hathe no Povver or Gouernemente ouer al other Biſhoppes,
reade the Sixthe Canon of the Nicene Councel. There it is expreſſely Commaunded,
that the Biſhop of Alexandria ſhal haue the rule ouer certaine Churches, and the Biſhop
of Rome ouer certaine, and the Biſhop of Antioche likewiſe ouer certaine: And that
it ſhal not be laweful for any one of them, to inuade the Juriſdiction of an other.
                  
                  
                     The Emperoure Iuſtinian ſaithe, Eccleſia Vrbis Conſtantinopolitanae
Romae Veteris praerogatiua laetatur:Cod. De Sacroſan. Eccle. Omni innouatione. Nicephorus, li. 12 cap. 13. 
                     The Churche of the Cittie of Conſtantinople
enioieth nowe the prorogatiue of Rome the Elder. Nicephorus ſaithe,
Romano & Conſtantinopolitano Epiſcopo ex aequo paria ſunt & dignitatis
praemia, & honorum iura: The title of dignitie, and right of honoure, geeuen to the
Biſhop of Rome, and the Biſhop of Conſtantinople are one, and equal.
                  
                     So likewiſe it was determined by Decree in the Councel of Conſtantinople:
Definimus Sedi Conſtantinopolitanae paria Iura,Concil. Conſtant. 2. cap. 36. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . & Priuilegia cum Sede
Veteris Romae: Wee decree, that the See of Conſtantinople ſhal haue Rightes, and
Priuileges equal with the See of Olde Rome. Therefore, as it is ſaide before,
Gennadius, togeather with the
                      Councel of Conſtantinople, wrote thus vnto the
Biſhop of Rome: Cures Sanctitas tua Vniuerſas tuas Cuſtodias, tibi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Subiectos
Epiſcopos:Gennadius ad omnes Metropolitanos, & ad Papam Roman. Cypriā ad Cornelium. 
                     Let your Holineſſe ſee vnto al youre owne Cures, and to the Biſhoppes, that be
ſubiecte vnto you.
                  
                  S. Cyprian, Cyrillus, Athanaſius, and others, writing, either of, or vnto
the Biſhop of Rome, cal him, not their Lorde and Maiſter, vnto whom of duetie
they ought Obedience, but their Brother, and their Felovve Seruaunte. Yea the
Pope him ſelfe, in ſome caſes, hathe rather offered his Obedience vnto other Biſhoppes.
                     Athanaſius ad Epi. Aphricanos. Epiſtola Liberij ad Athanaſium.
                     For thus writeth Pope Liberius vnto Athanaſius the Biſhop of
Alexandria: Quaeſo vt huic confeſſioni ſubſcribas, vt ego ſecurior efficiar, & tua mandata
inhaeſitanter obeam: I beſeche thee to ſubſcribe to this Confeſſion, that I maie be
out of doubte, and maie doo youre Commaundementes vvithout grudginge.
                     
                  
                  Yet nowe the Biſhop of Rome, to mainteine his title by a Write of Right,
for as mutche as the foure principal Patriarkes of the worlde haue forſaken him,
appointeth out Foure of his ordinarie Chaplens, and geeueth them the names of
foure Patriarkes: The firſt for Conſtantinople: the ſeconde for Alexandria: the
thirde for Antioche: the fourthe for Hieruſalem. And thus, hauing theſe foure
at Commaundemente, in his pleaſante fau
                        ••
                     e, he ruleth, and gouerneth the whole
worlde. In ſutche a ſolemne brauerie, the greate Cham of Tartarie at this daie,

after he hath dined him ſelfe,The Pope is God. ſoundeth out a trumpet, and geeueth al the kinges,
and Emperours of the worlde leaue to goe to dinner: and in this imagination,
and ioilitie, he continueth his claime to the poſſeſſion of al the worlde, euen by
as good right and Title, as doothe the Pope. And when ſo euer the Pope him
ſelfe, in his owne perſonne, openly, and ſolemnely ſaithe his Maſſe, he commaundeth
the Goſpel, and Epiſtle to bee readde in Greeke. Whereupon his owne
Maiſter of Ceremonies ſaithe thus:Ceremonia. li. 3. cap. 7. 
                     Hanc conſuetudinem hinc ortam puto, vt appareat
Romanam Eccleſiam in ſe continere Vtram
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Gentem: Hereof, I thinke, this
Cuſtome firſte proceeded, that hereby it maie appeare, that the Churche of Rome conteineth
in it Bothe Nations.
                     Antoni. in Summa. par. 3. tit. 22. cap. 6.
                     Artic. 4. Diui. 8.
                     Artic. 4▪ Diui. 7. Al this notwithſtāding, Antoninus ſaithe, Hoc Graeci
non credunt. For al this, the Greekes beleue it not.
                     
                  
                  The obiections of Iuſtinian, and of the Councel of Sardica, are anſweared in
my Former Replie to M. Hardinge.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 11.
               Whiche of the Anciente Holy Fathers euer called you Lorde,
and God?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  None that wiſe is, ſo ſpeaketh abſolutely: neuertheleſſe in ſome certaine ſenſe, S.A vaine forgerie. Clement calleth
euery Biſhop. Terrenum quendam Deum, a certaine earthly God, as it is written,Theſe vvordes are ſpoken of Princes and Magiſtrates. I haue
ſaide, ye are Gods, &c.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  So that yee make not the Pope an Abſolute God, ye thinke, ye maie otherwiſe
cal him God ſafely, and without preiudice. A proper ſhifte, to mainteine a
vaine man in ye poſſeſſion of his Godhed.
                     Hierony. In Daniel. cap. 3. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                     Suetonius in Domitiano
                     Suetonius.
                     Pompon. Laetus. Athenaeus, li. 7.
                     Chryſoſt. De Spi. Sancto.
                     Auguſt. Contra Fauſtum li. 13. cap. 17.
                     Euſe. li 2. ca. 13. In ſutche a pleaſant imaginatiō 
                     Antiochus
ſommetime the king of Syria, intituled him ſelfe by the name of God. So
the Emperoure Domitian vſed to aſſigne his Proclamations: Dominus Deus
veſter Domitianus: Youre Lorde God Domitian.
                      So the Emperoure Caligula
called him ſelfe, Deum optimum Maximum, & Iouem Latialem: The Beſte, and
moſte mighty God, and the greate God Iuppiter of Italie: So Sapores, the great king
of Perſia, called him ſelfe, Fratrem Solis, & Lunae: The brother of the Sonne, and
the Moone: So the peeuiſhe Phyſician Menecrates called him ſelfe Iuppiter: So
Nicoſtratus called him ſelfe Hercules: So Nicagoras made him ſelfe a paire of
whinges, and would needes be called the God Mercurius: So Manichaeus the
Heretique called him ſelfe the Holy Ghoſte: So the Romaines in olde times erected
vp an Image in the honour of Simon Magus the Sorcerer, with this Inſcription,
or Poſee, Simoni Sancto Deo: In the honoure of Simon the Holy God. By
this youre ſo handeſome Diſtinction, M. Hardinge, of God Abſolute, and God not
Abſolute, I ſee not, but euery of theſe might wel, and ſafely haue maineteined
his title without blame.
                  
                     Certainely,
                     Diſt. 96. Satis euidenter.
                     Chriſtopher. Marcel. In Conc. Latera. Seſs. 4.
                     Cardillus pro Concil. Trident. 
                     in this arrogante vanitie, ſcarcely any of al theſe was euer comparable
to the Pope. Pope Nicolas ſaithe, Conſtat Summum Pontificem à Pio
Principe Conſtantino Deum appellatum. It is wel knowen, that the Pope, of the
godly Prince Conſtantine, was called God. Likewiſe the Pope was wel content, to ſuffer
one of his Paraſites to ſaie vnto him, in the late Councel of Laterane, Tu es
alter Deus in terris: Thou arte an other God in Earthe. Likewiſe Cardillus the
Spaniard in Defence of the Popes La
                        •
                     e Chapter at Trident, oftentimes calleth

the Popes late Chapter at Tridente, oftentimes calleth ye
                      Pope Terrenū Deum,
An Earthely God: By the ſame ſtyle, and right, whereby Holophernes ſometime
ſaide,
                     Iudith. 5. Nobuchodonoſor eſt Deus Terrae: Nabuchodonoſor is the God of ye Earth.
                  
                  Vpon the Popes owne Clementines, yée ſhal finde the mater thus taken vp, &
qualified with greate indifferencie, and modeſtle, and thus ſpecially noted in the
Margine:The Pope is neither God, nor Man. Our Lorde God the Pope. 
                     Papa nec Deus eſt, nec Homo. And, to leaue other his like blaſphemo
                        ••
                     ,
& fond ſtyles,Extrauag. Iohan. 22. Cum Inter. In Gloſſa. Impreſſ. Lugduni. An. 1555. Pariſijs. 
                           〈◊〉
                         n. 1513. 2 Theſſalon. 2.
                     Gregor. in Iob. Ca. 34. Li 25. Ca. 14.
                     Anſelmus in. 2. Theſſalon. 2. in an other like Gloſe yée ſhal finde it written thus, Credere,
Dominum Deum Noſtrum Papam non potuiſſe ſtatuere, prout ſtatuit, Haereticum
cenſeretur: To beleeue, that Our Lorde God the Pope might not decree, as he decreed,
it were a mater of Hereſie.
                      Here haue we founde by expreſſe, & plaine woordes, euen
in the Popes owne Authentical, and allowed Booke, Our Lorde God the Pope.
                  
                  
                     Theſe thinges might ſeeme vncredible, had not S. Paule foretolde vs, that the
Man of Sinne ſhould ſit in the Temple of God, and ſhewe him ſelfe, as if he were
God. S.
                      Gregorie, writinge of Antichriſte, ſaithe thus, Cùm ſit damnatus Homo,
& nequaquam Spiritus, Deum ſe eſſe mentitur: Whereas he is a damned man, and
not a Spirite, by lieinge, he faineth him ſelfe to be God. Anſelmus ſaithe, Simulabit ſe
Religioſum, vt ſub ſpecie decipiat Pietatis: Imò ſe Deum eſſe dicet: & ſe Adorari faciet:
at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      regna Coelorum promittet: Antichriſte ſhal faine him ſelfe to be Holy, yt he
maie deceiue menne vnder the Coloure of Holineſſe. Yea, and he ſhal cal him ſelfe God: and
ſhal cauſe him ſelfe to be woorſhipped: and ſhal promiſe ye Kingdome of Heauen. Euſebius
ſaith,
                     Euſebius de Praeparat. Li. 7. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Hoc eſt Argumentum, eos odiſſe Deum, quo'd velint ſeipſos appellari Deos:
This is a token yt they hate God, for yt they wil haue them ſelues called by the name of God.
                  Likewiſe ſaith the Ancient Father Irenaeus, Antichriſtus exiſtens Apoſtata,
& Latro, quaſi Deus, vult Adorari: & cùm ſit Seruus, Regem ſe vult praeconiari:
Antichriſte, beinge a Renegate, and a Theefe, yet wilbe woorſhipped as a God: and
beinge but a ſlaue, yet he wilbe Proclaimed, and publiſhed, as a Kinge.
                      Therefore, although
y• 
                     Pope be not, as you ſaie, an Abſolute God, or an Abſolute Chriſte, yet
without any great inconueniēce, I trowe, he maie wel be an Abſolute Antichriſte.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 12.
               Whiche of the Anciente Holy Fathers euer ſaide, that you are not
a mere Natural man, but a certaine Subſtance made, & growen togeather,
of God and Man?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Can you bring him before his face,A fainte ercuſe. that ſhall ſaie ſo vnto him? I warrant you (ma
                        •
                     ſter Defender)
he ſhal either be reproued for his flattering, or proued to vnderſtāde no more by it, thenA certaine Diuine Povver in the Pope. a certaine diuine
power aboue the Naturall ſtate of men,A ſoare pouniſhemente for open Blaſphemie. or warned, that he be more circūſpecte in his gloſinge,
when Heretikes are ready to ſlaunder the whole Churche, becauſe of one Priuate mans affection.
               
               
                  The B. of Sacrisburie.
                  
                     He that maie cal him ſelfe, Lorde, and God, maie eaſily Claime him ſelfe to be
more,In Sexto: De Electione, & Elect. Fundamenta, In Gloſſa. Clemen. In Prooe
                           •
                        io. In Gloſſa. then a man. In ye
                      Popes owne Decretalles, it is noted thus in the Margine,
Papa nō eſt Homo: The Pope is not a Man. Your Gloſe vpon the Popes owne
clementines, allegeth theſe woordes out of one of your allowed Poëtes, Papa ſtupor
Mundi: The Pope is the Woonder of the Worlde. And againe,
                      Nec Deus es, nec
Homo: quaſi neuter es inter Vtrun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      
                     
                        
                           •
                        hou arte neither God, nor Man: In a manner
Thou arte neither of bothe: but rather a meane bitweene bothe.
                  
                  By the Authoritie of this Doctoure, it appeareth, that the Pope is neither
God, nor Man. Angel, I trowe, he is not. What other Creature ye maie make
of him, I leaue to you further, to conſider.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 13.
               Whiche of the Anciente Fathers euer ſaide, that you are the onely
Headſpringe of al Lavves?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhſoeuer ſaithe it, ſpeaketh not without euident reaſon, conſideringe that of the Principall of
euery gouernement, all lawes belonginge to the ſame, be deducted and deriued.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here haue ye brought vs a ful ſimple reaſon, as God knoweth. But to haue
brought vs ſomme Authoritie of Doctoure, or Councel, it had benne better.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 14.
               Whiche of the Anciente Fathers euer ſaide, that you haue Povver
ouer Purgatorie?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     No doubte, it vvere a vvoorthy mater. VViſely. O that ye would firſte beleue a Purgatorie, and then ſhoulde ye vnderſtande, what diſpenſation
of looſing and bindinge is committed to the Vicare of Chriſte.Eſai. 7. For, as Eſaie ſaithe, Excepte ye beleue,
ye ſhal not vnderſtande: and the conſequent doctrine muſt needes be obſcure, as longe as the principall
grounde thereof is wickedly denied.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Of your Purgatorie fantaſies, wee haue ſufficiently ſaide before. Where ye
wiſhe, wee woulde beleue, there is a Purgatorie, Verily wee beleue conſtantly,
what ſo euer God hath willed vs to beleue.Roman. 10. S. Paule ſaithe, Faithe commeth by
hearinge: Hearinge commeth by the VVoorde of God:
                      and thereby onely is Faithe
directed. As for your Folies, & Mockeries, thei are ſubiecte to Fanſie, and not to
Faithe.
                     Auguſt. de Tempore Sermon. 145. Feria. 3. Paſchat.
                     Auguſt. in quaeſtiont
                           •
                        . veteris Teſ
                           •
                        am quae. 43. S. Auguſtine ſaith, Nemo de Chriſto credat, niſi quod de ſe credi voluit
Chriſtus: Let no man beleue of Chriſte, but that, that Chriſte hath commaunded him to beleeue
of Chriſte. Againe he ſaith, Conſtat Fidem ſtultam non prodeſſe, ſed potiùs
obeſſe: It is certaine, that
                      Fooliſhe Faithe doothe no good, but rather burteth. Notwithſtanding
though al your Liſtes, & gaineful Territories of Purgatorie were
fully graunted, yet ſhould it be very harde for you to proue, either by Scripture, or
by Doctoure, that the Pope beareth any greater Authoritie, or ſwea there, to
commaunde in, or out at his pleaſure, then any other ſimple Priſte. Al be it, one of
your allowed Doctours ſaithe,Augelus Pariſienſis. 
                     Purgatorium eſt peculium Papae: Purgatorie is
the peculiare poſſeſſion of the Pope.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 15.
               Whiche of the Anciente Fathers euer ſaide, that you are hable to
Commaunde the Angels of God, as ye liſte your ſelfe?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Nor olde Father,Vntruthe manifeſte, As ſhal appeare. nor newe Doctour. And what ſo euer he be, that ſhal ſo tell you, beleue him
not. He ſpeaketh not Catholikely: and you muſt make no ſcruple in ſuche matters.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, at laſte, M. Hardinge, for ſhame, yée are faine to yeelde. No Doctoure, ye
ſaie, euer thus ſaide, neither Olde, nor Nevve. How be it, hereto ye haue laide a
very ſpecial exception: If any man haue ſo ſaide, ſaie ye, what ſo euer he were, he ſpake not
Catholikely. And yet againe ye tel vs further, How ſo euer it be, we ſhould neuer be ſcrupulous
in ſuche matters.
                  
                  
                     
But what if the Pope him ſelfe,The Popes povver ouer the Angelles of God. the Father of al Fathers, and Doctoure of al
Doctours, bothe Newe, and Olde, haue not bluſſhed to ſaie the ſame? Maie wee
ſaie, as you ſaie, The Pope him ſelfe vvas not Catholique? Or, if wée ſo ſaie, wil
you beleeue it?
                  In déede, Kinge Xerxes, the greate Kinge of Perſia, when he had brought ouer
his huge Armie into Graecia, ſente out his letters of defiance vnto the greate
Mounte Athos,
                     Herodotus. that is in Macedonia, & commaunded him to ſtande ſtil, and not
to ſt
                        •
                     rre a foote, nor to woorke any piſpleaſure, either to him ſelfe, or to his Armie.
Euen by like Authoritie, and with as good diſcretion, the Pope hath vſed to ſende
out his Preceptes, & Princely Letters, and to commaunde Angels, Archangels,
& al the Povvers of Heauen, to comme, to goe, to fetche, to carrie, & to be ready to
doo his wil. Therefore is he the better contente, to heare his frendes tel him thus,
Tibi data eſt omnis poteſtas,
                     In Concil. Lateranen. Sub Leo
                           •
                        
                        ne. 10. Seſs. 10. Extra. De Conſtitutionib. Statuta Canonum. Felin.
                     Felinus eodem loco. 
                     ſupra omues poteſtates, tam Coeli, quàm terrae.
Qui totum dicit, nihil excludit: To thee is geeuen al māner of Power, aboue al Powers,
as wel of Heauen, as of Earthe. He that ſaithe, Al, excepteth nothinge.
                  
                  Felinus your Doctoure ſaith thus, Nedum Circa Coeleſtia, Terreſtria, & Infernalia
papa gerit Vicariatum Chriſti, ſed etiam ſuper Angelos, Bonos, & Malos:
The Pope hath Chriſtes Lieutenantſhip, not onely ouer thinges in Heauen, ouer thinges
in Earthe, and ouer thinges in Hel, but alſo ouer the Angels, bothe Good, and Badde.
                  Innocentius the Pope him ſelfe ſaithe, Vicario Creatoris omnis creatura
Subiecta eſt: Vnto the Creatours Lieutenante euery Creature is ſubiecte. Your owne
Doctoure
                      Antoninus,Autonin. in Sum. par. 3. Titu. 22. Cap. 5. ante §. 
                     the Archebiſhop of Florence, ſaith, Poteſtas Papae maior
eſt omni alia poteſtate creata, aliquo modo extēdens ſe ad Coeleſtia, Terreſtria,
& Infernalia: vt de ea verificari poſsit, quod dictum eſt, Omnia Subieciſti ſub
pedibus eius: The Popes Povver is greater, then any other power, that God euer made:
and after a ſorte ſtretcheth it ſelfe vnto thinges i
                           •
                        
                      Heauen, thinges in Earth, and thinges in
Hel: ſo that, of that Povver the woordes maie be verified, yt are written by the Prophete
Dauid,Agrippa de vanitate Scientiarum. 
                     Thou haſte made al thinges ſubiecte to his fecte. Camotenſis ſaithe, Papa Angelis
praecipit, & poteſtatem habet in Mortuos: The Pope commaundeth the Angels
(of God), and hath power ouer the Deade.
                      Gregorius Haimburgenſis ſaithe,
Vt termiuis v
                        •
                     ar ſuorum Adulatorum,Gregor. Haimburgen. in Appellatione sigiſmundi Ducis Auſtriae.
                     Veſelus.
                     Agrippa de Vanita. Scientia
                           •
                        . Papa Angelis habet imperare: To vſe the
woordes of his Platterers, the Pope hath Povver to commaunde the Angelles. Therefore,
if any man happen to die vpon ye waie, as he paſſeth in Pilgremage to Rome,
Pope Clemente. 6. commaundeth the Angelles of God, to be at hande, and to
carrie his ſoule immediately into Heauen.
                  
                  Hereto, and to al other the like, M. Hardinge ſaithe, Theſe Popes, theſe Doctours,
theſe Fathers, theſe Pages, theſe Paraſites, herein were not Catholique.
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge, he ſaithe further, If the Pope, for his fanſie, take ſommewhat
vpon him, and ſommetimes be a litle ouer bolde with Goddes Angelles, to
Commaunde them, and Countremaunde them, at his pleaſure, in ſutche caſes we
ought not to be ouer ſcrupulous.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 16.
               Whiche of the Anciente Fathers euer ſaide, that you are the
Lorde of Lordes, and Kinge of kinges?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  He vſeth the cleane contrarie Title, callinge himſelfe Seruum Seruorum Dei, the Seruante of
the Seruantes of God. Yet if he, for the largeneſſe of his iuriſdiction, haue a number of Lordes and
Kinges within his folde,In a right good ſenſe. although he himſelfe dothe not boaſt of it, yet in a righte good ſenſe, that
Title maie be geuen to him.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Notwithſtandinge the Pope cal him ſelfe the Kinge of Kinges,
                     The Pope Kinge of Kinges. & the Lorde
of Lordes:
                     Extra De Maiorit. & Obedientia. Solitae. Diſt. 98. Si Imperator. In Gloſſa. Auentinus in Adriano. Notwithſtāding he ſaie, The Emperour is ſo far inferiour vnto him,
as the Moone is inferioure vnto the Sonne: Notwithſtandinge he ſaie, The Emperoure
is but his Bailife, his Stevvarde, & his Man: Notwithſtandinge he ſaie,
He hath power to ſet vp, & to put downe Kinges, and Emperours at his pleaſure,
Yet, ſaithe M. Hardinge, al this maie be ſpoken in right good ſenſe: for the Pope
vſeth a cleane contrarie Title, and calleth him ſelfe, Seruum Seruorum Dei,
The Seruante of Goddes Seruantes. Thus he thinketh it ſufficient, to weighe matters
onely by Title, and not by Truthe.
                  How be it, al this is but plaieinge vnder a Viſarde. The Diuel ſeldome theweth
his hornes:
                        
                           •
                        
                        ▪ Corinth. 11. but rather changeth him ſelfe into an Angel of Lighte. Touching
this Title, As the Pope calleth him ſelfe a Seruante, euen ſo doothe the Emperoure
likewiſe abaſe him ſelfe to the name of a Seruante. If ye doubts hereof,
reade your owne Gloſe vpon your Decretalles.
                     In Decretal. Grego. In prooemio. In Gloſſa. Extra. de Preben. & Dignitatib. Iohan. 22.
                     Execrabilis. In Gloſſa.
                     Herueus de Poteſt. Papae. Ca. 12. The woordes there be theſe: Etiam
Imperator ſeipſum appellat Seruum: LIkewiſe againe the ſame Gloſe ſaithe,
Papa ſe ſeruum appellat, & Imperator vocat ſe Seruum Vltimum Eccleſiae:
The Pope calleth him ſelfe a Seruante, and the Emperoure calleth him ſelfe the vileſt
Seruante of the Churche.
                  
                  Al this is nothinge els, but a politique kinde of diſſimulation, and Hypocriſ
                        •
                     e.
For if theſe be Seruantes, I praie you then, whoe be Lordes?
                  
                  Herueus, one of your owne Doctours, hereof ſaithe thus, Dicere, quo
                        •
                     d talia dicum
Summi Pontifices ex Humilitate, eſt omni
                        •
                      o' pernicioſum. Et hoc eſt ponere
os in Coelum. Philoſophus dicit, hoc eſſe peccatum Ironiae, quod opponitur
virtuti. Et addit, tales humiles non eſſe virtuoſos, ſed timidos, & blanditores. Et
Auguſtinus ait,Auguſt de Verbis Apoſtoli. Cùm Humilitatis cauſa mentiris, ſi nō eras peccator antequàm
mentireris, mentiendo peccator efficeris: To ſaie, that the Popes ſpeake theſe
woordes of Humilitie, it were very hurteful. And this is, To ſet the face againſt the Heauens.
Ariſtotle ſaithe, this is the 
                           ••
                        nne of Diſſimulation, or Hypocriſie, whiche is contrarie
vnto vertue. And ſaithe further, that ſutche humble menne are not vertuous,
but feareful, and flatteringe. And S. Auguſtine ſaithe, when ſo euer thou ſpeakeſt vntruthe
vnder the coloure of Humilitie, if thou were not a ſinner before, yet by tellinge vntruthe
thou arte made a Sinner.
                  
                  
                     Good Reader, pul of this painted Viſarde: & vnder this vaine Title of, Seruant
of Seruantes, thou ſhalt finde a Lorde of Lordes. For proufe hereof, thus ye
                      Pope
him ſelfe ſaith: Neither
                      Emperoure▪ 
                     nor Kinge maie iudge the Pope.Epiſtola Nicolat Papae, Inter Decreta Adriant Papae. Concil. tomo. 1▪ In purgatione Sixti. 
                     And his reaſon
is this, Non eſt Seruus ſupra Dominum: For (the Emperoure beinge a) Seruante,
in not aboue (the Pope, that is) his Lorde. Thus yée ſée, he that ſo humbly
calleth him ſelfe the Seruante of Seruantes, if ye touche him, or anger him, wil ſuddainely
change him ſelfe into the Kinge of Kinges, and Lorde of Lordes. For
in theſe woordes he plainely, & expreſſely calleth the Emperoure the Seruante,
and him ſelfe the Lorde. And, what ſo euer he ſaide to the contrarie, verily the
Popes Expoſition muſte néedes be more Authentical, then M. Hardinges.
                  
                  
                     He maketh the Emperoure to holde his Stitope: He maketh the Emperoure
to leade his Bridle: He maketh the Emperoure to kiſſe his Foote: He maketh the
Emperoure to lie downe grouelinge,
                     Doct. Bonner in Praefa. in Libel. Stephani Gardineri De Vera Obedientia. 
                     and ſetteth his foote on his necke: And yet
ſtil calleth him ſelfe, The Seruante of Seruantes. Fewe good Seruantes wilbe to
homely with their Maiſters. Doctoure Bonner ſaithe thus, Notwithſtandinde
the Pope be a very Roueninge Woulfe, dreſſed in Sheepes clothinge, yet he calleth
him ſelfe, The Seruante of Seruantes.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 1.
               We canne alſo goe further with you in like ſorte. What one, amongeſt
the whole numbre of the olde Biſhoppes and Fathers, euer
taught you either to ſaie Priuate Maſſe, whiles the people ſtared
on, or to lifte vp the Sacramente ouer your heade, in which pointes
conſiſteth nowe al your Religion: Or els to mangle Chriſtes Sacramentes,
and to bereue the people of the one parte, contrarie to
Chriſtes Inſtitution, and plaine expreſſe woordes? But that wee
maie once come to an ende: What one is there of al the Fathers,
whiche hath taught you to diſtribute Chriſtes Bloude, and the Holy
Martyrs Merites, and to ſelle openly your Pardons, and al the
roomes and lodginges of Purgatorie, as a gaineful kinde of marchandiſe?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Your obiections of Priuate Maſſe, of liftinge vp the bleſſed Sacramente, of miniſtringe the Communion
vnder one Kinde, be as common with you, as Life be with Beggars, and lies with Heretikes.
For in deede your queſtiōs be but beggarly and hereticall. Touching the ſame. I haue ſaideNote, that M. Hardinge, in his ſaide three Articles of Anſvveare to M. Ievvel, hath publiſſhed threeſcoare and nico
                           •
                         greate Vntruthes. ſo muche in
roy anſweare to M Iuell your neareſt frende his Chalenge▪ as here to rehearſe it againe,Article. 1. 7. 2. it is needeleſſe.
You maie ſeeke it there. The Doctrine of pardons I iudge verily you vnderſtande not. Here is no
oportunitie to diſcuſſe it. The full treatiſe of the ſame requiringe a longe proceſſe, maie wel to
an other time be differred.Fol. 117. Of Purgatorie I haue ſaide ſome deale here before. Theſe be the
matters, wherein you and your ignorant felow miniſters gladly ſhewe your vile railinge, and ſcoffinge
eloquence. Yet concerninge the doctrine of pardonsAnd al the ſame is leſſe then nothinge. leaſt I ſaie nothinge, this much
I haue thought good to ſaie here.
                  In the Sacramente as wel of Baptiſme, as of penaunce, al the bandes of ſinne are looſed, and the
whole euerlaſtinge paine due to ſinne is forgeuen. At Baptiſme no temporall paine is enioyned to vs,
becauſe Chriſte moſte freely beſtoweth the benefite of his death vpon vs at that our firſte entrie into
the Churche.A Doctrine ful of ſondrie blaſphemies. But if afterwarde we abuſe his mercie, returninge againe to filthy ſinne,
Chriſte would our ſeconde, thirde, and al other reconciliations from thence foorth, to be with due ſatisfaction,
not of his dreadful angre, (whiche onely his bloude, and the Sacrament of penaunce, by due
contrition and confeſsion in deede or in vowe receiued, is able to remoue) but with ſatisfactiō of ſuch
temporal paine, as his mercifull iuſtice required bothe of all others from the beginninge, andKinge Dauid alleged for proufe of Pardonnes. namely
of Kinge Dauid:
                        
                           •
                        
                        ▪ Reg. 12. To whome confeſsinge his faulte Nathan ſaide, Our Lorde hath put a way thy
Sinne, thou ſhalte not die. Beholde the forgeueneſſe of the mortal ſinne, and of the euerlaſtinge paine
due to the ſame. But yet ſo is it forgeuen, that withal it is transferred into a temporal ſatisfaction.
VVhat was that? It foloweth in the ſtorie, that bicauſe Dauid through his aduoutrie and murther
had cauſed the ennemies of God to blaſpheme his holy name, the childe borne of the wife of Vrias
ſhould ſurely die. And ſo it came to paſſe. If the death of a Sonne be ſo greuous a puniſhment to a good
Father, that King Dauid was content to praie, to faſte, to lie on the groūde, afflicting him ſelfe ſeuen
daies, onely to trie whether he might as it were by exchaunge bie out the death of his Sonne, and yet
ſo could not obteine his deſire: we may be moſt certaine, that the very beſt frendes of God, ſinning after
Baptiſme (or circunciſion, whiche in the olde lawe ſtode in place thereof) muſte by ordinary courſe
ſarisfie with ſome temporall affliction that iuſte iudgement of our merciful Make and Redeemer, if
farther grace be not founde by ſome other waie. This ſatisfaction hath benne therefore iuſtly called
the thirde and laſt parte of penaunce. VVhiche if it be not fulfilled in this life, vndoubtedly it ſhal be
ſtraightly exacted in the worlde to come in the fire of Purgatorie. For that ſinnes maye be in an other
worlde forgeuen to thoſe who die not in the deadly bondes of them,Vntruthe auouched vpon Chriſte. See the Anſvveare. our Sauiour hath geuen

vs to vnderſtande,Matth. 22. ſayinge, That the ſinne againſt the Holy Ghoſt ſhal not be forgeuen, neither in this
worlde nor in the worlde to come, whereof it appeareth that ſomme other Sinnes may be forgeuen
in the worlde to come.
                  VVell, this ſatisfaction may notwithſtanding be fulfilled more then one waie. For a man beinge
once by the Sacrament of penaūce iuſtly reconciled to the myſtical Body of Chriſte, which is his Church,
wherein (as the Prophete ſaithe) a faithfull man is made partaker of al that feare God and keepe his
commaundementes:Pſal. 118. we haue in that bande of peace ſuche an vnitie of Spiriie communicated to vs al,
that the defect of one may be in ſpirituall cauſesA folie paſſinge al other folies. ſupplied out of the plenty of all others his felowe
membres,Galat. 6. accordinge as the Apoſtle ſaithe,A texte ful vviſely applied to prooue Pardonnes. Beare ye one an others burdens. And becauſe the Head
(whiche is Chriſte) is the chiefe membre of all, and farre more then all the reſt, ſuch influence is from
him deriued throughout his myſticall Body, that euen his death may as well inwardely by charitie,
as outwardly by another waie alſo be applied to vs for the pardoninge of that temporal ſatisfactiō,
which after the Sacrament of penaunce is lefte vnforgeuen. And that is by ſuch authoritie, as Chriſt
gaue to Peter, ſaying:Matth. 16. To thee I will geue the Keies of the Kingedome of Heauen, and what ſo euer
thou bindeſt in Earth, it ſhal be bounde alſo in Heauen, and what ſo euer thouO Fonde man, Chriſte ſaithe, VVhat ſo euer thou looſeſt in Earthe, and not in Purgatorie. looſeſt in Earth, it
ſhall be looſed alſo in Heauen. Lo, what ſo euer Peter looſeth in earth, it ſhall be looſed in the ſight
of God. If therefore the Pope, who ſuccedeth Peter, do by iuſte cauſe looſe not onely the mortall Sinne
by the sacrament of penaunce, but alſo the bande of Temporall paine, whiche remaineth yet due to
to the Sinne: it is vndoubted, that ſuche paine is looſed in the ſighte of God. The cauſe of looſinge
muſt be, not onely the will of the Pope (who is put in Authoritie to builde, and not to deſtroy: to diſpenſe,
and not to lauiſhe) but a reaſonable change or recompence ſubſtituted in that behalfe, ſuche as
apperteineth to the Honour of God; or to the profite of ſoules: As mainteininge warr and fightinge
againſt infidels for the defence of Chriſtendome, recouery of the Sepulchre of Chriſte, ſuccouringe widowes,
Orphanes, or other poore perſons, the buildinge or mainteininge of Holy places, the viſitinge of
Priſons and Martyrs toumbes, or any like Deuout and Charitable deedes. VVhiche whiles the faithfull
Chriſtian dothe obediently performe (although otherwiſe the thinge enioyned be not great) he may obteine
remiſsion alſo of that temporall ſatisfaction, whiche was left in penaunce vnremitted. This
kinde of Pardon S. Paule gaue to that notorious ſinner,1. Cor. 5. who at Corinth had his Fathers wife, and was
for that faulte ſeparated from the Churche of God, to be afflicted temporally in his fleaſhe. But when
the Corinthians had informed S. Paule of his earneſt and true repentance, and had ſhewed their owne
fauour and good willes towarde him:2. Cor. 2. the Apoſtle anſweareth, VVhome yee forgeue ought, I alſo
(forgeue) for I alſo in that I haue forgeuen, if I haue forgeuen ought, for your ſakes in the perſon of
Chriſte, I haue forgeuen it. VVell, we are aſſured the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of forgeuinge ſuch afflictions,
as the partie was in, by reaſon he was deliuered out of the defence of holy Church, to that ſtate, where
the Deuill,In. 1. Cor. 5. Hom. 15. as S. Chryſoſtome vpon that place noteth, Pro ſolutione Peccatorum, for payment of his
Sinnes, might vexe him: and wherein ſuche perſons beinge put to their penaunce, vſed to remaine for
a certaine ſpace of moneths or yeeres, vntill their penaunce were done and expired. Now the reconcilinge
of the man not yet hauing done due ſatisfaction before his ordinary time, is a pardon. VVhich
the Apoſtle ſaithe, he dothe geue in the perſon of Chriſte, as hauinge auctoritie of him to doo it: and for
the Corinthians ſakes, as who were able by their Holy Praiers and common ſorowe (whereof the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh) to make recompence for that whiche lacked on the behalfe of his owne ſatisfaction.
If this muche doo not ſatisfie any man,And thus M. Hardinge avvaked out of his dreame. deſiringe to be fully reſolued herein, let him reſorte to the
Latine woorkes of the Holy and learned Biſhop of Rocheſter.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Theſe obiections, ye ſaie in your pleaſante homely compariſon, are as common
with vs, as Life vvith Beggars. And yet to my remembrance, neither you
                        •
                      
                     Priuate
Maſſe, nor your Halfe Communion was euer touched in this whole Apologie,
more then once, before this place: the Liftinge vp, or Shevvinge of the Sacramente,
not once at al. ye ſhoulde haue weighed your aduantages better, M.
Hardinge, before ye thus beſtowed your lotheſome quarrels.
                  
                     
But thought you in déede,The Popes Pardōnes. M. Hardinge, I wil not ſaie, as you ſaie, that with
ſo Lovvſy, and Beggerly, but that with ſo poore, and ſimple ſtuffe ye ſhoulde be
hable to mocke the worde? Many fonde tales bothe you, and your felowes haue
ſent vs ouer: but a fonder tale, then this tale is, of your Pardonnes, and Purgatories,
ye haue ſente vs none. I muſte ſaie to you, as S. Auguſtine ſommetime ſaide
to Iulianus the Pelagian Heretique:
                     Auguſtin contra Iulianum, Lib. 5. Cap. 1. 
                     Neceſsitate compellitur Talibus pannis indui
dui tam magna etiam Veſtra ſuperbia: Your Pride, be it neuer ſo greate, euen for very
poore neede and beggerie, is faine to couer it ſelfe with ſutche ſoary clowtes.
                     
                  
                  
                     I beſeche you, conſider, howe aduiſedly, and reuerently ye vſe Goddes Holy
VVoorde.2. Regum. 12. Matth. 12. 
                     Thus you ſaie, Nathan ſaide vnto Dauid, Our Lorde hath put awaie thy
ſinne: thou ſhalt not die: Chriſte ſaithe, The Sinne againſte the Holy Ghoſte ſhal not be
foregeuen, neither in this Worlde, nor in the Worlde to comme: Or, as S.
                      Marke ſaithe,
Non habe
                        •
                      remiſsionem in Aeternum:Marci. 3. Galat. 6. Matth. 16. Sed reus erit Aeterni delicti: He hath not remiſſion
for Euer: but ſhalbe guilty of Euerlaſtinge Sinne. S. Paule ſaithe, Beare ye one an others
burthen. Chriſte ſaithe to Peter, To thee wil I geeue the Keies of the Kingedome of
Heauen, &c. S.
                      Paule ſaid of him, ye had liued in ſhameful inceſte with his Fathers
wife,
                     1. Corinth. 5. 
                     Let ſutche a one be geuen ouer to Satan. Theſe be your
                      Scriptures: hereof ye ful
diſcretely, and learnedly Conclude thus: Ergo, The Pope hath a vvarrante ſufficiente
to graunte his Pardonnes, and that, as vvel to the deade, as to the
quicke.
                  O M. Hardinge, God is not to be mocked: feare his iudgementes: Abuſe not his
Name, or Woord in vaine. Ful wel you know, that neither Dauid, nor Nathan,
nor Chriſt, nor Paule were Pardōmoungers. What ſhould I further ſaie to him,
that with ſo greate a countenance, and ſo mutche a doo, can ſaie nothinge? Let S.
Auguſtine briefely anſweare al theſe vanities. Thus he ſaithe, Hoc quid eſt aliud,
niſi diligēter pro humana ſuſpicione contendere,
                     Augu. de Ciuit. Lib. 13. Cap. 24. 
                     & Scripturas Sanctas negligenter attendere?
What thing els is this, but ſtoutely to ſtriue for mannes fanſie: and negligently to conſider
Goddes Holy VVoorde?
                     
                  
                  
                     The Prophete Dauid, vpon whom ye woulde ſéeme to grounde theſe folies,
anſweareth you thus, Narrauerunt mihi iniqui fabulationes: Sed non vt lex tua Domine:
The wicked haue tolde mee many fooliſhe tales:
                     Pſal. 118. 
                     But, O Lorde, nothinge as thy Lawe.
S.
                      Auguſtine, & if he were nowe aliue, he woulde ſaie of you, as he ſaide of other
your Predeceſſours, O Vanitas, vendens Vanitatem, Vanitatem audituris, Vanis,
& Credituris:Auguſt. in Li. 50. Homili. Hom. 36▪
                      O Vanitie, ſellinge Vanitie, to them that wil heare Vanitie: and Vaine
are they, that wil beleue it.
                  
                  
                     Leo ſaithe, In hanc inſipientiam cadunt, qui cùm ad cognoſcendam Veritatem
aliquo impediuntur obſcuro,Leo ad Flauianum, Epiſt. 10 non ad Propheticas voces, non ad Apoſtolicas Literas,
nec ad Euangelicas Authoritates, ſed ad ſemetipſos recurrunt: Into this folie they fal,
that, when they be hindered by ſome darkeneſſe from the knowledge of the Truthe, goe not
to the Voices of the Prophetes, nor to the Writinges of the Apoſtles, nor to the Authorities of
the Goſpelles: but onely haue recourſe vnto them ſelues.
                  
                     Now, ſomewhat to ſaie particularely of the mater, touching your pardonnes,
your owne Doctoure Sylueſter Prieriâs, Maiſter of the Popes Palaice, writeth
thus: Indulgentiae Authoritate Scripturae non innotuere nobis: Sed Authorirate
Eccleſiae Romanae,Sylueſter Prierias contra Luthe. Romanorum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pontificum, quae maior eſt: Pardonnes are
not knowen vnto vs by the Authoritie of the Scriptures: but by the Authoritie of the Churche
of 
                           •
                        ome, and of the Popes, whiche is greater, then the Authoritie of the Scriptures.
                  
                  Therefore, M. Hardinge, by this Doctours iudgemente, it was greate folie to
allege ſo many Scriptures for proufe of your Pardonnes. For here yée are taught
in good ſadneſſe, that your Pardonnes can neuer be proued by any Scriptures.
It had benne mutche better for you, to haue alleged onely the Popes Authoritie.
                  
                  
                     
For that,The Popes Pardōnes. as your Sylueſter teacheth you, far paſſeth al the Authoritie of the Scriptures.
                  
                  Roffenſis ſaithe,
                     Roffenſis contra Lutcherum. Polydor. De Inuentorib. Lib. 8. Cap. 1. Ego reſpondeo, non ſatis certo conſtare, à quo primùm Indulgentiae
tradi coeperint. Apud Priſcos vel nulla, vel certè quàm rariſsima fiebat mentio de
Purgatorio. Quàm diu autem nulla eſſet cura de Purgatorio, nemo quaeſiuit Indulgentias.
Nam ex illo pendet omnis Indulgentiarum aeſtimatio. Si tollas Purgatoriū,
quorſum Indulgentijs opus erit? Coeperunt Indulgentiae, poſtquàm ad Purgatorij
Cruciatus aliquandiu trepidatum eſt. Thus I anſweare: It cannot wel appeare, from whom
Pardonnes firſt beganne. Emonge the Olde Doctours, and Fathers of the Churche, there was
either no talke at al, or very litle talke of Purgatorie. But as longe as Purgatorie was not
cared for, there was no man that ſought for Pardonnes. For the whole price of Pardonnes
hangeth of Purgatorie. Take awaie Purgatorie, and what ſhal we neede of Pardonnes?
Pardonnes beganne, when folke were alitle fraide with the paines of Purgatorie.
                  Iohannes Maior ſaithe,
                     Iohan. Maior, in 4. Sent. Diſi. 20. quaeſt. 2. De Indulgentijs pauca dici poſſunt per certitudinem,
quia Scriptura de illis expreſſè non loquitur. Nam quod ditur Petro, Tibi dabo Claues,
&c. certum eſt, quò'd opor
                        •
                     er intelligere illam Authoritatem cum ſale.
Fatuae ergo & ſuperſtitioſae ſunt quaedam Indulgentiae viginti millium annorum:
of Pardonnes little maie be ſaide of certainetie: for the Scripture expreſſely ſaith
nothinge of them. Touchinge that Chriſte ſaith vnto Peter, Vnto thee wil I geeue the Keies
&c. we muſte vnderſtande this Authoritie with a corne of Salte (otherwiſe it maie be vnſauery).
Therefore certaine of the Popes Pardonnes, that promiſe tvventie thouſande
yeeres, are fooliſhe, and ſuperſtitious.
                  
                     Your Schole Doctoures them ſelues were woonte ſommetime to ſaie,
                     Veſelus. 
                     Inuentio
indulgentiarum eſt pia fraus, & dolus non malus, quò populus officioſo errore
trahatur ad pietatem: The Diuiſinge of
                      Pardonnes is a Godly guile, and a hurteleſſe
deceite: to the intente, that by a deuoute kinde of E
                           •
                        oure the people maie be drawen to Godlineſſe.
                  
                  Alphonſus de Caſtro ſaithe,
                     Alphonſ. de Caſtro. Li. 8. Indulgentiae. Nulla res eſt, quam minùs apertè Sacrae Literae
prodiderint: & de qua minus vetuſti Scriptores dixerint. Non eſt mentio vlla de
Indulgentijs: There is nothing that the Scriptures haue leſſe opened, or whereof the Olde
Learned Fathers haue leſſe written, then Pardonnes. Of Pardonnes (in ye Scriptures
and Doctoures) there is no mention.
                  
                     Of the ſhameleſſe Marchandiſe, and ſales hereof, many Godly menne haue
complained.
                     1. Timoth. 6. 2. Petri. 2. 
                     Ye haue turned godlineſſe into gaine: and, as S. Peter ſaithe, Through
couetouſneſſe, by fained ſpeache, yee haue made Martes, and Markettes of the people. One
of your owne frendes ſaithe thus,
                     Opus Tripart. coniunctum cum Concil. Lateran. Lib. 3. Cap. 8. In multis Breuibus continentur tot Indulgentiae,
vt boni Viri mirentur, vnquàm de Conſcientia Papae, vel alicuius boni viri
potuiſſe illa procedere: In many of theire Bookes there are conteined ſo many daies, and
yeeres of Pardonne, that good menne marueile, that thei coulde euer comme out, by the
Conſente either of the Pope, or of any other god man.
                  
                  
                     To conclude,
                     Auguſt. In Epiſt. Iohan. Tracta. 1. 
                     wée wil ſaie with S. Auguſtine, Fratres, Ieſum Chriſtum Iuſtum
habemus Aduocatum apud Patrem. Ipſe eſt propitiatio pro Peccatis noſtris: Hoc qui tenuit,
Haereſim non fecit: Hoc qui tenuit, Schiſma non fecit. Vnde enim
facta ſunt Schiſmata? Cùm dicunt homines, Nos iuſti ſumus: Nos Sanctificamus immundos:
Nos iuſtificamus impios: Nos petimus: nos impetramus:
                      My Brethera, wee haue
Ieſus Chriſte the Righteous our Aduocate with the Father. He is the Propitiation, or Pardonne
for our ſinnes. He that helde this, neuer made Hereſie: He that helde this, neuer made
Schiſme. For whereof doo Schiſmes comme? Hereof they comme: when menne ſaie, (as now
the Pope ſaithe,) Wee are righteous: Wee doo make Holy the vnholy: VVee doo iuſtifie
the wicked: VVee doo Praie: we doo obteine.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 1.
               Theſe menne are woonte to ſpeake mutche of a certaine ſecrete
Doctrine of theirs, & of their manifold & ſundrie readinges. Let thē
therefore bringe foorth ſommewhat now, if thei can, that it maie appeare,
they haue at leaſte readde, or doo knowe ſommewhat. They
haue often ſtoutely noiſed in al corners, where they wente, that al the
partes of theire Religion be very olde, and haue benne approued, not
onely of the multitude, but alſo by the conſente, and continual obſeruation
of al Nations, and times. Let them therefore once in theire
life, ſhe we this theire Antiquitie: Let them make appeare to the eie,
that the thinges, whereof thei make ſutche a doo, haue taken ſo long,
and large encreaſe: Let them declare, that al Chriſtiā Nations haue
agreed by conſente to this theire Religion.
               Nay, nay, they turne theire backes, as we haue ſaid already, and
flee from theire owne Decrees, and haue cut of, and aboliſhed againe
within aſhorte ſpace, the ſame thinges, whiche but a fewe yeeres before,
them ſelues had eſtabliſhed, for euermore, foreſooth, to continewe.
Howe ſhould one then truſte them in the Fathers, in the Olde Councelles,
and in the Woordes ſpoken by God? They haue not, good
Lorde, they haue not (I ſaie) thoſe thinges, whiche they boaſte, they
haue: thei haue not that Antiquitie, thei haue not that Vniuerſalitie,
they haue not that Conſent, neither of al places, nor of al times. And,
though they haue a deſire rather to diſſemble, yet they themſelues
are not ignorant hereof: yea, and ſommetime alſo thei let not to confeſſe
it openly. And for this cauſe they ſaie, that the ordinaunces of
the Olde Councelles, and Fathers be ſutche, as maie nowe and then
be altered, and, that ſundrie and diuers Decrees ſerue for ſundrie, and
diuers times of the Churche. Thus lurke they vnder the name of the
Churche, and beguile ſeely creatures withe theire vaine gloſinge. It
is to be merueiled, that either menne be ſo blinde, that thei can not ſee
this: or, if thei ſee it, that they can be ſo patient, ſo lightly, & ſo quietly
to beare it.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Here is mutche a doo, and as ſome ſaie, greate boſte, and ſmal roſte: many wordes, litle matter. The
ſenſe of theſe wordes (if I be not deceiued) reſembleth M. Iewels chalenging ſprite, as like as an E We reſembleth
a ſheepe. VVhat we can bringe foorth, we ſaie notIt is good policie for him, that hath nothing to ſhevve, to holde his peace. Neither thinke wee it neceſſary at your
requeſte, to ſhewe, what we haue reade, and what we knowe. Boſting and bragging ſhewes we leaue
to you: that you require, hath ben ſufficiently declared other wheres. Al thinges are not to be ſaide at
al times. Yet two of your lowde lies beſides other that you make here, I wil be ſo bolde, as to diſcouer.
The decrees of the late Tridentine Councel (for that is it that you meane) although they be not yet in
al place moſte exactely obſerued, yet be they not repealed, cut of, and aboliſhed againe, as you ſaie.
                  
                     For trial hereof, conſider onely the vvoordes of Roffenſis, Maior, and Alphonſus, alleged in the former Diuiſiō. And what a fowle lie is that other, where you ſaie, that our ſelues acknowledge and confeſſe
openly that the faith and Doctrine, whiche we holde, is not Auncient, and Vniuerſal, for times, places,
and conſente of al? VVhat els meane we, when we chalenge vnto vs and claime the Catholike Faithe?
But this is your accuſtomed ſlender Rhetorike, when proufes and argumentes of truthe faile you, to vſe
the figure of impudent lieinge, and ſaie, that we our ſelues confeſſe it to be true, whiche you impute
vnto vs. VVhat ſo euer you ſaie in this place, we maie of right retourne it euer to you. So we do, and ſo

take you it, &c. And for ought that I can ſe yet, as your Synagog had of late the beginninge, ſo it is
like ſhortely to haue an endinge.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Of al theſe woordes, and others moe, ſo vaine, as many, there is not one woord
woorthe the anſwearinge. What affiance M. Hardinge, and his frendes haue in
theire Antiquitie, it maie appeare by the laſte Diuiſion.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 1.
               But, whereas they haue commaunded, that thoſe Decrees ſhould
be voide, as thinges nowe waxen too olde, and that haue loſte theire
grace, perhaps they haue prouided, in theire ſteede, certaine other
better thinges, and more profitable for the people. For it is a common
ſaieinge with them, that if Chriſte him ſelfe, or the Apoſtles
vvere aliue againe, thei could neither better, nor more Godly gouerne
Gods Churche, then it is at this preſente gouerned by thē.
They haue put ſommewhat in theire ſteede in deede: but it is chaffe
in ſteede of vvheate,
                  Hierem. 23. Eſai. 1. as Hieremie ſaith: & ſutche thinges, as, according
to Eſaies woordes, God neuer required at theire handes. They
haue ſtopped vp, ſaith he, al the vaines of the cleare ſpringing vvater,
& haue digged vp for the people deceiuable, & puddlelike pits,
ful of mire, and filth, vvhiche neither haue, nor are hable to holde
pure vvater. They haue plucked awaie from the people the Holy
Communion, the VVoorde of God, from whence al comforte
ſhoulde bee taken, the true Worſhippinge of God alſo, and the right
vſe of Sacramentes, and Praier, and haue geeuen vs of their own,
to plaie withal in the meane while, Salte, Water, Oile, Boxes,
Spittle, Palmes, Bulles, Iubilees, Pardons, Croſſes, Senſinges,
and an endeleſſe rabble of Ceremonies, and (as a man might terme
them with Plautus) prety games, to make ſporte withal.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Raile and reuel whiles ye wil, the Churche is gouerned byBut the Pope vſeth neither of them. diſciline. If Chriſte
himſelfe or his Apoſtles wee aliue againe, the worde, that is to ſaie,Vntruthes, vvithout either meaſure, or regarde of ſhame. the Doctrine of our belefe,
no we preached and receiued in the Catholike Church, ‡ neither ſhoulde be altered, ‡ nor coulde be bettered.
‡ For it is the ſame, he taught him ſelfe. And that we doubt not of it, accordinge to his promiſe,
he hath ſente the holy Ghoſte, to enforme the Churche of al truthe.Malach. 3. Pſal. 118. Remember you not, who ſaide, I am
God,O folie. The Change is in you, and not in God. and am not changed? againe, that the worde of God remaineth for euer?
                  This beinge true, it is euident, that we haue the ſound and weighty wheate, whiche no perſecution
of tyraunces, and blaſies of heretikes, no contagion of euil manners, for theſe fiften hundred yeeres could
either blowe from the floore of our Lordes berne, the Churche, or corrupt. VVe haue accordinge to the
Apoſtles counſel,Depoſitum 1. Tim. 6. kepte that hath ben committed vnto vs. VVe haue enioyed the fountaine of the water
of life.
                  Ye charge vs ſoare, that we haue plucked awaie from the people the holy communion, the worde
of God, the true worſhippinge of God, the right vſe of Sacramentes, and praier. VVho ſo euer taketh
theſe fiue awaie, wherein chiefly ſtandeth our ſaluation, the ſameThe Goſpel in your mouthe. is Antichriſt. VVere not that ye haue
already done ſo mutche for vs, as the worlde maie take you for impudente liers, we would not quietly
beare ſo greauous a matter. But nowe, that ye haue tried your ſelues ſo falſe of your worde, we litle
eſteme it: your railinge is no ſlaunder. Laſtly concerninge praier, what hath ben ordeined by our holy

forefathersVntruthe For your Barbarous vnknovven Pr
                           •
                        iers, to the time of the Anciente Lerned Fathers, vvere neuer knovven. of al ages,Chriſtes gouernement no better, thē the Popes. directed with the ſprite of God, for the maintenance and encreaſe of it to
Gods honoure, al that in fewe yeres by the inſtincte of Sathan, to promote his Kingedome, ye haue vtterly
aboliſhed, and by wicked violence brought the people fromVntruthes ioined vvith open Blaſphemie. deuotion to a carelesse idlenesse, from
speaking to God with hartes and lippes, to ‡ a spiritual dummesse, from praiers ‡ to chapters, from holy
thinkinge to ‡ vnprofitable harkeninge.
                  Ye can not abyde ſalte, water, oyle, palme, the croſſe, incenſe, &c. no maruel. No more can not the
deuil, who poſſeſſeth you, and rideth you, and after his owne wil driueth you from truthe, from Chriſten
Religion, and from al Godlines. VVere it ſo that your ſprite coulde a waie with thoſe thinges, then
were it not agreeing with his ſprite. Vntil ye geue place to the ſpirit of God, who maie driue out of
you the spiritie of Sathan, we looke to heare no better tidinges of you.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Ye were ſommewhat angrie, M. Hardinge, when ye thus beſturred your ſelfe.
It pitieth me in your behalfe. Chriſte, and his Apoſtles, yée ſaie, neuer ruled the Churche in better
order, then it is nowe ruled by the Pope, and his Cardinalles.
                      Euen ſo might they haue
ſaide, that had turned the Houſe of God into a Caue of Theeues. One of your frendes
ſaith,Matth. 21. Latomus de Vtra
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Specie. Iacobus Andreae aduerſus Hoſiū, Pag. 70. 
                     Apoſtolorū temporibus rudis adhuc erat Eccleſia: In the time of the Apoſtles,
the Churche as yet was rude, and Barbarous, and out of order.
                      And, being afterward reproued
for his blaſphemous ſpeache, he anſweared lewdly in his pleaſance,
               
               
                  Rudis, indigeſta
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     ue moles.
                  
                     Others of you ſaie, Chriſtus in Coelo praeſidet: Papa in Terris reſidet: Chriſte
ruleth in Heauen: the Pope in Earthe. An other ſaithe,
                     
                     Diſ. 19. Sicomnes Omnes Sanctiones Sedis Apoſtolicae
ſic accipiendae ſunt, tanquam ipſius Diuina voce Petri firmatae: Al the Lawes
of the Apoſtolique see of Rome muſte ſo be taken, as if they were confirmed by the Diuine
voice of Peter him ſelfe.
                  
                  
                     An other ſaith,
                     Andreas Barbatius Siculus ad Beſſarionem: Polydor. Vergil. de Inuentorib. Lib. 4. Cap. 9. Ceremoniar. Li. 1 Sect. 8. Cap. 6. Hierony. in Prouerb. 7. Sicut oſtium regitur Cardine, ita Eccleſia Romana regitur Conſilio
Cardinalium: As the doore is ruled by the hooke, ſo is the Churche of Rome ruled by
the Counſel of Cardinalles.
                  
                     Therefore the Pope him ſelfe ſaithe thus vnto them, Vos eritis Senatores vrbis,
& Regum ſimiles, veri Mundi Cardines, ſuper quos militantis oſtium Eccleſiae
voluendum, & regendum eſt: Ye ſhalbe the Senatours of my Cittie, and like vnto
Kinges, the very bookes, and ſtaies of the worlde, vpon whom the very doore of y• Churche
Militante muſte be turned, and ruled. Sutche are they, whom S.
                      Hierome imagineth
thus to ſaie, Non eſt Vir in domo. Non eſt Chriſtus Corporaliter in Eccleſia.
Surgens enim à mortuis, Aſcendit in Coelum: nobiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Miniſterium gubernandae Eccleſiae,
ſuam, videlicet, Domum reliquit: My Huſbande is not at home. (That is to ſaie)
Chriſte is not nowe Corporally in the Churche. For, beinge riſen from the deade, he is Aſcended
into Heauen: and hath leafte vnto vs the gouernmente of his Churche:
that is, the whole orderinge
of his Houſe.
                  
                  
                     True it is, as you ſaie,
                     Malach. 3. Pſal. 118. Matth. 15. 
                     God is one, and is not Changed. And his Woorde endureth
for euer. But the Change is in you, and not in God. Goddes Woorde is the Woorde
of Life: your Woorde is the Woorde of Vanitie.
                      God the Father hath not planted
it: Therefore it ſhalbe plucked vp by the rootes. God ſaithe by the Prophete Malachie:
The lippes of the Prieſte ſhal keepe knowledge:
                     Malach. 2. 
                     and the people ſhal require the Lawe at
his mouthe. For he is the Angel of the Lorde of Hoſtes. Vos autem receſſiſtis de Via, &c.
But you are gonne backe from the VVaie: you haue offended many a one in
the Lavve: you haue broken the Couenante of Leui, ſaith the Lord of Hoſtes.
And therefore haue I made you to be deſpiſed.
                  Yee haue changed the moſte parte of the Apoſtles Doctrine: And of al, that
euer they ordeined, yée haue in a manner leafte nothinge ſtandinge. S. Bernarde
                     
ſaithe of your owne Churche of Rome,
                     Readinge of Chapters. 
                     A planta pedis vſque ad verticem Capitis,
non eſt ſanitas vlla: From the ſole of the foote, vnto the Crowne of the heade, there
is not one whole place:
                     
                     Bernard. in Conuerſione Pauli. And yet ye beare vs ſtrongely in hande, that Chriſte, and his
Apoſtles neuer ruled the Churche in better order, then it is nowe ruled by the
Pope, and his Cardinalles.
                  
                  Al the reſte of your emptie talke is anſweared ſufficiently before. Yet one pange
of your Eloquence. I maie not in any wiſe leaue vntouched. Thus ye ſaie, By the inſtincte
of Satan, ye haue brought the people from deuotion, to careleſſe idleneſſe: from speakinge to
God with hartes, and lippes, to a ſpiritual doumbeneſſe: from Praiers, to Chapters: from Holy thinking,
to vnprofitable hearkeninge. If I were not wel acquainted with your ſpeache, M. Hardinge,
I could not thinke, ye would ſo vnaduiſedly beſtowe your woordes. I doubte
not, but euen hereby it ſhal ſoone appeare, whether of vs hath wilfully broken the
Apoſtles Orders, & refuſed the Godly Examples of the Holy Primitiue Churche
of God. Yee telle vs, that the Readinge of the Scriptures vnto the people, in the
Churche of God, is a Spiritual doumbeneſſe, and a thinge vnprofitable, as onely
diuiſed of our ſelues, and that, as you ſaie, by the inſtincte of Sathan, and neuer before,
either knowen, or vſed by any Catholique Learned Father.
                  
                     Yet the Aunciente Father Origen ſaithe,
                     Origen. in Ioſua Homil. 15. Iudaicarum Hiſtoriarum Libri traditi
ſunt ab Apoſtolis, Legendi in Eccleſijs: The Bookes of (the Olde Teſtament, which
are called) the ſtories of the Iewes, were deliuered by the Apoſtles, to be readde in the
Churches.Dionylius Eccle. Hierar. Cap 3. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Dionyſius ſaithe, Deinde ordine habetur Sacrorum Librorum Lectio:
After warde folowe in order the Leſſons of the Holy Bookes. Iuſtinus Martyr
ſaithe, Die Solis omnes, qui in oppidis, vel in agris morantur, vnum in locum conueniunt:
Commentaria
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Apoſtolorum, vel Prophetarum Scripta leguntur.
Deinde, is, qui praeeſt, admone
                        •
                      omnes, & horratur, vt ea, quae Lecta ſunt, bona, imitentur.
Deinde ſurgimus omnes, & comprecamur: Vpon the Sondaie, the Chriſtian people, that
dwel in towne,
                     Iuſtinus Martyr Apologia. 2. 
                     or Countrie, meete togeather in one place. There the Epiſtles of the Apoſtles,
or the prophetes Writinges are pronounced vnto vs. Afterward, he that
is the Chiefe, or Miniſter, warneth, and exhorteth al the reſte, that they wil folowe thoſe
good thinges, that they haue hearde readden. That donne, wee riſe vp al, and praie togeather.
S
                      Cyprian ſaithe,
                     Cyprian Lib. 2. Epiſt. 5. Lector perſonat Verba ſublimia: Euangelium Chriſti legit:
A Fratribus conſpicitur: cum gaudio Fraternitatis auditur: The Reader ſoundeth
out the high, and Heauenly Woordes: he readeth out the Goſpel of Chriſte: He is ſeene of the
Brethren: he is hearde with ioie of (al) the Brotherhoode.
                  
                  
                     The Fathers in the Councel of Conſtantinople ſaie thus,
                     Concil. Conſtantinopo. 5. Actio. 1. Tempore Diptychorum
cucurrit omnis multitudo cum magno ſilentio circum circa Altare,
& audiebant: At the time of Readinge (of the Chapter) al the multitude of the people
with greate ſilence drewe runde about the Anltare, or Communion Table, and gaue eare.
                  
                  
                     In the Councel of Laodicea it is written thus,
                     Concil. Laodice. Can. 16. In Sabbatis Euangelia cum
alijs Scripturis legi conuenit: Vpon ye Sabboth daie it is conuenient, that ye
                      Goſpelles,
and other Scriptures be readde (in the Churche vnto the people).
                     
                     Leo de Reſurrectione Domini, Sermo 2. Leo ſaith, Solennitati
Sacratiſsimae Lectionis ſubiungatur exhortatio Sacerdotis: After the ſolemne
Readinge of the moſte Holy Leſſon, let there folowe the Sermon, or Exhortation of
the Prieſte. S.
                     
                     Chryſoſtom. in Acta. Homil. 19. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Sta
                        •
                      Miniſter, & Communis Miniſter, & alta voce
clamat. Poſt illam vocem Lector incipit Prophetiam Eſaiae: The Miniſter, and
Common Miniſter ſtandeth vp, and crieth out with lowde voice (ſaieinge,
                      keepe ſilence,
and geeue eare). After that, the Reader beginneth the Propheſie of Eſaie. S.
                      Ambroſe
ſaith,
                     Ambroſ. Lib 5. Epiſt. 20. Iohan. 5. Non poſſum ego à me facere quicquam: ſicut audio, & iudico. Audiſtis Lectum:
Ego non accuſo vos: Moſes vos accuſat: Audiſtis Lectum: (Chriſte ſaithe) I cannot doo
any thinge of mee ſelfe: As I heare, ſo I iudge.
                      Yee haue hearde it readden: I accuſe you
not: It is Moſes, that accuſeth you. Yee haue hearde it readden.
                  
                     
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Readinge of Chapters. Audiſtis, cùm Euangelium legeretur: Modò, cùm legeretur,
ſi intenti fuiſtis Lectioni, Audiſtis: Audiuimus in Lectione, quae Lecta eſt,
Fratres dilectiſsimi:Aug. in Pſal 3. Auguſt. in 50 Homil. Hom. 4▪ Auguſt. de Tempore. Sermo 2. 
                     Ye hearde, when the Goſpel was readde: Ye hearde ere while, when
it was readde, if ye gaue eare to the Readinge: Deerely beloued, wee haue hearde in the
Leſſon, that hath benne readde.
                  Hereby, I thinke, it maie appeare, that the Readinge of Leſſons, and Chapters,
is no Newe Diuſſe in the Churche of God.
                  And yet wil you tel vs, M. Hardinge, that al this is onely a Spiritual
doumbeneſſe, and an vnprofitable Hearkeninge, brought in by the inſtincte of
Sathan, to promote his Kingedome? Or, if you dare ſo to tel vs, muſte wée beléeue
you?
                  
                     Verily,
                     Iſidor. de Eccleſ. Offic. li. 1. ca. 10. Iſidorus ſaith, Lectio eſt non parua audientium aedificatio. Vnde oporter,
vt quando Pſallitur, Pſallatur ab omnibus: quando Oratur, Oretur ab omnibus:
quandò Lectio Legitur, facto ſilentio, aequè audiatur à cunctis: The Leſſon (in
the Church) bringeth great profite to the hearers. Therefore when Singing is, let al
Singe togeather: when Praier is, let al Praie togeather: And, vvhen the Leſſon, or Chapter
is readde, let ſilence be made, and let al heare togeather. Tertullian ſaith,
Coimus ad Literarum Diuinarum Commemorationem.Tertullian. in Apologetico. Fidem Sanctis Vocibus
paſcimus: Spem erigimus: Fiduciam figimus: We comme togeather to the
Readinge of the Holy Scriptures: wee feede our Faithe with thoſe Heauenly Voices: wee
raiſe vp our affiance: wee foſten our hope. Againe he ſaithe,
                     
                     Tertullian. ad Vxorem. Lib. 2. Vbi fomenta Fidei
de Scripturarum Lectione? Where is the feeding of Faithe, that commeth by the
open pronouncinge, and Readinge of the Scriptures?
                  Origen ſaithe,
                     Origen. in Leuiticum, Homil. 5. Non fuiſſet Neceſſarium, Legi haec in Eccleſia, niſi ex his
aedificatio aliqua audientibus praeberetur: It had not benne Neceſſarie, to haue theſe
thinges readde in the Churche, onleſſe thereof might growe ſomme profite to the hearers.
                  
                  
                     Leo ſaith,
                     
                     Leo de Paſsione Domin. Serm. 19. 
                     Sacram Dominicae Paſsionis Hiſtoriam Euangelica, vt moris eſt,
narratione decurſam, ita omnium veſtrum arbitror inhaeſiſſe pectoribus, vt
vnicuique audientium, ipſa Lectio quaedam facta ſit vitio: I thinke, that the Holy
ſtorie of our Lordes Paſſion, whiche wee, as the manner is, haue readde vnto you, is ſo faſtened
vnto al your hartes, that the very hearinge it ſelfe vnto euery of the Hearers is a kinde of
ſeeinge. Chryſoſtome ſaith, The manner was, that before euery ſutche Leſſon,
or Chapter, the Miniſter ſhould ſaie vnto the people, with a loude voice, Attendamus:
Let vs Marke.
                     Chryſoſt. in Acta Homil. 19.
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaith, Epiſtolae Apoſtolicae, non tantùm illis Scriptae ſunt, qui
tempore illo,Auguſt. Contra Creſconium. Li. 1 Cap. 9. quo ſcribebantur, audiebant, ſed etiam nobis. Non enim ob aliud in Eccleſia
recitantur: The Apoſtles Epiſtles were not written onely to them, that hearde
them at the ſame time, when they were written, but alſo to vs. For to none other pourpoſe
they are readde openly in the Churche.
                  
                     This therefore is no Spiritual Doumbeneſſe, M. Hardinge: This is no
vnprofitable Hearkeninge: This is no Inſtincte, or VVoorke of Sathan. S.
Auguſtine ſaithe, Vide Formicam Dei: Surgit quotidiè: Currit ad Eccleſiam Dei: Orat:
Audit Lectionem:
                     Aug. in Pſal. 66. 
                     Hymnum cantat: ruminat, quod audit: Apud ſe cogitat: recondit
intùs grana electa de area: Beholde Goddes Emote: Shee riſeth daily: Shee renneth
to the Churche of God: shee Praieth: Shee heareth the Leſſon, or Chapter: Shee fingeth
the Pſalme: Shee cheweth, or remembreth, that ſhee hathe hearde: Shee muſeth
vpon it within her ſelfe: And within ſhee laieth vp the Cornes choſen from the
floore.
                  But your Churches, M. Hardinge, are ful, not onely of Spiritual, but alſo of
Corporal, and horrible doumbeneſſe. Of al, that is ſaide, or donne there, the

poor Godly People knoweth nothinge. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,Readinge of Chapters. 
                     Si intellectum
mentis remoueas, nemo aedificatur, audiendo, quod non intelligit: If yee remoue
the vnderſtandinge of the minde,
                     
                     Augu. de Geneſi ad Literam. Li. 12. Cap. 8. 
                     no man is edified, or taketh profite by hearinge, that he
cannot vnderſtande.
                  
                  
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Perdiderunt audiendi laborem, & tempus. Nam qui
non intelligit,
                     Chryſ. in Matth. Homil. 131. 
                     quod audit, perdit, quod audit: They haue loſte bothe theire laboure
in hearinge, and alſo the time. For he, that vnderſtandeth not, that he heareth, loſeth the
thinge, that he heareth. Therefore the Pope him ſelfe in his Pontifical, géeueth
this ſpecial Charge vnto the Reader,In Pontificali. 
                     Stude Lectiones Sacras diſtinctè, & apertè
proferre ad Intelligentiam, & aedificationem Fidelium: Endeuoure thee ſelfe
to pronounce the Holy Leſſons (or Chapters) diſtinctely, and plainely (not to a Spiritual
doumbeneſſe, but) to the vnderſtandinge, and profite of the Faitheful.
                  Touching the Praiers, that the ſimple people maketh in a tongue vnknowen,
Chriſte ſaithe,Matth. 15. 
                     This people honoureth me with theire lippes: But theire hartes are far
from mee.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 2.
               In theſe thinges haue they ſet al theire Religion, teachinge the
people, that by the ſame God maie be duely pacified, Spirites be driuen
awaie, and mens conſciences wel quieted.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat ſhal I ſaie to al this, but that ye lie? I would ſaie, as the manner is, Sauing your worſhippes:
but that your often and vnſhamefaſte lieing hath quite taken awaie from you al opinion of honeſtie.
Al Chriſtes Religion whiche we profeſſe, conſiſteth not in theſe thinges,Vntruthe. For hereby ye profeſſe to quiet mennes conſciences. Reade the Anſvveare. neither by theſe be mennes
conſciences quieted. By certaine of theſe, euil and impure ſprites be driued awaie in deede. VVhich
here by ſundry Aunciente recordes and Teſtimonies I woulde declare to be moſte true, were it not wel
yenough knowen by daily experience. But as for you, whereas neither Breade, nor VVater, nor Croſſe
driueth you awaie, it ſemeth ye are worſe to be coniured, then the deuil himſelfe. Many of your ſecte
Catholike Princes haue founde ſo ſtubborne, as they could yet neuer ridde theire Countries of them, but
by coniuration of fire.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Yée ſaie, yée ye neuer ſought to quiet mennes Cōſciences by Oile, Water, Palmes,
&c. And therefore ye ſtande vp a tipps toe, and in your familiare manner, crie oute,
yee lie. For ſhorte trial hereof, one example maie ſuffice, in ſtéede of many. Auguſtine
Steuchus,
                     Augu. Steuchus in Librum Numeror. Cap. 19. one of your ſpecial, and woorthy Doctoures, ſaithe thus, Aquas
Sale, & Orationibus Sanctificamus, vt ad earum Aſperſum nostra deleātur delicta:
We halowe VVater with Salte, and Praiers, that by the Sprinkelinge thereof our ſinnes maie
be foregeeuen.
                     
                     Sinnes foregeeuen by Holy VVater. Reade your owne Pontifical: and ye ſhal finde in the halowinge
of your VVater, your Aſſhes, your Palmes, your Candels, &c. this clauſe euermore
in the ende, Vt ſint nobis ad Salutem Animae, & Corporis: That they maie
be to vs to the Saluation of Body, and soule.
                     
                  
                  Whereas in the ende ye vaunte your ſelfe of your Crueltie,In Pontificali. and ſo pleaſantly
make Sporte with the Bloude of your Brethern, take it not for il, if I anſweare
you with the Woordes of Salomon,
                     Prouerb. 11. 
                     Viſcera impiorum crudelia: The bowelles
of the wicked be alwaies cruel.
                      Therein, M. Hardinge, ſtandeth your greateſte
puiſſance. If ye were no better armed with Fire, and Svverde, then ye be
with Scriptures, and Doctoures, no wiſe man woulde greately feare your
force.
                  
                     
                     As for vs, wée maie anſweare you now, as S. Cyprian ſommetime anſweared
the Heathens: Nobis ignominia non eſt, pati à Fratribus, quod paſſus eſt
Chriſtus:Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epiſt. 3. neque vobis gloria eſt, facere, quod fecit Iudas: It is no ſhame for vs, to
ſuffer of our Brethren the ſame violence, that Chriſte ſuffered: neither is it any praiſe for you, to
doo the ſame thinge, that Iudas did.
                  
                  
                     Tertullian ſaith vnto your Fathers:Tertullian in Apologe
                           •
                        ico. 
                     Crudelitas veſtra, gloria noſtra eſt: Semen
eſt Sanguis Chriſtianorum: Your crueltie is our Glorie: The Bloude of Chriſtians
is the ſeede of the Goſpel.
                      I praie God, al that innocente Bloude, that hath benne
ſheadde in this cauſe, be not required at your handes in the daie of Wrathe, and at the
declaration of the iuſte iudgemente of God.
                     Roma. 2.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 10. Diuiſion. 1.
               For theſe, lo, be the oriente colours, and Pretious ſauours of
Chriſtian Religion: theſe thinges dooth God looke vpon, and accepteth
thē thankefully: theſe muſt cōme in place to be honoured, & muſt
put quite awaie the Inſtitutions of Chriſte, & of his Apoſtles. And,
like as in times paſte, when wicked Kinge Ieroboam had taken
from the people the right ſeruing of God, & had brought thē to woorſhip
ye 
                  Golden Calues, leſte perchaunce thei might afterward change
theire minde, and ſlippe awaie, geatinge them againe to Ieruſalem
to the Temple of God there, hee exhorted them with a longe tale, to
be ſtedfaſt, ſaieinge thus vnto them: O Iſrael, theſe Calues be thy
Goddes. In this ſorte commaunded your God you ſhoulde woorſhip
him. For it ſhoulde be weariſome, and troublous for you, to take
vpon you a iourney ſo farre of, & yeerely to goe vp to Ieruſalem, there
to ſerue and honoure your God: Euen after the very ſame ſorte,
when theſe menne had once made the Lawe of God of none effecte,
through theire owne Traditions, fearinge that the people ſhoulde
afterwarde open theire eies, & fal an other waie, and ſhoulde ſommewhence
els ſeeke a ſurer meane of theire Saluation, Ieſu, howe often
haue they cried out, This is the ſame woorſhippinge, that pleaſeth
God, and whiche hee ſtraitely requireth of vs, and wherewith he wil
be turned from his wrathe: that by theſe thinges is conſerued the
Vnitie of the Churche: that by theſe al ſinnes be cleanſed, and conſciences
quieted: and that, who ſo departeth from theſe, hath leafte vnto
him ſelfe no hope of Euerlaſtinge Saluation. For it were weariſome,
and troublous (ſaie they) for the people to reſorte to Chriſte, to
the Apoſtles, and to the Anciente Fathers, and to obſerue continually,
what theire wil and commaundement ſhould be. This, ye maie
ſee, is to withdrawe the people of God from the Weake Elementes
of the worlde, from the leauen of the Scribes and Phariſeis, and
from the Traditions of menne. It were reaſon, no doubte, that
Chriſtes Commaundementes, and the Apoſtles were remoued, that
theſe theire diuiſes might comme in place. O iuſte cauſe, I promiſe
you, why that Anciente, and ſo longe allowed Doctrine ſhoulde be
nowe aboliſhed, and a newe Forme of Religion be brought into the
Churche of God.
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  It ſhoulde haue becomme Scoggin, Patche, Iolle, Harry Pattenſon, or VVil Sommer, to haue tolde
this tale mutche better, then your Superintendentſhips. And if ye woulde nedes haue plaied the parte
your ſelues, it had ben more conuenient to haue donne it on the ſtage, vnder a vices cote, then in a booke
ſet abrode to the worlde in defence of al your newe Engliſhe Churche. Ye ſhal neuer make any reaſonoble
man beleue your ſcoffinge tale. VVe eſteme litle your railinge compariſon, with your ſpiteful
woordes, and ſo mutche deuiliſhe villany.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 10. Diuiſion. 2.
               And yet, whatſoeuer it be, theſe menne crie ſtil, that nothing ought
to be changed: that mens mindes are wel ſatiſfied here withal: that
the Churche of Rome, the Churche, whiche cannot erre, hath decreed
theſe thinges. For Sylueſter Prieriàs ſaith, that the Romiſhe
Churche is the Squier, and Rule of Truthe, & that the Holy Scripture
hath receiued from thence Authoritie, and Credite. The
Doctrine, ſaith he, of the Romaine Churche, is the infallible Rule
of Faithe, from the vvhiche the Holy Scripture taketh her force.
And Indulgences, and Pardonnes (ſaithe he) are not made knovven
to vs by the Authoritie of the Scriptures, but they are knovven
to vs by the Authoritie of the Romaine Churche, and of the Biſhoppes
of Rome, vvhich is greater, then the Scriptures. Pigghius
alſo letteth not to ſaie, that without the licence of the Romaine
Church, we ought not to beleue the very Plaine Scriptures: Mutch
like as if any of thoſe, that cannot ſpeake pure, and cleane Latine, and
yet can babble out quickely, and readily a litle ſomme ſutche Lawe
Latine, as ſerueth the Courte, woulde needes holde, that al others
ought alſo to ſpeake after the ſame waie, that Mammetrectus, and
Catholicon ſpake many yeeres agoe, and whiche themſelues doo yet
vſe in pleadinge in Courte: for ſo maie it be vnderſtoode ſufficiently,
what is ſaid, & mennes deſires maie be ſatiſfied: & that it is a fondeneſſe,
nowe in the later ende, to trouble the worlde with a newe kinde
of ſpeakinge, and to cal againe the olde fineneſſe and eloquence, that
Cicero, and Caeſar vſed in theire daies in the Latine tongue. So
mutche are theſe menne beholden to the folie, & darkeneſſe of the former
times.C. Plinius. 
                  Many thinges, as one writeth, are had in eſtimation
oftentimes, bicauſe thei haue benne once dedicate to the Temples
of the Heathen Goddes: Euen ſo wee ſee at this daie, many thinges
allowed, & highly ſette by of theſe menne, not bicauſe they iudge them
ſo mutche woorthe, but onely bicauſe they haue benne receiued into a
cuſtome, and after a ſorte dedicate to the Temple of God.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye haue neuer donne with the Churche of Rome. I cannot blame you. For ſo long as that ſtandeth,
without ye repente and tourne,So vvas Chriſte taken of the Phariſeies. ye ſhal neuer be taken but for ſutche as ye be, Schiſmatikes, and Heretikes.
But alas poore ſoules, what thinke ye to ouerthrowe that Churche builded vpon the rocke
The fundation of the Churche of God, is not Peter, but Chriſte. Peter, againſte whiche hitherto neither tyrauntes, nor Heretikes farre paſsinge you in lerninge, and

honeſtie of common life,The Churche aboue Goddes VVoord. coulde euer preuaile? Trowe ye to extinguiſhe that faithe of the Romaine
Churche,Vntruthe. Fo
                           •
                         generally it
                           ••
                         contrarie to 
                           〈◊〉
                         Faithe of 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      whiche is the ſame that was the faithe of Peter,Luc. 22. for which Chriſte praied, that it ſhould
neuer faile? Ye laboure in vaine. VVel may Sathan winne you: the Churche whiche our Lorde praied
for, by you ſhal he neuer winne. Geue ouer therefore your vaine and wicked attemptes. Truſt not
in the patches, that falſely ye allege out of Canoniſtes gloſes, ſcholemen, riminge poetes, Heretikes, and
who ſo euer, be they neuer ſo bad. Some ignorant perſons maye ye deceiue, whoſe ſinnes deſerue the
ſame.
                  VVhat Sylueſter Prierlât ſaieth. I minde not here to diſcuſſe.It is eaſil
                           ••
                         founde in 
                           〈◊〉
                         Booke, 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Lutherum.
                      Neither where he ſaithe, that you
alleage, haue you thought good to tel vs, leſt. by peruſinge the place, we ſhoulde take you in a lie, as we
haue almoſte in al your other allegations. The like ſinceritie you uſe in alleaginge Pighius. VVe binde
our ſelues neither to the wordes of Sylueſter, nor of Pighius. If they erre, what is that to vs? Let them
beare theire owne burthen. If they tel truth, we beleue them for truthes ſake. If otherwiſe, we leaue
that parte for you to carpe. If Sylueſter Prierias ſaide, that for pointes of belefe, the Doctrine of the
Romaine Churche is a ſquire to trie theire truthe by: the ſameA comm
                           •••
                        rie biſide 
                           〈◊〉
                         Texte. beinge wel vnderſtanded is right true.
Likewiſe if Pighius ſaie, that the Romaine Churche ſheweth vnto vs, which be the approued and vndoubted
ſcriptures, and whiche be not: this is ſo true, as your ſelfe (I ſuppoſe) wil yelde thereunto. As
for that the ſcripture receiued from the Churche of Rome Authoritie, credite, and force:A proper Gloſe. if in your
meaninge you exclude God, that is your lie, not Sylueſters ſentence. If relation be made to vs, that we
ought not geue credite vnto it,Vanitie of Vanities: For the Scriptures vvere knovven, and beleued, before there vvas any Churche in Rome. onleſſe it had ben ſhewed to be holy ſcripture by the Romaine Church,
whiche is the true Churche of Chriſte: in this ſenſe, be it Sylueſter, or who els ſo euer ſaithe it, it is a true
ſaieinge, and agreable to S. Auguſtine,Contra Epiſt. Fundamenti. ca. 5. 
                     Ego Euangelio non crederem, niſi me Catholicae
Eccleſiae commueret Authoritas. I woulde not beleue the Gospel, except the Auctoritie
of the Catholike Churche moued me. And for that you alleage out of him, touchinge indulgences,
truthe it is, the ful, and whole knowledge of them is not plainely opened vnto vs, by expreſſe and euident
wordes of Scripture, no more then the myſterie of the bleſſed Trinitie, baptizinge of infantes,
and many other truthes: but rather by the doctrine of the Romaine Churche.
                  VVhere you tel vs of Pighius, that he letteth not to ſaie, that without the licence of the Romiſhe
Churche (for in that word you pleaſe your ſelfe wel) we ought not to beleue the very plaine ſcriptures:
It is no harde mater to finde it, Reade the Anſvveare. we wil proclaime you a lyer, vntil you ſhewe vs, where he ſpake ſo farre beſide reaſon, and lerninge.
The holy Churche doth not wil vs to ſtaie from belefe of the ſcriptures, vntil we haue licence: but by
al waies and meanes inuiteth and ſtirreth vs to beleue the truthe in the ſcriptures vttered.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The greateſt weight hereof vpon twoo of your Doctoures, Sylueſter
Prieriâs, and Albertus Pigghius. Whoes credite notwithſtandinge yée woulde
faine otherwiſe ſaue vpright, yet here, as it ſéemeth, ye are contente, for ſhame to
géeue them ouer. VVe binde our ſelues, yée ſaie, neither to the woordes of Sylueſter, nor of
Pigghius. If they erre, what is that to vs? This ſhorte, and blunte anſweare, notwithſtandinge
it ſéeme to like wel you, yet perhaps Prieriâs, and Pigghius it woulde
not like. I ſée no greate cauſe to the contrarie, but either of them might as wel renounce
your Authoritie, and ſaie of you, Wée are not bounde, neither to M. Hardinges
woordes, nor to his felowes.
                  
                     For that yée doubte the Truthe of our allegations, reade Sylueſter Prieriâs
Maiſter of the Popes Palace, in his Booke entituled,
                     Sylueſter Prierias, contra Lutherum. Contra praeſumptuoſas Martini
Lutheri Concluſiones, de poteſtate Papae. His wordes there emongeſt others be theſe:
Quicū
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nō innititur Doctrinae Romanae Eccleſiae, ac Romani pōlificis, tanquam Regulae
Dei infallibili, à qua etiam sacra Scriptura robur trahit, & Authoritatem,
Haereticus eſt: Who ſo euer leaneth not to the Doctrine of the Romaine Churche, and
of the Biſhop of Rome, as vnto the infallible Rule of God, of vvhiche Doctrine
the Holy Scripture taketh force and Authoritie, he is an Heretique.
                  
                  
                     
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     The Churche aboue Goddes VVoord. Authoritas Romanae Eccleſiae, Romani
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pontificis maior
eſt, &c. The Authoritie of the Romaine Churche, and of the Biſhop of Rome is greater,
(then the Authoritie of Goddes woorde
                     ).
                  As for that, is here alleged of Pigghius, it is the very ſounde, and ſenſe of the
greateſt parte of his Common place, De Eccleſia. Of whoes iudgemente herein,
M. Caluine writeth thus:Alb. Pigghius in locis Communib. De Eccleſia. 
                     Pighius ait, Nullius Scripturae Authoritate, quantum libet
Clarae, noſtro quidem iudicio, & euidentis, aduerſus Claram, conſonantem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Orthodoxorum
Patrum Sētentiam, & aduerſus communem Eccleſiae Definitionem, aliquid credere
cuiquam licere: Pighius ſaithe, that noman maie lawfully beleeue any thinge, by the Authoritie
of any Scripture, be the ſame, in our iudgement, neuer ſo plaine, and euidente, againſte the
cleare, and agreeable iudgemente of the Catholique Fathers, and againſte the Common determination
of the Churche:
                      By whiche he meaneth onely the Churche of Rome. Therefore,
M. Hardinge, it maie pleaſe you nowe a litle to ſpare your voice, and to ſtaie
your Proclamation.
                  But, for as mutche as yée ſéeme, ſo litle to eſtéeme theſe twoo Doctoures, Prieriâs,
and Pigghius, beinge otherwiſe, not longe ſithence, the chiefe Leaders, and
Captaines of al your bandes, ye maie therefore ioine others to them, to better
theire credite, and to encreaſe the Companie. And, for as mutche as wée ſpeake of
the Churche of Rome, let vs heare the iudgement of a Cardinal of the Churche
of Rome, notwithſtandinge otherwiſe alleged before.
                  
                     Cardinal Cuſanus therefore hereof ſaithe thus,
                     Nicol. Cuſanus de Authoritate Eccleſiae, & Cō
                        cilij ſupra & contra Scriptur. Haec eſt omnium ſanè intelligentium
Sententia, qui Scripturarum Authoritatem, & intellectum in Eccleſiae
approbatione fundant: & non è conuerſo, Eccleſiae
                        •
                      Fundamentum in Scripturarum
Authoritate locant: Nulla ſunt Chriſti praecepta, niſi quae per Eccleſiam pro talibus
accepta ſunt: Sequuntur igitur Scripturae Eccleſiā, & non è conuerſo: This
is the iudgemente of al them, that thinke rightly, that founde the Authoritie, and vnderſtandinge
of the Scriptures in the allowance of the Churche: and not contrariewiſe, laie the
Fundation of the Churche in the Authoritie of the Scriptures. There be no Commaundementes
of Chriſte, but ſutch onely, as ſo be taken, and holden by the Churche. Therefore the
Scriptures folovve the Churche: but contrarievvile the Churche folovveth
not the Scriptures.Iohan. Maria Verractus. Editus eſt, Ann. 1561. Alb. Pigghius Hierar. li. 1. a. 2. Alb Pigghius in controuerſijs. De Eccleſia. 
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Iohannes Maria Verractus, Humiliter
confitemur, Eccleſiae Authoritatem eſſe Supra Euangelium? We doo humbly confeſſe,
that the Authoritie of the Churche is aboue the Authoritie of the Goſpel.
Likewiſe Albertus Pigghius ſaithe, Apoſtoli quaedam Scripſerunt: non vt Scripta
illa praeeſſent Fidei, & Religioni noſtrae, ſed potiùs, vt ſubeſſent. Scripturae ſunt
Muti Iudices: Scripturae ſunt veluti Cereus Na
                        •
                     us: The Apoſtles haue written certaine
thinges: not that theire ſaide Writinges ſhoulde rule our Faithe, or Religion: but rather,
that they ſhould be vnder, and be ruled by our Faith. The Scriptures are doumbe
Iudges: The Scriptures are like a Noſe of vvaxe.
                  By theiſe, and other like vnreuerente, and godleſſe ſpeaches, they ſéeke to
leade the poore ſimple deceiued people from the Holy Scriptures, and Voice of
God, to the Authoritie of theire Churche: by whiche Churche they vnderſtande
onely the Pope, and his Cardinalles.
                  
                  
                     But yée ſaie, Theſe be the Prieſtes of the Houſe of Leui: The Pope is the Iudge for
the time,Deuter. Cap. 17. Heruaeus, De poteſta. Papae. ca. 23 in the place, that our Lorde hath Choſen. Somme others of you ſale, Papa eſt
tota Eccleſia Virtualiter:
                      The Pope is by Power, and vertue the whole Churche. What
ſo euer theſe ſhal happen to ſaie, wée maie not ſwarue from theire Iudgemente,
neither to y• Right hand, nor to the Lefte hand. Whereupon the Hebrevve Gloſe
noteth thus,
                     Nicol Lyra in Deuter. Cap 17. 
                     Si dixerint tibi, quòd Dextra ſit Siniſtra, aut quòd Siniſtra ſit Dextra,
talis Sententia tenenda eſt: Although they tel thee, y• thy Right hande is thy Lefte
hande: or that thy Lefte hande is thy Right hande, yet ſutche a Sentence muſte be holden as
good.
                  
                     
S. Auguſtine,
                     The Churche aboue Goddes vvoorde. ye ſaie, holdeth harde of your ſide. He ſaithe, Non crederem
Euangelio, niſi me Eccleſiae Catholicae Authoritas commoueret: I woulde not
beleue the Goſpel, excepte the Authoritie of the Catholique Churche moued me.
                     
Theſe fewe poore woordes haue benne toſſed of your parte, and wroonge, and preſſed
to the vttermoſte,Auguſtin contra Epiſtolam Fundamen. Cap. 5. to yeelde out that, was neuer in them. For hereby yée would
faine proue, that the Authoritie of the Churche, whereby yee euermore vnderſtande
your Churche of Rome, and none other, is aboue the Authoritie of
Goddes VVoorde: that is to ſaie, that the Creature is aboue the Creatoure, that
made Heauen, and Earthe.
                  
                     But what if S. Auguſtine, as he ſaithe, I beleue the Goſpel bicauſe of the
Churche, haue likewiſe ſaide, I beleue the Churche bicauſe of the Goſpel?
Then, I trowe, yee muſte turne your tale, and ſaie, The Goſpel is aboue the
Churche. His woordes be plaine:
                     Auguſt. In Pſalmum. 57. Ex ore Veritatis Eccleſiam agnoſco participem
Veritatis: By the Mouthe of (God, that is) the
                      Truthe, I knowe the Churche,
that is partetaker of the Truthe.Auguſtin. De Vnitate Eccleſiae, Ca. 2. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Nolo, Humanis Documentis,
ſed Diuinis Oraculis Eccleſiam Sanctam demonſtrari: Eccleſiam quaerere debemus
in Verbis Chriſti, qui eſt Veritas, & optim è nouit Corpus ſuum: Eccleſiam ſine
vlla ambiguitate Sancta Scriptura demonſtrat:Auguſtin. contra Creſconi. Grammat. Li. 1. Ca. 33. In Scripturis Sanctis Eccleſia
manifeſtè cognoſcitur: Eccleſiam, ſicut ipſum Caput, in Scripturis Sanctis
Canonicis debemus agnoſcere: I woulde, the Churche ſhoulde be ſhewed, not by
the Decrees of Menne,
                     Auguſtin. De Vnita. Eccleſiae, Ca. 16. 
                     but by the Heauenly Oracles, or VVordes of God: VVee
muſte ſeeke the Churche in the VVoordes of Chriſte, whiche is the Truthe, and beſte
knoweth his owne Body: The Holy Scripture ſheweth vs the Churche without doubtinge:
In the Holy Scripture the Churche is plainely knowen:
                     Auguſtin. eodem loco. VVee muſte knowe
the Churche by the Holy Canonical Scriptures, as we know (Chriſte, that is) the Heade.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Chryſoſtome,Chryſoſtom. in Matth. Hom. 49. Nullo modo cognoſcitur, quae ſit Vera Eccleſia,
niſi tantummodò per Scripturas: It is not any waies knowen, whiche is the True
Churche of Chriſte, but Onely by the Scriptures.
                  And thus, for as mutche as wée knowe, bothe Chriſte by the Churche, and the
Churche by Chriſte, the one geeuinge euidence to the other, by this reckeninge,
M. Hardinge, and by your ſhiftinge of turnes, wee muſte ſometimes place Chriſte
aboue the Churche, and ſommetimes the Churche aboue Chriſte.
                  
                  Now be it, S. Auguſtines minde was not, to commence an Action bitwene
Chriſte and his Churche, in compariſon of theire Dignities, or for trial, and keepinge
of their boundes: or, to teache vs, that the Truthe of God taketh Authoritie
of the Churche: but onely, to ſhewe vs, that the Churche is a witneſſe to Goddes
Truthe. And certainely it hath greate weight of perſuaſion, to moue the Conſcience
of any man, to ſée ſo many Kingedomes, & Countries to ioine togeather in y•
profeſſion, and obedience of one Truthe. And I doubte not, but euen this daie,
many thouſandes are the ſooner leadde, to humble them ſelues vnto the Goſpel of
Chriſte, for that they ſee, the whole worlde, that is to ſaie, the whole Churche of
God, is contented ſo willingly, & ſo humbly to embrace the ſame. Dauid, to teſtifie
the Truthe,
                     Pſalm. 18. Roman. 10. Pſalm. 76. and certainetie of the Goſpel, ſaithe thus, The ſounde of the Apoſtles
wente oute into al the Barthe, and the VVoordes of them into the endes of al the VVorlde.
This is the turninge of the Right hande of God.
                  
                  
                     Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto Fauſtus the Heretique,
                     Auguſtin. contra Fauſtum. Lib. 32. 
                     Cur non potiùs
Euangelicae Authoritati, tam Fundatae, tam ſtabilitae, tanta gloria diffamarae, atque ab Apoſtolorum
temporibus,
                     Cap. 19. 
                     vſque ad noſtra tempora, per Succeſsiones certiſsimas commendatae,
te non ſubdis? VVhy doeſt thou not rather ſubmitte thee ſelfe vnto the Authoritie of
the Goſpel, beinge ſo grounded, ſo ſtabliſhed, Preached, and publiſhed with ſo greate glorie,
commended, and deliuered vnto vs by moſt certaine Succeſſions from the time of the Aroſtles,
vntil our time?
                  
                     
                     Likewiſe in this ſame place by you alleged, S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     The Churche aboue Goddes vvoor de. 
                     Ego non
crederem Euangelio, niſi me Catholicae Eccleſiae cōmoueret Authoritas. Quibus
ergo obtemperaui dicentibus, Credite Euangelio, Cur eis non obtemperem dicentibus,
Noli credere Manichaeo? I woulde not beleue the Goſpel, onleſſe the Authoritie
of the Catholique Churche moued me.Auguſtin. contra Epiſt. Fundam. Ca. 5. Seeinge therefore I haue obeied them, ſaieinge to me,
Beleeue the Goſpel, why ſhould I not alſo obeie them ſaieinge vnto me, Beleeue not
Manichee?
                  
                  
                     Thus the conſente of the Churche heareth witneſſe to the Goſpel: without
whiche witneſſe notwithſtanding, the Goſpel neuertheleſſe were the Goſpel ſtil.
Therefore Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Matth. Hom. 49. Si dixerint, in ipſis Veris Eccleſijs Chriſtum apparuiſſe,
nolite eis credere dicentibus iſta deme: Quia non eſt digna Diuinitatis meae
notitia haec: If they ſhal tel you, that Chriſte hath appeared, yea euen in the very True
Churches, yet beleue them not ſaieinge thus of mee: For this is no meete knowledge for my
Godhedde.
                  
                  
                     To conclude, M. Hardinge, wée wil ſaie to you, as S. Auguſtine ſommetime
ſaide to the Donatian Heretiques, auancinge their onely Churche in Aphrica,
euen as you nowe auance onely your Churche of Rome:Auguſt De Vnitate Eccleſiae, Ca. 11. Nos poſt vocem Paſtoris
noſtri, per ora Prophetarum, per os proprium, per ora Euangeliſtarum nobis aperriſsimè
declaratam, voces veſtras non admittimus, non credimus, non accipimus:
After the voice of our Shepehearde, vttered moſte plainely vnto vs by the mouthes
of the Prophetes, by his owne mouthe, and by the mouthes of the Euangeliſtes, if ye bringe vs
your owne voices, wee allowe them not, wee beleeue them not, wee receiue them not.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 1.
               Our Churche, ſaie thei, cannot erre. They ſpeake that (I thinke)
as the Lacedaemonians longe ſithence vſed to ſaie, that it was not
poſſible to finde any Adulterer in al their Common Healthe: whereas
in deede they were rather al Adulterers, and had no certaintie in
their Marriages, but had their wiues in common amongeſt them al:
Or, as the Canoniſtes at this daie, for theire bellies ſake, vſe to ſaie
of the Pope,
                  Summa Angelica, in dictione Papa. that, for ſo mutch as he is Lorde of al Benefices, though
he ſelle for monie, Biſhoprikes, Monaſteries, Prieſthoode, Spiritual
Promotions,Theodoricus de Schiſmate. and parte with nothinge freely, yet bicauſe he counteth
al his owne, he cannot committe Simonie, though he vvould
neuer ſo faíne. But how ſtrongly, & agreably to reaſon theſe things
be ſpoken, wee are not as yet hable to perceiue, excepte perchaunce
theſe menne haue plucked of the whinges from the Truthe, as the
Romaines in olde time did proine,Plutarchus. and pinion their Goddeſſe Victorie,
after they had once gotten her home, to the ende, that with
the ſame whinges ſhe ſhoulde neuer be able, to flee awaie from them
againe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Towarde the ende of your Apologie, Syr Defender, who ſo euer you be, that pieced it togeather,
you doo but trifle. Of like your ſtuffe is ſpence. For here litle ſaie you, that you haue not ſaide
already. VVherefore I craue Pardon of the Reader, if accordinge to the ſlenderneſſe of matters
obiected, myThis is good plaine dealinge. For in deede this Anſvveare is very ſclender. confutation ſeeme alſo ſlender. Sir you doo now but patche peeces togeather, whiche
you haue gathered out of your note Bookes, into the ſame infar
                        •
                     ed, ſome out of the Canoniſtes, ſome out

of the Scoolemen, and them not of the greateſt eſtimation, moſt of al out of Humanitie bookes, wherein
you be pretely ſeene. And that ſeemeth to be your chiefe profeſsion. As for Diuinitie, there appeareth
no greate knowledge in you. VVhat ye rehearſe of the Lacedemonians, it perteineth to
your owne companies, no leſſe, then to them, I meane onely your Apoſtates, Monkes, and Friers, Prieſtes,
and Nonnes.
                  You finde greate faulte in the Canoniſtes that be at this daie, and name in your Margent Summa
Angelica, the Author whereof died many yeeres paſte. If he, Theodoricus, what ſo euer he
was, or any other Canoniſte offende you, as for his bellies ſake, ſpeakinge of the Pope, that ſhould ſette
your teeth anedge: what pertaineth that to vs, who defende the Catholike Faithe, not the ſaieinges
of euery Canoniſte? You were beſte, ſeeinge you make ſo muche adoo with them, to Article their errours,
and either write a railinge Booke againſt them, which yeVVith M. Hardinges good inſtructions. can eaſely doo, or ſende one of your
beſt learned ſuperintendentes to Bononia, there in open ſcoole with diſputations to confute them.
And ſo doubtleſſe ye ſhal either conuerte them, whiche were a woorthy acte: or proue your ſelues
fooles, whiche were greate pitie.
                  But to anſweare your obiection, we ſaie, firſte, that you alleage Summa Angelica falſely.
Nothing is founde ſoundinge to that you burthen the Pope withall in the place by you quoted, in
dict. Papa. Nexte, whereas it is written in Summa Angelica, In curia Romana titulus de
Simonia non habet locum,
                     In dict. Simonia. you, Syr Defender, either nor knowinge what folowed, or of malice
abuſinge the place, haue reported the ſame, as if it were preciſely ſaide without any diſtinction.
VVhereas in deede the ſelfe ſame Summe vſeth this diſtinction, ſaieinge,Ver. vtrum actoritas. 
                     Verum eſt in ijs quae ſunt
Simoniaca de iure poſitiuo ſolùm: ſed non in ijs quae ſunt Simoniaca de iure diuino.
VVhereby he meaneth that the Pope is not vnder the rules of Simonie concerningeA vvoorthy diſtinction. Hereby the Pope maie ſelle Biſhoprikes, and Benefices vvithout Simonie. ſuche lawes and
paines, as he himſelfe, or his predeceſſours haue made in that behalfe. For they haue made many
thinges belonginge thereto, as you may well knowe your ſelfe, who are ſo pretely ſeene in the Canon
Lawe, as it may appeare by the often and cunninge allegations whiche you bringe out of the Gloſes.
But concerningeThis kinde of Simonie ſtandeth onely in, ſellinge of Orders, and Sacramentes, &c. that Simonie, whiche properly is ſo called, the Pope is noleſſe ſubiecte thereto by
the true iudgement of Summa Angelica,
                     Vntruthe ſhameleſſe, as ſhal appeare. whiche you haue ſhamefully belied, then any other man.
                  You ieſt at Gods bleſſed Truthe alwaies remaininge in his Holy Churche, and prophanely reſemble
it to a birde proined and pinyoned, that it flie not a waie. As though the Churche kepte truthe
with ſuche policie, as the olde Romaines are fained, to haue kepte their Goddeſſe Victorie. VVell
Syr, we tell you in ſadneſſe, we are aſſured of the Truthe, that it is in the Churche, and that it ſhall
neuer departe from thence. And if ye call this, cuttinge away of her winges, that it neuer flie from
the Churche: wee graunte they be cut in ſuche ſorte, as ſhee ſhall keepe the Churche for euer as her
owne neaſt. And will you knowe who telleth vs this? Euen God him ſelfe, ſaieinge in his Prophete
Eſaye to Chriſte of his Churche:Eſai. 59. 
                     I will make this couenaunt with them, ſaithe our Lorde: My ſpirite
whiche is in thee, and my woordes whiche I haue put in thy mouthe,Ful diſcretely, and vvel applied: As if theſe vvoordes had benne meante of the Pope, and his Succeſſours. ſhall not departe from
thy mouthe, and from the mouthe of thy ſeede, and from the mouthe of thy ſeedes ſeede, ſaithe our
Lorde, from this time foorthe, for euermore.
                  Againſte this truthe, what ſo euer ye bringe in reproufe of Popes liues, whom not withſtandinge
moſte impudently ye belie, what vndiſcrete ſaieinges, or flateries ſo euer ye burthen the Canoniſtes
with, all tourneth to nothinge. The Truthe remaineth vnſhaken: your ſpirite of lieinge, ſcoffinge,
and malice thereby is diſcyfred.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, yée ſaie, Sir Defender is pretily ſéene in Humanitie: For that, yée ſaie,
ſéemeth to be his chiefe profeſſion. Verily, M. Hardinge, Wee are wel pleaſed, to
take ſutche, and ſo mutche learninge, as you maie ſpare vs. Wee contende onely
for Truthe, and not for Learninge. What ſo euer our Learninge be, if it maie
pleaſe God, to vſe it to his Glorie, it ſhalbe ſufficiente, be it neuer ſo litle. How be
it, had you not had ſomme good likinge in your owne Learninge, yée woulde not
vpon ſo ſimple occaſions haue vpbraided others.
                  
                     
                     Touchinge that,
                     The Pope cannot commit Simonie. 
                     ſundrie of your Doctours haue ſaide, the Pope cannot commit
Simonie, firſte it ſhalbe neceſſarie in that behalfe, to conſider the ſtate, and practiſe
of the Churche of Rome. S. Bernarde, writinge vnto Pope Eugenius, ſaith,
Limina Apoſtolorum Ambitio iam plùm terit,Bernardus de Conſideratione. Li. 3. quàm Deuotio. Vocibus Ambitionis
veſtrum toto die reſultat Palatium: Ambitio in Eccleſia per te regnare
molitur: The Apoſtles Entries, or Gates in Rome, are nowe more worne with
                      Ambition,
then with Deuotion. Al the daie longe your Palaice ringeth with the ſounde of
Ambition. By thy meanes, Ambition ſeeketh to reigne in the Churche of God.
Againe he ſaith,
                     Bernardus in Conuerſione Pauli. Sermo. 1. Dè Ciuitate Dei Li. 18. Cap. 22. Viues. Sacri gradus dati ſunt in occaſionem turpis Lucri: & quaeſtū aeſtimant
Pietatem: The Holy Degrees, or Eccleſiaſtical roumes are geeuen ouer to occaſion of
filthy gaine: and the ſame gaine they coumpte Holineſſe. Ludouicus Viues ſaith, Romae
cùm omnia propè vendantur, & emantur, nihil tamen agas ſine Lege, ac Formula,
at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      euam Sanctiſsimi iuris: At Rome, not withſtandinge al thinges be boughte, and ſolde,
yet maie yee doo nothinge there without Fourme, and Order, and that of moſt Holy Religion.
                  
                  
                     Your owne Gloſe ſaithe,
                     In Sexto De Electione & Elect. poteſt. Fundamenta. In Gloſſa. Roma eſt Caput Auaritiae. Ideò omnia ibi venduntur:
Rome is the Heade of Couetouſneſſe. Therefore al thinges there are boughte, and ſolde.
Where as alſo
                      Iohannes Andreae, your greate Canoniſte, noteth this Verſe, alludinge
to the name of Rome,
Roma manus rodit: quos rodere non valet, odit.
                  
                  Durandus ſaithe,
                     Durandus de modo Celebrandi Concil. Ti. 20. Simonie ſo reigneth in the Churche of Rome, as though
in deede it vvere no Sinne. To be ſhorte, theſe twoo Veries were commonly
ſpreadde of Pope Alexander,

                        Vendit Alexander Claues, Altaria, Chriſtum.
                        Vendere iure poteſt: Emerat ipſe priús.Muſculus in Iohan. Cap. 6.
                        
                     
                  
                  Pope Alexander maketh ſale of his Keies, of his Aultares, and of Chriſte him ſelfe. VVel
maie he leſſe theſe thinges: for he him ſelfe paied wel for them.
                  Notwithſtanding, ye doubte not, but al this, by a prety ſoary Diſtinction, maie
ſoone be excuſed. For thus yée ſaie: Verum eſt in ijs, quae ſunt Simoniaca de lure
Poſiiuo ſolùm:
                     Summa Angeli. in Simonia. 
                     Sed non in ijs, quae ſunt Simoniaca de lure Diuino. Whereby,
ye ſaie, the Authoure meaneth, that the Pope is not vnder the Rules of Simonie,
concerninge ſutche Lawes, & paines, as he him ſelfe, or his Predeceſſoures haue
made, and prouided in that behalfe. And therefore, as your modeſte manner is,
yee ſaie, wee haue falſely alleged, and ſhamefully belied Summa Angelica.
                      But why
doo you not better open the ſeueral partes of your Diſtinction? Why doo ye not better
tea
                        •
                      he vs to vnderſtande, what is Simonie by Lavve Poſitiue: and what is
Simonie by the Lavve of God? And why doo yée not declare eche parte by plaine
Examples? Seeinge you thus to ſteale awaie in the darke, wée haue ſomme cauſe
to doubte your dealinge.
                  
                     How be it, to make the matter plaine, your owne Gloſe ſaith thus, Simoniaca
deſui Natura,Extra. De Officio Iudicis Delegati. Ex parte N. In Cloſſa. ſunt quae Nouo, aut Vereri Teſtamento prohibita ſunt: vt, Emere, vel
Vendere Sacramenta, Simoniaca de Iure Poſitiuo, ſunt, quae ſolùm ſunt Spiritualia
ex Conſtitutione Eccleſiae: vt ſunt Tituli Beneficiorum Eccleſiaſticorum &c.
Theſe thinges are Simoniacal of their ovvne Nature, that are forebidden in the Olde,
and Newe Teſtamente: as to buie, or ſelle Sacramentes. Theſe thinges are Simoniacal
by Lavve Poſitiue, whiche are Spiritual onely by the ordinance of the Churche.
Sutche are the Titles of al Eccleſiaſtical Benefices, and Dignities: Ac be Biſhoprikes.
Deanries, Abbies, Archedeaconries, &c. Thus, M. Hardinge, if your
Pope ſelle Sacramentes, whiche wil yéelde him but litle monie, He maie be

charged with Simonie.The Pope cannot commit Simonie. 
                     But if he ſelle Biſhoprikes, Deanries, Abbies, Archedeaconries,
Prebendes, Perſonages, neuer ſo many, yet by the ſhifte of your
prety Diſtinction, noman maie charge him. For al theſe thinges are Spiritual,
onely by the Popes ovvne Poſitiue Lavve, that is to ſaie, by the Ordinance of
the Churche. And thinke you not, ſo good a Diſtinction was wel woorthe the
findinge oute? One of your owne Companie, ſpeakinge hereof, ſaithe thus:
O Petre,Aureum Speculum. quantam animarum multitudinem cateruatim tranſmiſit, & tranſmittit
ad Infernum haec Superſtitialis, & Damnanda Diſtinctio? Multis eſt occaſio,
& viam aperit and ruinam Damnationis aeternae: O Peter Peter, howe many Soules
hath this Superſtitious, and Damnable Diſtinction ſente by heapes, and yet doothe dayly ſende
into Hel? It is an occaſion vnto many, and openeth the waie vnto the fal of Euerlaſtinge
Damnation.
                  
                  
                     To make the mater plaine,
                     ff. De Offi. praeroris. L. Barbarius. Colum. 2. Baldus ſaithe, Simonia non cadit in Papam recipientem:
Though the Pope take monie, yet no Simonie can touche him. In like
ſorte ſaithe his felowe
                      Bartolus, Papa non dicitur facere Simoniam, conferendo
Beneficia,ff. Eod. Titulo. Ead. L. Bartolus. & Dignitates, accepta Pecunia: The Pope is not ſaide, to commit Simonie,
although he take Monie for the Benefices, and Dignities of the Churche.
                  
                  Theodoricus ſaithe, Papa non poteſt committere Simoniam. Sic tenent
Iuriſtae.Theodoricus De Schiſmate inter Vrban. & Clement. Lib. 2. Ca. 32. Quia Simonia excuſatur per Authoritatem eius: The Pope cannot commit
Simonie. So holde the Canoniſtes. For Simonie by his Authoritie is excuſed. Felinus
ſaithe, Iſta Gloſa videtur dicere, quód Papa non committit Simoniam in
recipiendo pecuniam pro collatione Beneficiorum: ex quo non ligatur proprijs
Conſtitutionibus. Tamen Moderni tenent indiſtinctè, quòd Papa non
inuoluatur Crimine Simoniae:Felinus de Officio Iudicis delegati. Ex parte. N. Et ita ego teneo: Et ſic eſt ſeruanda communis
opinio. Ergo Papa poteſt dictam prohibitionem Simoniae firmatam in
Vniuerſali Eccleſia, limitare reſpectu Apoſtolicae Sedis. Et ſi diceres, Requiritur
in talibus apparens cauſa, dico, hîc eſſe cauſam apparentem. Nam ceſſante tali
redditu, qui maximus eſt, attenta hodierna Tyrannide, Sedes Apoſtolica contemneretur:
This Gloſe ſeemeth to ſaie, that the Pope committeth not Simonie, receiuinge
monie for the beſtowinge of Benefices: for as mutche as the Pope is not bounde
to his owne Conſtitutions. Yet nowe adaies the Lawiers holde, without any ſutche Diſtinctiō,
(of Lavve Poſitiue, and Lavve of God) that the Pope cannot in any wiſe comme
within the daunger of Simonie. And ſo I mee ſelfe doo holde: and ſo the cōmon opinion muſt
be holden.
                     A iuſte, and a reaſonable cauſe, wherefore the Pope maie ſelle Biſhoprikes, Deanries, Abbies &c. Extra De Simonia, Ca. 1. Numero. 6. Fol. 18. Abb. Archidiacon. in Tract. De Haereſi. ver. Et quia tanta eſt. 
                     Therefore, notwithſtandinge the Lawe yt forebiddeth Simonie, take place in the
whole Vniuerſal Churche, yet in reſpecte of the Apoſtolique See of Rome, it maie be reſtrained.
But thou wilte ſaie, In ſutch caſes there ought to be ſome apparente cauſe. I telle the,
that there is a cauſe apparente. For this reuene we (of Simonie) whiche is very greate, beinge
once cutte of, conſideringe the Tyrannie, that nowe is, the Apoſtolique See woulde be
deſpiſed. By this authoritie it appeareth, The
                      Pope is not able to mainteine
his Eſtate, and Countenance, nor to ſaue al thinges vpright, without Simonie.
                  Panormitane ſaithe, Etſi Papa accipiat pecuniam pro collatione alicuius Praelaturae,
aut Beneficij, tamen Dominus Cardinalis ait, Non committitur Simonia: Notwithſtandinge
the Pope take monie for the beſtoweinge of a Biſhoprike, or of a Benefice, yet
my Lorde Cardinal ſaithe, there is committed no Simonie. Archidiaconus Florentinus
ſaithe, Papa recipiendo pecuniam, non praeſumitur animo vendendi
recipere: Sed vt illa pecunia ad vſum ſuum conuertatur: cùm Papa ſit Dominus
Rerum Temporalium, per illud dictum Petri, Dabo tibi Omnia Regna
Mundi:The Diuels VVoordes alleged vnder the name of S. Peter. 
                     The Pope receiuing monie (for Biſhoprikes, or Benefices) is not thought to
take it by waie of ſale: but onely, to turne the ſame monie to his owne vſe. For the Pope
is Lorde of al vvorldly goodes, as it appeareth by the woordes of Peter (whiche
woo
                           •
                         des notwithſtandinge Peter neuer ſpake: for they were ſpoken by Sathan)

Vnto thee wil I geeue al the Kingedomes of the VVorlde.
                     The Pope cannot commit Simonie.
                  
                  
                     Againe Felinus ſaith, Quod datur Papae datur Sacrario Petri: nec eſt proprium
Papae: Sed prodeſt danti, tanquam facienti opus pijſsimum: What ſo euer is geeuen to the
Pope,Felinus De Offi. Iudicus delega. Ex parte. N. (for Biſhoprike, or Benefce, by waie of Simonie) it is geeuen to S. Peters
Treaſurie. Neither is it the Popes owne ſeueral goodes. But it is auaileable to the geeuer,
as vnto one, that doothe a moſte Godly deede. Sutche a ſpecial grace hath the
                      Pope.
Of moſte Diueliſhe Vice,
                     The Pope changeth Vice into Vertue. 
                     he is hable to make moſte godly Vertue.
                  
                  Hoſtienſis ſaithe, Papa poteſt vendere Titulum Eccleſiaſticum, vt Epiſcopatum,
Abbatiam, &c. The Pope maie ſelle any Eccleſiaſtical Title, or Dignitie, as a
Biſhoprike, or an Abbie, without danger of Simonie.
                  But,Extra De Simonia. Ca. 1. Hoſtien. what ſpeake wee of the Pope? Your Cardinalles them ſelues, by your fauourable
Conſtructions, and godly orders, are likewiſe Priuileged, to committe
Simonie, ſafely, and freely, & without blame. Panormitane ſaith, Cardinalis, pro
Palafreno à nobili viro recepto,
                     Extra. De simnia, Eiſi queſtiones 
                     non praeſumitur committere Simoniam: A Cardinal,
for receiuinge a Palfraie of a Noble Man,
                      (for a Benefice, or a Biſhoprike) is not
thought to commit Simonie.
                     
                  
                  
                     Thus, whereas Chriſte draue Buiers, and Sellers out of the Churche, you by
your proper Diſtinctions, haue receiued in Buiers, and Sellers, and thruſte oute
Chriſte.Hieronymus. 
                     S. Hierome ſaithe, Per Nummularios ſignificantur Beneficij Eccleſiaſtici
venditores: qui Domum Dei faciunt Speluncam Latronum: By the Exchangers
are ſignified the Sellers of Eccleſiaſtical Benefices: whiche make the Houſe of God, a
Denne of Theeues.
                     1. Quaeſt. 1. Eos qui. 
                     In your owne Decrees it is written hus, Tolerabilior eſt
Macedonij Haereſis, qui aſſerit, Spiritum Sanctum eſſe Seruum Patris, & Filij. Nam
iſti faciunt Spiritum Sanctum Seruum ſuum: The Hereſie of Macedonius, that
ſaide, the Holy Ghoſte is Seruante, and ſclaue to the Father, and to the Sonne, is more tolerable,
then is the Hereſie of theſe simoniſtes. For theſe menne make the Holy Ghoſte
their owne Seruante.
                  
                  Yet, yée ſaie, yee are wel aſſured, that the Truthe is in the Churche of Rome,
and ſhal neuer departe from thence, notwithſtandinge any diſorder, or faulte
whatſoeuer, there committed. And for proufe thereof, yee allege, as yée ſaie, the
Woordes of God him ſelfe in y• 
                     Prophete Eſaie.
                     Eſaie. 59. Al be it, in that whole Prophete,
there is not one woorde expreſſely mentioned of the Churche of Rome. Sutche
a fantaſie, as it appeareth, was ſommetimes in the Heretiques, called the Manichees.
For thus thei ſaide,Auguſtin. De Natura Boni, Ca 46. 
                     A Principibus Gentis Tenebrarum Lumen, ne ab
ijs aufugeret, tenebatur: The Princes of the Nation of Darkeneſſe helde faſte y• Light,
leaſte it ſhoulde flee from them.
                      For euen ſo doothe the Pope, and his Cardinalles
holde the Truthe, as the Princes, or Powers of Darkeneſſe helde the Lighte. It
was harde dealinge for you, to binde Chriſte in Recogniſance, not to departe from
the Pope: yee ſhould rather haue bounde the Pope, not to departe from Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. in Michaeam. Ca. 4. Prophetae Hieruſalem non habent in ore Prophetiam: Et
in Domino requieſcunt, & dicunt: Non venient ſuper nos mala. Quorum cauſa
Speculatoriū Dei hoſtili aratro diuiditur: Et locus, quondam pacis, ruinis plenus fit: &
Templum Domini in vepres, ſpinaſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         conuertitur, & eſt Habitaculum beſtiarum:
The Prophetes of Hieruſalem haue neuer a woorde of Propheſie in their mouthes.
Yet they reaſte them ſelues vpon the Lorde, and ſaie, There ſhal no euil comme vpon vs.
For thene ſakes the Watche Tower of the Lorde is turned vp with the enimies Pleughe:
the place of peace is ful of ruine: the Temple of the Lorde is turned into Breeres, and Thornes:
and is becomme a ſtable of wilde beaſtes.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 2.
               But what if Ieremie telle them, as is afore rehearſed, that theſe

be Lies? What if the ſame Prophete ſaie in an other place, that the
ſelfe ſame menne,Hieremi. 12. whoe ought to be Keepers of the Vineyarde, haue
brought to nought, and deſtroied the Lordes Vineyarde? Howe if
Chriſte ſaie, that the ſame perſones, whoe chiefely ought to haue
a care ouer the Temple,
                  Matthae. 21. 
                  haue made the Lordes Temple a denne
of Theeues?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here come you in with your whatiffes, whiche commonly you vſe, when other Rhetorike faileth
you. VVee tell you plainely without any iffes, thatLearnedly proued. Ieremie meante of you, and ſuche as you
be, and calleth your whole newe fangled Doctrine, Verba mendacij, the woordes of lieinge,
earneſtly geuinge warninge, that menne geue no credite to them. His other rebuke perteineth alſo
to you. VVhen were euer ſuche Theeues in the Churche of God, as yee are?
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 1.
               If it be ſo, that the Churche of Rome cannot erre, it muſte needes
folowe, that the good lucke thereof is farre greater, then al theſe
mennes policie. For ſutche is their Life, their Doctrine, and their
Diligence, that for al them, the Churche maie not onely erre, but
alſo vtterly be ſpoiled, and periſh
                     •
                  . No doubte, if that Churche
maie erre, whiche hath departed from Goddes VVoorde, from
Chriſtes Commaundementes, from the Apoſtles Ordinaunces,
from the Primitiue Churches Examples, from the Olde Fathers,
and Councelles Orders, and from their owne Decrees, and whiche
wil be bounde within the compaſſe of none, neither Olde, nor Newe,
nor their owne, nor other folkes, nor Mannes Lawe, nor Goddes
Lawe, then it is out of al queſtion, that the Romiſhe Churche hath
not onely had power to erre, but alſo that it hathe ſhamefully, and
moſte wickedly erred in very deede.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  A man would haue thought, you woulde haue brought ſome ſubſtantiall Argumente, whereby to
prooue, that the Churche erreth. Neither make you excuſe in that, you ſpeake of the Romaine
Churche.The Churche of Rome is the vvhole Catholique Churche. In this accompte wee make no difference betwene the Romaine Churche, and the Churche.
But all your proufes depende vpon your iffes, whiche beinge denied, you haue nomore to ſaie. No
doubte (ſaie you) if that Churche maie erre, whiche hath departed from Goddes VVoorde, from
Chriſtes Commaundementes, &c. then it hath erred in very deede. But Syr, what if a man denie
your ſuppoſal, and ſtaie you in your firſte if? VVhat haue you to prooue it? All that you haue
ſaide hitherto. We knowe, and of litle force it is. But no doubte, ſaie you, if that Churche maie erre,
which hath departed from Goddes VVoorde, &c. Yea forſoothe, if all iffes were true, then if Heauen
fell, wee ſhoulde catche Larkes. And if a bridge were made betwene Douer and Calys, wee
mighte goe to Boleine a foote, as VVilliam Somer once tolde Kinge Henry, if it be true, that
I haue hearde ſaie.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here in nothinge els, but onely the Canonization of poore VVilliam Sommer.
While your Bookes, M. Hardinge, ſhal liue, al his ſage ſawes ſhal neuer die.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 2.
               But ſaie they, ye haue benne of our Felovvſhip, but novve ye
are becomme foreſakers of your Profeſsion, and haue departed
from vs. It is trewe: We haue departed from them, &, for ſo dooinge,
we bothe geeue thankes to Almighty God, & greatly reioice on
our owne behalfe. But yet for al this, from the Primitiue Churche,
from the Apoſtles, and from Chriſte wee haue not departed. True
it is: Wee were brought vp with theſe menne in darkeneſſe, and in
the lacke of the knowledge of God, as Moſes was brought vp in
the Learning, & in the boſome of the Egyptians. VVe haue benne
of your Companie,
                  Tertull. in Apologetico. ſaithe Tertullian, I confeſſe it: and no marueile
at al: For, ſaith he, menne be made, and not borne Chriſtians.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVee ſaie, (as ye reporte) that ye haue benne once of our Felowſhip, but now ye are become Apoſtates
and foreſakers of your Profeſsion,By this vvhole diſcourſe, Chriſt, and his Apoſtles maie be condemned. and haue wickedly departed from vs. By the name of vs,
we meane not ſome one particular companie, but Chriſtes Catholike Churche. VVe ſaie of you, as S.
Ihon ſaide of the like,1. Ioan. 
                           •
                        . whome he calleth Antichriſtes: Ex nobis exierunt, ſed nō erant ex nobis.
Nam ſi fuiſſent ex nobis, permanſiſſent vti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nobiſcum: They are departed from out of vs,
but they were not of vs. For if they had benne of vs, they had doubteles remained ſtill with vs.
                  But what is your anſweare hereunto? It is deſperate, fooliſhe, and lieinge. Firſte, ye confeſſe the
thinge, and not onely that, but alſo thanke God for it, and greatly reioice in it. And therein ye folowe
the woorſe ſorte of Sinners,Prouerb. 
                           •
                        . of whom Salomon ſaithe, Laetantur cùm malè fecerint, & exultant
in rebus peſsimis: They be glad when they haue donne euil, and reioice in the worſte thinges that
are. Ye haue diuided the Churche of God, ye haue rente our Lordes nette, ye haue cut his whole wouen
cote, which the wicked Souldiers, that Crucified him, could not finde in their hartes to doo. Dionyſius
Alexandrinus, writinge to Nouatus the greate Heretike, who did as ye haue donne, ſaithe thus
vnto him, as Euſebius reciteth,Eccleſ. Hiſit. Lib. 6. Ca. 5. in Graecis. whereby yee maie eſteeme the greatneſſe of your crime: Thou ſhouldeſt
haue ſuffered what ſo euer it were, that the Churche of God mighte not be diuided. And martyrdome
ſuffered for that the Churche ſhoulde not be diuided, is no leſſe glorious, then that which
is ſuffered for not dooinge Idolatrie. Yea in mine opinion it is greater. For there one is martyred
for his owne onely Soule, and here for the whole Churche. Thus it foloweth, that by your
Apoſtaſie, and by your diuidinge of Goddes Churche, yee haue donne more wickedly,A good excuſe of Idolatrie. then if yee
committed Idolatrie.
                  But yet for all this, (ſaie they) from the Primitiue Churche, from the Apoſtles, and from Chriſte
we haue not departed. VVhat can be ſaide more fooliſhly? VVhy Syrs,Yes verily: Euen as the Houſe of God, and the Caue of Theeues vvere al One Temple: Matthae. 21. is not the Primitiue Churche
and this of our time one Churche? Dothe it not holde togeather by continuall Succeſsion till the
worldes ende? VVhat, hath Chriſte moe Churches then one? Is the Primitiue Churche quite
donne, and now muſte there beginne a newe? Is not Chriſte, his Apoſtles, and all true beleuers, in what
time or place ſo euer they liue, his one myſticall Body, whereof he is the Head all other the members? As
Chriſte is one, the Holy Ghoſte one, one Faithe, one Baptiſme, one Vocation, one God: ſo is the Churche one,
whiche beganne at the firſte man, and ſhall endure to the laſte: whereof the liuinge parte on earthe
before the comminge of Chriſte into Fleaſhe, was ſometime broughte to ſmall number: after his comminge,
and after that the Apoſtles had Preached and ſpreadde the Goſpell abroade, the number neither
was euer, nor ſhalbe other then greate (though ſometime accompted, ſmall in reſpect of the vnbeleuers)
vntil the comminge againe of the Sonne of Man,Luc. 1
                           •
                        . at what time he ſhall ſkantly finde Faithe, ſpecially
that whiche woorketh by Charitie, in the Earth. Againſt whiche time buſely ye make preparation.
                  For ſome parte of excuſe of your forſakinge the Churche, ye ſaie, ye were brought vp with vs in

darkeneſſe, and in the lacke of knowledge of God, as Moſes was amonge the Aegyptians: For that ye
bringe out of Tertullian, helpeth you nothinge at all. I praie you Syrs, what darkeneſſe meane ye?
Speake ye of Sinne? VVee excuſe not our ſelues. But when tooke ye out the beame of your owne eies,
that yee eſpie the mote of our eie? It were well ye proued your ſelues honeſt menne, before ye required
vs to be Angels. If ye meane the darkeneſſe of ignorance, as peraduenture ye doo, and the lacke
of knowledge of God: Now that ye are departed from vs, and haue ſet chaire againſt chaire, (I
ſee not cauſe why to ſaie, Aulter againſt Aulter) what more and better knowledge of God haue ye,
then we haue, and euer haue had? Doo we not know the Articles of our belefe? Tell vs, whiche doo
we lacke? This is life Euerlaſtinge (ſaithe our Sauiour in the Goſpell) to knowe thee God alone, and
whom thou haſte ſente Ieſus Chriſte.Ioan. 17. Matth. 16. So farre as God lightneth our vnderſtandinge with the SupernaturallHere M. Hardinge laieth out his heapes of Learninge.
light of his grace, this muche wee know. For which Peter the Sonne of Iona was accompted
bleſſed of Chriſte, the ſame we ſinne full Papiſtes through Gods grace, alſo knowe and confeſſe. The
Commaundementes of God we knowe: what is good, what is euill, whiche be ſinnes, whiche be Vertues,
what is to be folowed, what is to be ſhunned, ſo farre as is behoofull, we be not ignorant.
                  VVhat is the darkeneſſe then, for whiche ye would needes be gonne from vs? And what is that
woorthy knowledge ye haue wonne by your departure? Tell vs, that we maie bte the Bookes, and goe
to ſcoole with you. Truly without ye haue ſome hidden and ſecrete knowledge, which ye haue not
vttered to the worlde hitherto, as we beleue ye haue not, beinge ſuche boaſters as ye are: we ſee litle
cauſe, ye ſhould twite vs of ignorance, and bragge of your owne knowledge. This we ſee full well,
they that runne away from vs to your ſide, be they Monkes or Friers, Tinkers or Tapſters, Coblers or
Bodgers, white or blacke, by and by in your Synagoges they be great Rabbins. And ye the ſuperintendentes
admitte them to be your Miniſters and Preachers of the woorde, and tell them they can doo
well, and they beleue no leſſe themſelues. But the people take them for ſuche, as they knewe them before
they tooke ſuche degree, and many times for their good behauiour, they foregete their Holy Miniſterie,
and Chriſten them by their common name, whiche was not geuen them at the Fonte. Yet all
this proueth not either our ignorance, or your maruelous and rare knowledge. Neither ſhall ye euer
be able to proue to any man of learninge and iudgement, that in any liberall ſciences, or righte knowledge
of the Scriptures, ye are comparable to the learned menne of the Catholike Churche. Though
about fifty yeeres paſte and vpwarde for a ſpace, the ſtudies of eloquence and of tonges were intermitted,
yet then and before thoſe times was there no ſmal number of men, who had profounde knowledge
of all good Artes, and ſpecially of the Holy Letters. I reporte me to Thomas VValden, who very
learnedly confuted the Hereſies of your greate Graundfather Iohn VVicklef, to Alcuinus in the
great Charles time, to Beda before that, all three Engliſh men, to Anſelme and Lanckfrancke Biſhops
of Englande, though ſtrangers borne, to S. Thomas of Aquine, S. Bernarde, Rupertus, and hundreds
moe, whiche here is no place to recken. VVere not they, by confeſsion of all, greate Clerkes? doo not the
beſte learned of our time, in obſcure matters fetche light of them? To ſaie the Truthe, in compariſon of
their cleare light, your ill ſauoringe ſnoffes maie ſcantly ſeeme to yeelde a darke ſmoke. Many talke
of your painted ſheath, who, were they learned in dede, woulde ſoone perceiue neither that to be very
freſhe and gaie: for as for your ſworde, what ruſty and beggerly met all it is, the wiſer parte of the
worlde ſeeth.A very Learned, and a vvorthy Concluſion. But vvoe be to them, that calle Light Darkeneſſe, and Darkeneſſe Lighte: Eſai. 
                           •
                        . Therefore ye ſhall do well, Syrs, to ſpeake no more of the darkeneſſe and ignorance
of the Catholike Churche, and to boaſt leſſe of your greate cunninge, and knowledge.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Your heade was very idle, M. Hardinge, when it coulde ſo eaſily yeelde vs
ſutche idle talke. If yée thinke it in no caſe to be lawful, to departe from them,
what ſo euer thei be, that beare the ſhewe, and countenance of the Churche, then
muſte yée néedes condemne the Apoſtles, and Prophetes, and moſte ſpecially
Chriſte him ſelfe. But let vs conſider, from what companie wée are departed.
So maie the cauſes of our departure the better appeare. For the Pope him
ſelfe ſaithe not nay, but, vpon iuſte conſiderations, any Churche maie leaue the
                     
Churche of Rome.Departing from the Churche of Rome. 
                     His owne woordes be theſe, Nulli agere licet, ſine diſcretione
Iuſtitiae, contra Diſciplinam Romanae Eccleſiae: VVithout diſcretion of Juſtice, it
is lawful for no man, to doo any thinge contrarie to the order of the Churche of Rome.
By this the Popes owne Decree,
                     
                     Diſt. 12. Non Decit. In Rubric. vvith diſcretion of Iuſtice, it is lawfull to doo
contrarie to the Orders of the Churche of Rome.
                  
                  
                     But, for a ſhorte, and general viewe of that whole Churche in this behalfe,
S. Bernarde ſaithe thus,
                     Bernardus in Synodo Remenſi. 
                     Parum eſt noſtris Paſtoribus, quòd non ſeruant nos,
niſi & perdant. Non parcunt ſuis, qui non parcunt ſibi, Perimentes pariter, &
Pereuntes: It is not ſufficient for our Biſhoppes, that they ſaue vs not, onleſſe they alſo
doo deſtroie vs: Sparinge not them ſelues, they ſpare not their people. They doo bothe
periſhe them ſelues, and kille others.In eadem Synod. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Non cuſtodiunt hoc tempore
Sponſam, ſed perdunt: Non cuſtodiunt Gregem Domini, ſed mactant,
& deuorant:
                      They keepe not this daie, the Spouſe of God, that is, his Churche, but
they deſtroie her: They keepe not this Flocke, but they kille, and deuoure. He that writeth,
Paralipomena Vrſpergenſis, in the ſtorie of the Councel of Conſtance,
ſaithe thus,
                     Paralipom. Vrſpergen. Pa. 396. 
                     Spiritum extinguebant: Prophetias aſpernabantur: Chriſtum in Membris
ſuis perſequebantur: Erat
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         planè Perſequutrix Eccleſia: They oppreſſed
the Sprite of God: they defied the Voices of the Prophetes: they perſequuted Chriſte in his
Members. And in deede the Churche was geeuen to woorke perſequution.
                  Aeneas Siluius,Aeneas Sylui. in Epiſt. ad Caſparem Schlickium. Paralipom. Vrſpergen. in Clemen. 5. 
                     that afterwarde was Pope Pius. 2. ſaithe, Refriguit Charitas,
& Fides omnis interijt: Charitie is waxen colde, and al Faithe is deade.
                  
                  
                     In the life of Pope Clemens. 5. it is written thus: Hic fuit Publicus Fornicator.
Ab eo tempore defecit omnis Diſciplina, & Religio in Cardinalibus:
& tres Radices vitiorum, Superbia, Auaritia, Luxuria, validiſsimè dominātur:
This Pope was an open VVhoore maiſter. From that time forewarde, al kinde of Diſcipline,
and Religion decaied in the Cardinalles: and three rootes of vices, Pride, Auarice, and
Lecherie, mightily bare the ſwaie.
                  
                  Antonius Marinarius,In Concil. Trid. Antonius Marinarius. 
                     at your late Chapter at Tridente, ſaithe thus of the
Churche of Rome, Si Euangelica Fides noſtrae vitae Regula eſſet, re ipſa Chriſtiani
eſſemus. Nunc Titulo, & Ceremonijs vocamur Chriſtiani: If the Faithe of the
Goſpel were a Rule vnto our life, then ſhoulde wee be Chriſtians in very deede. As nowe,
by Titles, and Ceremonies, wee beare onely the name of Chriſtians.
                  
                  
                     At the ſame Chapter, the Biſhop of Bitonto ſaide thus, as I haue reported
before:
                     Concil. Trident. Epiſcopus Bitontinus. Quibus turpitudinum Monſtris, qua ſordium Coll
                        •
                     ute, qua Peſte non ſunt
foedati, non corrupti in Eccleſia Sancta, & populus, & Sacerdos? A Sanctuario Dei
incipite: si vllus iam pudor, ſi vlla pudicitia, ſi vlla ſupereſt bene viuendi vel
ſpes, vel ratio: VVith what Monſters of Filthineſſe, with what Vileneſſe, with what
Peſtilence be they not corrupted, and defiled in the Holy Churche (of Rome), as wel the
Prieſte, as the People? Beginne euen with the Sanctuarie of God: if there be any Shame,
if there be any regarde of Honeſtie, if there be any Hope, or waie to liue wel.
                     
                  
                  
                     An other ſaithe,
                     Franciſ. Zephyrus in Apologeticum Tertulliani. O nos miſeros, qui Chriſtiani dicimur. Genres agimus ſub nomine
Chriſti: Miſerable are wee, that are called Chriſtians. VVe liue as Heathens,
vnder the name of Chriſte. An other ſaithe, O lugenda Roma, quae noſtris
Maioribus clara Patrum Lumina protuliſti: noſtris temporibus, monſtroſas
tenebras,Arnulphus, aut Bernardus in Concil. Remen. Petrar. in Rithmis Italicis: Schola di Errori: è Tempio di Ereſia. futuro ſaeculo famoſas, offadiſti: O miſerable Rome, whiche in the time
of oure Elders, haſte brought foorthe the lightes of woorthy Fathers: but in our daies, haſte
broughte foorthe Monſtrous Darkeneſſe, ſhameful, and ſclaunderous to the time to comme.
Petrarcha calleth Rome, a Schoole of Erroure, and a Temple of Hereſie.
                  Brigitta, whoſe woordes, and Propheſies yée haue in reuerence, ſaithe in her
Reuelations, Chriſtus ſumer Benedictionem à Clero Romano, & dabit eam alteri

Genri facienti voluntatem Domini:Departing from the Churche of Ro
                           ••
                        
                      
                     Chriſte ſhal take his bleſſinge from the
Cleregie of Rome: and ſhal geue the ſame vnto a people, that ſhal doo his wil.
                  
                  By theſe ſewe, wée maie conceiue the whole ſtate of the Churche of Rome:
whiche onely Churche,Herma
                           ••
                         Riddus. aboue al others, M. Hardinge telleth vs, is ſo founded in
the Truthe, that it can neuer haue power to be deceiued.
                  
                     Wee haue departed therefore, from Shepeheardes, that ſpoiled the flocke:
From Biſhoppes, that deſtroied the Churche: that oppreſsed the Sprite of
God: that defied the voice of the Prophetes: that perſequuted Chriſte in his
members: that bothe periſhed them ſelues, and killed others: that walowed in
monſters of filthineſse: that liued, as Heathens, vnder the name of Chriſte:
That were voide of Charitie: voide of Faithe: voide of Diſcipline: voide of
Religion: that were Chriſtians onely in Titles, and Ceremonies: From whom
Chriſte had vvithdravven his Bleſsinge: To be ſhorte, wée haue departed
from the Temple of Hereſie, and from the Schoole of Erroure.
                  This, M. Hardinge, is the bewtie, and face of your Romaine Cleregie: this is
that bleſſed Companie, that wée haue foreſaken.
                  
                     Yet, ſaie you, It had benne better, to haue died, then to haue broken the Vnitie of ſutche a
Churche. For your frendes tel you, that without the Obedience of the Biſhop of
Rome,De Maiorita & Obedient. Vnam Sanctam. Subeſſe Romano Pontifici, eſt de neceſsitate Salutis. there is no Hope of Saluation. Notwithſtanding, your owne Clemens,
whom ye commonly cal the Apoſtles Felovve, ſaithe thus, Schiſma efficit, non qui
ab Impijs ſeceſsionem facit, ſed qui à Pijs: He maketh no Schiſme, or Diuiſion in the
Churche, that departeth from the Wicked: but he, that departeth from the Godly.
And therefore he addeth further,
                      Laici, cum ijs qui contraria ſententiae Dei dogmata
defendunt, nolite ſocietatem habere, neque participes illorum Impietatis fieri. Ait enim
Dominus,Clemens, Apoſtolicar. Conſti
                           •
                        a. Lib. 6. Cap. 4. Recedite de medio horum hominum, ne cum eis pereatis: Yee
Laie menne, haue no Felowſhip with them, nor be you Partetakers of their VVickedneſſe,
that defende Doctrines contrarie to the doctrine of God. For Our Lorde ſaithe,
Departe from the middes of this people, leſte yee periſhe togeather with them.
                  
                  Pope Pius.Aeneas Syluius ad Rector. & vniuerſitatè Colonien. Paraliponena Vrſpergenſ Pag. 435. 2. ſaithe, Reſiſtendum eſt quibuſcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in faciem, ſiue Paulus,
ſiue Petrus ſit, qui ad Veritatem non ambulat Euangelij: VVee muſte withſtande
any man vnto the face, be it Peter, be it Paule: if he walke not after the Truthe of the
Goſpel. S.
                      Auguſtine ſaithe, Ne Catholicis quidem Epiſcopis conſentiendum
eſt, ſicubi fortè falluntur, & contra Canonicas Scripturas aliquid ſentiant:
VVee maie not agree, no not with the Catholique Biſhoppes, if they happen to be deceiued,
and thinke any thinge contrarie to the Canonical Scriptures.
                     Auguſtinus de Vnitate Eccleſi. Ca. 10.
                  
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Ex ipſis Veris Eccleſijs frequenter exeunt ſeductores.
Propterea nec ipſis omninò credendum eſt, niſi ca dicant, vel faciant,
quae conuenientia ſint Scripturis:
                     
                     Chryſoſtom. in Matth. Hom. 49. Euen oute of the very True Churches oftentimes there
comme deceiuers. Therefore wee maie not in any wiſe beleeue, no not them, (notwithſtandinge
they be the True Churches of God) onleſſe they ſpeake, or doo ſutche thinges,
as be agreeable to the Scriptures.
                  Anſelmus,Anſelmus in. 2. Theſſalon. 2. 
                     a late VVriter, expoundinge theſe woordes of S. Paule, Tunc
Reuelabitur ille iniquus, ſaithe thus, Romanus Pontifex, qui tenet nunc Eccleſias,
teneat illas, donec de medio fiat: id eſt, donec ab ipſa Romana Eccleſia,
quae eſt Medium, & Cor Eccleſiarum, fiat iniquitas, ob quam ab ea multae diſcedant
Eccleſiae: Let the Biſhop of Rome, that nowe holdeth the Churches, holde
them ſtil, vntil it be taken awaie from the middes: yt is to ſaie, vntil Wickedneſſe be wought
of the Churche of Rome, that is the Middeſt, and harte of Churches: for vvhiche
vvickedneſſe, many Churches ſhal departe from her.
                  
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſ. in Epiſt ad Theodoſ. & V
                           •
                        ſent. Nullus pudor eſt, ad meliora tranſire: It is no ſhame, to
goe to the better.
                  
                  
                     
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto Fauſtus the Heretique,
                     Departing from the Churche of Rome. 
                     Ille me quondam de gremio
tuo Error excuſſerat. Expertus fugi. quod experiri non debui: That Erroure ſhooke
me once out of thy boſome. Beinge taught by proufe, I haue fledde that thinge, that I ſhould
not haue proued.Auguſt Contra Fauſtum. Lib. 15. Cap. 3.
                  
                  Ambroſius Anſbertus, one of your owne Doctoures, ſaithe, Per Hieremiam
Prophetam dicitur, Exite de medio eius populus meus, & ſaluet vnuſquiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      animam
ſuam ab ira faroris Domini.Ambroſ. Anſber. in Apocalyp. Li. 2. Cap. 2. Nequaquā enim in hac vita de medio Ciuitatis reprobae,
id eſt, de medio malorum quos Babylon illa ſignificat, electorum aliquis valet exire,
niſi deteſtādo, quod ab ipſis agitur, & agēdo, quod ab ipſis deteſtatur: The Prophete Hieremie
ſaith, O my people, goe foorth frō the middes of them, and ſaue euery man his owne ſoule
frō the rage of oure Lordes furie. For none of the Electe of God can in this life goe foorthe
from the middes of that Wicked Cittie, that is to ſaie, from the middes of the euil, whiche
that Babylon ſignifieth, but by defieinge, that they doo: and by dooinge, that they defie.
                  
                  And, whereas yee would ſo faine daſte our eies, and couer your deformities
with the name of the Churche,
                     Cyprian. De Lapſis, Sermo. 5. S. Cyprian ſaithe, Non eſt Pax, ſed Bellum:
nec Eccleſiae iungitur, qui ab Euangelio ſeparatur: It is no Peace, but VVarre:
neither is he ioined to the Churche, that is diuided from the Goſpel.
                  
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. ad populum vntioch. n. Homi. 17. Mihi Ciuitas, non habens pios ciues, Omni villa vilior
eſt: & quacun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Spelunca ignobilior: A Cittie, that hathe not Godly Citizens, is
vnto me viler, then any Village: and more lothe ſome, then any Caue. And this he ſaithe
of the
                      Cittie of Antioche, whiche, by expreſſe woordes, he more eſteemeth, then
the Cittie of Rome.
                  
                     Wee graunte, wée haue departed from you, vpon ſutche occaſion, and in ſutche
ſor te, as Moſes ſommetime departed from oute of Aegypte: or, as S. Auguſtine
from the Manichees. How be it, in very deede, you naue rather departed from
out of vs.
                     Chryſoſtom in Matth. Hom. 46. 
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Sic de iſta Noua Hieruſalem, id eſt, de Eccleſia,
qui Spirituales Chriſtiani fuerunt, relicta Corporali Eccleſia, quam perfidi
occupauerant violentia, exierunt ab illis. Magis autem illi exierunt à nobis, ſicut
Iohannes exponit. Non enim ille de Eccleſia exire videtur, qui corporaliter
exit, ſed qui Spiritualiter Veritatis Eccleſiaſticae Fundamenta reliquit. Nos enim
ab illis ex
                           •
                        uimus Corpore: illi à nobis animo. Nos enim ab illis extuimus
Loco: Illi à nobis Fide. Nos apud illos reliquimus Fundamenta parietum:
Illi apud nos reliquerunt Fundamenta Scripturarum. Nos ab illis egreſſi ſumus
ſecundum aſpectum Hominum: Illi autem à nobis ſecundum Iudicium
Dei. Relicta eſt autem deſerta, ex quo de illa Corporali Eccleſia Spiritualis
exiuit: Id eſt, de populo ſuo, qui videbatur Chriſtianus, & non erat, Populus
iſte exiuit qui non videbatur, & erat. Magis autem, ſecundumquod diximus,
illi à nobis exierunt quàm nos ab illis: Euen ſo, touchinge this Nevve Hieruſalem,
whiche is the C
                        •
                     urche, they, that were Spiritu. [Chriſtian menne, lecuinge the Bodily Churche,
whiche the wicked by violence had inuaded, departed out from them: Or, as s S. Iohn
expoundeth it, they rather departed out from vs. For he ſeemeth not in deede to departe
from the Churche, that Bodily departeth: but he, that Spiritually leaueth the Fundations of
the Eccleſiaſtical Truthe. VVe haue departed from them, in Body: they haue departed
from vs, in Minde. VVe from them, by Place: they from vs, by Faithe. VVee haue
leafte with them the Fundations of the VValles: They haue leafte with vs the Fundations
of the Scriptures. VVee are departed foorthe from them, in the ſighte of Man: They are
departed from vs, in the Iudgemente of God. But nowe, after that the Spiritual Churche
is gonne foorthe, the Bodily Churche is leafte foreſaken: That is to ſaie, from that people,
that ſeemed to be a Chriſtian people, and was not, this people is gonne foorthe, that ſeemed
not out wardely, but was ſo in dede. Notwithſtandinge, as wee haue ſaide before, they
haue rather departed from vs, then we from them.
                  
                     
                     Ye ſaie,
                     The Churche in fevve. 
                     your Churche of Rome, that nowe is, and the Primitiue Churche,
is al One Churche. Euen ſo the Moone bothe in the ful, and in the wane, is al
One Moone: Euen ſo Hieruſalem, as wel vnder Dauid, as vnder Manaſſ es, was
al one Cittie. The Holy place, whether ye Maieſtie of God, or ye
                      Abomination of
Deſolation ſtande in it, is al one place. The Primitiue Churche, ſaie you, and
the Churche of Rome, that novv is, is al one Churche. Therefore wée ſaie, the
Churche of Rome, that now is, in Truthe, and Religion, ought to agrée
with the Primitiue Churche.
                  
                     Whether the Churche maie be brought to a fevve in number, or no, wée
had occaſion ſommewhat to ſaie before. The Anciente Father Irenaeus ſaithe,
Quemadmodum ibi in plurimis eorum,Irenaeus, Lib. 4. Cap. 46. qui peccauerunt, non bene ſenſit Deus,
Sic & hîc multi ſunt vocati: pauci verò electi: As in the Olde Teſtamente, in many
of them, that offended, God was not pleaſed: Euen ſo now in the Nevve Teſtamente,
many are called, and fewe are Choſen. In Conſideration whereof, S.
                      Hierome crieth
out in an Agonie within him ſelfe,
                     Hieron in Eſai. Lib. 8. Cap. 24. Fortalitium Fidei. Lib. 5. Tanta erit Sanctorum paucitas: So ſmal ſhalbe
the number of holy menne. One of your owne Doctours ſaithe, as it is alleged once
before,
                      Licet in hoc bello Daemonum cadāt Religioſi Principes, & Milites, & Praelati Eccleſiaſtici,
& Subditi, ſemper tamen manent aliqui, in quibus ſeruatur Veritas Fidei,
& Iuſtificatio bonae Conſcientiae. Et, ſi non niſi duo viri Fideles remanerent
in mundo, tamen in illis ſaluaretur Eccleſia, quae eſt Vnitas Fidelium: Notwithſtandinge
in this warre of Diuelles, bothe the Godly Princes, and Souldiers, and Eccleſiaſtical
Prelates, and Subiectes be ouer throwne, yet euermore there remaine ſomme, in whome the
Truthe of Faithe, and the Righteouſneſſe of good Conſcience is preſerued. And, notwithſtandinge
there vvere but tv voo Faithful menne remaininge in the worlde, yet euen in
them, the Churche of God, whiche is the Vnitie of the Faithful, ſhould be ſaued.
                  
                  But, for yt wée ſaie, vvee vvere brought vp emonge you in Darkeneſse, and
Ignorance, Yée enter out of ſeaſon into a needeleſſe diſcourſe of cōpariſon of Learninge,
In the Liberal Sciences,
                      ye ſaie, we are not comparable to the Learned menne of your
ſide. It was not our meaninge, M. Hardinge, to cal the Bright beames of your Liberal
Learninge into queſtion. It appeareth, yee woulde faine haue it blaſed, and
magnified to the vttermoſte, and no waie to be diſgraced. Wee meante onely the
knowledge of God, and the open Profeſſiō of his Holy Woorde: In compariſon of
whiche knowledge, al other knowledge, what ſo euer, is meere darkneſſe.
                  How be it, touchinge any kinde of the Liberal, and Learned Sciences, there
was no great cauſe, why ye ſhoulde, either ſo highly rowſe your ſelfe in your owne
opinion, or ſo greately diſdeigne others.De Summa Trinita. Linwoode. Ye maie remember, that your Prouincial
Conſtitutions beginne with theſe woordes, Ignorantia Sacerdotum.
                  
                  
                     It were no greate Maiſterie, to charge the Chiefe Doctoures of your ſide with
ſomme want of Learning. Ludouicus Viues ſaith, Vt quid
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Ius ſuperioribus ſaeculis
minùs tittum fuit ſtudentium manibus,Ludoui Viues de Cauſis Corrupt. Artium, Lib. 5. ita purius ad nos peruenit: For the ſpace of certaine
hundred yeeres paſte, the leſſe any Booke came into (your Learned) ſtudentes handes, the
purer, and better it came to vs. Meaninge thereby, that euery thinge was the woorſe
for your Learned handelinge. Of
                      Thomas, Scotus, Hugo, and others, of whom
yée ſeeme to make ſo greate accoumpte, your owne frende Catharinus ſaithe,
Scholaſtici multa ineruditè Comminiſcuntur:Catharinus aduerius Petrum à Sold. 
                     Theſe Schole Doctoures imagine
many m
                           •
                        ters vnlearnedly. Eraſmus ſaithe, Portenta, quae nunc paſsim legimus
in Commentarijs Recention Interpretum, tam impudentia, & inſulſa ſunt, vt videātur
ſuibus ea ſcripſiſse,Eraſm in Scholijs in Hieronym ad Mar
                           •
                        ellam. non Hominibus: The monſtrous folies, yt wee commonly reade in ye
Commentaries of the late Interpreters, (whereby he meaneth the very croppe, and the
woorthieſte of al your Scholaſtical
                      Learned Doctoures) are ſo far without ſhame, and
ſo peeuiſhe, as if they had benne vvritten for Svvine, and not for menne. One of

your Doctoures ſaithe,
                     Compariſon of Learning. Apoſtolus, dicitur ab Apos, quod eſt Argumentum, vel praeeminentia,
& Stolon, quod eſt Miſsio: quaſi praeeminenter Miſſus. An other ſaithe, Apocriſarij,
dicuntur Nuntij Domini Papae.Eraſmus ad Archiepiſc. Toleta. Extra de Elect. & Electi Poteſt. Signifi. in Gloſſ. Manipul. Curat. Pag. 101. Nam criſis dicitur Secretum: & Apos, dicitur
Nuntius. An other ſaithe, Cathedra, eſt nomen Graecum, & componitur à Cathos,
quod eſt Fides, & edra, quod eſt Sponda. An other ſaithe, Eleemoſyna, dicitur
ab Eleis, quod eſt, Miſereri, & Mois, quod eſt Aqua. Peter Crab in his late Scholies
vpon the Councelles, ſaith thus, Mulieres 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , id eſt, Cohabitantes Sacculos:
Likewiſe againe he ſaithe, Phrygium factum eſt ex Pénnis Pauonum. Of
your Liberal Learned Cleregie one ſaithe thus: Nec verba Canonis intelligunt,
nec,Inter Decreta Felicis pp. Conc. Tomo. 1. Pag. 168 In Donatione Conſtantini. Herma. Riddus. Hierony. In Reg. Monacho. Ne ad Riſum Provocentur Angelici Spiritus. quae ſint verba Conſecrationis ſciunt. They vnderſtand not the woordes of theire
Canon: neither knowe they, whiche be the Woordes of Conſecration. And therefore he,
that forged the
                      Rule of Monkes, vnder the name of S. Hierome, chargeth them
in any wiſe to pronounce euery woorde diſtinctely, and wa
                           •
                        ily, leſte by theire fooliſhe
vtterance they ſhoulde make the Angelles to falle a laughinge.
                  
                  Theſe fewe maie ſerue you for a taſte. Hereby, M. Hardinge, it maie appeare,
your Cleregie hath no greate cauſe, to make ſutche triumphe of theire Learninge.
Howe be it, wée vpraide you not herewith: nor was this the cauſe of oure departure.
Yee holde both Faithe, and Learning, and Churche, and Religion, by enheritance.
Chriſte hath once praied for Peter: Therefore your Faithe, and Learning
can neuer faile. Yet notwithſtandinge, your late Bookes, freight with ſo many vnciuile,
and vaine ſpeaches (for of your often Vntruthes I wil ſaie nothing) ſauoure
more of Choler,Hierony in Prouerb. Li. 2. Ca. 19. then of Learninge. S. Hierome ſaithe, Doctrina viri per patientiam
noſcitur. Quia tantò quiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         minùs oftenditur doctus, quantòconuincitur minùs
patiens: A mannes Learninge is knowen by his patience. For the leſſe patiente a manne
ſheweth him ſelfe, the leſſe he ſheweth to be his Learninge.
                  
                  Woulde God, yee woulde humble your knowledge, and make it obediente to
the knowledge of God.Actor. 8. Otherwiſe, that Peter ſaide vnto Simon Magus, of his
moonie, maie likewiſe be ſaide vnto you, of your knowledge: Thy knovvledge
be vvith thee to thy deſtruction.
                     1. Cor in 2. 3. Eſdr. 4. 1. Cor. 13. Matth. 13. Our Learninge is the Croſse of Chriſte:
of other Learninge wée make no vauntes. God is called the God of Truthe, and
not of Learninge. S. Paule ſaithe, Al kinde of Learninge ſhalbe aboliſhed. God
make vs al Learned to the Kingedome of Heauen.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 13. Diuiſion. 1.
               But, wherefore, I praie you, haue they themſelues, the Citizens,
and dwellers of Rome, remoued, and comme downe from thoſe Seuen
Hilles, whereupon Rome ſommetime ſtood, to dwel rather in the
Plaine, called the field of Mars? They wil ſaie peraduenture, bicauſe
the conductes of Mater, wherewithout menne cannot commodiouſly
liue, haue now failed, and are dried vp in thoſe Hilles. Wel then, lette
them geeue vs like leaue in ſeekinge the Water of Eternal Life, that
they geeue them ſelues in ſeekinge the Water of the wel. For that
Water verily failed amongeſt them. The Elders of the levves, ſaith
Ieremie,
                  Hiere. 14. 
                  ſente theire litle ones to the VVateringes: and thei, findinge
no VVater, beinge in miſerable caſe, and vtterly loſte for
thirſte, brought home againe theire veſſels emptie. The nedy,
and poore folke,
                  Eſai. 41. ſaithe Eſaie, ſought aboute for VVater: but no
vvhere founde they any: theire tongue vvas euen vvithered vvith

thirſte. Euen ſo theſe menne haue broken in peeces al the pipes, and
conduites: they haue ſtopped vp al the ſpringes, and choked vp the
Fountaine of Liuinge Water with dyrte, and myre. And, as
Caligula, many yeeres paſt, locked vp faſte al the ſtorehouſes of corne
in Rome, & thereby brought a general dearthe and famine amongeſt
the people, euen ſo theſe menne, by damminge vp al the Fountaines
of Goddes VVoorde, haue brought the people into a pitiful thirſt.
They haue brought into the world,Amos. 8. as ſaithe the Prophete Amos, a
Hungre, and a Thirſte: nor the Hunger of Breade, nor the Thirſte
of VVater, but of hearinge the VVoorde of God. With greate
diſtreſſe went they ſcatteringe about, ſeekinge ſomme ſparke of heauenly
light, to refreaſhe theire conſciences withal: but that light was
already thoroughly quenched out, ſo that they coulde finde none.
This was a rueful ſtate: This was a lamentable forme of Goddes
Church. It was a miſerie, to liue therein, without the Goſpel, without
Light, and without al Comforte.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVel, and witteely reaſoned foreſoothe. No no Sirs, if it were that holeſome VVater of Eternal
life whiche ye thirſte after,Vntruthe. For vvee are not departed from the Catholique Churche. ye woulde neuer haue departed from the high hil, the Catholike Church,
and come downe into the valleis, where ye finde the durty pudles of fleaſhely pleaſures, where the deuil
Behemoth,Iob. 40. as Iob ſaithe, dormit in Iocis humentibus, ſleapeth in woiſte places. Al were not ſterued
for hunger and thirſt of that water of Gods VVorde. Therefore ye ſpeake bothe ſlaunderouſly and
ignorantly for diuines, where ye ſaie, that we had broken in peeces al the pipes and conduites, that
we had ſtopped vp al the ſpringes, and choked, and dawned vp al the Founteines of Liuinge VVater
with durte and myre.
                  Yet vnwares or ignorantly, they cal that faithles and pagane ſtate, a lamentable forme of Gods
Churche, whereas they ſhoulde haue accoumpted it no Churche at al. For where is no worde of God, no
light, no Goſpel at al, how can there be any Church? VVithout theſe, any multitude is no more a Church,
then without Chriſte, a man is a Chriſtian, then a deade man is a man. And thus with malicious
ſlaunderinge, not with lerned reaſons: with theire owne affirmations, not with apt allegations, haue
they gone about to proue, that theſe many hundred yeres the Churche hath erred▪ But thankes be to God,
al this winde ſhaketh no corne. VVhen al theſe haſty blaſtes be blowne▪ ouer, the Churche of God ſhal
ſtand ſtil vnmoued, vpon the rocke, Chriſt builded it on, and appere glorious in her ſted faſtnes and truth,
maugre the gaine ſaieinge of al Heretikes, and ſhal appere to them terrible, as a ſtronge armie ſet in
battaile raye.Cantic. 6.
                  
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, ye beginne out of ſeaſon to plaie with your Allegories, and
Myſtical Fantaſies. Your Catholique Churche of Rome is the Mounte:
Worldly pleaſure is the Vale. By whiche Compariſon, wée muſte beleue, that the
Pope, and his Cardinalles, ſittinge on highe vpon the Mounte, paſſe theire time
there onely in Faſtinge, and praier, and in al manner pouertie, and penurie, and
ſtraitou
                        •
                     ſſe of Life, and haue vtterly abandoned al worldly pleaſures. Notwithſtanding
ſomme haue ſaid,Paralipomen. Vrſpergen. in Clement. 5. 
                     In Cardinalibus Superbia, Auaritia, Luxuria validiſſimè
dominantur: In the Cardinalles of Rome Pride, Auarice, and Lecherie are in theire
greateſt Courage.
                      Howe be it, touchinge as wel this, as other your like folies, conceminge
the Churche, I wil not ſaie, Ye keepe your woonte: but I muſte néedes
ſaie, Yée doo but trifle.
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 13. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wherefore,Departing from the Churche of Rome. though our Departinge were a trouble to them, yet
ought they to conſider withal, howe iuſte cauſe we had of our Departure.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  In deede our charitie is ſutche, as we confeſſe it to be a griefe vnto-vs, to ſee you plaie the part
of rebellious children, to vſe preſumption for ſubmiſsion, contempt for obedience, ſpite for loue. Yet ſith
that ye are deſperate and incorrigible, as by your departing from vs the Church felt ſome anguiſh and
trouble, ſo now that ye are gone, it is releued, as the body is eaſed, when after a purgation it hath auoided
euil humours. Nowe ſaie you beſte.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée are not gonne from the Churche of God, M. Hardinge: Wée are gonne
onely from you, that haue ſo vnreuerently abuſed the Churche. But ye feele good eaſe,
yée ſaie, and are wel reliued by our departure, as, to vſe your homely compariſons, a ſick body
is reliued by a purgation. God of his mercie graunt, that yée maie likewiſe be purged
of al the reſte. So ſhal yée féele more eaſe, and be better reliued.
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hierony. ad Fabiolam. De. 42. Manſionibus, Manſione. 1. Hebraei dicunt, quòd ea nocte, qua egreſſus eſt Iſrael ex Aegypto,
omnia in Aegypto Templa deſtructa ſunt: ſiue terrae motu, fiue ictu fulminum.
Spiritualiter autem dicimus, quòd egredientibus nobis ex Aegypto, errorum Idola corruant,
& omnis Peruerſarum Doctrinarum cultura quatiatur: The Rabines, or Hebrewe
Doctoures ſaie, that the ſame night, that Iſrael departed out of Egypte, al the Idolatrous
Temples in Egypte were deſtroied: either by Earthquake, or by Lighteninge. But
here of wee learne, in a Spiritual ſenſe, that when wee departe out of Egypte (that is to
ſaie, from the companie of Idolaters) the Idolles of erroure falle to the grounde, and
al the honoure of falſe Doctrine is ſhaken downe. Sutche reliefe, M. Hardinge, wée truſt,
yée ſhal finde by our departure.
                     
                  
                  Beda, expoundinge theſe woordes of the Apocalyps, Comme foorthe from
her,Beda in Apocal. Lib. 3. Cap. 18. my people, and be not partetakers of her ſinnes, ſaithe thus: Inducit diſceſsionem,
quae eſt ruina Babylonis: cùm enim Loth diſceſſerit à Sodomis, Sodomae
funditùs tollentur: S. Iohn ſpeaketh of the departure, whiche is the ruine, and fal
of Balylon. For, when Loth ſhal departe out of Sodome, then ſhal Sodome vtterly be
ouerthrowen.
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Beda in Apocal. Lib. 3. Cap. 19. Poſt haec audiui vocem, Alleluia: Laus, & Gloria, & Virtus Deo
noſtro. Haec nunc ex parte dicit Eccleſia. Tunc autem perfectè dicet, cùm diſceſsio facta
fuerit: After this I hearde a voice, Alleluia: Praiſe, and Glorie, and Power be to our
God. This ſonge the Churche in parte ſingeth already. But then ſhal ſhee in deede and
perfitely ſinge it, when departure ſhalbe made (from Antichriſte, or Babylon).
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 1.
               For if they ſaie, It is in no wiſe lawful for one, to leaue the felowſhip,
wherein he hathe benne brought vp, they maie aſwel in our
names, & vpon our heades, likewiſe condemne the Prophetes, the Apoſtles,
and Chriſte him ſelfe. For why complaine they not alſo of
this, that Loth went quite his waie out of Sodome: Abraham out

of Chaldee,
                  Example of Chriſte the Iſraelites out of Egypte, Chriſte from the Ievves,
and Paule from the Phariſeis? For excepte it be poſſible, there maie
be a lawful cauſe of Departinge, wee ſee no reaſone, why Loth, Abraham,
the Iſraelites, Chriſte, and Paule maie not be accuſed of Sectes,
and Seditions, aſwel as others.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Yet bringe ye nothing to the purpoſe. Your proufes be ſo weake, and hange ſo euil togeather, that
we maie wel tel you (whiche Irenaeus obiected to Heretikes) that ye make a rope of ſande. VVe
ſaie not, it is in no wiſe lawful for one to leaue the felowſhip, wherein he hath benne brought vp. But
contrary wiſe,Apocal. 18.
                     Thus mutche confeſſed is ſufficiente. if the felowſhip be naught and wicked, euery one is bound to eſchewe it▪ Depart from
Babylon my people, and be not ye partakers of her ſinnes, ſaith the heauenly voice to S. Iohn.A ſuddaine Concluſion. Therefore
the examples ye bringe, helpe nothinge your cauſe.
                  Loth went out of Sodome, Abraham of Chaldea, the Iſraèlites of Egypte, Paule from the Phariſeis,
by Gods ſpecial warninge. VVhere ye ſaie, Chriſte went from the Iewes, onleſſe ye referre it to his
ſteppinge aſide from them for a while: ye ſhoulde rather haue ſaide, the Iewes went from Chriſte. But
whereto perteineth this? Though ye were ſo malicious, as to compare the Catholike Churche to Sodome,
to Chaldea, to Egypte, to the Iewes and Phariſeis: yet, I wene, ye are not ſo proude, asA vaine folie. For a good man maie folovve Chriſte vvithout preſumptuous Compariſon. to compare
your ſelues to Loth, to Abraham, to Gods peculiar people, to Paule, to Chriſte himſelfe. Theſe departinges
we allowe, and God required them: yours we blame, and God deteſteth.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée compare not our ſelues, M. Hardinge, neither with Loth, nor with Abraham,
nor with Paule: leaſte of al with Chriſte him ſelfe. But wée humbly ſubmitte
our ſelues both in life, and in Doctrine, to be guided by theire Examples. And
thus, I truſte, we maie lawfully doo, without iuſte note of preſumption. S. Chryſoſtome
ſaithe,Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 79. 
                     Data eſt tibi poteſtas diuinitùs imitandi Chriſtum, vt poſsis illi ſimilis
fieri. Noli expaueſcere hoc audiens. Timēdum enim tibi potiùs eſt, ſi ſimilis
illi fieri negligas: Thou haſte power geeuen the from God to folowe Chriſte, that thou
maiſte be like vnto him. Be thou not afraide to heare this thinge. Thou haſte more cauſe to
feare, if thou refuſe to be like vnto him.
                      Likewiſe ſaithe the Anciente Father Origen,
Si quem imitati volumus, propoſitus eſt nobis Chriſtus ad imitandum:
                     Origen. in Ezechiel. Homil. 7. 
                     If wee
deſire to folowe any man, Chriſte is ſet before vs, that wee ſhoulde folowe him.
                  
                  
                     But if it be ſo Provvde a parte, in Religion, and Life to folowe Chriſte, what is
he then, that claimeth to him ſelfe Chriſtes Authoritie, and calleth him ſelfe euen
by the name of Chriſte? You know, of whom it is written,
                     Extra De Trāſlatio Epiſcopi, Quāto. Hoſtien. Bernard. De Cō
                        ſideratio. Lib. 2. Papa poteſt, quicquid
Chriſtus ipſe poteſt. The Pope can doo, what ſo euer Chriſte him ſelfe can doo.
Yee knowe, who is wel contented, to heare him ſelfe thus ſaluted: Touchinge Primacie,
                     
thou art Abel: touchinge Gouernemente, thou art Noē: touchinge Patriarkſhip,
thou art Abraham: touchinge Order, thou art Melchiſedech: touchinge Dignitie,
thou art Aaron: touchinge Authoritie, thou art Moſes: touchinge Iudgemente, thou
art Samuel: touchinge Power, thou art Peter: touchinge Anointinge, thou art Chriſte.
Theſe woordes, I trowe, M. Harding, maie ſommewhat ſéeme to ſauoure of Pride.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 2.
               And, if theſe menne wil needes condemne vs for Heretiques, bicauſe
we doo not al thinges at theire Commaundemente, whom (in
Goddes Name) or what kinde of menne ought they themſelues to be
taken for, whiche deſpiſe the Commaundemente of Chriſte, and of the
Apoſtles?
               
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Our frailtie concerninge life, we accuſe, and lamente, and commende our ſelues to Gods infinite
mercie. Touchinge belefe and neceſſarie doctrine of faithe, raile ye at vs neuer ſo mutche, we neither
deſpiſe theVntruthes notorious, & manifeſte vnto the vvorlde. Commaundementes of Chriſte, nor the ‡ traditions of the Apoſtles.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 3.
               If we be Schiſmatiques, bicauſe we haue leaft them, by what name
then ſhal thei he called themſelues, whiche haue foreſaken ye 
                  Greekes,
from vvhom they firſte receiued theire Faithe, foreſaken the Primitiue
Churche, foreſaken Chriſte himſelfe, and the Apoſtles, euen
as if Children ſhoulde foreſake theire parentes?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVho ſo euer departe from the Catholike Churche, they be Schiſmatikes: ye haue departed from the
Catholike Churche, ofHere M. Harfreely yeldeth vs the firſt ſix hundred, and three ſcore yeeres, that is to ſaie, the vvhole time of the Apoſtles, & Holy Fathers of the Churche. theſe nine hundred yeeres: ergo ye be ſchiſmatikes. The firſte propoſition ye wil
not denie: The ſeconde your ſelues confeſſe: the concluſion then muſte nedes be true. If we ſaie the ſame,
blame vs not. Neither ſaie we that onely, but alſo that ye are Heretikes. VVhereby the meaſure of your
iniquitie is increaced. The ſame crime ye woulde impure vnto vs, if ye wiſie howe. If ye haue no more
to laie to our charge, but that we haue foreſaken the Grekes, ye ſhal not be offended with the world,
if it geue vs the title, name, and eſtimation of Catholikes, as heretofore. For (remember your ſelues) we
haue not forſaken: he Grekes, but the Greekes in ſome pointes haue forſaken vs. By the name of vs, alwaies
I vnderſtande the Catholike Churche, euen the Holy Romaine Churche, whoſe faithe we profeſſe,
and with whom we communicate.
                  
                     Reade the Anſvveare. And howe ſtandeth it with your lerninge, that we receiued the faithe firſt from the Grekes?
For where ye ſaie, we haue forſaken the Primitiue Churche, yea Chriſte himſelfe, and the Apoſ
                        •
                     les, ye
haue tolde vs this ſo often, that now we take them to be but wordes of courſe, and a common blaſte of
your railing ſprite. The Romaine Churche receiued the faithe from IeruſalemVntruthe, As ſhal ſoone appeare. and not from Grece, as
the reſte of the world did,Eſai. 2. according to the Prophecie, De Siō exibit lex, &c. As for the land of Britaine
our natiue country, if the faithe were firſte brought hither by Ioſeph of Arimathaea, and his felowes,
as by old tradition we are told:Certainely vve receiued not our Faithe firſte frō the Churche of Rome. then was the Church here firſt planted by faithful Iewes, and
not by Grekes. This beinge true, we maruel what ye meane, to charge vs with forſaking the Grekes,
ſpecially where ye ſaie, we firſte receiued the faith from them▪ VVhiche is no truer, then that we receiued
our Engliſhe language from them.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     It were no ſhame for you, M. Hardinge, to confeſſe, that the Churche of
Rome firſte receiued her Faithe from the Churches of Graecia.Augu. Epiſt. 178. Augu. Epiſt. 170. Chryſoſto ad Popul. Antiochen. Homil. 14. 
                     Neither are they
ſo vtterly voide of Learninge, that haue ſaide the ſame. Rather I marueile, what
Learninge can leade you, to ſate the contrarie. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Terra Graecorum,
vnde vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      deſtinata eſt Fides: The Land of Graecia, from whence the Faithe
into al places was ſente abroade. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Radix Orientalium Eccleſiarum,
vnde Euangelium in Aphricam venit:Tripar. Hiſtor. Lib. 4 Cap. 16. Sozom. Li 3. ca. 8 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     The Roote of the Eaſte Churches, from whence
the Goſpel came into Aphrica. S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe vnto the people of Antioche,
Chriſtianorum nomen▪ velut ex quodam Fonte, hinc incipiens, omnem mundum
inundauit: The name of Chriſtians beginninge firſte from this Cittie of Antioche,
as from a Springe, hath flowed ouer the whole worlde. The
                      Biſhoppes of the Eaſte wrote
thus vnto Iulius the Biſhop of Rome: Ad Eccleſiam Romanā ab Oriente Praedicatores
Dogmatis aduenerūt: The Preachers of Chriſtian Doctrine came frō yt Eaſte to

the Churche of Rome.The Faith brought to Rome oute of Graecia. 
                     Likewiſe S. Baſile ſaith, The Goſpel of the Kingedome, ſpringing
vp
                      firſt in the Church of Graecia, was frō thence publiſhed abroade into al ye world.
Euſebius ſaithe,
                      Lucis virtus, & Sacrae Religionis Lex, beneficio Dei, quaſi è ſinu
Orientis profecta, cunctum ſimul Orbem Sacro Iubare illuſtrauit: The power of
the Light, and the Lawe of Holy Religion, by Goddes benefite, ſpringinge out, as it were,
from the boſome of the Eaſte,
                     Baſil. In Epiſt ad Epiſ. per Italiam & Galliam. Euſebi. De vita. Conſtan. Orati. 2. Cod. De Sacroſā. Eccleſiis. L. Iubemus. §. Sciē
                        tes. 
                     hath ſhined ouer the whole worlde togeather with a bleſſed
beame. The Emperoure
                      Iuſtinian ſaithe, Conſtantinopolis, Religionis, & Fidei
Mater perpetua: Conſtantinople is the Euerlaſtinge Mother of Faithe, and Religion. And
likewiſe againe,
                      Sacroſancta Cōſtantinopolitanae Ciuitatis Eccleſia, Mater Pietatis
noſtrae, & Chriſtianorum Orthodoxae Religionis omnium: The moſte Holy
Churche of the Cittie of Conſtantinople, the Mother of oure Holineſſe, and the Mother
of al Chriſtians of the Catholique Faithe.
                  
                  In like ſorte, the Churche of Conſtantinople, euen vntil this daie, intituleth
it ſelfe:Cod. in Eod. titu. 1. Decernimus. Epiſt. Eccle. Conſtantinop. Ad Eccle. Pragen. Concil. Trident. Oratio Epiſcopi Bitontini. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
The Churche of Conſtantinople, the Mother, and Maiſtreſſe of al that
be Catholique.
                      To be ſhorte, if ye wil not beleue any of theſe, yet at leaſte yee maie
beleue your owne Felowes. The Biſhop of Bitonto in youre late Chapter at
Trident, vttered theſe woordes, as it maie wel appeare, with luſty courage: Eia
igitur Graecia Mater Noſtra, cui id torum debet, quod habet Latina Eccleſia:
O therefore oure Mother Graecia: vnto whom the Latine Churche, or the Churche of
Rome, is beholden for al, that euer ſhe hath.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theſe thinges, M. Hardinge, beinge true, wee marueile, what ſhoulde moue
you to denie, that yee firſt receiued the Faithe from the Churche of Graecia. Touchinge
the mater it ſelfe,
                     In opere Triparti. li. 2. ca. 1. In. 2. To. Concil. 
                     it is written thus in youre owne Councelles, Si Graeci, per
quandam Sciſſuram, diuiduntur à Latinis, ita Latini à Graecis. Et ideo videtur, quòd, Si
Graeci debent dici Schiſmatici propter huiuſmodi Diuiſionem, eadem ratione, & Latini:
praetereà Graeci magis ſeruant Antiquas Conſuetudines Apoſtolorum, &
Diſcipulorum Chriſti, in Barbis, &c. If the Grekes, by a certaine Diuiſion, be ſundred
from the Latines, euen ſo be the Latines ſundred from the Greekes. And therefore
it ſeemeth, if the Greekes in reſpecte of this Diuiſion ought to be called Schiſmatiques,
that then the Latines alſo ought ſo to be called in like caſe. Furthermore, the Greekes
doo more duely keepe the Olde Cuſtomes of the Apoſtles, and of Chriſtles Diſciples, touchinge
Beardes, &c. then doo the Latines.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 1.
               For though thoſe Greekes, who this daie profeſſe Religion, and
the name of Chriſte, haue many thinges corrupted amongeſt them,
yet holde thei ſtil a great number of thoſe thinges, whiche they receiued
from the Apoſtles. They haue neither Priuate Maſſes, nor
mangled Sacramentes, nor Purgatories, nor Pardones. And as for
the titles of Highe Biſhoppes, and thoſe glorious names, they eſteeme
them ſo, as whoſoeuer he were, that woulde take vpon him the
ſame, and woulde be called, either Vniuerſal Biſhop, or the Head of
the Vniuerſal Churche, they make no doubte, to cal ſutche a one, both
a paſſinge proude man, and a man, that woorketh deſpite againſte al
the other Biſhoppes his Brethren, and a plaine Heretique.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As ye haue oftentimes belied vs,Vntruthe. As it ſhal plainely appeare. ſo nowe ye belie the poore Greekes. So little are ye able to ſaie

ſomewhat, and therein to ſaie truthe. For they haue Maſſe commonly without companie to communicate
with the Prieſte, whiche ye cal Priuate Maſſe: ſoVntruthe, As large, as manifeſte. is it al Greece ouer, ſo is it in Aſia, in Syria,
in Aſsyria, in Armenia, and where ſo euer the Religion of Chriſte is profeſſed: As amonge the
Greekes in Venis, I my ſelfe, and diuerſe of oure countrie menne haue ſeene it commonly practized.
Like wiſe praie they al for the dead, and thinke them to be relieued by the praiers, oblations, almoſe,
and deedes of charitie, doone for them by the liuinge. VVhiche minde, and opinion implieth that faith,
Vntruthe, For the Grecians neuer receiued theſe fantaſies of Purgatorie. whiche the Churche holdeth of purgatorie.
                  But though (ſaie ye) thoſe Greekes haue many thinges corrupted, yet holde they ſtil a greate
number of thoſe thinges, whiche they receiued of the Apoſtles. And wilt thou knowe, Reader, what
they be? Forſoothe they haue neither Priuate Maſſes, nor mangled Sacramentes, nor Purgatories, nor
Pardons. Is not the witte of this Defender to bee commended, that maketh a man to holde that,
whiche he hath not?O, ſo merily this mā plaieth vvith his fanſie. Thoſe Greekes holde ſtil, ſaithe he. VVhat holde they? Mary they haue not this
and that. This is a newe kinde of holdinge, for a man to holde, that he hath not. If they holde ſtil,
then haue they ſtil. But they haue not, ſaieth he: then howe holde they? A man maie by the rules of
this newe Logique, thus reaſon: The Turkes, Saracenes, Iewes, Infidels, Idolaters, yea, the ſhepe of
Cotteſholde alſo, if ye wil, haue neither priuate Maſſes, nor Communion vnder one kinde, nor Purgatories,
nor Pardons: Ergo, they holde a number of thinges, whiche they receiued from the Apoſtles.
The antecedent is true. VVho ſo euer denieth the conſequente, muſt compte this Defenders Logique
very ſimple. VVhat if one ſhoulde make this argumente, This Defender hath neither good Logique, nor
very fine Rhetorike, nor profounde Philoſophie, nor the right knowledge of Diuinitie: Ergo, he holdeth
many Hereſies? Though bothe the Antecedent, and Conſequent be true, yet is the argument naught.
For by like reaſon one might conclude, an honeſt vnlearned catholique man to be an Heretique, whiche
were falſe and iniurious. Sutche is the Logique, ſutche are the topikes of this newe negatiue, and
ablatiue diuinitie: for ſo maie we worthely cal it. Negatiue, in reſpect of their blaſphemous tongues,
denieing ſundrie weightie pointes of our Faithe: Ablatiue, in reſpecte of their wicked handes, caſting
away, throwinge downe, and taking away manie good thinges, perteining to the maintenance
of Chriſten Religion, and Goddes honour. Put them from their negatiues, and from their ablatiues,
then in what caſe ſhal they ſtande?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  I am aſhamed, the worlde ſhould be combred with ſo childiſhe folies. This Defenders
witte, ye ſaie, is to bee commended. He maketh a man to holde, that be neuer hadde.
And what holde they? ſaie you. Mary, they haue not this, and that. This is a newe kinde
of holdinge, for a man to holde, that he hath not. If they holde ſtil, then haue they ſtil. But
they haue not: then howe holde they? Nowe ſurely, M. Hardinge, I trowe, wee
ſhal Haue, and Holde a mery man. So prety ſporte yee canne make youre ſelfe
with Hauinge, and Holdinge. It were great pitie, yee ſhoulde euer be otherwiſe
occupied. Annibal of Carthage, when he hadde hearde Phormio the Oratoure
talke pleaſantly a longe whyle togeather,Cicero, De Oratore. 2. beinge afterwarde demaunded,
what he thought of his Eloquence, made aunſweare in his homely ſorte, Multos ſe
vidiſſe delitos ſenes: ſed, qui magis, quàm Phormio, deliraret, vidiſſe neminem.
                  
                  But, ſomme what to yelde vnto your pleaſance, why maie not a man Holde,
that be neuer Hadde, as wel as Loſe, that he neuer Hadde? In the Learned Gloſes
vpon youre Decrees,
                     Diſt. 17. Concil. in Gloſs. yee maie finde this note emongeſt others, Nota, quòd
aliquis dicitur perdere, quod nunquā habuit: Marke wel this: A man maie be ſaid to
Loſe, that he neuer Hadde. And yet, ye ſaie cōmonly in the Schooles, Priuatio ſemper
praeſupponit habitum, The Loſing of a thing alwaies pre ſuppoſeth the Hauing of
the ſame.
                      Or, to anſweare you in plainer wyſe, why maie not a man as wel Holde
nothinge, as you maie talke ſo mutche, and yet ſaie nothing? Galene ſaide ſommetime
to one,Galenus. that ſpake then in ſutche ſubſtantial manner, as you ſpeake nowe,
Accipe nihil: & tene fideliter: Take nothinge: and holde it faſte.
                     
                  
                  
                     
But to leaue youre folies,The Greke Churche. and ſeely toies, M. Hardinge, with youre Turkes,
and Saracenes, and Sheepe of Coteſholde, wee ſaie not, The Greekes Holde
ſtil, that they neuer Hadde: But wee ſaie, They Holde ſtil, that they euer Hadde.
Youre Priuate Maſſes, and youre Dimi Communions they Holde not: for they
Hadde them neuer. The Holy, and VVhole Communion in Bothe kindes,
they Holde ſtil: and ſithence the Apoſtles time they haue hadde them euer.
                  
                     They praie alſo for the Dead: And therein, yee ſaie, is implied youre Faithe of Purgatorie.
                     
I wil not here touche the ſimplicitie of youre Rhetorique, or Logique,
M. Hardinge: But onely wiſhe you, to haue better regarde to youre Diuinitie.
For ought, that I can ſee, Praier for the Deade, and youre Fantaſie of Purgatorie,
were neuer ſo ſtraitely coupled togeather, but that they might wel, and
eaſily goe a ſunder. The Grecians, as they Praie for the Deade, ſo doo they Praie
for the Apoſtles, for the Patriarkes, for the Prophetes, and for the Bleſſed Virgine
oure Ladie:
                     Liturgia Baſilij, Liturgia Chryſoſtomi. as you maie ſoone perceiue by S. Baſiles, and by S. Chryſoſtomes
Liturgie. Yet, I thinke, yee woulde not haue youre Reader beleue, as an
Article of youre Faithe, that the Apoſtles of Chriſte, the Patriarkes, the Prophetes,
and the Bleſſed Virgin Chriſtes Mother are ſtil in Purgatorie. What
ſo euer other opinion the Grecians haue of the Deade, certaine it is, they coulde
neuer yet be brought to beleue youre Purgatorie.
                  
                  
                     Roffenſis,
                     Polydor. De Inuentoribus, li. 8. cap. 1. one of your greateſt Doctoures, as I haue ſaide before, ſaith thus, Purgatorium
Graecis vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad hunc diem non eſt creditum: The Grecians vntil this
daie beleue not Purgatorie. Thus, M. Hardinge, I knowe not, whether by
youre Logique, or by youre Diuinitie, (for bothe are marueilous) yee woulde
faine force youre poore Greekes, to Holde that thinge, that they neuer Hadde.
                  
                  An other proper paſtime yee make youre ſelfe with youre Negatiues, and
Ablatiues. And wherefore, it were harde to telle, ſauinge that, I ſee, ye were
wel diſpoſed, and wel it became you, to be mery. The Ancient Learned Fathers,
hauinge to deale with impudent Heretiques, that in defence of their Erroures,
auouched the Iudgemente of al the Olde Biſhoppes, and Doctoures, that hadde
benne before them, and the general conſente of the Primitiue, and whole Vniuerſal
Churche, and that with as good regarde of Truthe, and as Faithefully, as you
doo nowe, the better to diſcouer the ſhameleſſe boldeneſſe, and nakedneſſe of theire
Doctrine, were oftentimes likewiſe forced to vſe the Negatiue, and ſo to driue the
ſame Heretiques, as wee doo you, to proue theire Affirmatiues: whiche thinge to
doe, it was neuer poſſible. The Anciente Father Irenaeus thus ſtaied him ſelfe,
as wee doo,Irenaeus. li. 1. ca. 
                           •
                        . by the Negatiue: Hoc ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Prophetae Praedicauerunt, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Dominus
docuit, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Apoſtoli tradiderunt: This thinge neither did the Prophetes publiſhe.
nor oure Lorde teache,
                     
                     Chryſoſt. De Incomprehenſi. Dei natura, Hom. 3. Leo. Epiſt. 93. cap. 12. 
                     nor the Apoſtles deliuer. By a like Negatiue Chryſoſtome
ſaithe, Hanc Arborem non Paulus plantauit, non Apollo rigauit, non Deus
auxit: This Tree
                      (of Erroure) neither Paule planted, nor Apollo watered, nor God
encreaſed. In like ſorte Leo ſaithe, Quid opus eſt in cor admittere, quod Lex
non docuit, quod Prophetia non cecinit, quod Euangelij Veritas non praedicauit,
quod Apoſtolica Doctrina non tradidit? What needeth it, to beleue that thing,
that neither the Lawe hathe taught, nor the Prophetes haue ſpoken, nor the Goſpel hathe
preached, nor the Apoſtles haue deliuered?
                      And againe, Quomodo noua inducuntur,
quae nunquam noſtri ſenſere Maiores?
                     Leo, Epiſt. 97. cap. 3. 
                     Howe are theſe newe diuiſes brought
in, that oure Fathers neuer knewe?
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine,Auguſt. Epiſt. 165 
                     hauinge reckened vp a greate number of the Biſhoppes of
Rome, by a general Negatiue ſaithe thus: In hoc ordine Succeſſionis nullus
Donatiſta Epiſcopus inuenitur: In al this order of Succeſſion of Biſhoppes, there is

not one Biſhop founde,
                     Priuate Maſſe in the Greke Churche. 
                     that was a Donatiſte. S.
                      Gregorie, beinge him ſelfe a Biſhop
of Rome, and writinge againſte the Title of Vniuerſal Biſhop, ſaith thus,
Nemo Deceſſorum meorum hoc tam prophano vocabulo vti conſenſit: Nullus
Romanorum Pontificum hoc ſingularitatis nomen aſſumſit:Gregorius, li. 4. Epiſt. 32. 
                     None of al my
Predeceſſours euer conſented to vſe this vngodly Title: No Biſhop of Rome euer tooke
vpon him this name of Singularitie.
                  
                  Theſe, and other like Negatiues, the Holy Fathers in Olde times mighte
ſafely vſe without controlmente: for that there was no Doctoure of Louaine
as yet vp ſtarte, to carpe, and quarrel at their Diuinitie. Leaue this childiſhe, and
vnſauerie ſportinge, and triflinge with youre Negatiues, M. Hardinge. It were a
greate deale more ſeemely, for a man of Learninge, and Grauitie, and more to
youre pourpoſe, to proue youre Affirmatiues.
                  
                  
                     They haue Priuate Maſſe,
                      yee ſaie, in al Graecia, Aſia, Syria, Aſſyria, Armenia,
and, where ſo euer the Religion of Chriſte is profeſſed. Al this wee muſte needes beleue
vpon youre woorde: for other proufe yee offer to make none. Notwithſtandinge,
if they haue ſutche Priuate Maſſes in al thoſe Countries, tel vs, I beſeeche you,
who were the Authours, and Makers of theſe Maſſes? Yee wil ſaie, S. Iames, S.
Chryſoſtome, or S. Baſile. For of theſe names, and Maſſes, yee haue tolde vs
many a tale. Yet, if yee conſider the mater wel, yee ſhal finde, that theſe ſelfe ſame
Maſſes were our Communions, and nothinge like to youre Maſſes: And, that
the Holy Sacramentes at the ſame, contrarie to youre newe diuiſes, were deliuered
generally in Bothe kindes to al the people.
                     
                  
                  
                     S.
                     Liturgia Iacobi. 
                     Iames in his Maſſe ſaithe thus, Diaconi tollunt Diſcos, & Calices, ad
impertiendum populo: The Deacons take vp the Diſſhes, and the Cuppes, to miniſter
the Sacramente vnto the people.
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome in his Maſſe ſaithe thus,
                     
                     Liturgia Chryſoſtomi. 
                     Pòſt Myſteria feruntur ad locum,
vbi populus debet communicare: Afterwarde the Holy Myſteries, or Sacramentes
be brought vnto the place, where the people muſte receiue togeather.
                  S. Baſile in his Maſſe ſaithe thus,Litur. Baſilij. 
                     Nos omnes de vno Pane, & de vno
Calice participantes, &c. Cantores cantant Communionem: & ſic Communicant
Omnes: Al wee receiuinge of One Breade, and one Cuppe, &c. The Quiere ſingeth
the Communion: and ſo they Communicate Al togeather.
                      Therefore, M. Hardinge, yee
muſte needes confeſſe, either that the Grecians this daie vſe none of theſe Maſſes:
or, that theire Maſſes are not youre Maſſes, but oure Communions: Whiche bothe
are contrarie to youre ſelfe.
                  
                     In the Armenians Liturgie,
                     
                     Georgius Caſsā
                        der in Liturgijs. 
                     it is written thus, Qui non ſunt digni Communicare
hanc Oblationem Dei, exeant foras ante fores Eccleſiae, & ibi Orent:
                     
They, that are not woorthy to receiue this Oblation of God, let them goe foorthe before the
Churche doore: and there let them praie.
                  Of the Grecians order in this behalfe, youre greate, and ſpecial Doctoure,
Cardinal Beſſarion,
                     Beſſarion, De Sacrament. Euchariſtiae. beinge him ſelfe a Greeke borne, ſaithe thus, Hoc ipſe ordo
rerum poſcebat: primùm, Conſecrare: deinde, Frangere: poſteà, diſtribuere:
Quod nos in praeſenti facimus: This the very order of the thinges required: firſte, that
wee ſhoulde Conſecrate,
                     Circa annum Domini, 1450. 
                     or Bleſſe the Breade: Nexte, that wee ſhoulde Breake it: Laſte
of al, that wee ſhoulde Diuide it,
                      (or deliuer it to the people). VVhiche thinge vve
(Grecians) doo at this preſent daie. Thus you ſee, M. Hardinge, that the Grecians
this daie Conſecrate, Breake, and Diuide the Sacramente vnto the people,
as wee doo. Therefore it is vntrue, that you ſaie, They haue this daie youre Priuate
Maſſe.
                  
                  Touching the Grecians, that liue nowe in Venice, what order thei vſe there,

I cannot telle.Priuate Maſſe in the Greke Churche. Notwithſtandinge, as I haue hearde ſaie, Priuate Maſſe they haue
not. But if they haue, liuinge vnder the Popes Iuriſdiction, it is no marueile.
Certaine it is, that Venice is no parte of Grecia.
                  Matthias Illyricus,Matthi. Illyricus, in Teſtibus Veritatis. pag. 5. 
                     beinge him ſelfe borne in Dalmatia, not farre from the
Confines, or Borders of Grecia, and therefore, as it maie be thought, the better
acquainted with theire Orders, ſaith thus: Eccleſia Graeca, ei
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      coniunctae, Aſiatica,
Macedonica, Myſica, Valachica, Rutenica, Moſchouitica, & Aphricana, id
eſt, totus Mundus, vel certè eius maxima pars, nunquam Primatum Papae
communi conſenſu conceſſerunt: nunquam Purgatorium probauerunt: nunquam
Priuatas Miſſas: nunquam Communionem ſub vna ſpecie: The Churche
of Grecia, and the Churches of Aſia, Macedonia, Myſia, Valachia, Ruſſia, Moſchouia,
and Aphrica, ioined thereunto, that is to ſaie, in a manner the whole Worlde, or at
leaſte, the greateſte parte thereof, neuer graunted the Pope his Supremacie: neuer allowed
either Purgatorie, or Priuate Maſſes, or the Communion vnder one kinde.
                  
                     In the Proeme or Entrie of the Councel of Ferraria,Concil. Ferrari
                           •
                        . in Prooemio. 
                     it is written thus,
Proxima Dominica quindecim Graeci Sacerdotes domi Imperatoris, iuſſu eius.
Miſſam ſolenniter celebrarunt. Vbi etiam Marchio cum ſuis Ciuibus adfuit,
& Panem Benedictum, per Patriarchae dextram, more Graecorum, accepit, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
libauit: The nexte Sonnedaie, fiftiene Greeke Prieſtes within the Emperours Palaice, by
his Commaundemente, ſaide a Solemne Maſſe (or Communion) where as the Marqueſe
was preſent with his Cittizens, and, as the manner of the Grecians is, receiued, and taſted
the Breade Conſecrate, at the hande of the Patriarke. Here it is to be noted by the waie,
that theſe
                      fiftiene Prieſtes ſaide not fiftiene Seueral Maſſes, but al togeather one
onely Maſſe:Petrus Vrbeuetanus, in Vita Deusdedit Pap. 
                     and that the ſame one Maſſe was no Priuate Miniſtration, but a
Communion. Whereof Petrus Vrbeuetanus ſaithe thus, Tum ad inſtar Graecorum,
non cantabatur in vna Eccleſia, niſi forſan vna Miſſa: Then there was
ſonge in one Churche no more, ſauinge perchaunce one onely Maſſe, as the manner of the
Grecians is.
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Durandus, Offerebant magnum Panem, & omnibus
ſufficientem: Quod adhuc Graeci ſeruare dicuntur: They offered vp one greate
loafe,
                     Durādus in Rationali. li. 4. 
                     that might ſuffice al the Churche: VVhiche order, thei ſaie, the Grecians keepe
vntil this daie.
                  By theſe fewe, I truſte, M. Hardinge, it maie ſoone appeare, whether of vs
haue belied youre poore Grecians.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 2.
               Nowe then, ſince it is manifeſte, and out of al peraduenture, that
theſe menne are fallen from the Greekes, of whome thei receiued the
Goſpel, of whom thei receiued the Faith, the True Religion, & their
Churche it ſelfe, what is the mater, why thei wil not now be called
home againe to the ſame men, as it were, to theire Originalles, and
firſte Founders? And why be thei afraide to take a paterne of the
Apoſtles, and Olde Fathers times, as though thei al hadde benne
voide of vnderſtandinge? Doo theſe menne, weene yee, ſee more, or
ſette more by the Churche of God, then thei did, who firſte deliuered
vs theſe thinges?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Softe and faire, Sir Defender: you haue not yet proued, that you ſaie, is manifeſte, and out of

al peraduenture. Remember you not the olde homely verſe of youre sophiſtrie. Neque negatiuis,
rectè concludere ſi vis? Speake to the pourpoſe, or els I woulde you woulde make an ende of
youre filly follies. For in deede you trifle, and ſaie nothinge worth to be anſweared. And here litle
cauſe doo you miniſter vnto me, to vtter ſubſtantial ſtuffe. VVhiche I deſire the diſcrete Reader to conſider,
for mine excuſe, that with a trifler I doo alſo but trifle.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, by youre owne confeſſion, yee doo but trifle with
youre Filly follies: for that, I trowe, youre ſubſtantial, and better ſtuffe was
not yet ready.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 3.
               In deede, we haue renounced that churche, wherein wee could neither
haue the Woorde of God ſincerely taught, nor the Sacramentes
rightly adminiſtred, nor the name of God duely called vpon: Whiche
churche alſo them ſelues confeſſe to bee faulty in many pointes: And
wherein was nothinge hable to ſtaie any wiſe man, or one, that hath
conſideration of his owne ſafetie.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  And why haue ye renounced this Churche, but for that ye might not be ſuffered to ſette foorthe
to the loſſe of Chriſten ſoules the deteſtable hereſies of VVicklef, Luther, Zuinglius, Caluine, and other
youre falſe Maiſters, whiche ye cal youre ſincere woorde of God, after youre Schiſmatical, and Heretical
manner? That ye ſaie, there was nothinge in the Catholique Churche, hable to ſtaie
any wiſe man, or any that hath conſideration of his ſafetie: it is one of youre impudent lies.
                  There were bothe wiſe menne in the Churche, and greate multitudes of ſutche as hadde good
regarde of their ſoule healthe, alwaies before the Deuil hadde ſutche a hande vpon Luther, and the
reſte of youre newe Apoſtles, and Apoſtates.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 4.
               To conclude, wee haue foreſaken the churche, as it is nowe, not
as it was in Olde times paſte, and haue ſo gonne from it, as Daniel
went out of the Lions Denne, and the three children out of the Furneſſe:
and, to ſaie the truthe, we haue benne caſte out by theſe menne,
(beinge curſed of them, as thei vſe to ſaie, with Booke, Bel, and Candel)
rather then haue gonne awaie from them of our ſelues.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Churche that nowe is, and the Churche that was in Olde time, is one Churche, as a man
in his olde age is the ſame man, he was in his youthe.Vntruth. For God him ſelfe ſaithe, Comme foorth from the middes of them, O my people: Apocal. 18. From the whiche Churche no faultes, or unperfections
can excuſe you for youre departinge.Daniel. 6. &. 3. Neither haue ye gone from it as Daniel was
deliuered out of the Lions Denn
                        •
                     , nor as the three Children out of the Furneſſe: but ye haue departed
wilfully from the houſe of God, where touchinge Faithe, al be of one accorde, vnto the Synagog of
Antichriſte, vnto Babylon of Sectes, where is no order, but confuſion, vnto the kingdome of Satan: and
there ye remaine as it were in a Denne of Lions, where that roring Lion with his fellowes, lieth in
waite,1. Pet. 5. ſeckinge whom he maie deuoure. Ye haue ſtepped from the place of Spiritual refrigerie, into
the frieinge panne of Schiſmes and Hereſies,A hote kinde of Diuinitie. and from thence, after that ye haue nowe boyled and
fried, in malice and rancoure againſte the Churche, excepte ye repent, ye are like to leape into the

Furneſſe of Hel, that for euer ſhal tormente you, and neuer conſume you. Complaine not of youre caſtinge
out of the Churche. To be excommunicate, ye haue deſerued. And that kinde of puniſhement
is by a merciful diſcipline, extended vpon you, partly for your amendement, partly to conſerue the
reſte of the body whole from youre peſtiferous contagion.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Nowe yee beginne to keepe Hote Schooles, M. Hardinge. Youre Frieinge
pannes, and Furneſſes, with other youre like Kitchin implementes of Frieinge,
and Boilinge, are hote, and dangerous to deale withal.
                  The cauſes of oure departure from you, are anſweared before.
                  The Churche, ye ſaie, that nowe is, and the Churche, that was in Olde times, is one
Churche.
                      Euen ſo, as I ſhewed you before, the Moone, beinge ful, and the ſame
Moone eclipſed, is one Moone: Euen ſo, a Man wel aduiſed, and the ſame Man
ſtarke madde,Matthae. 21. is one Man: Euen ſo, the houſe of God, and a Caue of theeues, is
one Houſe.
                  
                  Yee haue Excommunicate vs,Iohan. 9. 12. 16. Iohan. Epiſt. 3. Qui amat Primatum gerere. Apocalyp. 13. and put vs from you. So did certaine of youre
Predeceſſours, and Fathers, Excommunicate Chriſte, and his Apoſtles. So did
Diotrephes, that firſte claimed your Papale Primacie, Excommunicate the Faithful
of Chriſte, that were the Firſte Planters of the Goſpel. So it is written
in the Apocalyps, that Antichriſte ſhal Excommunicate al them, that wil not
Adoure the Image of the Beaſte.
                  
                  
                     The Pope him ſelfe ſaithe,
                     24. Quae. 1. Ait. 
                     Excommunicatus non poteſt Excommunicare:
He that is Excommunicate him ſelfe, hath no Right, or Power to Excommunicate
others.24. Quae. 3. Comperimus, Rubri. 
                     And in youre owne Lawe it is written thus, Qui illicitè alium Excommunicat,
ſeipſum, non illum, condemnat:
                      He that vnlawefully Excommunicateth
an other, Condemneth not him, but him ſelfe.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt Ad Clericos Hipponen. Citatur. 11. Quae. 3. Quid obeſt. Auguſtin. In Iohan. Tract. 45. Quid obeſt homini, ſi eum de illa Tabula delere velit
Humana ignorantia, quem de Libro viuentium non delet iniqua conſcientia?
What is a man the woorſe, if the ignorance of a man ſtrike him out of the Booke of the
Churche, if il Conſcience ſtrike him not oute of the Booke of Life? In this caſe S.
Auguſtine ſaithe, It commeth ſommetimes to paſſe, Vt plurimae ſint Foris oues,
& plurimi ſint Intus Lupi: That there be many Sheepe without the Churche, and
many Woulues within the Churche.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 5.
               And wee are comme to that Churche, wherein thei them ſelues
cannot denie (if thei wil ſaie truely, and as thei thinke in their owne
conſcience) but al thinges bee gouerned purely, and reuerently,
and as mutche, as wee poſſibly coulde, very neere to the order vſed in
the olde time.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye are come vnto the malignant Churche, to the Congregation of Reprobates, whither as into
a ſincke in maner al the Hereſies that Satan euer raiſed vp from the beginning, be auoided.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 1.
               Let them compare oure Churches and theirs togeather, and thei
ſhal ſee, that them ſelues haue moſte ſhamefully gonne from the Apopoſtles:
and wee moſte iuſtely haue gonne from them. For wee, folowinge

the Example of Chriſte, of the Apoſtles, and the Holy Fathers,
geeue the people the Holy Communion, Whole, and perfite:
But theſe menne, contrarie to al the Fathers, to al the Apoſtles, and
contrarie to Chriſte him ſelfe, doo ſeuer the Sacramentes, and plucke
away the one parte from the people, and that with moſte notorious
Sacrilege, as Gelaſius termeth it.
               Wee haue broughte againe the Lordes Supper vnto Chriſtes
Inſtitution, and haue made it a Communion in very deede,
common, and indifferent to a greate number, accordinge to the name.
But theſe menne haue chaunged al thinges, contrarie to Chriſtes
Inſtitution, and haue made a Priuate Maſſe, of the Holy Communion.
And ſo it commeth to paſſe, that we geeue the Lordes Supper
vnto the people: and thei greue them a vaine Pagent, to gaſe vpon.
               Wee affirme togeather with the Ancient Fathers, that the Body
of Chriſte is not eaten, but of the good, & Faithful, and of thoſe, that
are endued with the Sprite of Chriſte. Theire Doctrine is, that
Chriſtes very Body Effectually, and, as thei ſpeake, Really, and
Subſtantially, maie not onely be eaten of the wicked, and vnfaithful
menne, but alſo (whiche is monſtrous, and horrible to be ſpoken) of
Miſe, and Dogges.
               We vſe to praie in our Churches,
                  1. Corinth. 14. after that faſhion, as, according
to Paules leſſon, the people maie knowe, what wee praie, and maie
anſweare, Amen, with a general conſent. Theſe menne, like ſoundinge
Metal, yelle oute in the Churches vnknowen, and ſtrange
woordes without vnderſtandinge, without knowledge, and without
deuotion: yea, and doo it of pourpoſe, bicauſe the people ſhould vnderſtande
nothinge at al.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     Vntruthe. For there is no better compariſon, then bitvvene Contraries: Contraria iuxta ſe poſita, magis eluceſcunt.
                      As compariſon can not duely be made betweene Lighte and Darkenes, betweene Truthe and
Lieing, betwene Chriſte and Belial: ſo neither betwene the Catholike Churche, and ſtartinge holes of
Heretiques. You ſaie muche, and proue nothinge. The moſte ye haue to crake of, whiche yee
haue neuer doone withal, is youre miniſtringe of bothe kindes vnto the people, youre newe founde
holy daie the Engliſhe Communion, your Seruice in the vulgare tonge▪ and your vile obiection of Miſe
and Dogges. This is the ſtoreboxe of M. Iuelles high Diuinitie, whiche he maketh no greate ſtore
of, but ſhaketh it abroade euery where. To euery pointe I haue ſaide ſo mutche, as isYenough, no doubte, and ſufficiente. For in the ſelfe ſame foure Articles, M. Hard. hath vttered foure ſcore and fourteen great vntruthes. yenough,
to ſtaie the hartes of thoſe, that feare God, in mine anſweare to M. Iuelles chalenge. To the mater of
bothe kindes, and the obiection made out of Gelaſius, in the ſeconde article. To that of Priuate
Maſſe, in the firſte article. To al that is ſaide for the Churche Seruice in the vulgare tongue, in the
thirde Article. To the obiection of Miſe, Dogges, and VVormes, in the 23. Article. The ſame here to reherſe
againe, I thinke it nedeles.
                  But where ye affirme the Body of Chriſte not to bee eaten, but of the good, and faithful onely, if
ye meane the Sacramental eating, ſo as it is eaten vnder the Sacrament in the viſible forme of Bread,
and VVine, and not of theVnfruteful, & vaine diſtinctiōs Reade the Anſvveare. Spiritual eating onely, that is falſe. In that ye ſaie the Fathers be on your
ſide, meaninge the * Sacramental eatinge, ye belie them. And ſo like wiſe reporting our Doctrine
to be, that wicked and vnfaithful menne maie eate the Body of * Chriſte effectually, ye be
                        ••
                     e vs. VVe

teache that the euil maie eate the Body of Chriſte Really,Compariſon of churches. that is, in deede, but not effectually. They
onely eate effectually, who eatinge it worthely obteine the effecte of Chriſtes Body: VVhiche is the
vnitie of the myſtical body of Chriſte,Gregor. Dialog. li. 4. and increace of grace.This Booke is ful of Fables, and Vanities: and therefore not thought to bee S. Gregories. There is verely (ſaithe S. Gregorie)
in ſinners, and in them whiche receiue vnworthely, the true Fleaſhe of Chriſte, and his true Bloude,
ſed eſſentia, non ſalubri efficentia, but in ſubſtance, not in holeſome effecte.
                  That euil menne receiue the true Body of Chriſte Sacramentally,Auguſtin. Epiſt. 162. no leſſe then good, where I
might alleage in manner al the Olde Fathers,S. Auguſtine is directely to the Contrarie. See the Anſvveare. S. Auguſtine only maie ſuffice, who affirmeth the
ſame, ſpeakinge thus of Iudas. Tolerat ipſe Dominus Iudam, diabolum, furem, & venditorem
ſuum finit accipere inter innocentes Diſcipulos, quod norunt fideles, pretium noſtrum.
Our Lorde him ſelfe doth tolerate Iudas, and ſuffereth a Deuil, a Thefe, and him that ſolde him, to
receiue amongeſt his innocent DiſciplesOur Price, He meaneth the Sacramente of our Price. our Price, whiche the Faithful doo knowe. But what nede
any man to require the teſtimonies of Fathers,1. Corin. 11. ſithe S. Paule teacheth vs, ſo to beleue? VVho ſo euer
(ſaithe he) eateth this Bread, and drinketh of the Cuppe of our Lorde vnworthely, he ſhal
                        •
                     e gilty
of the Body, and Bloude of our Lorde.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  There is no better compariſon to bee made, M. Hardinge, then bitweene
Light, and Darkeneſſe: Truthe, and Falſehed: Chriſte, and Belial. For one
of theſe contraries doothe euermore bewraie the other. And therefore Chriſte
ſaithe,Iohan. 3. 
                     He that doothe il, hateth the Light, and commeth not to it: leſte his euil dooinges
ſhoulde bee eſpied. And this is it, M. Hardinge, that you ſo carefully keepe the
people from the Lighte of Goddes vvoorde:
                     Plini. li. 18. leſte by compariſon thereof, they
ſhoulde beginne to lothe youre Darkeneſſe. Plinie ſaithe, Tritico reperto, continuò
damnatum eſt Hordeum, & quadrupedum refectibus traditum: As ſoone
as VVheate was once founde
                      (by compariſon thereof) ſtreight waie Barly was refuſed,
and geuen to Cattel to feede vpon.
                  
                  
                     S.
                     Cypriā. Ad Corneliū, li. 1. Epi. 3. Cyprian ſaithe, Haec eſt, frater, vera dementia, non cogitare, quòd mendacia
non diu fallant: Noctem tam diu eſſe, donec illuceſcat dies: This is very
mere madneſſe, my Brother, not to conſider, that lies cannot longe deceiue the world: (Remēber)
it is Night no lenger,
                     Chryſoſtom. In Matthae. ca. 23. 
                     but vntil the Daie ſpring. And therefore Chryſoſtome
ſaithe, as it is alleged before, Haeretici claudunt Ianuas Veritatis: Heretiques ſhut
vp the Gates of the Truthe. For they knowe right wel, if the
                      Truthe maie appeare,
theire falſehedde wil ſoone be eſpied,
                     Tertul. De praeſcription. 
                     and the Churches ſhalbe none of theires. Tertullian
ſaithe, Ipſa Doctrina Haereticorum cum Apoſtolica comparata, ex diuerſitate,
& contrarietate ſua pronuntiabit, neque Apoſtoli alicuius Authoris
eſſe, neque Apoſtolici Viri: The very Doctrine of Heretiques compared togeather with
the Apoſtles Doctrine, euen by the diuerſitie, and contrarietie, that is in it, beareth witneſſe of
it ſelfe, that it neuer came, neither from any Apoſtle of Chriſte, nor from any Apoſtolique Man.
                  
                  
                     When the Emperoure Adrianus hadde yeelded to graunte the Chriſtians
one Church within the Cittie of Rome,Aelius Lampridius. 
                     certaine of his Priuie Counſel aduiſed him
in any wiſe not ſo to doo: For that,
                      they ſaide, if the Chriſtians might haue but one
Churche within the Cittie, the whole people woulde becomme Chriſtians: and by compariſon
thereof, theire Idolles Churches ſhould be forſaken. Reſtore you the
                      Holy Communion,
M. Hardinge, and ye ſhal ſee youre Maſſes, and Mockeries ſoone falle to
grounde,
                     1. Regum. 5. Hieronym. Ad Algaſiā, Quae. 11. 
                     as did the Idole Dagon at the preſence of the Arke of God. S. Hierome
ſaithe, Mendacium Antichriſti, Chriſti veritas deuorabit: The Truthe of
Chriſte ſhal deuoure, and conſume the Lieinge of Antichriſte.
                  Touchinge the Shakinge out of Stoareboxes, yee hadde no greate cauſe to
complaine. For there is not one of al theſe maters, one onely of Priuate Maſſe
excepted, that hitherto throughout this Apologie hathe, to my remembraunce,

benne touched,Infidelles, Dogges, Miſe. or mentioned more, then once. But it is a ſmal mater, M. Hardinge,
that maie ſuffice you, to make a quarrel.
                  That Miſe, and Dogges maie eate the very Natural Body of Chriſte,
and that Really, Subſtantially, and in deede, it is youre Doctrine: it is not ours.
For wee vtterly abhorre it, and defie it, as moſte deteſtable, and lotheſome
villanie.
                  
                     I marueile not, to heare you ſaie, that wicked Creatures, and Faithleſſe
Infidelles maie eate Chriſtes Body, ſeeinge yee doubte not, to auouche the ſame
of Brute Beaſtes,
                     Auguſt. in Iohā. tracta. 26. 
                     and Dombe Cattel. Yet, S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Hoc
Manducare illam Eſcam, & illum Potum Bibere, in Chriſto manere, & illum
manentem in ſe habere: This is the Eatinge of that Meate, and the drinkinge of that
Drinke,
                     Iohan. 6. 
                     for a man to dwelle in Chriſte, and to haue Chriſte dwellinge within him. Euen
ſo ſaithe Chriſte him ſelfe,
                      He that eateth my Fleaſhe, and Drinketh my Bloude.
(is neither vvicked Creature, nor Faithleſſe Infidelle, nor Dogge, nor Mouſe,
but) dvvelleth in mee,Auguſti. Epiſt. 162. and I in him.
                  
                     But S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Iudas accepit Pretium noſtrum: Iudas receiued
oure Price: whiche by youre expoſition can bee none other, but the Body of Chriſte. O
M. Hardinge, yee ſhoulde not thus haue mockte the worlde with this Authoritie.
You youre ſelfe knowe, yee deale not plainely: you youre ſelfe knowe, that S.
                     
Auguſtine by theſe woordes (Oure Price) meante onely the Sacramente of oure
Price.
                     
                     Chryſoſtom. Ad Haebr. Homi. 16. 
                     So Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Baptiſma Chriſti Sanguis Chriſti eſt:
The Baptiſme of Chriſte, is the Bloude of Chriſte: Not for that it is ſo in deede,
but for that it is a Sacramente of the Bloude of Chriſte. Euen ſo it is noted in
youre owne Decrees:
                     De Con. Diſ. 2. Hoc eſt. Ipſa immolatio carnis Chriſti, quae Sacerdotis manibus
fit, Vocatur Chriſti Paſſio, Mors, Crucifixio: Non Rei Veritate, ſed Significante
Myſterio: The Oblation of the fleaſhe of Chriſte, that is wrought with the
Prieſtes handes, is called the Paſſion, the Death, and the Crucifieinge of Chriſte: not in
Truthe of mater, but in a Myſterie Signifieinge. This Expoſition ye maie not wel
refuſe: It is S.
                      Auguſtines: It is youre owne. Hereof wee haue ſpoken otherwheres
more at large. But, to put the mater oute of doubte, that it maie appeare,
in what ſenſe Iudas receiued the Price of Chriſtes Deathe, S. Auguſtine him
ſelfe thereof ſaithe thus,
                     Auguſtin. In Pſalm. 3. Chriſtus adhibuit Iudam ad Conuiuium, in quo corporis,
& Sanguinis ſui Figuram Diſcipulis ſuis commendauit, & tradidit: Chriſte
receiued Judas vnto his Banket, whereat he gaue to his Diſciples the Figure of his Body, and
Bloude.
                  
                  The Booke, that ye allege in the name of S. Gregorie, is vaine, and Childiſhe,
and ful of Fables, and not S. Gregories.
                  
                  
                     But S. Paule ſaithe,
                     1. Cor. 11. 
                     Who ſo euer Eateth of this Breade, and Drinketh of the Cuppe
of oure Lorde vnwoorthily, he ſhal be guilty of the Body, and Bloude of oure Lorde.
Euen ſo S.
                     
                     Auguſt. Contra Creſco. li. 1. ca. 23. Auguſt Contra Creſco. li. 2 ca. 13. Auguſtine writeth of the VVater of Baptiſme: Baptiſmus valet,
alijs ad Regnum: alijs ad Iudicium: Baptiſme is auaileable to ſomme vnto the Kingdome
of God: to ſomme vnto Judgemente. Againe he ſaithe,
                      Baptiſmum multi habent,
non ad Vitam Aeternam, ſed ad Poenam Aeternam, non bene vtentes
tanto bono: Somme haue Baptiſme, not to Life Euerlaſtinge, but to Paine Euerlaſtinge,
not wel vſinge ſo good a thinge.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Tertullian,Tertullian. De Baptiſmo. Si qui pondus intelligant Baptiſmi, magis timebunt
conſecutionem, quàm dilationem: They that vnderſtande the weighte of
Baptiſme, wil feare more the geattinge of it, then the delate.
                  
                  Yet yee preſſe the mater further: S. Paule ſaithe, Who ſo eateth vnworthily of
this Breade, is guilty of the Body and Bloude of Chriſte: Ergo, ſaie you, Chriſtes Body,
and Bloude muſte needes be Really Preſent. Here, Maiſter Hardinge, it were a woorthy

mater,Guilty of the Bodie and Bloude &c. to ſee, by what enginnes ye woulde proue theſe haſty Concluſions, or
howe yee woulde force this Guilte, and this Preſence to goe togeather. For,
thinke you, that no man can be guilty of the Body, and Bloude of Chriſte, but he,
that hath Chriſtes Body, and Bloude Really Preſent in his hande? Verily, S.
Auguſtine ſaithe,Auguſt. De Tempore, Sermo. 20. 
                     Reus erit, non parui preiij, ſed Sanguinis Chriſti, qui violat, &
commaculat Animam, Chriſti Sanguine, & Paſſione mundatam: He is
                      Guilty of no ſmal
Price, but euen of the Bloude of Chriſte, that (by Fornicatiō, or Aduouterie) defileth
his owne ſoule, that was made cleane by the Paſſion, and Bloude of Chriſte.
                      Yet hath he
not therefore Chriſtes Bloude Really Preſente.
                  
                  
                     Athanaſius ſaithe,
                     
                     Athana. De Paſſione, & Cruce Domini. Ezechiel. 33. 
                     Adorantes Dominum, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ita, vt dignum eſt eo, viuentes, non
ſentiunt ſe reos fieri Dominicae Mortis: Worſhippinge Oure Lorde, and not liuinge
ſo as is meete for our Lorde, they feele not, that thereby they are made Guilty of our
Lordes Death. So ſaithe God by the Prophete Ezechiel, I wil require the Bloude
of the people at thy hande.
                  
                     Chriſte ſaithe,
                     
                     Luke. 11. God ſhal require of you the Bloude of the Prophetes, that hathe
benne ſheadde from the beginninge of the worlde.
                  This Guilte, M. Hardinge, maie wel ſtande withoute any Real Preſence of
the Bloude, either of Chriſte, or of the Prophetes.
                  
                  This therefore is S. Paules meaninge, that the wicked, reſortinge vnwoorthily
to the Holy Myſteries, and hauinge no regarde, what is meante thereby, deſpiſe
the Deathe, and Croſſe of Chriſte, and therefore are Guilty of the Lordes
Body, and Bloude, that are repreſented in the Sacramente.
                  
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     
                     Concil. Nicen. 2. Actio. 6. 
                     as he is alleged in the ſeconde Councel of Nice, Is, qui
Imaginem Imperatoris violat, in prototypum Dignitatis iniuſtus eſt:
                      He, that defileth
the Emperoures Image, is iniurious to the Maieſtie of the Emperoures Perſone, that
is pourtraide in the Image.
                  
                     S. Cyprian ſaithe,
                     
                     Cyprian. De Ablutione pedum. 
                     Impijs, in Morte Chriſti nullus ſupereſt quaeſtus: ſed iuſtiſſimè
eos beneficia neglecta condemnant: The wicked haue no gaine by the Deathe
of Chriſte: but the benefites, that they haue deſpiſed, doo moſte iuſtely condemne them.
                  
                     To comme neare to the pourpoſe,
                     Auguſt. Ad Bonifaci. Epiſt. 50. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Habent Foris Sacramentum
Corporis Chriſti: ſed Rem ipſam non tenent Intus, cuius eſt illud
Sacramentum. Et ideò ſibi iudicium manducant, & bibunt: Outwardly
they haue the Sacramente of Chriſtes Body: But the thinge it ſelfe (whiche is Chriſtes
Body, repreſented by the Sacramente) inwardly in theire hartes they haue not. And
therefore they Eate, and Drinke their owne iudgemente. S.
                      Auguſtine ſaithe, they
are Guilty, not bicauſe they receiue, but bicauſe they receiue not the Body of
Chriſte.
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. In Iohā. tracta. 26. Qui non manet in Chriſto, & in quo non manet Chriſtus,
procul dubio non Manducat Spiritualiter Carnem eius, nec Bibit eius
Sanguinem: licet Carnaliter, & Viſibiliter premat dentibus Sacramentum
Corporis, & Sanguinis Chriſti: Sed magis tantae rei Sacramentum ad Iudicium
ſibi Manducat & Bibit: He that abideth not in Chriſte, nor Chriſte in him, out of doubte
he eateth not Spiritually his Fleaſhe, nor Drinketh his Bloude: not withſtanding Carnally (that
is to ſaie, with his bodily Mouthe) and viſibly he do preſſe with his teethe the Sacramente
of the Body, and Bloud of Chriſt: And rather, eateth and drinketh (not Chriſtes very
                     
Body, and Bloude, but) the Sacramente of ſo greate a thinge vnto his Judgemente.
Theſe woordes, M. Hardinge, be ſo plaine, that I cannot imagine, what ye ſhould
more deſire. They are Guilty of the bloude of Chriſte, for that they deſpiſe the
price, wherewith they were ſaued, not for that they receiue it Really into theire
mouthes.
                  
                  
                     So S. Auguſtine ſaithe againe, Reus erit Aeternae Mortis, quia vilem in ſe

                     habuit Sanguinem Redemptoris:
                     Guiltie of the Bodie and Bloude &c. The Aduouteroure is Guilty of Euerlaſtinge Deathe,
bicauſe he deſpiſed in him ſelfe the Bloude of oure Sau
                        •
                     oure.
                  The Diſtinction, that you imagine bitweene Real Receiuinge in the wicked,
and Effectual Receiuinge in the Godly,Auguſt. De Tempore, Sermo. 120. as it is onely of youre ſelfe, without the
Authoritie of any Doctoure, Greeke, or Latine, ſo is it nothing els, but a very Effectual,
and Real Folie. For the very Body of Chriſte, if it be not Effectually receiued,
is not receiued. Chriſte him ſelfe ſaithe, He that eateth mee, ſhal liue
by me.
                     Ambroſ. De Benediction. Patriarch. cap. 6. 
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Hic panis eſt remiſſio peccatorum. Qui accipit, non
moritur morte peccatoris: This Breade is the Remiſſion of Sinnes. He that receiueth
it, ſhal not die the death of Sinner.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Qui non ſumit hanc Eſcam, non habet Vitam: &, qui
eam ſumit,
                     
                     Auguſt. In Iohā. tracta. 26. 
                     habet Vitam, & hanc vti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Aeternam: He, that receiueth not this meate,
hath no life: And he, that receiueth the ſame, hath life, and that Euerlaſtinge.
                  
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. 
                           •
                        odem loco. Huius rei Sacramentum in Menſa Dominica praeparatur,
& de Menſa Dominica ſumitur: quibuſdam ad vitam, quibuſdam ad exitium: Res
vero' ipſa, cuius eſt Sacramentum, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium,
quicunque eius particeps fuerit: The Sacramente hereof is prepared vpon the Lordes
Table, and from the Lordes Table is receiued: to ſomme vnto life, to ſomme vnto deſtruction.
But the thinge it ſelfe, (that is, the Body of Chriſte,) whereof it is a Sacrament,
is receiued, of al menne to life, and of no man to deſtruction, vvhoſoeuer ſhalbe
partaker of it.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 2.
               But, not to tarrie aboute rehearſing al pointes, wherein wee and
they differ, for they haue wel nigh no ende, wee turne the Scriptures
into al tongues: they ſcant ſuffer them to be hadde abroade in any
tounge.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVeeThis is nothing. but open mockerie. gladly ſuffer them to be hadde in euery place of chriſtendome in the learned tongues,
Hebrewe, Greeke, and Latine (to be readde of the vulgare Vnlearned people). Neither were
they altogether forbidden to be hadde in ſomme vulgare tongues, before the ſaucy maleperines of Heretiques
forced the gouernours of the Churche, for ſauegarde of the people,Vntruthe, too fonde for a child For there vvas neuer ſutche order taken by the Gouernours of the Churche. to take other order.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Ye can voucheſaue to allowe vs the Scriptures in the three Learned Tongues,
Greeke, Hebrevve, and Latine: that is to ſaie, in ſutche ſorte, as the ſimple people
maie in no wiſe touche them. But where did God euer ſanctifie theſe three
tongues, and cal them Learned? Or, where were they euer ſo ſpecially Canonized,
and allowed, aboue al other tongues, to the cuſtodie of the Scriptures?
                  
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 48. 
                     Scriptura Canonica tot Linguarum Literis, & ordine, &
ſucceſſione Celebrationis Eccleſiaſticae cuſtoditur: The Canonical Scripture is keapte in
the Letters of ſo manie tongues, and by the order, and ſucceſſion of Eccleſiaſtical publiſhinge.
Againe he ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. De Doctrina Chriſtiana. li. 2. ca. 5. 
                     Scriptura Diuina ab vna Lingua profecta, per varias
interpretum Linguas, longè, laté
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         diffuſa, innotuit Gentibus ad Salutem: The Holy
Scriptures, paſſing from one Tongue, and beinge publiſhed abroade, fane and wide, (not only
by three learned Tongues, but alſo) by ſundrie Tongues of Interpretours,
                      haue
comme to the knowledge of Nations, and people, to their Saluation. Againe he ſaithe,
Habemus Dei beneficium,
                     
                     Auguſt. In Pſal. 105. 
                     qui Scripturas ſuas in multis Linguis eſſe voluit: We haue
the benefite of God, that woulde haue his Scriptures to be (not onely in Three, but) in
many Tongues.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaith,
                     The Scriptures in the vulgare tongues. Syri, Aegyptij, Indi, Perſae, Aethiopes, & innumerae aliae
Gentes, Dogmata ab hoc introducta, in ſuam transferentes Linguam, hommes
Barbari, Philoſophari didicerunt: The Syrians, the Egyptians, the Indians, the Perſians,
the Ethiopians, and other nations innumerable, tranſlatinge into theire
ovvne tongues the Doctrine,
                     Chryſoſt. in Iohan. Homil. 1. Hieronym. in Pſalm. 86. 
                     that they had receiued of S. Iohn, being Barbarous people,
endenvoured them ſelues to learne wiſedome. S.
                      Hierome ſaithe, Scriptura Sancta
populis omnibus legitur, vt omnes intelligant: The Holy Scripture is readde to al
Nations, that al maie vnderſtand it. It were harde to ſaie, that al the Nations of the
worlde readde, or hearde the Scriptures in Gréeke, Hebrewe, or Latine, to the intent,
thei might the better vnderſtande thē. If theſe Authorities ſéeme not plaine,
and ſufficiente,
                     
                     Theodoret. De corrigend. Graecorum affectib. Lib. 5. Theodoretus ſaithe further, Hebraici Libri, non modó in Graecum
idioma conuerſi ſunt, ſed in Romanam quoque Linguam, Aegyptiam, Perſicam,
Indicam, Armenicam, & Scythicam, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      adeó Sauromaticam: ſemel
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vt dicam,
in Linguas omnes, quibus ad hanc diem Nationes vtuntur: The Hebrewe Bookes
of the Scriptures are tranſlated, not onely into the Greeke, or Latine tongue, but alſo
into the tongues of Egypte, Perſia, India, Armenia, Scythia, and Sarmatia: and, to be
ſhorte, into al the tongues, that vntil this daie are vſed in the worlde. This, I trowe, is
ſommewhat more, then
                      Greeke, Hebrevve, and Latine. This whole matter, in
my Former Replie to M. Hardinge,
                     Articulo. 15. 
                     is further anſweared.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 3.
               We allure the people to reade, and to heare Goddes VVoord: thei
driue the people from it.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye allure the people buſely to heare, and reade the Scriptures for euil purpoſe. And thereby ye haue
filled theire hartes, whom ye haue deceiued, with pride, ſo as they thinke them ſelues able to iudge of
the higheſt queſtiōs, that be in diuinitie. VVe kepe the people, ſo farre as we can for you, from hereſies,
and require them rather to be hearers, then iudges, and to learne neceſſary knowledge of Gods worde
A mockerie. For many heare not one Sermon in tvventie yeeres. at holeſome, and Godly ſermons.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée teache not the people, to preſume of Knowledge, as you teache them, to
preſume of Ignorance: But onely wée exhorte them, for the better ſatiſfaction of
theire conſciences, to reade the Scriptures, & therein to learne the good wil of God.
And, not withſtandinge ye maie not allowe them to be Iudges, yt is to ſaie, to diſcerne
bitwéene the Light of God, and your Darkeneſſe, yet yée might ſuffer them
to pike vp ſomme ſmal crommes, that fal from the Lordes Table. How be it, socrates
ſaith,Apolog. Sacratis Matth. 11. The ſimple vnlearned people, in caſes of Truthe, iudgeth oftentimes
more vprightly, then the déepeſt Philoſophers. Likewiſe Chriſte ſaithe, I thanke
thee, O Father, for that thou haſt hidde theſe thinges from the wiſe, and politique, and haſt opened
the ſame to littel babes.
                  
                  
                     But ye wil ſaie, The Scriptures are harde, and aboue the reache of the people. Euen ſo ſaide
ye
                      Pelagian Heretique Iulianus. And therefore S. Auguſtine thus reproueth him
for the ſame:
                     Auguſti. Contra Iulian. Li. 5. Ca. 1 Exaggeras, quàm ſit difficilis, pauciſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      conueniens erudiris Sanctarum cognitio
Literarum: Yee enlarge, and laie out with many wordes, how harde a mater the knowledge
of the Scriptures is, and meete onely for a fewe learned men. S.
                      Chryſoſtome ſaith,
Scripturae & Seruo,Chryſoſtom. in Matth. Homil. 1. & Ruſtico, & Viduae, & Puero, & illi, qui valdè imprudens
eſſe videatur, faciles ſunt ad intelligendum: The Scriptures are eaſy to the Sclaue, to
the Huſbandeman, to the Widovve, to the Childe, and to him, that maie ſeeme to be
very ſimple of vnderſtandinge.
                     Auguſti. Epiſc 3. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Modus ipſe dicendi, quo Sacra
Scriptura cōtexitur, &c. quaſi amicus familiaris, ſine fuco ad cor loquitur indoctorum,
at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      doctorū: The phraſe, or māner of ſpeache, wherein ye Scriptures are writtē, &c. ſpeaketh
wtout coloure as a familiare frend vnto the hart, as wel of ye Vnlearned, as of the Learned. S.
                     
                     
Cyril ſaithe,
                     Cyrillus contra Iulian. Lib. 7. Scripturae, vt omnibus eſſent notae, paruis, & magnis, Vtiliter familiari
ſermone commendatae ſunt, ita vt nullius captum trāſcendant: The Scriptures,
that they might be eaſy to al menne, as wel ſmal, as greate, are profitably ſet abroade
in familiare ſpeache: ſo, that they ouerreache no mannes capacitie. S.
                      Auguſtine ſaith,
Sunt quidam homines,Augu. in Pſal. 131 qui, cùm audierint, quo'd debent eſſe humiles, nihil volunt diſcere:
putantes, quo'd, ſi aliquid didicerint, Superbi erunt, &c. Hos reprehendit Scriptura:
Somme menne, when they heare ſaie, they muſte be lowly, wil learne nothing: thinking,
that, if they learne any thinge, they ſhalbe prowde. But theſe are reproued by the Scriptures.
Likewiſe againe S.
                      Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Augu. In Sēten. exceptis ex Auguſtino, Pa. 1067. Ipſa ignorantia in illis, qui intelligere noluerunt,
ſine dubitarione peccatum eſt: In eis autem, qui non potuerunt, eſt poena
peccati. Ergo, in vtriſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      non eſt excuſatio, ſed iuſta damnatio: Ignorance in them,
that woulde not vnderſtande, without doubte is ſinne: But in them, that coulde not vnderſtande,
it is the puniſhement of ſinne. Therefore neither of them bothe hath good excuſe: but
either of them hath iuſte damnation.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 4.
               We deſire to haue our cauſe knowen to al the worlde: they flee to
comme to any trial.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Then why came ye not to theA vvoorthy Councel of fourtie Biſhops, ſutche as they vvere: In the time of Paulus. 3 chiefe, and moſte lauful conſiſtorie of the worlde, the late general
Councel at Trent? VVhat trial ſhoulde we come vnto? Our Doctrine hath had too high a teacher, to be
tried by men nowe. It hath ben approued too longe, to be put in daieinge in theſe daies at the later
ende of the worlde.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  That wée made not our appearance at your late Chapter at Tridente, ye haue
already made our excuſe. The Iourney was too lōge, to be taken in vaine. Ye ſaie,
your Doctrine, be it right, be it wronge, maie not nowe be tried, nor put in daieinge.
So ſaide ſommetimes the Olde Donatiane Heretiques vnto S. Auguſtine,
Diſputare nolumus:
                     Augu. Epiſt. 169. 
                     & Baptizare volumus: Diſpute wee wil not: But
                      (continewe
in our erroure, and) Baptize wee wil.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 5.
               We leane vnto Knowledge: they vnto Ignorance. We truſte vnto
Light: they vnto Darkeneſſe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye leane to the fauoure of ſecular Princes, whom by flattery, and Hereſie ye may deceiue. Crake
not of your greate knowledge,Eſai. 5. nor of your light. O be to them, crieth our Lorde in Eſaie, that ſaie, good
is euil, and euil is good: that put light for darkenes, and darkenes for light. Your demeanour is ſo euil,
your Doctrine ſo falſe, your tongue ſo railinge, that we take your worde for no ſlaunder.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée flatter our Princes, M. Hardinge, as Nathan flattered Kinge Dauid: as
Iohn Baptiſte flattered Herode: as S. Ambroſe flattered Theodoſius, and as
ſalte flattereth the gréene ſoare. In déede wée deſpiſe not the Miniſter of God, as
ſundrie of your felowes haue vſed to doe:Dorman. Pag. 15. Staniſlaus Orichonius in Chimaera. of whom one doubteth not to ſaie, The
Pope is the Heade: and Kinges, and Emperours are the Feete. An other ſaithe,
The Prieſte is ſo farre aboue the Kinge, as a Man is aboue a Beaſte. Sutche
woordes of contempt, and villanie we haue not vſed. Wée yelde to the Kinge, that
is dewe to the Kinge: wée yelde to God, that is dewe to God. Wée ſaie to the
Prince,Ambroſ. Lib. 5. Epiſt. 33. as S. Ambroſe ſommetime ſaide to the Emperoure Valentinian: Noli te
grauare Imperator, vt putes te in ea, quae Diuina ſunt, Imperiale aliquod ius habere:

                        Trouble not your ſelfe,
                     
                     Flattering of Princes 
                     my Lorde, to thinke, that you haue any Princely Power ouer thoſe
thinges, that perteine to God.
                  
                  
                     But if they be flatterers, that humbly aduertiſe, & directe theire Liege Princes
by the Woorde of God,
                     Petr. De palude: de poteſtat. pp. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 40. Non nos. on Gloſſa. Extrauag. Iohan 22. 
                           •
                        um inter. in Gloſſa. Hoſtien De trāſlaitone Praelais. Quanto. 
                     what are they then, that ſaie, as you ſaie, Totus Mundus
non poteſt accuſare Papam: Nemo poteſt dicere Papae, Domine cur ita facis?
Sacrilegij inſtar eſſet, diſputare de facto Papae: Dominus Deus noſter Papa: papapoteſt,
quicquid Deus ipſe Poteſt: The whole world maie not accuſe the Pope: No
ma
                           •
                         maie ſaie to the Pope, Sir, why doo yee thus? It were a ſinne as bodde as Sacrilege, to diſpute
of any the Popes doinges: Our Lorde God the Pope: The Pope maie doo, what
ſo euer God him ſelfe maie doo. Theſe, theſe, M. Hardinge, and a thouſand other your
like ſpeaches maie ſéeme ſommewhat to ſmel of flatterie.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion 6. & 7.
               We reuerence, as it becommeth vs, the Writinges of the Apoſtles,
and Prophetes: and they burne them.
               Finally, we in Goddes cauſe, deſire to ſtande to Goddes onely iudgemente:
they wil ſtande onely to theire owne.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat ſo euer ye pretende, the cauſe ye haue taken in hande to defende, is not Gods cauſe: neither
is this ſtirre,Hoſiuscontra Brentū Lib. 1. whiche ye make in the worlde, for Chriſtes ſake. 
                        •
                     uther himſelfe, when at a diſputation
with doctor Eckius, inflamed with anger, and paſsinge the boundes of modeſtie, was admoniſhed of
certaine, for as mutche as it was Gods cauſe, that was treated, to handle the matter more ſoberly and
with the ſpirite of ſoftenes, he brake out into theſe wordes: Non propter Deū haecres caepta eſt,
nec propter Deum finietur. This mater is not begōne for Gods ſake, neither for Gods ſake ſhal i
                        •
                      be
ended. Therefore ſpeake no more to vs of Gods cauſe. There be other cauſes, ye moue you to doo, as ye doo.Vntruthe, ſtā
                        dinge in open, and vvilful corruption.
                  
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Luther, yée ſaie, in diſputation, was enflamed with anger, and paſſed the
boundes of modeſtie. No doubte, M. Hardinge, if he had had ſomme parte of your
ſobrietie, and modeſtie, he might haue donne a greate deale better. Touchinge the
mater, being zelouſly moued with the iniquitie, and wicked wilfulneſſe of his Aduerſaries,
he vttered theſe wordes,Iacobus Andreae contra Hoſium. Pag 352. not of him ſelfe, but of Freere Eckius, that diſputed
againſt him: Eckius, and his felowes neuer beganne this mater for Goddes
ſake, nor for Goddes ſake wil they ende it. For he ſawe, they had begonne, & were
bente to ende it againſte God, as beinge enflamed with ambition, and malice, and
procured, and hired by the Pope. Euen ſo, M. Hardinge, maie wée alſo truely ſaie,
You, and your Felowes haue not begonne theſe your Contentious Vanities for
Goddes ſake: nor for Goddes ſake wil you ende them.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 8.
               Wherefore, if thei wil weigh al theſe thinges with a quiet minde, &
fully bente to heare, & to learne, thei wil not onely allowe this determination
of ours, whoe haue foreſaken Errours, & folowed Chriſte,
and his Apoſtles, but themſelues alſo wil foreſake their owne ſelues,
and ioine of theire owne accorde to our ſide, to goe with vs.
            
            Here endeth the Fifthe
Parte.
         
         
            
            The Sixthe Parte.
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 1.
               
                  BVt peraduenture they wil ſaie, it was treaſon,
to attempt theſe maters without a ſacred
General Councel: For that therein conſiſteth
the whole force of the Churche: there
Chriſte hath promiſed, he wil euer be a preſente
aſſiſtant. Yet they themſelues, without
tarrienge for any General Councel, haue
broken the Commaundementes of God, and
the Decrees of the Apoſtles: and, as wee ſaid
a little aboue, they haue ſpoiled, and diſanulled almoſte al, not onely
the Ordinaunces, but euen the Doctrine of the Primitiue Churche.
And, where they ſaie, It is not lawful, to make a chaunge without a
Councel, what was he, that gaue vs theſe Lawes, or, from whence
had they this Iniunction?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If general Councels continewe in that eſtimation, and Auctoritie they haue euer had, theire priuate
conſpiracies, and falſe conueiances in corners be like to be daſſhed. Nowe pri
                        •
                     keth foorth theire
Secretary, who thinketh him ſelf a freſh ſouldier in Rhetorike, and geueth the onſette vpon vs, with a
blinde peraduenture. But Sir, what ſo euer you imagine vs to ſaie, touchinge a General Councel, we are
not ſo ſimple as to graunt (whiche your Peraduenture ſemeth to ſurmiſe of vs) that your Heretical, and
moſte vngodly matters, whiche you ſpeake of, might without blame be attempted by licence of any
Councel. Sutche wicked changes in religion, as ye haue made, neither is it lawful to make with a
Councel, nor without a Councel.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 2.
               In deede King Ageſilaus did but fondely: who, when he had a determinate
anſweare made him of the opinion and wil of mighty Iuppiter,
woulde afterwarde bringe the whole matter before Apollo, to
knowe, whether he woulde allowe thereof, as his Father Iuppiter
had donne, or no. But yet ſhoulde wee doo mutche more fondely,
when we heare God him ſelfe plainely ſpeake to vs in his moſt Holy
Scriptures, and maie vnderſtande by them his wil and meaninge,
if wee would afterwarde (as though this were of none effecte) bring
our whole cauſe to be tried by a Councel: which were nothinge els,
but to aſke, whether menne would allowe as God did, and, whether
menne woulde confirme Goddes Commaundemente by theire Authoritie.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  For as mutche as the ſcriptures, wherein God speaketh vnto vs, be in ſundrie places not moſte open
and plaine toVaine folie. For vvhat haue Humaine, or Natural ſenſes to doo vvith the ſenſe of God? humaine ſenſes, and many by miſtakinge them be deceiued: were it not wel done of you,
for the more ſuretie, and better vnderſtandinge of that ye goe about, I meane, in matters concerninge

religion,To take Counſel of men. to folowe the iudgemente of the Catholike Churche repreſented in general councels? Yea we
ſaie boldely, that ſurer it is in pointes of faithe to leane to theThe Expoſitiōs of the Fathers very ſeldome agree togeat
                           •
                         er: Yet are they for the moſt parte, contrarie to the Churche of Rome. expoſition of the Fathers agreinge togeather,
and to folowe the tradition of the Churche: then to truſt to your ſelues, or to the letter of the
ſcriptures, ſcanned onely by your owne wittes. For the Churche is promiſed to be lead into al Truthe
by the holy Ghoſt. Ye cannot ſaie, any ſuch promiſe hath ben made to your particulare company. Therefore
it were not fondly done, as ye ſaie, but wiſely, ſaie we, if ye tried, and examined your Doctrine,
which ye pretende to be according vnto the Scriptures, by theThe tradit 
                           〈◊〉
                        , novve vſed in the Romaine Churche, are co
                           ••
                        only cō
                        trarie to the Traditiōs of the Anciente Learned Fathers. Therefore this Rule is deceitetul. rule of Eccleſiaſtical Tradition, which
is the chiefe rule to trie euery Doctrine by.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée neuer deſpiſed the iudgemente of the Learned, and Holy Fathers: but
rather take them, and embrace them, as the Witneſses of Goddes Truthe. And
therein wée finde you the more blame woorthy, M. Hardinge, for that, hauinge
without cauſe renounced the iudgemente, and orders of the Primitiue Churche,
and Anciente Fathers, as to the wiſe, and Learned it maie ſoone appeare, yet neuertheleſſe
yée euermore make vaunte of your Antiquitie, and fraie the world with
a viſarde of the Churche, & a ſhewe of Olde Fathers: as if a poore Sommonere, that
had loſte his Commiſſion, would ſerue Citations by the vertue of his emptie bore.
And thus haue ye ſet al your vaine fantaſies in place of Goddes Churche: and
your Churche, in place of God: as, by the woordes, and witneſſe of your owne Felowes,
I haue before ſhewed more at large.Parte. 5. Ca 10. Diui 2. Nic. Cuſanus de Authoritate Eccliſiae. &c. Hierem 2. For example, Cardinal Cuſanus ſaith,
Nulla ſunt Chriſti Praecepta, niſi quae per Eccleſiam pro talibus accepta ſunt:
The Commaundementes of Chriſte are no Commaundementes, Onleſſe they be ſo allowed by
the Churche.
                     
                  
                  
                     Thus yée leaue Iuppiter, and renne to Apollo: or rather, yée foreſake God, &


ſéeke to Man: &, as it is written in the Prophete Hieremie, Yee leaue the Fountaine
of the Water of Life: and rippe vp broken, and filthy Ceſternes, that can holde no Water.
Tertullian thus vpbraideth the Heathens,
                     Tertullian in Apologetico. Clemens Alexā
                        drin in Oratione ad Genies. Chryſo. in Epiſt. ad Galat. Ca. 1. Apud vos de humano arbitratu Diuinitas
penſitatur: Emonge you the right of God is weighed by the iudgemente of menne.
But
                      Clemens Alexandrinus ſaithe, Quoniam ipſum Verbum ad nos venit de Coelo,
nō eſt nobis ampliùs eundum ad Humanam Doctrinam: For ſo mutche as the Worde
it ſelfe, (that is, Chriſte) is comme to vs from Heauen, wee maie not nowe any more ſeeke
vnto the Doctrine of Man. Likewiſe S.
                      Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Fuiſſet extremae abſurditatis,
eum, qui edoctus fuerat à Deo, poſtea cum hominibus communicate: It had
benne greate folie for S. Paule, hauing receiued his Doctrine from God him ſelfe, afterward
to conferre thereof with menne, that is to ſaie, with
                      Peter, or Iames, or with any others.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 1. Diuiſion. 3.
               Why, I beſeche you, except a Councel wil, and commaunde, ſhal
not Truthe be Truthe, or God be God? If Chriſte had meante to
doo ſo from the beginninge, as that he woulde preache, or teache nothinge,
without the Biſhoppes conſente, but referre al this Doctrine
ouer to Annas, & Caiphas, where ſhoulde nowe haue benne the Chriſtian
Faithe? Or, who at any time ſhoulde haue hearde the Goſpel
taught? Peter verily, whom the Pope hath oftener in his mouthe, &
more reuerently vſeth to ſpeake of, then he dooth of Ieſus Chriſte, did
boldely ſtand againſt the Holy Councel, ſaieing, It is better to obey
God, then Men. And, after y• 
                  Paule had once entierely embraced the

                  Goſpel, & had receiued it, not from menne, nor by man, but by the
onely VVil of God, he did not take aduiſe therein of fleaſh, & bloude,
nor brought his caſe before his kinneſmen, and Brethren, but wente
foorthewith into Arabia, to preache Goddes Diuine Myſteries, by
Goddes onely Authoritie.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If you occupie a flute no better, by my reade, you ſhal geue ouer your pipinge and floutinge.
Truthe is truthe, and God is God, whether any councel wil or nil. Mary, as for the Truthe, and for
God, euery councel lawfully aſſembled hath wil: ſo againſte the Truth and againſt God, it hath no nil.
VVhen ye proue vnto vs, that ye are ſpecially called, as Paule was, and haue a ſpecial commiſsionVVee preache againſte your folies, and fantaſies: & not againſte the Doctrine of the Churche. to
preache againſte the Doctrine of the Churche, as he had againſte the wicked Iewes, then a Gods name
take no aduiſe of any man, but forthwith preache, and crieout ſo lowde as ye liſte, ſo that ye goe into
Arabia, as Paule did, or where els ſo euer ye wil. For euery good man would be lothe, England ſhould
be troubled with you.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 2. Diuiſion. 1.
               Yet truely, we doo not deſpiſe Councelles, Aſſemblies, and conferences
of Biſhoppes, and Learned mēne: neither haue we donne, that
we haue donne, altogeather without Biſhoppes, or without a Councel.
The matter hath benne treated in open Parlamente, with longe
conſultation, and before a notable Synode, and Conuocation.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Either your tonge agreeth not with your harte, or els I wil proue the contrarie by your owne
argumentes, which in the nexte Paragraphe before this ye haue huddeled vp. For whereas your matters
are (as ye ordinarily ſaie) euident by plaine ſcripture, and the VVoorde of God is readen of euery
man (without diſtinction and limitation) therefore ye do firſte of al plaie as fonde a parte, as Kinge
Ageſilaus did, who receiuinge an anſweare of mighty Iupiter, woulde afterwarde bringe the matter
before Apollo. Yea furthermore, ye do mutche more fondely then he, if when ye maie heare God
him ſelfe ſpeake plainely to you in the moſte holy ſcriptures, ye woulde bringe the whole cauſe to be
tried by a Councel.
                  Howe ſaie ye then nowe, are not theſe your owne proper reaſons, &c. your foreſaid worſhipful reaſons,
&c? If ye meane (as by reaſon ye muſte) the Parlamentes of theſe later daies, the firſte of al did
make moſte for you: and yet how open was it for you? Had ye any place at al in it? VVere ye admitted
within the dores? Or had ye any thing to do in that aſſemblie? Cōſider thē with what conſult atiō your
purpoſes were concluded. Did they tarie many monethes about it? Had they Biſhops?Vntruthe encloſed. For they had Diuines: & a ſolemne Diſputation vvas appointed at VVeaſteminſter in the preſēce of the States of the Realme But your Felovves fladde from it. Had they Diuines
and the moſte lerned, to reaſon to and fro with al libertie? VVas the Authoritie of the Vniuerſal
Churche of Chriſte, and the Doctrine of the Aunciente Fathers conſidered? Ye ſaie in Latine, plenis
Comitijs, that is, in the ful and whole aſſemblie, as though none at al had there reſiſted, but euery
man had yelded to your matters. VVhat ſaie ye then of the ſpiritual lordes, a greate parte of the parlamente,
and without al doubt, the parte, whiche muſte be chiefely and onely regarded, when the queſtiō
is of religion? How many of thē gaue you their voice to your Goſpel? Yea, which of them al did not
reſiſt it? One alone, I muſte confeſſe, was afterwarde made to breake vnitie, of whom a right good, and
Catholike Biſhop ſaide to a noble man, we had but one foole among vs, and him ye haue gotten vnto you.
But as of the ſpiritual Lordes ye had none at al (except that one, litle woorthy of the name of a Biſhop
and lorde, whoſe lerninge was ſmal, and honoure thereby mutche ſteined) ſo of the temporal ye had not
al: and ſo had ye alſo in the lower howſe very many, and wel learned, that ſpeake againſte you.
                  But let vs conſider the notable conuocation, in whiche your matter hath ben treated. If ye meane
the cleregie comminge togeather at that firſt parlament time, of whiche we ſpeake, it was of Catholikes,

not of Sacramentaries,Parlamente. and it put vp a bill againſte your procedinges: ſo farre it was of from
confirminge them. If ye meane any ſince that time, in whiche your ſuperintendentſhips mette togeather,
for what cauſe was it a notable Synode, and a notable conuocation?
                  Ye be deſperate in your lieinge, and crake of a full Parlament, and a notable Synode, not regardinge
by what meanes ye promote your cauſe to the multitude, and ſaue your ſelues from reproche
of extreme folie. For otherwiſe ye, whiche can ſo amplifie the ſmall and obſcure meetinges of a
fewe Caluintſtes of one litle Iland, what would ye not ſaie of the laſte generall Councell, to whiche
more Nations were aſſembled togeather, then are ſhyres in Englande: more yeeres were beſtowed in
conſultation, then weekes in your full Parlament:A notable great cōpanie. There vvere onely fouretie poore Biſhoppes: and yet ſomme of the ſamevvere no Biſhoppes. more Biſhoppes defined and ſubſcribed, then
were Miniſters of all ſortes in your notable Synode by many partes.
                  Laſtly if they will needes haue their matters ſeeme to depende of their Parlament, let vs not be
blamed, if wee call it Parlament Religion, Parlament Goſpell, Parlamente Faithe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée wil not diſcuſſe the Right, & Intereſt of the Parlamentes of Englande.
As mutche, as concerneth Goddes euerlaſtinge Truthe, wee holde not by Parlamente,
but by God. Parlamentes are vncertaine, & often contrarie, as wée haue
ſéene. But Goddes Truthe is one, and certaine, & neuer changeth. The thinges,
that were ſo ſuddainely, and ſo violently ſhaken downe in the late time of Queene
Marie, are now, of Goddes greate mercie, by oure moſte Noble, and Gratious
Lady Queene Elizabeth, aduiſedly, and ſoberly reared vp againe, that thei maie
the more firmely continewe, and ſtande the better. What ſo euer wante, yée imagine,
was in that Parlamente, for as mutche, as wée were no parte thereof, I
truſte, wee maie the more eaſily be excuſed. How be it, ſo ſcornefully diſdeigninge
the whole State of ſo Noble a Realme, yée ſhal hardely winne the opinion, either
of Sobrietie, or of greate Wiſedome.
                  
                     But your Biſhoppes, yée ſaie, withſtoode vs: and your Brethren in the Conuocation promoted
a bille againſte oure Doctrine. I know, M. Hardinge, they ſubſcribed then againſte vs
with the very ſame handes, with whiche, not longe before, they had openly proteſted,
and ſolemnely ſworne againſte the Pope: & with whiche they haue ſithence
receiued, and embraced our whole Religion, to the vtter condemnation of al your
folies.
                  
                     Onely one foole,
                      yée ſaie, yee had emongeſt all your Biſhoppes: And he was ſoone gotten
to comme to vs. Happy were they, M. Hardinge, that had but one foole in ſo greate
a companie. If ſomme of your Louanian Cleregie had then benne Biſhoppes, I
thinke, they might haue benne ſommewhat better ſtoared. Notwithſtandinge,
it was not wel donne, of your parte, ſo vnciuilely to calle your Brother foole. Al
the reſte of your Brethren, very fewe excepted, haue donne the like. Yet fooles, I
trowe, yee wil not calle them: leſt happily your owne wittes be called in queſtion.
                  Where yée would ſéeme to ſaie, that the Parlamente holden in the firſte yéere
of the Queenes Maieſties Reigne, was no Parlamente, for that your Biſhoppes
refuſed wilfully, to agree vnto the Godly Lawes there concluded, ye ſeeme therein
to bewraie in your ſelfe ſomme wante of ſkille. The wiſe, and learned coulde ſoone
haue tolde you, that in the Parlamentes of Englande, maters haue euermore vſed
to paſſe, not of neceſſitie, by the ſpecial conſente of the Archebiſhoppes, and Biſhoppes,
as if without them no Statute might lawfully be enacted: but onely by
the more parte of the voices, yea although al the Archebiſhoppes, and Biſhoppes
were neuer ſo earneſtly bente againſte it. And Statutes, ſo paſſinge in Parlamente,
onely by the voices of the Lordes Temporal, without the conſente, and agreemente
of the Lordes Spiritual, haue neuertheleſſe alwaies benne confirmed,
and ratified by the Real aſſente of the Prince, and haue benne enacted, & publiſhed

vnder the names of the Lordes Spiritual,
                     Parlamente. and Temporal.
                  
                  Reade the Statutes of Kinge Idwarde the Firſte. There ſhal yee finde, that
in a Parlamente ſolemnely holden by him at S. Edmundes Burie, the Archebiſhoppes,
and Biſhoppes were quite ſhutte foorthe. And yet the Parlamente helde
on, & good, and wholeſome Lawes were there enacted, the departinge, or abſence,
or malice of the Lordes Spiritual notwithſtandinge. In the Recordes thereof it
is written thus,An. Dom. 1296. 
                     Habito Rex cum ſuis Baronibus Parlamento, & Clero excuſo,
Statutum eſt, &c. The Kinge, keepinge the Parlamente with his Barons, the
Cleregie, (that is to ſaie, the Archebiſhoppes, & Biſhoppes) beinge ſhutte foorthe,
it was enacted, &c.
                  Likewiſe,Anno 1273. In Prouiſione de Martonae, Ca. 9. 
                     In Prouiſione de Martona, in the time of Kinge Henry the thirde,
whereas mater was moued of Baſtardie, touchinge ye Legitimation of Baſtardes
borne before Marriage, the Statute paſte wholy with the Lordes Temporal, whether
the Lordes Spiritual woulde, or no: Yea, and that contrarie to the expreſſe
Decrees,Extra. Qui Filj ſint Legitimi. and Canons of the Churche of Rome. The like hereof, as I am enfourmed,
maie be founde, Richardi. 2. An. 11. Ca. 3. How be it, in theſe caſes, I
muſt confeſſe, I walke ſommewhat without my compaſſe. Touchinge the Iudgemente
hereof, I referre mee ſelfe wholy vnto the Learned.
                  Further, whereas ye calle the Doctrine of Chriſte, that now by Goddes great
Mercie, and to your greate griefe is Vniuerſally, and freely Preached, a Parlamente
Religion, and a Parlamente Goſpel, (for ſutche ſobrietie becommeth you
wel, and maie ſtande you in ſteede, when learninge faileth) yee mighte haue remembred,
that Chriſte him ſelfe, at the beginninge, was Vniuerſally receiued, and
honoured through this Realme, by aſſente of Parlamente: and further, that without
Parlamente, your Pope him ſelfe was neuer receiued, no not in the laie time
of Ouéene Marie. Yea, & euen then, his Holineſſe was clogged with Parlamente
Conditions, that, what ſo euer had benne determined in Parlamente, and was not
repealed, were it neuer ſo contrarie to his wil, and Canons, ſhould remaine ſtil inuiolable,
and ſtande in force. Otherwiſe, his Holineſſe had gonne home againe.
Sutche, M. Hardinge, is the Authoritie of a Parlamente. Verily, if Parlamentes
of Realmes be no Parlamentes, then wil your Pope be no Pope. Therefore
with like Sabrietie, & grauitie of ſpeache, yee mighte haue ſaide, Oure Fathers
in olde times had a Parlamente Chriſte: And your late Fathers, and Brethren
had a Parlamente Faithe, a Parlamente Maſſe, and a Parlamente Pope.
                  
                  Neither is it ſo ſtrange a mater, to ſee Eccleſiaſtical Cauſes debated in Parlamente.
Reade the Lawes of Kinge Inas, Kinge Elfrede, Kinge Edvvarde,
Kinge Ethelſtane,
                     Leges Canuti. Kinge Edmunde, Kinge Edgare, Kinge Canute: And ye ſhal
finde, that our godly Forefathers, the Princes, and Peeres of this Realme, neuer
voucheſaued to entreate of maters of Peace, or Warre, or otherwiſe touchinge
the Common ſtate, before al controuerſies of Religion, and Cauſes Eccleſiaſtical
had benne concluded. Kinge Canute in his Parlamente, holden at Wincheſter
vpon Chriſtemaſſe daie, after ſundrie Lawes, and Orders made, Touchinge
the Faithe, the keepinge of Holy Daies, Publique Praiers, learninge of
the Lordes Praier, Receiuinge of the Communion thriſe in the yeere, the manner,
and fourme of Baptiſme, Faſtinge, and other like maters of Religion, in the
ende thereof ſaithe thus, I am ſequitur Inſtitutio legum Saecularium: Now foloweth
an order for Temporal Lavves.
                  
                  Thus wee ſee, that the godly Catholique Princes in Olde times, thought it
their duetie, before al other affaires of the Common Weale, firſte to determine
maters of Religion, and that euen by the Parlamentes of this Realme.
                  In a Parlamente holden by Kinge William the Conqueroure it is written

thus:Tridētine councel. Superintendentes. 
                     Rex, quia Vicarius Summi Regis eſt, ad hoc conſtituitur, vt Regnum, & populum
Domini, & ſuper omnia, Sanctam Eccleſiam, Regar, & defendat, &c. The
Kinge, for as mutche as he is the Vicare of the Higheſt Kinge, is therefore appointed
to this pourpoſe, that he ſhoulde Rule, and defende the Kingedome, and
People of the Lorde, & aboue al thinges the Holy Churche, &c. Hereby it appeareth,
that Kinges, and Princes are ſpecially, and of pourpoſe appointed by God,
not onely to defende, but alſo to Gouerne, and Rule the Holy Churche.
                  
                  How he it, wee geue God thankes for the ſame, that is: and truſte, that, for his
owne names ſake, he wil confirme, that he hath begonne. The hartes of Princes,
and Determinations of Parlamentes are in his hande. If any thinge wante, the
Arme of the Lorde is not ſhortened: He is hable to ſupplie the ſame.
                  Yee magnifie mutche your late Chapter of Tridente,
                     Concil. Trident. Sub Carolo Quinto. whiche you woulde ſo
faine haue called a General Councel: with ſo many Nations: ſo many Biſhoppes: ſo many yeeres of Conſultation. Yet notwithſtandinge of al theſe ſo
many, and ſo many Nations, and Countries, if it maie pleaſe you to ſit downe,
& to take the accoumpte, yee ſhal finde there were onely poore fourtie Biſhoppes,
and certaine of the ſame, (as Richarde Pates, the Biſhop of VVoorceſter, and
Blinde ſir Roberte,
                     Robert. Coecus. vide Concil. Trident. ſub Paulo. 3 Matthias Plac. Illyricus in Proteſt. contra Concil. Trident. Pagin. 79. the Archebiſhop of Armach) that onely had the bare titles
of Biſhoprikes, and in deede were no Biſhoppes. Twoo others of your ſaide ſo
many, and ſo Notable Learned, & Holy Biſhoppes, beinge at your ſaide woorthy
Coūcel, were euen there killed in Aduouterie: y• one ſtriken downe with a Clubbe:
the other taken in the manoure by the Huſbande, & hanged by the necke, out of a
greate Lucane windowe, into the ſtreete. For theſe, and other cauſes, Henry
the Frenche 
                     
                        •
                     nge openly, by his Embaſſadoure, proteſted againſte the ſame
Councel in the preſence of al your ſo many, and ſo many Biſhoppes there, and
ſaide,Io Sle
                           •
                        danus, Li. 23. Anno. 1551. 
                     It vvas not a Councel General, but a Priuate Couente, or Aſſemblie of
a fevve certaine people ſummoned togeather for gaines ſake.
                  
                  
                     Now,
                     Conuentus quorundam Priuatus vtilitatis gratia inſtitut
                           •
                        es. 
                     whereas it hath pleaſed you, as wel here, as els where, to ſporte your
ſelfe with Superintendentes, and Superintendentſhippes, and to refreaſhe
your wittes with ſo vaine a fanſie of your owne, if yee had benne ſo deepely traueiled
in the Doctoures, Nevve, or Olde, as ye beare vs in hande, yee mighte
eaſily haue knowen, that a Superintendente, is an Anciente name, and ſignifieth
none other,
                     Auguſtin. De Ciuit. Li. 19 Ca. 19. Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 126. 
                     but a Biſhop. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Vocabulum Epiſcopatus inde ductum
eſt, quo'd ille, qui praeficitur, eis, quibus praeficitur, Superintendit. Ergo, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
Latinè dicere poſſumus Superintendere. Againe he ſaithe, Quod Graecè
dicitur, Epiſcopus, hoc Latinè, Superintentor, interpretatur. Chryſoſtome
ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. 1. ad Timoth. Hom 10. Hieronym. Ad 
                           •
                        uagrium. Anſelm ad Philippen. Ca. 1. Beda. 1. Petri. 2. Petrus de Palude, De Poteſt. Colla. Apoſtolis, Arti. 1. Epiſcopus ex eo dicitur, quo'd omnes inſpiciat. S. Hierome ſaithe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
id eſt, Superintendentes. Anſelimus ſaithe, Epiſcopus Latinè
Superintendens dicitur. Beda likewiſe ſaithe, Epiſcopus Latinè Superintendens
dicitur. Petrus de Palude ſaithe, Epiſcopus dicitur Superintendens: Et
Petrus fuit Superintendens toti Mundo: Peter was the Superintendente of the
whole Worlde. Your owne Thomas of Aquine ſaith, Epiſcopi dicuntur ex eo,
quòd Superintendunt. Therefore, M. Hardinge, if Modeſtie moue you not, yet
at leaſte for your grauities ſake, leaue plaieinge with theſe vaine, and childiſhe
folies. The Biſhoppes of Englande haue this daie, not onely the ſame Name,
but alſo the ſame roume, and Authoritie, and Iuriſdiction, that other Biſhoppes
haue euer had before.
                     Thom. 2. 2. quae. 184. Ar. 6.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 1.
               But, touchinge this Councel, whiche is nowe ſommoned by
Pope Pius, wherein menne ſo lightly are condemned, beinge neither

called,Al ſoares ſalued by the Councel of Tridente. nor hearde, nor ſeene, it is eaſy to gheaſſe, what we maie looke
for, or hope of it.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Generall Councell of Trente is now at length by Gods ſpeciall fauour concluded and ended.
VVhat haue ye to ſaie to it? Forbeare your accuſtomed lyinge, what haue ye to ſaie to it? ForVntruthes open, and vvithout ſame. For example, your Stevves, your Courteghianes, and Fornications vvere neuer touched. matters
of Faithe, what is not ſounde and true? For * maners, what ſore lacketh due ſalue? For * diſcipline,
what diſorder hath not holeſome reſtrainctes and puniſhmentes? VVhat defectes be not prouidently
conſidered, how to be ſupplied? VVhat abuſes be not required to be taken a waie, as farre, as
mans wiste coulde deuiſe, and the weakeneſſe of the preſente age can beare?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Al this mater is fully anſweared by VVhat, and by VVhat. VVhat mater of
Faithe? VVhat manners? VVhat diſorder? VVhat defectes? VVhat Abuſes?
                      But al
theſe vvhattes notwithſtanding, vvhat if your Pope, your Cardinalles, and your
Cleregie, with the whole diſorder of your Romaine Churche, with ſo many
Prieſtes keepinge Concubines, with ſo many Non Reſidentes, with ſo many
Doumbe Biſhoppes, and with ſo many thouſandes of common Harlottes, be
in caſe now, euen as they were before? Wil yée telle vs neuertheleſſe, that al your
ſoares be ſufficiently ſalued? Or, muſte wée beleue, that your keepinge of Concubines,
your open Stewes, and Fornications &c. be no ſoares? Verily, S. Bernarde
ſaithe,Bernard. in Cantica. Sermo. 33. Hulcote in Lib. Sapien. Lectio. 23 Bernard. in Conuerſ. Pauli. Bapt. Mantuan. Faſtor. Lib. 4. Ad Leonem. 10. Concil. Trident. as it is alleged before, Inteſtina, & inſanabilis eſt plaga Eccleſiae: The
wounde of the Churche bleedeth inwardely, and is paſt cure:
                      And againe, A planta pedis,
vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad verticem Capitis non eſt in ea ſanitas: There is no whole parte in the
Churche from the ſole of the foote, to the toppe of the Heade. Baptiſta Mantuanus
ſaith, Aegrotatqúe Fides iam proxima morti: The Faithe of the Romaine Churche
is ſicke, and almoſte deade.
                  
                  In your Olde Latine Tranſlation of the Bible, there be ſundrie errours, ſo open,
and ſo groſſe, that a very Babe maie ſoone eſpie them: as it maie more plainely
appeare by Budaeus, Eraſmus, Valla, Faber, Lindanus, and others. Yet,
that notwithſtandinge, your Councel ſaithe preciſely thus, Ne quis Veterem
vulgaram Editionem reijcere quouis praetextu audeat, vel praeſumat: Lette no
man dare, or preſume by any manner of coloure, to refuſe the Olde Common Tranſlation
of the Bible: As if your Councelles were yourpoſely ſummoned, to mainteine
errours. If yee wil ſo wilfully deceiue vs in ſenſible maters, how maie wée
then truſte you in maters of Faithe?
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 2.
               In times paſt, when Nazianzene ſawe in his daies, how menne
in ſutche Aſſemblies were ſo blinde, and wilful, that they were carried
with affections,Nazian. ad Procopium. and laboured more to geate the victorie, then
the Truthe, he pronounced openly, that he neuer had ſeene a good
ende of any Councel. What would he ſaie nowe, if he were aliue at
this daie, and vnderſtoode the heauinge, & ſhouinge of theſe menne?
For at that time, though the matter were laboured on al ſides, yet
the controuerſies were wel hearde, and open errours were put cleane
awaie by the general voice of al partes: But theſe menne wil neither
haue the caſe to be freely diſputed, nor yet how many errours ſoeuer
there be, ſuffer they any to be changed. For it is a common cuſtome

of theirs, often, and ſhameleſly to boaſte, that their Churche cannot
erre, that in it there is no faulte, & that they muſte geeue place to vs
in nothinge. Or, if there be any faulte, yet muſte it be tried by their
Biſhoppes, and Abbates onely, bicauſe they be the Directours, and
Rulers of maters: for that they be the Churche of God. Ariſtotle
ſaithe, that a cittie cannot conſiſte of Baſtardes: but whether
the churche of God maie conſiſte of theſe menne▪ lette them
ſelues conſider. For doubteleſſe, neither be theire Abbates, Abbates
in deede, nor their Biſhoppes natural right Biſhoppes.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Gregorie Nazianzene in his Epiſtle to Procopius ſaithe thus: I refuſe to come to whatſoeuer
Councell of Biſhoppes. Becauſe I coulde neuer yet to this daie ſee the ende of any Councell ende wed
with any profite, and after whiche, thinges amiſſe were not rather made more greuous, then healed.
Nazianzene in that Epiſtle ſpake ofVntruthe. For he ſpeaketh of al manner of Councelles, as vvel General, as Prouincial: His vvoordes be, Prorſus decreui fugere Omnem Conuentum Epiſcoporū.
                      prouinciall Councelles, ſpecially thoſe that were holden in his
troubleſome times, where moſt commonly Heretikes through fauour of their deceiued Princes bare the
ſwea. VVhiche in matters of Faithe coulde hardely then obteine any credite amonge the Catholikes,
onleſſe they had benne confirmed by the auctoritie of the Biſhop of Rome: of whiche ſorte at that
age were fewe. Thoſe other Nazianzene had experience of, of theſe he had not. Albeit in deede
the vtilitie of the Nicence Councell in his time, that is to ſaie, within ſo fewe yeeres after the ſame
was holden, was not yet thoroughly eſpied, and fully knowen abroade. Neither would he, if he were
aliue at this daie, reproue the Holy generall Councell of Trente, as ye doo. For why ſhoulde he?
                  
                     This is a luſty kinde of Diuinitie. And how ſhameleſſe be ye, to require vs, to yelde and geue place vnto you? VVho made you iudges
ouer vs? ‡ VVho gaue you commiſsion? VVhere is your warrant?
                  VVhat neede ye to ſhewe your malice ſo muche at Biſhoppes, and Abbattes? VVhiche of them
hurteth you? Haue ye not in priſon, or in cuſtodyVntruthe. For they are committed onely by the appointemente of the Prince. at your appointement all the Biſhoppes of England,
one Apoſtata yet liuinge excepted, which after ſundry flightes and changinge of cotes, is fledde from
the tentes of the Churche to your ſcattered troupes? The Abbottes, haue ye not driuen them awaie?
Be ye yet a fraide of their ſhadowes? As by Ariſtotle a Cittie can not conſiſte of Baſtardes, nomore
can the Churche of Englande conſiſte of ſuche Baſtarde Biſhoppes, as ye be: what number of Abbottes
ye haue lefte in Cloiſters, ſuche number of true Biſhoppes haue yee lefte in Churches. One muſte I
ſtill except, who is a true Biſhop by conſecration (as I vnderſtande) though a falſe man by Apoſtaſie,
and goinge from his Faithe, and from his Religion.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Touchinge the vnlucky ſucceſſe of Councelles, the Ancient Father Nazianzene
ſaithe thus,Gregor. Nazianzenus ad Procopium. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Equidem, vt verè, quod res eſt, ſcribam, prorſus decreui fugere
Omnem Conuentum Epiſcoporum. Nullius enim concilij bonum exitum
vnquam vidi. Concilia enim non minuunt mala, ſed augent potiùs: To ſaie
the truthe, I am vtterly determined neuer to comme to any Councel of Biſhoppes. For I
neuer yet ſawe good ende of any Councel. For Councelles abate not il thinges, but rather
increaſe them.
                      Theſe woordes thus vttered, whether they be vniuerſally true,
or otherwiſe, I wil not reaſon. It maie ſeeme hereby, this Learned Father, for
his time, by experience founde them true. And for ought, that maie appeare to the
contrarie, notwithſtandinge any thinge conteined in your Gloſe, he ſeemeth to
vtter the ſame, as wel of General Councelles, as of Prouincial.
                  
                  Certainely after the Greate General Councel of Nice, the Arian Heretiques
waxed moe, and more mighty, then euer they had benne before. The Emperours
Conſtantius, and Valens, with their Wiues, and Courtes became Arians. Conſtantinus
                     
the Greate him ſelfe was alſo doubted to be an Arian.
                     The ſucceſſe of councels. Monkes, and Abbates. 
                     Liberius the Biſhop
of Rome, and Hoſius that famous Learned Biſhop of Spaine, gaue their
handes vnto the Arians. Tenne ſeueral ſundrie Prouincial councelles gaue
their voices with the Arians. S. Hierome ſaithe, Ingemuit totus Orbis, &
Arianum ſe eſſe miratus eſt: The whole wordle beganne to groane, and marueiled, that
it had taken parte with the Arians. Therefore Nazianzene ſaithe, He neuer ſawe
Councel,
                     Sozomenus. Hieronym. Aduerſus Luciferianos. nor Prouincial, nor General, that ended wel: for that, as one ſaithe,
The greater ſide oftentimes ouer vveigheth the better. Euen ſo ſaide the
Frenche Kinges Embaſſadoure, in the behalfe of his Prince, in your Chapter at
Tridente: Noſtra, Patrumqúe noſtrorum, & Auorum memoria, Synodos indictas fuiſſe,
Epiſcopos conueniſſe,
                     Tit. Liuius. Maior pars vincit meliorem. 
                     maximos in Germania, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Italia Conuētus peractos eſſe, ſcimus.
Vix tamen vllus, aut perexiguus inde fructus Chriſtianitati conſtirit: Wee
knowe, that bothe in our Grandfathers, and Fathers, and oure owne time, Councelles haue
benne ſummoned,
                     
                     Oratio Synodica Legati Regis Franciae. An. 1562. 
                     Biſhoppes haue mette togeather, greate and ſolemne Aſſemblies haue
benne keapte, as wel in Germanie, as in Italie: yet ſcarcely any good at al, or very
litle good came thereof to the ſtate of Chriſtendome.
                  
                  Concerninge Abbates, and Monaſteries, wee haue ſaide before. Wée haue as
many Abbates in Englande this daie, as either Chriſte euer had, or his Apoſtles.
Notwithſtandinge one of your Learned felowes of Louaine, for the good wil he
beareth to that Religion,
                     Copus. Fol. 284. telleth vs, that the Apoſtles vvere Monkes, & Chriſte
himſelfe was the Abbate. The Abbates, and Monkes, that were in olde times,
were menne geuen to Studie,Auguſt. Epiſt 81. Auguſt. Epiſt. 76 and Learninge. And out of Monaſteries learned
menne were then taken, as out of Schooles, and Vniuerſities, to the rule, and gouernemente
of the Churche. But your Abbates nowe are as mutche like thoſe
Abbates, as your Churche is like the Primitiue Churche of Chriſte.
                  
                  Eraſmus ſaithe,
                     Eraſm. in Scholijs in Epiſtolam ad Ruſticum Monachum. Haud ſcio, an nunc magis expediret Eccleſiae Chriſtianae, ſi
pauciora eſſent Monaſteria, eſſet
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      omnium idem Cultus, eaedem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      preces, eadem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
vitae ratio: I knowe not whether it were better for the Churche of Chriſte, that
there were fewer Monaſteries: and that al menne had one Seruice of God, one kinde
of Praier, and one order of Life.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 3.
               But graunte, they be the Churche: let them be hearde ſpeake in
Councelles: let them alone haue authoritie, to geeue conſente: yet in
olde time, when the Churche of God (if ye wil compare it with their
Churche) was very wel gouerned, bothe Elders, and Deacons,
as ſaithe Cyprian, and certaine alſo of the Common People were
called thereunto, and made acquainted with Eccleſiaſtical maters.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ah Syrs, woulde ye haue the common people come to the Generall Councell? VVhom meane ye, I
praie you? Tinkers and Tapſters. fydlers and Pypers, ſuche as your miniſters be? Alas poore ſoules.
what ſhould they doo there? For there is no tinking nor tipplinge, no fidlinge nor Pypinge. There
may they ſhutte vp bothe budgets and mouthes. For neither can they ſpeake in ſuche an audience
to be vnderſtanded, nor can they vnderſtande, what is ſpoken. Looke in your Bookes better, and you
ſhall finde Cyprian to make litle for your purpoſe.
                  Had your mater benne good, it might haue benne defended without lies. Beinge as it is, altogeather
beſide Truthe and reaſon, for ſome colour of mainetenance of the ſame, ye paſſe all meaſure
in lieinge. VVhere ſaithe S. Cyprian that certaine of the common people were called to Eccleſiaſticall
Councelles? Yea, ſpecially where ſaithe he,S. Cyprians vvoordes be plaine, Nihil ſine conſenſu plebis, &c. Lib. 3. Epiſt. 10. that the common people were made iudges of Eccleſiaſticall

matters,Prieſtes vnlearned. for ſo hath your Latine, whiche not without guile your Lady interpreter commonly
tourneth, were made acquainted with Eclceſiaſticall matters? If you had meante true dealinge. Defender,
you would haue quoted the place: but you knewe thereby your falſehead ſhoulde haue benne
eſpied.Your 
                           〈◊〉
                         deceiueth 
                           〈◊〉
                         It is not there. The place whiche you meane, doubtles is in the ſeconde tome of S. Cyprians woorkes, where
we finde the ſentences of the Biſhoppes of Aphrike, De Haereticis Baptizandis: VVhiche proueth
your ſtraunge ſaieinge, by you fathered vpon that holy Martyr, nothinge at al. The woordes be theſe,
Cùm in vnum Carthagini conueniſſent, &c. VVhen many Biſhoppes in the firſte daie of September
were aſſembled together at Carthage, out of the prouince of Aphrike, Numidia, Mauritanta,
with their Prieſtes, and Deacons, the moſt parte of the people alſo beinge preſente &c.
                  Now what can you gather out of them for your pourpoſe more, but that a greate number of the
people were preſente onely in the Churche, or other place, where the Biſhoppes were aſſembled? That
certaine of the common people were called to this Councell, there is no ſuche woorde mentioned, nor
by Cyprian, nor by any els.Vntruthes, boldely auouched. Reade the A
                           •
                        ivveare. Neither were the Prieſtes them ſelues (which this youthfull Gentil woman
interpreteth Elders) and Deacons * called thither, but they * attended vpon the Biſhoppes, as
in ſuch caſe it hath benne accuſtomed: for ſentence none might geue, in any Councell, but * onely Biſhoppes.
Then howe muche leſſe were the common people called to that Councell, ſpecially to ſitte as
Iudges in Eccleſiaſticall matters? Mary, that you woulde ſo haue it, I thinke well. For ſuche
confuſion mighte beſte ſerue you to procure the ouerthrowe of good order, in whiche the Churche
is gouerned: whiche if it be maineteined duely, your diſordered and rebellious ſtate will ſoone be
confounded.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Your Tinkers, and Tapſters, M. Hardinge, are aſhamed in your behalfe, to ſée
your folie. A poore ſeely ieſter, to winne his dinner, woulde be lothe to ſcoffe ſo
coldely. Certaine of our Cleregie wante the knowlege of Rhetorique, Logique,
Philoſophie, the Hebrevve, the Greeke, and the Latine tongues: Therefore
yée calle them Tinkers, and Tapſters. Sutche is the Sobrietie, and Modeſtie of
your talke. Of what Schoole, or tongue then are your Prieſtes, M. Hardinge,
that, for the more parte, can neither Speake Latine, nor Reade Engliſhe, nor vnderſtande
the Articles of their Faithe, nor any portion of the Scriptures:
Clovvdes without Raine: Lanternes without Lighte: Salte without ſauoure:
Blinde guides: Dombe Dogges: that, as one ſaithe, ſéeme to haue their ſoules
geuen them in ſtéede of ſalte, to kéepe them from ſtinkinge? Of what Arte, or Occupation
was he,De Con. Diſt. 4 Retulerunt. Iulius. pp. 2. Alphon. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. that Baptized a childe in Latine, in this ſorte, In nomine Patria,
& Filia, & Spirita Sancta? What a ſkilful Clerke was your Pope Iulius. 2.
that aſſigninge a warrante, in ſtéede of Fiat, wrote, Fiatur? Your owne Doctour,
Alphonſus de Caſtro, ſaith, Conſtat plures Papas adeo' illiteratos eſſe, vt Grammaticam
penit ùs ignorent: It is moſte certaine, that many Popes be ſo vnlearned,
that they be vtterly ignorante of their Grammar.
                      And, beinge vtterly ignorant of their
Grammare Rules, I beſeche you, for what other profounde science of Logique,
or Philoſophi
                           •
                        ,
                     Felinus, de Reſcriptis. Si quan
                           •
                         do. can yée praiſe them? An other of your Doctoures ſaithe, Papa
propter defectum literaturae non poteſt deponi: The Pope maie not be depoſed
for lacke of Learninge.
                      That is to ſaie, the Pope, though he be neuer ſo ignorante,
or voide of knowledge, yet is as good a Pope, as the beſte.
                  
                     An other of your Doctours ſaith,
                     Aureum Speculum, In Antilogia. Venalitate Curiae Romanae, inaniter praeficiuntur
Lenones, Coqui, Stabularij equorum, & Pueri: Through the bribene of the
Courte of Rome, Baudes, Cookes, Hoſtlers, and Children be placed in Offices to
gouerne the Churche. Shal wee therefore ſaie, as you ſaie, that al your
                      Prieſtes be
Fidlers, and Pipers, Tinkers, and Tapſters?
                  
                     Somme certaine of oure Cleregie be ignorante in the tongues, as yours be:
but not ignorante in knowledge,
                     2. Corin. 11. 
                     as yours be. The woorſte of them ſeeth, & lamenteth

your wilful ignorance.
                     Prieſtes vnlearned. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Multò minùs malum eſt, indoctum
eſſe,Auguſt. contra Academic. Li. 3. Ca. 7. quàm indocilem: Leaſſe hurte is it, to be vnlearned, then to be wilful, and
vnapte to learne. Irenaeus ſaithe, Melius eſt, & vtilius, idiotas, & parum ſcientes
exiſtere,Irenae. Lib. 2. Ca. 45. & per Charitatem proximos Deo fieri, quàm putare ſe multum ſcire, & multa
expertos, in ſuum Deum blaſphemos inueniri: Better is it a greate deale, for menne to be
ignorante, and to knowe but litle, and by loue to drawe neare to God, then to thinke them
ſelues to knowe mutche, and to haue greate experience, and yet to be founde blaſphemers againſte
God.
                  
                  
                     S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſ. De Fide, Li. 1. Cap. 3. Non in Dialectica complacuit Deo, ſaluum facere populum
ſuum. Regnum enim Dei in ſimplicitate Fidei eſt, non in contentione Sermonis:
It pleaſed not God, by Logique to ſaue his people: For the Kingedome of God ſtandeth not
in contention of talke,
                     Ambroſ. De Incarnatione Domini. Ca. 9. 
                     but in ſimplicitie of Faithe. Likewiſe he ſaith,
                      Verba Philoſophorum
excludit ſimplex Veritas Piſcatorū: The ſimple plaine Faithe of Fiſhers confoundeth
the woordes of the learned Philoſophers. The Ancient Father
                      Origen ſaithe,
Sapientes huius ſaeculi,Origen. in Cantica, Homili. 4. videntes abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Arte Grammatica, & peritia Philoſophica conſurgere
muros Euangelij, v
                        •
                     lut cum irriſione quadam dicunt, perfacilé hoc poſſe deſtrui
calliditate Sermonum, per aſtutas fallacias, & Argumēta Dialectica: The wiſe menne
of this world, ſeeinge the walles of the Goſpel to riſe vp without Grammare, and profounde
knowledge in Philoſophie, ſaie ſcornefully emongeſt them ſelues, that al this by
ſuttletie of ſpeache, and crafty ſhiftes, and Logical Argumentes, maie ful eaſily be ſhaken
downe.
                  
                  It appeareth by the Councelles of Carthage,
                     Conci. Carthag. 3. Can. 19. Et Concil. Hippon. 
                     and Hippo Regius, that in olde
times Children vnder fouretene yeeres of age were admitted to be Readers in the
Churche: and, notwithſtandinge either theire age, or wante of learninge, the people
was wel contented, with ſilence, and reuerence to geue eare vnto them.
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſtom. in Geneſ. Homi. 44. 
                     in humanis negotijs, quando Rex Diademate coronatus, &c.
Euen in worldly affaires, when the Kinge ſendeth ſoorthe his Proclamations, the Currer, or
pourſeuante is oftentimes a man of ſmal accoumpte, and ſommetime ſo baſe, that he neuer
knewe his owne Father, or Grandefather. But they that receiue the Proclamation, haue no
regarde vnto him, that brought it: notwithſtandinge, in reſpecte of the Kinges letters, that
he brought, they geue him honoure, and with ſilence, and reuerence geue attendance to the
Proclamation.
                  
                     Theſe ſimple vnlearned ones, whome you ſo diſdainefully deſpiſe, ſhal riſe vp
in the daie of our Lorde, and condemne you with al your knowledge. God is hable
to make the poore Aſse to ſpeake,
                     Numer. 22. Hieronym. in Pſalm. 82. 
                     to controlle blinde Balaams wilful pourpoſes.
S. Hierome ſaithe, Paulus, qui Soloeciſmos facit in loquendo, Chriſti Crucem
portat, &, quaſi triumphans, omnes capit: Totum Orbem ſubegit, ab Oceano vſque ad
Mare Rubrum: Paule, that is not hable to vtter his minde in congrue ſpeache, beareth
the Croise of Chriſte, and taketh al menne Priſoners, as if it were in triūphe: from the Occean
vnto the Redde Sea, he ſubdewed the whole worlde. Likewiſe S.
                      Ambroſe ſaithe,
Non quaero,Ambroſi. Ad Grattanum de Fide, Lib. 1. Ca. 5. quid loquantur Philoſophi: requiro quid faciant. Soli in ſuis Gymnaſijs
remanſerunt. Vide, quàm Fides Argumentis praeponderet. Illi quotidiè à ſuis conſortibus
deſeruntur, qui copioſé diſputant: Iſti quotidiè creſcunt, qui ſimpliciter credunt.
Non creditur Philoſophis: Creditur Piſcatoribus: I demaunde not, what theſe
greate learned Philoſophers ſaie, but what they doo. They are foreſaken, and leafte alone
in theire Schooles. Beholde, howe mutche more weight there is in Faithe, then in Argumentes.
They with theire profounde Reaſons are daiely foreſaken of theire felowes:
Theſe with their Simple Faithe goe forewarde, and encreaſe daily. Menne beleeue not
the learned Philoſophers: They beleeue vnlearned Fiſhers.
                  
                  
                     Prieſtes, yee ſaie, this youtheful Gentlevvooman interpreteth Elders.
OM. Hardinge, litle needeth y• godly Learned, & vertuous Lady, to feare your ſo
vumanly, and childiſhe toies. If yee had benne either ſo ſagely ſtudied, as ye pretende,

& your frendes have thought, havePrieſtes, Deacons, and Laie menne in coūcelles. yée might ſoone haue learned, that Preſbyter,
a Prieſte, is nothinge els, but Senior, that is, an Elder. And therefore, whereas S.
Paule ſaithe, Aduerſus Presbyterum accuſationem ne admiſeris: S. Cyprian
tranſlatinge the ſame, ſaith thus, Aduerſus Maiorem natu accuſationē ne receperis.
Your owne Doctoure Thomas Aquin
                           •
                        s ſaith, Presbyteri in Graeco dicuntur, quaſi
Seniores.
                     1. Timoth 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Your owne Gratian ſaithe, Presbyter Graecé, Latinè Senior interpretatur.
S. Hierome ſaith, Idem eſt Presbyter, qui Epiſcopus. Theſe twoo woordes,

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,Cypria. ad Quirinum. Li 3. Ca. 76. are expounded in Latine, Natu maior, Natu maximus.
So Plutarchus ſaithe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Olde Trees: So Nazianzene
ſaithe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Goeinge by a ſtaffe, as olde menne vſe to doo.
Therefore,Thomas Secundae Secundae. quaſt. 184 arti. 6. M. Hardinge, it had benne more for your grauitie, to haue ſpared theſe
youtheful folies.
                  
                     Yee ſaie, The Prieſtes, and Deacons waited onely vpon the Biſhoppes: but Sentence in Councel
thei might geue none.
                     
                     Diſt 21. Cl
                           •
                        ros. Hieronym. ad Titum, Cap. 1. Plutarch. in Publicola. 
                     This tale were true, M. Hardinge, if euery your woorde were a
Goſpel. But S. Luke woulde haue tolde you far otherwiſe. For, ſpeakinge of the
firſt Chriſtian Councel, holden in y•
                      Apoſtles time, he ſaith thus: Conuenerunt Apoſtoli,
& Seniores, vt diſpicerent de hoc negotio: The Apoſtles, and Elders mette
togeather, to take order, touchinge this mater. And againe in the Concluſion,
                      Placuit
Apoſtolis,Actorum. 15. Nicephorus, Li. 8. Cap 15. & Senioribus, cum tota Eccleſia: It ſeemed good to the Apoſtles, and
Elders, togeather with the whole Churche. Nicephorus ſaith, Athanaſius inter Diaconos
Alexandriae Primarius, nō minima pa
                        •
                     s Nicenae Synodi: Athanaſius beinge
(not a
                      Biſhop, but) one of the chiefe
                      Deacons of Alexandria, was not the leaſt parte of
the Councel of Nice.Tertullian in Apologetico. Tertullian ſaith, Praeſident probati qui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Seniores, honorem
iſtū nō pretio, ſed teſtimonio adepti: The Judges in ſutche Eccleſiaſtical Aſſemblies be
the beſte allowed Elders, hauinge obteined that honoure, not for monie, but by the witneſſe
of their Brethren.
                     Concil. Nicen. 2. Actio. 2. 4 & 6 
                     And in the Seconde Councel of Nice, Petrus Protopresbyter,
and Petrus Presbyter, not beinge Biſhoppes, but onely Prieſtes, ſente thither
by Adrianus the Biſhop of Rome, gaue their aſſentes, and ſubſcribed their
names before al the Biſhoppes.
                  Touchinge S. Cyprian▪
                      yée ſaie, as your grauitie, and modeſtie leadeth you,
VVee lie, without coloure, and paſſe meaſure in Lieinge. And here, as menne doo, that goe by
gheaſſe, & anſweare longe before thei knowe, yée finde out a place in S. Cyprian,
that wée thought not of: and, vpon affiance thereof, yée blowe vp your trumpe, and
cal vs Liers. How be it, wiſe menne thinke him a haſty Iudge, that pronounceth
before he knowe the cauſe.Cyprian. Lib. 3. Epiſt. 10. S. Cyprian ſaithe, A primordio Epiſcopatus
mei, ſtatui, nihil ſine conſilio veſtro, & ſine conſenſu Plebis, mea priuatim ſententia,
gerere: From my firſte entringe into the Biſhoprike, I haue determined to doo nothinge
by mine owne authoritie, without your ad
                              ••
                           ſe
                      (being the Prieſtes, & Deacons), and
without the conſente of the people. For dooinge the contrarie hereof, the Anciente
Father Origen rebuketh Biſhoppes of Pride, and ſtatelineſſe. Thus he ſaithe,
Quis hodiè corum,
                     Origen. in Exodum, Homil. 11. 
                     qui populis praeſunt, Conſilium dignatur inferioris ſaltem Sacerdotis
accipere? Ne dixerim Laici, vel Gētilis: What one now adaies, of al the Biſhoppes,
that haue the ouerſighte of the people, vouch
                              •
                            ſaueth to take the Councel of any Inferioure
Prieſte? I wil not ſaie, of a Laie man, or of an Heathen. S. Ambroſe, touchinge
a caſe of Faithe againſte the Arians,
                     Ambroſ. Lib. 
                           •
                        . Epiſ. 32. ſaithe thus: Veniant, ſi qui ſunt, ad Eccleſiam.
Audiant cum populo: Non vt quiſquam Iudex reſideat: ſed vt vnuſquiſque
de ſuo affectu habeat examen: If there be any of them, let them comme to the
Churche: Let them geue care, and hearken with the people: Not that any man there ſhal
ſitte as Iudge: but that euery man maie haue the examination of his ovvne
minde.
                  
                  
                     To conclude, your owne Pope Nicolas, writinge vnto Michael the Greeke

Emperoure,Epiſt. Nicolai pp. ad Imp. Michaelem. 
                     ſaithe thus, Vbinam legiſtis, Imperatores, Anteceſſores veſtros, Synodalibus
conuentionibus interfuiſse? Niſi fortè in quibuſdam, vbi de Fide
tractatum eſt: quae Vniuerſalis eſt: quae omnium communis eſt: quae non ſolùm
ad Clericos, verùmetiam
                        •
                      ad Laicos, & ad omnes omninò pertinet Chriſtianos:
Where did your Maieſtie euer reade, that your Predeceſsoures, beinge Emperoures,
were euer preſente at the Aſsemblies of Councelles? Onleſſe it were, when queſtion was
moued concerninge the Faithe. For Faithe is Vniuerſal, and common to al menne, and belongeth,
not onely to the Prieſtes, but alſo to the Laie menne, and generally to al Chriſtians.
But hereof wée ſhal haue occaſion to ſpeake more hereafter.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 3. Diuiſion. 4.
               
                  But, I put caſe, theſe Abbates, & Biſhoppes, haue no knowlege:
what if they vnderſtande nothinge, what Religion is, nor howe we
ought to thinke of God? I put caſe, the pronouncinge, & miniſtringe
of the Lawe be decaied in Prieſtes, and good counſel faile in the
Elders,Micheae. 3. 
                  & as the Prophete Micheas ſaith, The Night be vnto them
in ſteede of a viſion, and darkeneſſe in ſteede of Propheſienge:
Or,
                  Pſal. 56. 
                  as Eſaias ſaithe, VVhat if al the vvatchemen of the cittie be
become blinde? VVhat if the Salte haue loſte his propre ſtrength
and ſauerineſſe,Matth. 5. 
                  and as chriſte ſaithe, be good for no vſe, ſcante
vvoorthe the caſtinge on the dounghil?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The worlde knoweth ſo well, (yea Heauen alſo) the greate woorthineſſe of thoſe Fathers in euery
reſpect, that, I ſhould doo them wronge here to praiſe them, for that by your fonde ſurmiſes you
ſeeke their diſpraiſe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Heauen,Matthias Flacius Illyricus, in Proteſtatione contra Concil. Triden Pag. 79. and Earthe knoweth, M. Hardinge, that twoo of your Reuerende
vvoorthy Fathers, notwithſtandinge their vertues, and al their greate woorthineſſe,
were taken, and ſlaine in Aduouterie, euen there preſente at your Councel.
Therefore yee doo your ſelfe ſomme wronge, in reſpecte of your credite, ſo waſtefully
to beſtowe your praiſes.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 1.
               Wel yet then, they wil bringe al matters before the Pope, who
cannot erre. To this I ſaie, firſte it is a madneſſe to thinke, that the
Holy Ghoſte taketh his flight from a General councel, to renne to
Rome, to the ende if he doubt, or ſticke in any matter, and cannot expounde
it of him ſelfe, he maie take counſel of ſomme other Sprite,
I wote not what, that is better learned, then him ſelfe. For if this be
true, what needed ſo many Biſhoppes, with ſo greate charges, & ſo
farre iorneies, to haue aſſēbled their Conuocation at this preſent at
Tridente? Yt hadde benne more wiſedome, and better, at leaſt it had
benne a mutche nearer, and handſommer waie, to haue brought al
thinges rather before the Pope, & to haue comme ſtreight foorthe, &
haue aſked counſel at his Diuine Breaſte. Secondly, it is alſo an
vnlawful dealinge, to toſſe our mater from ſo many Biſhoppes, &

                  Abbates, and to bringe it at laſte to the trial of one onely man, ſpecially
of him, who him ſelfe is appeached by vs of hainous, and foule
enormities, and hath not yet put in his Anſweare: who hath alſo aforehande
condemned vs without Iudgement by order pronounced,
and ere euer we were called, to be Iudged.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVe maie leſſe wonder at your ieſtinge in other thinges, ſithe now wee ſet you ſcoffe and ieſte in
thinges touchinge God him ſelfe. Syr, ſet you ſo lighte by the Holy Ghoſte.VVe Honour, and Adoure the Holy Ghoſte, as very God: But you ſhamefully abuſe the name of God. as thus vnreuerently to
talke of his flight and runninge to Rome, of his doubtinge, and ſtickinge, of his vnableneſſe to declare
doubtfull caſes, of aſkinge counſell of an other ſpirite? VVho euer vttered ſuche vile talke of the
Holy Ghoſt, but ſome vile caitife, quite voide of his grace? Can not you conceiue that reaſonably the
determinations of Councels be referred to the Pope Chriſtes Vicare in Earthe, onleſſe ye vtter ſuche
vnreuerent and prophane ſcoffes? It had become a wicked Celſus, a Porphyrius, a Iulian, thus to talke,
rather then any Chriſtian Hickeſcorner. You ſhould at leſte haue looked on your ſquare Cappe, and
your white rochet, if you haue any: if nothinge els, they woulde haue tolde you, that ſuche prophane
lightneſſe became not your perſon.
                  Concerninge the pointe it ſelfe, you touche,Vntruthes hudled togeather vvithout ſhame. although the Pope haue that Priuiledge, whiche
Chriſte‡‡ praied to his Father for to be geuen vnto Peter,Luke. 22. as beinge Peters Succeſſour, that his ‡ Faith
faile not, and that be confirme his Brethren, and therefore be an ‡ aſſured iudge in matters of Faithe:
yet this notwithſtandinge, councels be not aſſembled togeather in vaine. For the Fathers of the
Councell dooA ſage kinde of mockerie. For then doothe not the Pope Confirme his Brethren: but rather is Confirmed by his Brethren. helpe the Faithe and Doctrine of the higheſt Paſtour. VVherefore in the firſte councell
at Ieruſalem,Act. 15. when as a greate queſtion roſe, and Peter had ſaide his iudgement, not propped
with any teſtimonie of the Holy Scriptures, Iames approued it, addinge thereto the teſtimonies of the
Prophetes. For Gods prouidence ſo tendereth the Churche, that the chiefeBy this Diuinitie Iames vvas a member of Peter. members, though they
depende of the ‡ Head, yet defende and healpe the Head.
                  VVherefore Seda admoniſheth diſcretely,Lib. Retra. in act. Apoſtolorum. that Paule conferred the Goſpel, which he had Preached
amongeſt the Gentiles, with the other Apoſtles, ſeekinge warely to be reſolued, whether he Preached
rightly of the ceaſsinge of the obſeruances of the Lawe. Not that he doubted ought thereof himſelfe,
(ſaithe he) but that the mindes of them, that were in doubte, might be confirmed by the Auctoritie of
that Apoſtolike Councell.
                  To that you alleage ſecondly, as a greate inconuenience, wee tell you, that foraſmuch as the Pope
is at euery generall Councell laufully aſſembled, either in perſon, as ſundry Popes haue benne, or by his
Legates:VViſely. The Holy Ghoſte that is preſente at the Councel, for better aduiſe, taketh coū
                        ſel of the Pope. neither it is an vnlaufull dealinge, nor ſuche toſsinge, as you terme it, matters maturely debated
in the Councell, to be referred to the Pope head of the Councell, not ſo muche for a newe triall,
as for finall confirmation. The Fathers of the Nicene councell beſought S. Sylueſtes
                        •
                     , that what they
had ordeined, he would confirme and ratifie. And Leo what thinges the Councell of Chalcedon had
decreed, touchinge matters of faithe, ſaithe, that he approueth them. And the Councel it ſelfe ſpeakinge
to Leo, ſaithe thus: Decretis tuis noſtrum honora Iudicium: VVith thy Decrees honour
our Iudgement. Likewiſe the Fathers of other councels, required their conſtitutions to be ſtrengthened
by confirmation of the Popes auctoritie.
                  And ſir, finde you faulte with the Pope, becauſe he hath not yet put in his anſweare? I praie
you,The vvhole vvorlde accuſeth him. who accuſed him? VVhere, when, and whereof? In what laufull Courte? Before what laufull
Iudge? O you ſaie, he hath not yet put in his anſweare. Be it that Hicke, Hob, and Hans of your ſectes
haue impudently accuſed him. How would ye haue him bringe in his anſwere? To what ſeate of iudgmente,
to what Conſiſtorie can ye cite him, that is by Chriſte appointedA foule Vntruthe. For Chriſte neuer gaue the Pope any ſutche Commiſsion. to be the Supreme iudge of
all his Churche▪ the Sheepeherde of all his Flo
                        •
                     ke? It is not for him you know, to bringe in his anſwere
in VVeſhminſter Haull, nor in Sterre Chamber. VVill ye haue him appeare before your high Commiſsioners
in the longe Chappell at Powles, or in M. Crindalles chamber thereby, where ye haue ſaide and
donne your pleaſure, and depriued many honeſt menne of their benefices? Or will ye rather haue him

come to Geneua,The Sprite of Councelles. to Zurich, to Frankforde, to Straſburg, to VVittenberg, or to ſome other corner, where
ye haue your congregations, there to be iudged by Iacke and Gille? I pitie you, poore ſoules, that yee
talke thus ſo farre out of ſquare, and woulde the Pope to bringe in his anſweare, ye knowe not
where, hauinge neither iuſte Courte, or Conſiſtorie to call him vnto, nor laufull iudge, nor lawe to
paſſe vpon him. For through your Schiſmes and Hereſies, as ye haue made your ſelues Churcheleſſe,
Chriſtleſſe, and Godleſſe ſo alſo Courtleſſe, Iudgeleſſe, and Lawleſſe. I can not compare you better
then to the Rebelles of Northfolke vnder Captaine Kete, amongeſt whom Mount Surrey was their
London, and an Oke or an Elme commonly called the tree of Reformation, was their VVeſtminſter
Halle. Suche Prince, ſuch Dominion: ſuch Iudge, ſuch Conſiſtorie.
                  Ye complaine, the Pope hath condemned you without iudgement by order pronounced, and before
yee were euer called to be iudged. This is as true, as that the Murderer or Theefe anſweareth the
Iudge at the barre, ſaieinge, not gilty my Lorde. Ye haue benne ſundry times called to laufull Conſiſtories,
to Synodes, to Councels. Alwaies either ye made not your appearance, or by right of ſafeconduct
conueyed your ſelues away, without any ſhewe of Obedience: or vpon promiſe of amendement,
you were dimiſſed. How many Legates and Nuncios haue ſundry Popes ſente into Germanie and
other Prouinces, to conuent you, to heare you, to moue you to a better minde, and call you home, and
with all mercifull meanes to gather you againe into the lappe of the Churche? He may ſaye, to your
condemnation,Eſai. 5. that was ſaide of the Iewes: what is that Iought to haue donne toOpen Blaſphemie: The Churche is the Popes Vineyarde. my Vineyarde,
whiche I haue not donne? But all was in vaine, ſuch hathe benne your ſtubbourneſſe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wée ieſte not at Goddes Holy sprite, M. Hardinge. Wée know, it is the ſame
Sprite of VViſedome, that hath renewed the face of the worlde, & diſcouered the
multitude of your folies. But wel maie wée ieſte at your vnhandſome, and open
legierdumaine, that ſo vainely ſeeke to blinde vs with a painted ſhadowe of the
Sprite of God. Yée pretende longe Praiers, mutche Faſtinge, great conference of
Doctours, and Scriptures, and the vndoubted preſence, and aſſiſtance of Goddes
Holy Sprite in al your dooinges: & yet openly ſtriue againſt y• manifeſt VVoorde,
and Sprite of God, and folowe onely your owne Sprite, whiche wee maie truely
calle the Sprite of Vanitie. The Sprite, that you meane, is nothinge els, but the
Sprite of Rome: whiche, you ſaie, is the Sprite of Truthe, & cannot erre. In one
of your late Councelles,
                     Nicolaus de Clauengijs. holden in Rome, as yée were ſinginge, Veni Creator
Spiritus, God ſente downe an Owle from the toppe of the Churche, to ſitte emongeſt
you: that the worlde might knowe, in what sprite yée were aſſembled.
                  
                     Elias,
                     3. Regum. 18. 
                     the Prophete of God, ieſted thus at y• 
                        Prieſtes of Baal:
                      Crie out alowde: It is
your God. Either he is occupied in ſomme talke: or he is in his Inne: or he is trauailinge vpon y•
waie: or els perhaps he is a ſleepe. Yet neither was Elias an Hicke Scorner: nor ieſted he
at Goddes Holy sprite: nor did he any thinge, y• was vnſéemely for his perſonne.
                  
                  
                     As for your Councelles, whether they be al, and euermore ſummoned by the
Sprite of God, or no, it maie wel be doubted. The Vniuerſitie of Pariſe thus proteſted,
by waie of Appeale,
                     Appellatio Vniuerſ. Pariſien. Anno. 1517. 
                     againſte Pope Leo. 10. & his Councel: Dominus Leo
Papa Decimus, in quodam Coetu in Ciuitate Romana, neſcimus qualiter, non
tamen in Spiritu Domini, Congregato: Our Lorde Pope Leo 10. in a certaine
Councel, geathered in y•
                      Cittie of Rome, by what meane, wee know not: but ſurely not
by the Sprite of God. And touchinge your Late Chapter, or Conuenticle, whiche
ye cal the Councel of Trente,Oratio Synodica, Anno. 1562. 
                     the Frenche Kinges Embaſſadoure, beinge there in
preſence, ſaide thus: Minùs legitima, minusúe libera fuiſse dicuntur illa Concilia.
Qui aderant, ad voluntatem alterius ſemper loquebantur: The ſaieinge is,
that theſe were neither Lavvful, nor Free Councelles. The Biſhoppes, that were
there, ſpake (not alwaies of the
                      Spirite of God, but) euermore to pleaſe ſomme other:
By whiche, Other, he meante the Pope.
                  
                     
                     Chriſte ſaith vnto Peter,
                     Confirmation of Coūcelles 
                     I haue praied for thee: and Paule wente vp to Hieruſalem,
to viſite Peter: Ergo,
                      ye ſaie, The Pope hath Authoritie to confirme Councelles.
                     
O M. Hardinge, your Logique of Louaine is marueilous haſty. Yée force your
Concluſions,
                     Luc. 22. Galat. 2. to renne in poſte. For what maketh, either Chriſtes praier for
Peter, or Paules iourney from Arabia to Hieruſalem, for the Confirmation of
Councelles? Verily, here is no manner mention, neither of Confirmation, nor
of Councel, nor of Pope.
                  
                  
                     Whereas Chriſte praied namely for Peter, S. Auguſtine ſaithe, as he hathe
benne alleged before,
                     Auguſt. De quae. Noui Teſtamen. quaeſt. 75. Nunquid pro Petro rogabat: pro Iacobo, & Iohanne non
rogabat? Did Chriſte praie onely for Peter: and did he not praie for Iames, and Iohn?
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Augu. De Verb. Domi. In Euang. Secundum Lucā, Sermo. 36. Hac nocte poſtulauit Satanas vexare vos, ſicut triticum: Sed ego
rogaui Patrem pro vobis, ne deficiat Fides veſtra: This might hath Sathan deſired
to threaſhe you, as if yee were wheate. But I haue praied to my Father (not onely for Peter,
but) for you, that your Faithe maie not faile.
                  
                  Touchinge that Paule wente vp to Hieruſalem, of Courteſie, to ſée Peter, he
ſought not thereby y• allowance of his Doctrine, as a man,Galat. 2. that otherwiſe ſtoode in
doubt, whether he had ſo long, for the ſpace of fourtiene yéeres preached Truth, or
Falſehedde: but rather found fault wt 
                     Peters diſſimulatiō in Doctrine, & reproued
him openly euen vnto the face. S. Hierome ſaith, Perrexit Hieruſalem, non tam vt
diſceret aliquid ab Apoſtolis,
                     Hieronym. in Epiſt. ad Gal. ca. 1. 
                     quàm cum eis Euangelium, quod docuerat, collaturus:
Paule went vp to Hieruſalem, not ſo mutche to learne any thinge of the Apoſtles, as to conferre
with them touchinge the Goſpel, that he had preached.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe further, Paulus nihil opus habebat Petro: nec illius
egebat voce:Chryſoſt ad Galat. Cap 1. ſed honore par erat illi: Nihil enim hîc dicam amplius: Paule had no
neede of Peter: nor had any cauſe to craue his voice: but in honoure, and woorthineſſe, was
his equal: As for more, I wil not ſaie.
                  
                  
                     Concerninge the Confirmation of Councelles, wée haue ſaide otherwhere
more at large. Councelles were Confirmed,In the Former Replie, Artic. 4. Diuiſion. 26. 
                     not onely by the Biſhop of Rome,
but alſo by other Biſhoppes, and Patriarkes: and not onely by other Biſhoppes,
but alſo by Kinges, and Emperours. The Emperoure Martianus ſaith, Sacro
noſtrae Serenitatis edicto venerandam Synodum Confirmamus: By the Holy Edicte
of our Maieſtie wee Confirme this Reuerende Councel.Concil. Chalced. Actio. 3. 
                     Likewiſe the Biſhoppes
in the Councel of Conſtantinople, beſought ye
                      Emperour Theodoſius,
Rogamus Clementiam tuam,Concil. Conſtantinopolitan. 5. vt per Literas tuae Pietatis ratum eſſe iubeas, Confirmeſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
Concilij Decretum: Wee beſeeche your fauoure, that by your Maieſties Letters,
yee wil ratifie, and Confirme the Decree of the Councel.
                  
                     Touchinge the Councel of the Apoſtles at Hieruſalem, your owne Doctoure
ſaithe,
                     Heruaeus de poteſtat. Pp. Ca. 14. Poſtquàm Petrus dixiſſet, Iacobus, Authoritate Pontificali▪ protulit Definitiuam
Sententiam: When Peter had ſaide his minde, Iames, by his Epiſcopal Authoritie,
pronounced the Definitiue Sentence: that is to ſaie, gaue his Confirmation to
the whole.
                     
                  
                  To conclude, Councelles haue benne allowed, and holden for good, whether
the Biſhop of Rome would, or no. Liberatus ſaith, When Anatolius, by conſent
of the Councel of Chalcedon,
                     Liberat. Cap. 13. had obteined the Primacie, & the Biſhop of Romes
Legates ſtoode againſt it, theire gaineſaieinge of the Iudges, and Biſhoppes there
was not receiued. And notwithſtandinge the Apoſtolique See of Rome euen hitherto ſtand
againſte it, yet the Decree of the Councel, by the Authoritie, and mainteinance of
the Emperoure,
                     
                     Quodammodò. 
                     after a ſorte, ſtandeth ſtil in force.
                  
                  
                     Mutche pleaſant ſporte yée make vs, vvith puttinge in the Popes anſvveare.
                     
Be it, ſaie you, that Hicke, Hob, and Hans haue accuſed the Pope. VVoulde ye haue him appeare in
this Courte, or in that, to be iudged by Iacke, and Gil? The whole worlde, M. Hardinge, hath
                     
of longe time charged the Pope with Ambition,
                     To iudge the Pope. 
                     Briberie, Simonie, Superſtition,
Idolatrie, and open Corruption of the ordinances, and wil of God. If he diſdeigne
the iudgemente of ſo many, and calle the whole worlde Hicke, and Hob, let him
not marueile, if the whole worlde diſdeigne him. If he maie be both Iudge, and
Partie, and maie make anſweare onely before him ſelfe, I doubte not, but he ſhal
haue a good fauourable hearinge.
                  
                     I beſéech the,
                     Parte. 5. Cap. 6. Diui. 7. 
                     good Chriſtian Reader, for ſhorteneſſe ſake, conſider that I haue
written before, touchinge the Accuſinge, and Iudgeing of the Pope. There ſhalte
thou ſée,
                     Ennodius. 9. Q. 3. Nemo. 
                     as Ennodius ſaithe, That the Pope togeather with the Power of Teaching,
hath receiued free libertie to doo il, without controlmente. Therefore he ſaithe, Ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ab
Auguſto, ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ab omni Clero, ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            à Regibus, ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            a Populo Iudex iudicabitur:
                     
The Pope, that is the Iudge, ſhalbe iudged, neither by the Emperoure, nor by the
vvhole Cleregie, nor by Kinges, nor by the People. Sutche a Prerogatiue, ſaithe
Athanaſius,
                     Athanaſi. cōtra Arianos Oration. 1. 
                     was ſommetime claimed by the Ariane Heretiques: Cùm ipſi ſint rei,
ac Iudicio obnoxij,
                     
                     Chryſo. in Matthae. Homil. 85. 
                     veluti Caiaphas, iudicandi munus inuadunt: Whereas they thē ſelues
be guilty, and in danger of Iudgement, they plaie the parte of Caiphas, and take vpon them
to be iudges them ſelues. In like manner Chryſoſtome ſathe, Figura ibi duntaxat
Iudicij erat: re autem ipſa erat Latronum impetus:
                      There was onely a face of Iudgemente:
but in deede it was a biunte or violence of Theeues.
                  Yee ſaie further,Eſai. 5. 
                     The Pope maie ſaie, to our condemnation, that God ſaithe vnto the Iewes:
what is it, that I ought to haue donne to my vinsyarde, but I haue donne it? And thus yée geue
the Pope power, to callenge the Churche of God, to be his owne. Euen ſo Nero
that wicked Tyran, when he had waſted, and conſumed the Cittie of Rome, and
burnte it with here, he called the ſame neuertheleſſe by his owne name, Neronopolis,
Neroes tovvne.
                     Heruaeus de poteſtat. Papae. One of your Doctoures ſaithe, Huius Communitatis non
eſt Dominus, niſi Chriſtus, vel Papa: There is no Lord of this common ſlate, (that is
to ſaie, of the Churche) but either Chriſte, or the Pope: As if Chriſte, and the Pope
were iointepourchaſers.
                  
                     But in deede Chriſte onely is the Prince of Paſtours.1. Pet. 5. Auguſt. de verb. Domi. in Euang. Secūdum Iohan. Sermo. 50. Eſai. 5. 
                     And the Churche is his
onely Spouſe, and not the Popes S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto Chriſte, Tu Petro non
dixiſti, Palce Oues tuas: ſed, Paſce Oues meas: Thou ſaidſte not vnto Peter, Feede thy
Sheepe: but, Feede mine. Peter belongeth vnto the Churche: but the Churche belongeth
not vnto Peter.
                  The Churche is not the Popes Vine: It is the Vine of the Lorde of Sabaoth.
It ſhal be ſufficiente for the Pope, if he maie be onely a branche in this Vine: if he
be not withered: if he be not cutte of, and throwen into the fiere.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaith,
                     Augu. in Iohan. Tracta. 323. 
                     Qui hoc animo paſcunt Oues Chriſti, vt Suas velint eſſe, non
Chriſti, ſe conuincuntur amare, non Chriſtum: vel gloriandi, vel dominandi, vel acquirendi
cupiditate: They, that feede the Sheepe of Chriſte, to that ende, that they woulde haue
them to be theire Sheepe, and not Chriſtes, are founde to loue them ſelues, and not Chriſte, for
deſire, either of Glorie, or of Gouernemente, or of Gaine.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 4. Diuiſion. 2.
               Howe ſaie ye, doo wee diuiſe theſe tales? Is not this the very
courſe of the Councelles in theſe daies? Are not al thinges remoued
from the whole holy Councel, and brought before the Pope alone:
that as thoughe nothinge had benne donne to pourpoſe by the indgementes,
and conſentes of ſutch a number, he alone maie adde, alter,
diminiſhe, diſanulle, allowe, remitte, & qualifie, what ſo euer he liſte?
Whoſe woordes be theſe then? And why haue the Biſhoppes, & Abbates
                  
in the laſte Councel at Tridente but of late concluded thus
in thende, Sauinge alvvaies the Authoritie of the See Apoſtolique
in al thinges? Or why dooth Pope Paſchale write ſo proudely of him
ſelfe?De Election. & Electi pote. Significaſti. 
                  As though, ſaithe he, there vvere any General Councel hable
to preſcribe a Lavve to the Churche of Rome: vvhereas al
Councelles both haue benne made, and haue receiued their force,
and ſtrength by the Authoritie of the Churche of Rome: and in
ordinaunces made by Councels, is euer plainely excepted the Authoritie
of the Romaine Biſhop. If they wil haue theſe thinges allowed
for good, why be Councelles called? But if they commaunde
them to be voide, why are they leafte in theire Bookes, as thinges
allowable?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Sir, what neeede you beſtowe ſo mutche talke in vaine? Is 
                        〈◊〉
                      not reaſon theVVho made al the Faithful of Chriſt, the Popes Members? members acknoweledge
the heade? VVoulde you the members to worke their actions without the heade? Is Pope Paſchalis
to be called proude for preferringe the Churche of Rome before a Councel? Haue not Councels euer
ben thought to lacke theire ful Auctoritie,Vntruthe plaine, and manifeſte. For the Pope had no Authoritie to calle Coūcelles: As it ſhal appeare. whiche were not called and confirmed by the Biſhop of
Rome?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The Modeſtie, and Sobrietie of Pope Paſchalis claime ſhal better appeare
in the nexte Diuiſion. Verily the Churche of Rome, theſe many yéeres, maie ſéeme
to haue benne nothinge els, but a Moother of Falſehed, & a Schoole of Pride. Pope
Nicolas ſaithe,Nicola. Pp. 1. Ad Imp. Michael
                           •
                        . Concil. Lateran. Sub Leone 10. Seſsione. 10. 
                     De Sedis Apoſtolicae iudicio nemini licet iudicare: It is lawful for noman
to iudge of the Popes Iudgemente. And of late yéeres, Pope Leo ſaide, Papa
habet Authoritatem ſuper omnia Concilia: The Pope hathe Authoritie ouer al
Councelles. That al lawful Councelles haue euermore benne ſummoned, and
confirmed by the Pope, it is a mauifeſt, and groſſe vntruthe: as hereafter it ſhalbe
opened more at large.
                  Where ye ſaie, It is reaſon, the Members ſhoulde acknowledge theire Heade, For ſhame,
M. Hardinge, and for your credites ſake, once leaue theſe vanities. If the Pope be
any parte of Goddes Churche, he is a Member, and not the Heade: and the Faithful
of the Churche of God, are Chriſtes Members, and not the Popes.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 1.
               But be it ſo: Let the Biſhop of Rome alone be aboue al Councelles,
that is to ſaie, let ſomme one parte be greater then the whole:
let him be of greatter Power, let him be of more Wiſedome, then al
his: and,Hieron. ad Euagrium. in ſpite of Hieromes heade, let the Authoritie of one Cittie
be greatter, then the Authoritie of the vvhole vvorlde.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  It is a common manner of this Defender, what he muſt needes graunt, to make a ſhewe in wordes,
as though it were free gifte. So many times beggers wil ſeme gentilmen, and paiers of debte wil
ſeme geuers. Let the Biſhop of Rome, (ſaithe he) alone be aboue al coūcels.Vntruthe. Othervviſe ſhevve vs, by vvhat Authoritie he is ſo. Sir, he is ſo: no thake to you.
Yet ſpeake you like a liberal gentilman: That is to ſaie, let ſome one parte be greater then the whole.

No ſir,The Pope aboue General coū
                        celles. maugre your ſcoffinge heade, parte ſhal not be greater then the whole, but parte ſhal be greater
then parte.Ful vviſely. As if the Pope vvere the Heade, & the vvhole Churche vvere his Body: Or, As if the Pope vvere the Maiſter, & the Churche his Familie. In a right ſenſe is not the heade greater then the body, the Biſhop then his cleregy, the
* maiſter of a houſe more then his familie? Neither is the Councel the whole pardy, excepte your mery
witte can deuiſe vs a whole body without a heade. Let him be of greater power, ſaie you. And ſo
he is. Let him be of more wiſedome, then al his. VVe ſaie not ſo. It maie be, that his Councel hath more
learninge,The Councel hathe more VViſedome, and Learninge, then the Pope: yet the Pope is in VViſedome, and Learning aboue the Councel. more knowledge and more wiſedome, then his onely perſon. Albeit, when we ſpeake of
that wiſdome of the See Apoſtolike, whiche is ſure, infallible, and cannot erre: we meane not onely the
Popes ſingular perſon, but the heade Paſtoure and Biſhop, as he doth thoſe thinges, whiche perteine to
that chaire: that is to ſaie, in aſmutche as he procedeth not vpon his owne priuate iudgemente,O fonde folie. For ſo any ſimple creature, ſo longe as he is leadde by the Holy Ghoſt, can neuer erre. but
by the inſtincte of the Holy Ghoſte, promiſed by Chriſte to his vicare. VVhere you ſaie, And in ſpite of
Hieromes heade, let the Authoritie of one Citie be greater them the Authoritie of the whole world:
we tel you, that this you ſpeake more ſpitefully, then learnedly. For S. Hierome in his epiſtle to Euagrius
ſpeakethVntruthe, vaine, and childiſh. For S. Hierome ſpeaketh plainely of Authoritie: Si Authoritas quaeritur, Maior eſt Orbis Vrbe. onely of a particular matter, blaminge the cuſtome of Rome, where contrary to the cuſtome
of the whole world, deacons in certaine caſes were preferred before Prieſtes, whereof we haue ſpoken
before.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Sir defender, ye ſaie, ſpeaketh like a Liberal Gentleman. Againe yée ſaie, No ſir, Maugre your
ſcoffinge heade. Theſe, and other like woordes, M. Hardinge, are ſittinge, and ſeemely
for your perſonne, and maie wel becomme your mery witte.
                  Where wee ſaie, Let the Biſhop of Rome be of greater povver, then any
General Councel, yée anſweare vs readily, And ſo he is: Where wée ſaie, Let
him be of more VViſedome, then al other Biſhoppes, Yée anſweare againe,
Wee ſaie not ſo: As if yée woulde allowe the Pope Authoritie, and Power without
Wiſedome. Yet wiſe menne haue ſaide, that Povver vvithout VViſedome
is the kingedome of Folie.
                  
                  
                     Somme of your frendes haue ſaide, Si Totus Mundus ſententiaret in aliquo negotio
contra Papam, videtur, quo'd ſtandum eſſet Sententiae Papae:
                      If the whole worlde
ſhoulde geeue ſentence in any mater againſte the Pope, it ſeemeth, wee ought rather to ſtande
to the Popes iudgemente, then to the Iudgemente of al the worlde. Albertus Pigghi us
ſaithe, Certius eſt iudicium Papae, quàm iudicium Generalis concilij, aut Totius
Orbis terrarum: The Iudgemente of the Pope is more certaine, then is the Iudgement
of a General Councel, or els of al the whole worlde. An other ſaithe, Papa virtualiter
eſt Tota Eccleſia:
                      The Pope by Power is the whole Vniuerſal Churche. An other
ſaith,
                     9. quaeſt. 3. Nemo. In Gloſſ. 
                     Poteſtas ſolius Papae excedit Poteſtatem reſiduae Eccleſiae: The Popes onely
Power excedeth the Power of al the Churche biſide.Alb Piggh. Eccl. Hiera. li. 6. ca. 13. Heruae. De poteſta. Pp. Cap. 23. Petr. De Palude, de poteſtat. Pp. Artic. 4. 
                     An other ſaithe, Papa non poteſt
ſubijcere ſe Concilio Generali:
                      The Pope cannot ſubmitte him ſelfe to a General
Councel. Vpon theſe woorthy Fundatiōs yée haue built vp the Popes Infinite, and
Vniuerſal Povver: And therefore yée ſaie, Sir Defender woulde ſeeme, to graunte you of
free gifte, that he muſte needes graunt perforce, whether he wil or no.
                  
                     Al this not withſtandinge, M. Hardinge, others of your more indifferente Doctoures,
would haue tolde you an other tale. S. Bernarde ſaithe, Quae maior ſuperbia
eſſe poteſt,Extra. De Iudicijs. Cùm veniſſent. Iohā. Andr. Berna. Citatur à Pico Mirand. In quae. An Papa ſit ſupra Concil. Picus Mirandul. eodem loco. quàm vt Vnus homo toti Congregationi iudicium ſuum praeferat, tanquàm
Solus habeat Spiritum Sanctum? What greatter pride can there be, then that One
man ſhould eſteeme his owne iudgemente more, then the iudgemente of al the Churche, as if he
onely had the Sprite of God? Whereunto
                      picus Mirandula addeth theſe woordes,
Imò Simplici potiùs Ruſtico, & Infanti, & Aniculae magis, quàm Pontifici Maximo,
& mille Epiſcopis credendū eſt, ſi iſti contra Euangelium, illi pro Euangelio
faciant: Naie, wee ought to beleue a Simple plaine Huſbandeman, or a Childe, or an
Olde Wooman, rather then the Pope, and a thouſand Biſhoppes, if the Pope, and ye
                      Biſhoppes
ſpeake againſte the Goſpel, and the others ſpeake with the Goſpel.
                  
                     
                     The Biſhoppes in the Councel of Ferraria ſaie thus, Quacunque facultate Romana
Eccleſia praedita ſit, Vniuerſali tamen Eccleſiae, quam Generalis Synodus
prae ſe fert, inferior eſt: With what ſo euer power the Churche of Rome be endewed,
yet is it inferioure to the Vniuerſal Churche,Conc. Ferrarion. Seſsion 10. 
                     that is repreſented by the General Councel.
                  
                     The Biſhoppes in the Councel of Baſile ſaie thus,
                     Concil. Baſilien. Inter Epiſtolas Synodales. Etſi Papa ſit Caput Miniſteriale
Eccleſiae, non tamē eſt maior tota Eccleſia. Alioqui errante Pōtifice, quod
ſaepè contingit, & contingere poteſt, tota erraret Eccleſia: Although the Pope be the
Miniſterial heade of the Churche, yet is he not greater, then al the Churche. Otherwiſe,
when ſo euer the Pope erreth, whiche thing happeneth oftentimes, and maie wel happen, the
whole Churche ſhoulde likewiſe erre.
                  
                  
                     Againe they ſaie,
                     In appendice Conc. Baſilien. Sacroſanctae Generali. Nonnulli os ſuum ponenies in Coelum, Poteſtatem Romani
Pontificis ſupra Poteſtatem Sacrorum Generalium Conciliorum, contra Iuris
Diuini, & Humani Veritatem, à Sanctis Patribus aliâs declaratam, exaltare nituntur:
Many menne ſettinge theire face againſte the Heauen, goe aboute to exalte the
power of the Biſhop of Rome aboue the Power of Holy General Councelles, contrarie
to the Truthe of the Law, both of God, and man, declared vnto vs by the Holy Fathers.
                  
                  
                     Againe they ſaie,
                     In eadem appē
                        dice, Et Primò. 
                     Eccleſia Romana non eſt Vniuerſa, ſed eſt de Vniuerſirate
Corporis Myſtici, id eſt, Eccleſiae: Et ſic eſt Membrum dicti Corporis Myſtici, vt pater per
Beatum Gregorium. Igitur ex quo eſt Membrū dicti Corporis, non eſt, nec eſſe
poteſt Caput illius: Cùm differentia ſit inter Caput, & Membra: The Churche of
Rome is not Vniuerſal, but a parte of the Vniuerſal Myſtical Body of Chriſte, whiche is
the Churche: and ſo is it a Member of Chriſtes ſaide Body Myſtical, as it appeareth by S.
Gregorie. Therefore, for as mutche as it is a Member of the ſaide Body, it is not, neither
can it be the Heade of the ſame Body. For there is a difference bitweene the Heade, and the
Body.
                  
                     Likewiſe againe they ſaie,
                     In eadem appē
                        dice, Eod. capite. Allegant, Papam impunè poſſe tollere Conſtitutionem
Concilij Generalis, contra prohibitionem ipſius Concilij Generalis: ſupponentes,
Papā else Paſtorem Vniuerſalis Eccleſiae. Sed ipſorum ſuppoſitum eſt falſum: & cō
                     ſequenter
ipſorum aſſertio ſuper eo fundata eſt falſa: Thei ſaie, The Pope maie ſafely aboliſhe
the Decree of a General Councel, notwithſtandinge the ſame General Councel
haue decreed the contrarie:
                     The Pope is not paſtoure of the Vntuerſal Churche. 
                     ſuppoſinge, that the Pope is the Biſhop of the Vniuerſal Churche.
But theire ſuppoſal is falſe: and ſo conſequentely falſe is theire Doctrine, that they haue builte
thereupon.
                  
                  Therefore, M. Hardinge, this parte of your Booke, emonge the reſte, woulde
more aduiſedly haue benne conſidered. D. Cole him ſelfe, notwithſtanding otherwiſe
wel enclined vnto your faction, yet in this pointe is wel content to géeue you
ouer.D. Cole. Thus he ſaithe of him ſelfe: I holde herein rather with Gerſon, that the
Councel is aboue the Pope.
                  
                  
                     The Pope,
                      yée ſaie, in one reſpecte, as he is a Man, in his owne ſingulare perſone, maie happen
to erre: But in an other reſpecte, as he is Heade Paſtoure, and Chiefe Biſhop, and is placed in
Peters Chaire, he cannot erre. And thus, as the Heathens, in olde times, imagined
theire Centaurus to be halfe a Man, and halfe a Horſe: or theire Ianus to haue twoo
faces, the one behinde, and the other before: euen ſo haue you imagined twoo Popes
in one body: the one goeinge backewarde, the other forewarde: the one bearinge
Light, the other Darkeneſſe: the one deceiued, the other not deceiued: the One
ſpeakinge Truthe, the other Falſehedde: and yet both theſe Popes incorporate togeather
in one Perſone. Geue vs leaue therefore, M. Hardinge, to ſaie nowe,
as the whole Vniuerſitie of Pariſe ſaid,Appellatio Vniuer. Pariſien. à Leon. 10. An. 1517. not longe ſithence, vnto Pope Leo, A
Domino noſtro Papa, iam non bene conſulto, appellamus: Wee appeale from our
Lorde the Pope, beinge, as nowe, not wel aduiſed.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Certainely,
                     Hierony. ad Heliodorum, De laude vitae Solitariae. 
                     S. Hierome ſaith, Non eſt facile, ſtare in loco Pauli, tenere gradum
Petri, iam cum Chriſto regnantium: ne fortè veniat Angelus, qui ſcindat Velum Templi
tui, qui Candelabrum tuum de loco moueat: It is no eaſy mater, to ſtande in Peter, or
Paules place nowe reigninge with Chriſte: leſte the Angel comme, and rente a ſunder: he
vele of thy Temple, and remoue they Candeſticke from his place.
                  
                  The place of S. Hierome to Euagrius,
                     Parte. 2. Ca. 3. Diuiſi. 5. is anſweared before.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 5. Diuiſion. 2.
               How then, if the Pope haue ſene none of theſe thinges, and haue
neuer read, either the Scriptures, or the Olde Fathers, or yet his
owne Councelles? Howe if he fauoure the Arians, as once Pope Liberius
did? Or haue a wicked, and a deteſtable opinion of the life to
comme, and of the immortalitie of the Soule, as Pope Iohn had but
fewe yeeres ſithence? Or, to encreaſe his owne Dignitie, doo nowe
corrupte other councelles, as Pope Zoſimus corrupted the councel
holden at Nice in times paſte: and doo ſaie, that thoſe thinges
were diuiſed and appointed by the Holy Fathers, whiche neuer once
came into their thought: and, to haue the ful ſwaie of Authoritie, doo
wreaſte the Scriptures, which thing, as camotenſis ſaith, is an vſual
cuſtome with the Popes? Howe if he haue renounced the Faithe of
chriſte, & becōme an Apoſtata, as Lyranus ſaithe many Popes haue
benne? And yet, for al this, ſhal the Holy Ghoſte with turninge of a
hande, knocke at his breaſte, and euen whether he wil, or no, yea, and
wholy againſte his wil, kindle him a light, ſo as he maie not erre?
Shal he ſtreight waie be the Headeſpring of al Right, and ſhal al the
treaſures of Wiſdome, & Vnderſtanding be found in him, as it were
laide vp in ſtoare? Or, if theſe thinges be not in him, can he geeue a
right, and apte iudgemente of ſo weighty maters? Or, if he be not hable
to iudge, woulde he haue, that thoſe maters ſhoulde be brought
before him alone?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  To your howe ifs, and what ifs I coulde ſone make an anſweare by the contraryVVhat then? Should he therfore be aboue General Councelles? And Sir, how if
the Pope haue ſene al theſe thinges, the Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels? VVhat haue you then to ſaie?
Is not your tale then at an ende? VVere your matter good, and your ſelfe wiſe, you woulde nor ſo commonly
vſe that weake kirde of reaſoning. But to a number of your how ifs, and what ifs, for the readers
ſake, to put awaie al ſeruple, I geue you this anſweare.
                  Gods wiſedome (as the Scripture ſaithe) diſpoſeth al thinges ſweetly,Sadly, and ſagely, and mutche to the purpoſe. and in one inſtant forſeeth the
ende,Sapien. 8. and meanes that be neceſſary to the end. If he promiſe any man life euerlaſting, withal he geueth
him grace alſo to do good dedes,Rom. 8. whereby to obteine the ſame. VVhom he hath glorified (ſaith S. Paule)
thē he hath iuſtified and called. So whereas he hath by force of his praier made to the Father, promiſed
to Peter,Matt. 16. Luc. 22. and for the ſafetie of the Churche,Vntruthe, fonde, and childiſhe: For Chriſt praied nomore for Peter, thē for others: nor euer made mention of Peters Succeſſours. to euery Peters Succeſſour, that his faithe ſhal not faile,
and therfore hath willed him to confirme his brethren, that is, to remoue al doubtes and errours from
them: we are aſſured, he wil geue him ſutche witte, diligence, learninge, and vnderſtandinge, as this
firmnes, and infallibilitie of faithe, and confirminge of brethren requireth. Shal we ſtande in doubte
whether that happeneth in thinges ſupernatural, whiche we ſee to be in thinges natural, that who
geueth the ende, he geueth alſo thinges, that perteine to the atteininge of the ende? If God woulde

promiſe vs abundance of corne for the nexte yeere to come,O vvoorthy, & graue reaſons. what were more foliſh, then to doubte, and
ſaie like to this Defender, howe if, and what if men wil not til the grounde, nor ſo we any ſeede?
Doubtles if they ſo we, they ſhal reepe if they ſowe not, neither ſhal they reepe. But what? VVe maie
gather of the promiſe of God, that we ſhal haue not onely faier and ceaſonable wether, wherby the
fruites of the earth maie proue plentiful, but alſo that the huſbandmen ſhal emploie theire endeuour,
paines, and labour. For the abundance of corne ſo promiſed ſhal not be geuen but to ſutch, as til, ſo we,
and truail Euen ſo wheras Chriſte hath promiſed to theVntruthe. For Chriſte neuer entred into ſutche couenāte vvith Peters Succeſſours. Succeſſours of Peter, firmnes of Faithe, to
the Apoſtles and theire Succeſſours the ſpirite of Truthe, and likewiſe to Councels gathered in his
name: we muſte perſwade our ſelues, that nothinge ſhal wante neceſſary for the controuerſies, touchinge
faithe, to be decided.
                  That you ſaie of Liberius the Pope, is ſtarke f
                        •
                     lſeVntruthe, plainely reproued by S. Hierome. He neuer fauoured the Arians. The moſte ye
can finde againſte him, is, that he was compelled by the greate perſecution of Conſtantius the Emperoure,
to ſubſcribe to the Arians. Neither is that by the Aunciente writers of the Eccleſiaſtical ſtories
conſtantly affirmed but of the chiefe of them not ſpoken of, where moſte occaſion was, to ſignifie it, if
it had ſo ben: of ſome denied, of ſome mentioned not as true, but as a falſe rumoure bruted abroade of
him.Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 15. Lib. de viris illuſtrib. in Chronicis. By whiche rumour it ſemethS Hieromes Authoritie refuſed, as a man vvriting raſhely, he knevve not vvhat. S. Hierome was deceiued, remaininge in the Eaſte, farre from
the places where the Truth might more certainely be knowen. But were it true, that he ſubſcribed,
as Peter denied Chriſt. yet beinge doneThe Pope denieth Chriſt, for lacke of Charitie, but not for lacke of Faithe. for lacke of Charitie, and not by erroure in faith, wel might
that facte be ſlaunderous to the Churche, but it was not a decre made in fauour of the Arians, neither
to confirme that hereſie.
                  That you reporte of Pope Iohn the 22. is likewiſe moſte falſe. The worſte that Marſilius of Padua,
and VVilliam Ockam Heretikes wrote of him to flatter the Emperour Lidouicus of Bauaria, is,
that he had taught openlyVntruthe manifeſt See the Anſvveare. (whiche alſo is referred to the time before he was Pope)Vntruthe. For he helde alſo, that the Soules of the vvicked ſhoulde not be pouniſſhed before the Iudgemente. that the ſoules
of the iuſte ſee not God vntil the daie of iudgemente. That he had a wicked, and a deteſtable opinion of
the immortalitie of the ſoule, there was no ſutche his opinion, but it is your falſe ſlaunder, by whiche
your wicked and deteſtable malice imagined to deface the Churche, and ſpecially the Auctoritie of
the holy See Apoſtolike. No ſtorie of any eſtimation mentioneth, that he was of that firſte opinion, after
he came to be Pope, much leſſe that he gaue any definitiue ſentence of ſuch matter. But contrariwiſe,
Vntruthe, cō
                        trarie to that M Hardinge ſaid immediatly before. For then he helde this Erroure in the time of his Popedome. when as he prepared him ſelfe to goe to the definition of that queſtion, concerninge the ſeeinge of
God, whiche iuſte ſoules haue before the daie of iudgement, as Benedictus theleuenth in ſua extrauagante
ſaieth, he was preuented by death, ſo as he might not do it.
                  You belte Zoſimus:Vntruthe manifeſtely reproued by the Coū
                        cel of Aphrica. be corrupted not the Councel of Nice: But ſignified to the Biſhops of Aphrike aſſembled
in Councel at Carthage, the Truthe concerninge the Canons of the Nicene Councel. The ſame
maie be proued by Iulius the firſt, by the Epiſtle ofTheſe be very vaine, and childiſhe forgeries. Athinaſius, and other Biſhops of Egypt, Thebats,
and Libya, written to Marcus the Pope of the Original of the, 72. Canons of the Nicene Councel, that
remained in ſafe cuſtodie in the Churche of Rome, ſubſcribed with the handes of the Fathers, that at
the ſame Councel were preſent And what credite was to be geuen to the contrary informatiō of only
twenty Canons, that was retourned from the Biſhops of Conſtantinople and AlexandriaVntruthe, vvithout any ſauoure of vvitte, or learninge. VVhy ſhoulde M. Hardinge allege to fooliſhe Fables? when Hereikes
before had burned the Bookes, where the whole number was conteined, and lefte but thoſe
twenty, that al Bookes nowe commonly haue?
                  If we ſhoulde alleage Camotenſis, and Lyre, you woulde cal them the blacke garde, and ſet litle
by them. Firſt ſhe we vs where they haue that you alleage out of them. M Iuel alleageth that of Canotenſis
in an other place. But where it is, he kepeth it to him ſelfe, and of him ſelfe it is likely it proceded.
For his dealinge is ſutche, as any falſe practiſe in reſpecte of him, maie ſeme credible. Albeit
what worſhipful Doctour ye meane by CamotenſisIf yee knovve him not, then maie you beſte blame your Ignorance. I knowe not: Peraduenture ye meane Carnotenſis,
otherwiſe called Iuo I haue cauſe to geſſe, that ſo it ſhould be. And yet foure Bookes of ſundry Printes
bothe Engliſhe, and Latine ſo haue. If there be any ſutche, as I ſuppoſe there is not, he is very obſcure,
nor worth the naminge.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here yée ſaie, And Sir, Howe if the Pope haue ſeene al theſe thinges, the Scriptures, the Fathers.

the Councelles?
                     VVhether the Pope maie erre, or no. 
                     VVhat haue you then to ſaie? Is not your tale then at an ende? No verily, M. Hardinge.
I woulde further deſire God, to geue him grace, to vſe them wel, and to his
Glorie. Notwithſtandinge your owne Doctoures wil ſoone put al theſe your
vvhattes, and vvhatifs, out of queſtion. For, concerninge the Popes greate, and
high Learning,Alphonſ. contra Haereſ. li. 1. ca. 4. 
                     Alphonſus de Caſtro ſaith, as he hath benne alleged before, Conſtat,
plures Papas adeò illiteratos fuiſſe, vt Grammaticā penitùs ignorarent: It is
certainely knowen, that ſundrie Popes haue benne ſo vnſkilful in learninge, that thei neuer vnderſtoode
their Grammare. But, Chriſte hath praied for Peter, and made ſure promiſe,
that his Faithe ſhould neuer faile.
                      Therefore the Pope is wiſe: the Pope is learned: the
Pope is Catholique: the Pope cannot erre. Al this, and a greate deale more, the
Pope maie claime onely by Vertue of Chriſtes praier. Now therefore, if the Pope
ſhoulde erre, or be in Hereſie, he might ſue Chriſte in an Action of Couenante,
& require him to perfourme his Promiſe.Michae 3. So ſaithe the Prophete Michaeas, Sacerdotes
in mercede docebant, & Prophetae in pecunia diuinabant: & ſuper Dominum
requieſeebant, dicentes, Nonne eſt Dominus in medio noſtrum? The Prieſtes
taught the people for hiere: and the Prophetes Propheſied for moonie: and yet they reſted
them ſelues vpon Goddes Promiſe, ſaieinge, And is not the Lorde in the middes emongeſt
vs?
                     Pſalm. 118. Hierem. 17. But the Prophete ſaith, Euery man is a lier: Accurſed is he, that truſteth
in Man. Your owne Doctour Alphonſus ſaith, Omnis homo errare poteſt in Fide,
etiamſi Papa ſit: Euery man maie erre in Faithe: yea, although he be the Pope.
                  
                  
                     How be it,
                     Concil. Tomo. 1. Tertull. Contra Praxeam. 
                     that your Vnlearned Reader maie the better conſider, how ſafely he
maie géeue credite to your bare woorde, whether the Pope maie be deceiued in
Faithe, or no, it maie eaſily appeare by theſe fewe Examples. Who ſo liſteth to
ſéeke, maie finde moe. pope Marcellinus offred vp incenſe, & made Sacrifice vnto
Diuelles.
                     Beat. Rhenanus. Hieron. in praefatione de Viris illuſtribus. Tertullian ſaithe, Epiſcopum Romanum agnoſcentem iam Prophetias
Montani, Priſcae, Maximillae, &c. The Biſhop of Rome, wel likinge now the
Propheſies (or Hereſies) of Montanus, Priſca, and Maximilla, &c. Vpon whiche
woordes Beatus Rhenanus noteth thus, Epiſcopus Romanus Montanizat: The
Biſhop of Rome fauoureth the Hereſie of Montanus. Pope Liberius vvas an Arian
Heretique:Concil. Nicenum 2. Action. 7. 
                     as hereafter it ſhal better appeare. Pope Honorius was condēned for an
Heretique in two General Councelles.Concil. Conſtantinop. 6. Acti. 13. Alphōſ li. 1. ca 4 In Legenda Hilarij. 
                     In the Councel of Conſtantinople the
woordes of his condemnation be alleged thus:
                     Synod. Romana. in Faſciculo rerum ſciendarum impreſſo Coloniae. 1553. Anathematizari curauimus Honorium,
qui fuerat Papa Antiquae Romae: quia in omnibus mētem Sergij ſequutus
eſt, & impia dogmata confirmauit: Wee haue cauſed Honorius, yt late Pope of olde
Rome, to be accurſed: for y• in al thinges he folowed the minde of Sergius the Heretique,
and confirmed his wicked Doctrine. Alphonſus de Caſtro ſaithe, Anaſtaſium Papam
fauiſſe Neſtorianis, qui Hiſtorias legerit, non dubitat: Who ſo euer hath readde ye ſtories,
or courſe of time, cannot doubt, but Pope Anaſtaſius fauoured the Neſtorian Heretiques.
In the very Legende of Hilarius it is mentioned, that Pope Leo was an Arian
Heretique. In a Synode holden at Rome againſt Pope Hildebrande, it is written
thus, Incendio tradidimus Decreta eorū Heretica: Wee haue burnte their Heretical
Decrees.Iohannes Stella Venetus. Pope Sylueſter. 2. was made Pope by Necromancie, and in recompenſe
thereof,
                     Epiſto. Hulderici ad Nicolaum Papam. 
                     promiſed him ſelfe both Body, & Soule vnto the Diuel. Huldericus y•
                      Biſhop
of Auguſta in Germanie, expreſſeth the Reſtrainte of Prieſtes Marriage by
theſe woordes, Periculoſum huius Haereſis Decretū: The dangerous Decree of this Hereſie.
Notwithſtanding I haue ſéene the ſame Epiſtle vnto P. Nicolas,
                     
                     Eraſm. in Annotation. in Epiſt. ad Galat. Cap. 2. In faciem illi reſtiti. 
                     togeather with
an other Epiſtle to like purpoſe, written in olde Veleme of very Ancient Recorde,
vnder the name of Voluſianus the Biſhop of Carthage? But what néede wee to
touche al the particulares? The Doctoures of the Great Schole of Sorbona in Pariſe,
haue determined in theire Articles, that S. Peter him ſelf erred in the Faith.
The Councel of Baſile condemneth Pope Eugenius by theſe wordes: Eugenium
contemptorem Sacrorum Canonum:Concil. Baſilien. Seſsione. 34. Pacis, & Veritatis Eccleſiae Dei perturbatorem notorium:

Vniuerſalis Eccleſiae Scandalizatorem: Simoniacum: Periurum: Incorrigibilem: Schiſmaticum:
à Fide deuium: Pertinacem Haereticum, &c. Wee condemne, and depoſe
Pope Eugenius, a deſpiſer of the Holy Canons: a diſturber of the Peace, and Vnitie of the
Churche of God: a notorious offendoure of the whole Vniuerſal Church: a Simoniſte:
a Foreſworne man: a man Vncorrigible: a Schiſmatique: a man fallen from the Faithe: and
a vvilful Heretique. Of Pope Iohns Hereſie, touching the Immortalitie of
the Soule,
                     24. Q. 3. Haereſis. In Conc. Conſtā
                        tien. in Appendice, Ca. In primis. Quinimò idem Iohan. Pp. 22. dixit, et pertinaciter credidit, animam hominis cum Corpore humano mori, & extingui, ad inſtar animalium brutorum. 
                     wee ſhal ſpeke more hereafter. S. Hierome ſaithe, Qui Scripturam intelligit
aliter, quàm ſenſus Spiritus Sancti flagitat, quo ſcripta eſt, licet ab Eccleſia non receſſerit,
tamen Haereticus appellari poteſt: Who ſo euer otherwiſe vnderſtandeth the Scriptures,
then the ſenſe of the Holy Ghoſte requireth, by whom they were written, (as, it is
moſte certaine, the
                      Pope in infinite places bothe hath donne, and dothe) although he
be not departed from the
                      Churche, yet he maie wel be called an Heretique.
                  
                  Now, if Idolaters, Montaniſtes, Arians, Monothelites, Neſtorians, Deniers
of the Immortalitie, Simoniſtes, Sorcerers, Maineteiners of Filthineſſe, & other
Obſtinate, and Wilful Heretiques maie erre, then, what ſo euer M. Hardinge, &
his Felowes ſhal ſaie to the contrarie, it is eaſily ſeene, that the Pope maie erre.
                  
                  
                     Verily the Councel of Baſile ſaithe thus, Multi è Summis Pontificibus in
Haereſes, & Errores lapſi eſſe dicuntur, & leguntur: Certum eſt, Papam Errare
poſse: Concilium ſaepè condemnauit, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      depoſuit Papam, tam ratione Fidei,
quàm Morum: It is reported, and readde, that many Popes haue fallen into Errours, &
Hereſies: It is certaine, that the Pope maie erre: The Councel hath oftentimes
condēned, and remoued y•
                      Pope, in reſpecte, as wel of his Hereſie in Faith, as of his lewdeneſſe
in life.
                     Concil. Baſilien. inter Epiſt. Synodales. viſellius. 24. Q. 1. A rectas In Gloſſa. Viſellus ſaithe, Summorum Pontificum quidam peſtilenter errauerunt:
Certaine of the Biſhoppes of Rome haue benne in Peſtilente Hereſies. Your
owne Gloſe ſaith, Certum eſt, quòd Papa Errare poteſt: It is certaine, that y•
                      Pope
maie erre. An other of your Doctoures ſaithe,
                      Interdum poſsit aliquis eſſe, qui eſſt à
Sede remouendus: vt ſi eſſet Foemina, vel Hereticus: ſicut fuerunt aliqui: & ob hoc
non numerantur in Catalogo Paparum: The Pope maie ſommetimes be ſutche a one, as
maie ſeeme woorthy to be remoued:
                     Iohan. De Pariſijs, de poteſiat. Regia & Pap. Heruaeus de poteſta. Pp. Cap. 18. Gerſon, Anliceat appellare à Pp. Hoſtien de Conceſsione Praebē
                        dae. Propoſuit. Extra. de Electione. Significaſti. Abb. 
                     as if he were a VVooman, or an Heretique: And certaine
ſutch there haue benne: and therefore thei be not reckened in ye Calendare of the Popes.
An other ſaith, Aliqui Papae inuenti ſunt flagitioſi, & Haeretici: Somme Popes haue
benne founde wicked menne, and Heretiques. An other ſaithe, Et Papa, & Epiſcopi
ſunt deuiabiles à Fide: Both Popes, and Biſhoppes maie wander from the Faithe. An
other ſaith,
                      Papa mandans, aliquid fieri, quod ſonet in Haereſim, turbat ſtatum Eccleſiae,
& non eſt ei parendum: The Pope commaundinge any thing to be donne, that ſoundeth
of Hereſie, troubleth the ſtate of the Churche: and we maie not obeie him. An other
ſaithe,
                      Papa poteſt else Haereticus, & de Haereſi iudicari: The Pope maie be an
Heretique, and of Hereſie maie be iudged.
                  
                     Al theſe were ye
                      Popes vndoubted frēdes. But now let vs heare the Pope him ſelf.
Pope Pius. 2. otherwiſe called Aeneas Syluius, ſaith thus: Quid ſi criminoſus Papa
contraria Fidei praedicet, Haereticiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Dogmatibus imbuat Subditos? What if
a notorious vvicked Pope teache thinges contrarie to the Faithe, and with Heretical
Doctrine peruerte his Subiectes?
                  
                  
                     I would not ſtand ſo long in ſo cleare a caſe, were it not, that M. Harding, al this
notwithſtandinge, telleth vs ſo ſadly, and biddeth vs beleue it vpon his warrante,
that the Pope vndoubtedly can neuer erre. Staniſlaus Hoſius, ye greateſt ſtickler
of that ſide,
                     Hoſius in Confeſsione Petricouion. Cap. 29. Alphonſ. Contra Haereſ. li. 1. ca. 4. 
                     bluſſheth not to ſaie thus, Numerētur omnes, &c. Recken al ye
                      Popes,
that euer were, from Peter, vntil this Iulius, that now is: There neuer ſate in this Chaire any
Arian, any Donatiſte, any Pelagian, or any other, that profeſſed any manner Hereſie.
Yet neuertheleſſe, your owne Doctour Alphonſus ſaithe, Non credo, aliquem
eſſe adeò Impudentem Papae Aſſentatorem, vt ei tribuere hoc velit, vt nec Errare,

nec in Interpretatione Sacrarum Literarum hallucinari poſsit: I beleue, ther

                           〈◊〉
                         ſo ſhameleſſe a Flatterer of the Pope, that wil graunte him this Prerogatiue, that he
can neuer erre, nor be deceiued in the expoundinge of the Scriptures. Here, M. Hardinge,
your owne principal Doctoure Alphonſus calleth al them, y• mainteine your Doctrine,
and ſaie, as you ſaie, The ſhameleſse Flatterers of the Pope. Certainely, I
thinke, it maie ſafely be ſaid: If a mā wil take y• viewe of al Chriſtendome, he ſhal
not find ſo many Heretiques in any one See, what ſo euer, as maie be found in the
See of Rome.Franc. Petrarch. Epiſt. 20. 
                     And, for y• cauſe, perhaps. Frāciſcus Petrarcha calleth Rome Aſylū
Haereſum, & Errorū: The Sainctuarie of Errours, and Hereſies: And in his Italian
Sonetres he calleth it, The Schole of Erroure, and the Temple of Hereſie.
                  
                     As for Nicolaus Lyra, yée doubte of our dealinge, for that the Printer
hath not quoted the place.
                     Schola di Errori, e Tempio di Ereſia. 
                     It maie pleaſe you therefore to peruſe his notes
vpon the xvi. Chapter of S. Mathevve. There emonge other ye ſhal finde theſe
woordes:
                     Nicol. Lyra in Matthae. Cap. 16. Ex hoc patet, quo'd Eccleſia non conſiſtit in hominibus, ratione Poteſtatis, vel
Dignitatis Eccleſiaſticae, vel Saecularis: Quia multi principes, & Summi Pontifices
inuenti ſunt apoſtataſſe à Fide: Hereby it appeareth, that the Church ſtandeth not
in men, in conſideration, either of theire Power, or of theire Dignitie, either Eccleſiaſtical, or
Temporal. For many Princes, and Popes haue benne founde to haue ſtraied from
the Faithe.Baldus de offic. praeſid. L. Saepe. 
                     Therefore Baldus ſaithe, Cautela eſt, quo'd quis dicat, Credo, quod
credit Sancta Mater Eccleſia: non, quod credit Papa: It is to be marked, that a man
many ſaie, I beleue, that the Churche beleueth: but not, I beleue, that the Pope beleueth.
Yée ſaie, Chriſte praied for
                      Peter: Ergo, the Pope cannot erre. But where was Chriſtes
                     
Praier then, when ſo many Heretiques were Popes in Rome? Wil yée ſaie, that
Chriſte praied for Arians, for Neſtorians, for Montaniſtes, for Monothelites,
for Simoniſtes, for Idolaters, for Necromancers, for Poiſoners, for Murtherers,
& for Dame Iohane too? Or, that by the vertue of Chriſtes Praier, none of
theſe could euer Erre? Or, y• the Popes Erroures muſt goe for Truthe, or his Hereſies
be holden as Right Religion, onely bicauſe you telle vs, that, what ſo euer
he ſaie, He cannot Erre? O M. Hardinge, I ſhewed you before, y•
                      Chriſte praied,
not onely for Peter, but alſo for al the reſte of his Diſciples. Origen ſaithe, as he
is before alleged,
                     Orig. in Matth. Tractat. 2. Num audebimus dicere, quo'd aduerſus vnum Petrum non praeualiturae
ſint Porrae Inferorum: aduerſus coeteros Apoſtolos praeualiturae ſint? Shal wee dare
to ſan
                           •
                         yt the Gates of Helle ſhal not preuaile againſte onely Peter? and that ye ſame Gates
ſhal preuaile againſt al other the Apoſtles?
                     Cyprian. in Orationem Dominicam. 
                     S. Cyprian ſaith, Rogabat pro delictis noſtris,
ſicut iple declarat, cùm dicit ad Petrum: Ego Rogaui pro te, ne deficiat Fides tua:
Chriſte praied (not for Peter onely, but) for our ſinnes, as he him ſelfe declareth, ſaieing vnto
Peter, I haue praied for thee, that thy Faith ſhould not faile. S.
                      Auguſtine, expoūding
the ſame woordes,
                     Aug. De Verbis Domi. ſecund. Lucam Sern. 36 Chryſo. in Matthae. Homil. 33. 
                     ſaithe thus: Ego rogaui Patrem pro vobis, ne deficiat Fides
veſtra: I haue praied (not onely for
                      Peter, but alſo) for you, yt your Faith ſhoulde not faile.
                     
Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Omnis Chriſtianus, qui ſuſcipit Verbum Petri, Thronus
fit Petri: & petrus ſedet in co: Euery Chriſtian man, that receiueth the word of Peter,
is made Peters Chaire: and Peter him ſelfe ſitteth in him.
                  
                  
                     Otherwiſe, M. Hardinge, they are not al Peters, that ſitte in place of Peter.
S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
                     Ambroſ. De Poeniten. Li. 1. Ca. 
                           •
                        . Hierony. in Sophontam. Cap. 1. Pope Liberius. Non habent Haereditatem Petri, qui Fidem Petri non habent:
They haue not Peters Enheritance, that haue not the Faithe of Peter.
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaith, Auferet Dominus nomina vanae gloriae, & admirationis falſae, quae
verſantur in Eccleſia:
                      God wil take a waie theſe names of vaine Glorie, and falſe oſtētation,
that are vſed in the Churche.
                  
                  Where wée ſaie, Pope Liberius fauoured the Arians, that,
                      ye ſaie, is ſtarke falſe.
And yet,Hieron De Eccl. Scriptorib. In Fortunatiano. yée knowe, S. Hierome is the reporter of that falſehed. But S. Hierome,
ye ſaie, vvas deceiued. In ſutche Reuerence, and Regarde yée haue the Doctoures,

and Learned Fathers of the Churche. Yee beleue them no further, then yée liſte. I
doubte not, but S. Hierome might better ſaie, M. Hardinge is deceiued. Certainely?
Alphonſus, your owne Doctoure, ſaith, De Liberio Papa, Conſtat fuiſſe Arianum:
Touchinge
                      Pope Liberius,Alphonſ. Contra Haereſ. li. 1. ca. 4. Platy. in Liberio. Antonin. Par. 2. Tit. 10. ca. 4. 
                           •
                         5. Iouerius. 
                     it is wel knowen, he vvas an Arian. Platyna
                      ſaith,
Liberius, vt quidam volunt, in rebus omnibus ſenſit cum Haereticis: Pope Liberius, as
ſomme ſaie, was in al pointes of one iudgemente with the (Arian) Heretiques.
                  
                  Antoninus the Archebiſhop of Florence, ſaith, Liberius Papa conſenſit praeceptis
Auguſti (Ariani) vt vnà cum Haereticis Communicaret: Pope Liberius ſo
conſented to the Commaundementes of the Arian Emperoure, that he communicated wt
the Heretiques.Herman Gigas. Hiſtorta Longobardica. 
                     So ſaithe louerius in the Abbriedgement of Councelles: So ſaith
Hermannus Gigas: ſo ſaith your very Legende, cōmonly called Hiſtoria Longobardica.
Emong others, Eraſmus ſaith, Ariana Haereſis, & Romanum Pontificē
inuoluit,Eraſm. in Annotationib. in Hieronym. Contra Lucifertan. & ipſos Imperatores: The Ariās Hereſi entangled, and wrapt bothe Pope
and Emperoure. By the Pope namely he meaneth Liberius. Yet you doubte
not to ſaie, S. Hierome was ſhamefully deceiued, and wrote of ignorance, he knewe not what.
                  
                  Likewiſe, yée ſaie, That weé reporte of Pope Iohn, is moſte falſe. Our reporte
is,Pope Iohn. 
                     That Pope Iohn denied the Immortalitie of the Soule:
                      not thorowly, and altogeather,
but onely in that he ſaide, Vntil the time of the Laſte Iudgement, the Soule
lieth ſtil, as in a traunſe, as doothe the body, vvithout ſenſe of ioie, or paine.
Wherein he, not onely withſtoode the expreſſe Woorde of God, but alſo vnwares
quite ouerthrewe his owne whole Kingedome of Purgatorie, which is the greateſt,
& faireſt of al his three Crownes. For what auaile his Pardōnes, & Trētalles,
if the ſoule lie ſtil a ſléepe vntil the daie of Iudgemēt, & feele no paine? Verily, after
the laſte Iudgement, by common conſente, there ſhalbe no Purgatorie. Nowe, if
there be no place of Purgatorie, neither before, nor after the laſte Iudgement, then
maie wée wel conclude, that abſolutely, & without doubte there is no Purgatorie.
The firſte Authours of this erroure,Auguſtin. Ad Quoduultdeū. Gerſon in Sermone Paſchali. Copus Dialog. 1. Pag. 50. as S. Auguſtine ſaithe, were the Heretiques
called Arabici. Touchinge Pope Iohns erroure, Gerſon ſaithe thus, Iohannes
Papa. 22. decreuit, &c. Pope Iohn. 22. decreed, that ye Soules of the wicked ſhould
not be pouniſhed, before the daie of the laſte Iudgemente: whiche erroure the Vniuerſitie of
Pariſe condemned for Hereſie, and cauſed the Pope to recante. One of your owne Cōpanions
of Louaine ſaith, Pope Iohn keapte this erroure ſecretely to him ſelfe, and
neuer had the open conſent of the Churche of Rome. And, for better excuſe hereof,
he ſaithe,Pag. 51. 
                     Petrus, non Fidem Chriſti, ſed Chriſtum, ſalua Fide, negauit: Peter denied,
not the Faith of Chriſte, but, his Faith ſaued, he denied nomore but Chriſte. And ſo,
by this prety ſhifte of your Louanian Diuinitie, yée haue bothe Chriſte without
Faithe, & alſo Faithe without Chriſte. Thus, M. Hardinge, it is plaine by your
owne Doctoures, & Felowes, y• our reporte of Pope Iohn is neither a falſe ſclaunder,
as you ſaie,Pope Zoſimus. 
                     nor proceedeth of deteſtable, and vvicked malice.
                  
                  For the reſte, yée ſaie, vvee belie Pope Zoſimus. He corrupted not the Councel of
Nice.
                     
                     Artic 4. Diui. 6. Concil. Aphric. Can. 101. For trial whereof, I referre mee ſelfe to my Former Replie vnto your Anſweare.
Certainely, what ſo euer learned man wil ſtande in denial hereof, he muſt
néedes want coloure in his face. The fraude was notoriouſly found, & detected to y•
whole world by y• Ancient Learned Fathers.An Epiſtle forged vnder thename of Athanaſiꝰ. The Coūcel of Nice corrupted. 
                     Cyrillus, & Articus, y• one being Patriarke
of Alexandria, the other of Antioche, and was reproued, and publiſhed by
twoo hundred, and ſeuenteene Biſhoppes, openly in the Councel of Aphrica. The
peeuiſhe forged Epiſtle, that yée allege vnder the name of the Learned Godly Father
Athanaſius, The fantaſtical burninge of the Canons of Nice without fire,
with other your like childiſhe vanities, ſcarcely méete for children to plaie withal,
are likewiſe anſweared.
                  One of your owne Louanian companie confeſſeth,In the Replie. Artic. 4. Diui. 6. that in the late Councel
                     
of Florence, the Greekes there made open complainte, that the Biſhop of Rome
had corrupted the Canons of the Councel of Nice. Alypius y• Biſhop of Tagaſtā,
ſpeakinge hereof in the Councel of Carthage, ſaith thus: Adhuc tamen me mouet,
quoniam cùm inſpiceremus Graeca Exemplaria huius Synodi Nicenae,Copus Pag. 78. Concil. Florent. Seſsione. 20. iſta ibi, neſcio,
qua ratione, minimè inuenimus: Yet this thing moueth mee, that when wee examined,
and conferred the Originalles of the Nicene Councel, vvritten in Greeke, I knowe
not,
                     Concil. Carthaginen. 6. Cap. 4. Epiſt. Bonifacij 2 ad Eulalium. 
                     by what meanes, thieſe thinges wee founde not there.
                  
                  Yet Pope Bonifacius, to ſaue the Credite of the See of Rome, was forced to
ſaie, and publiſhe openly, that the ſaide Alypius, and Aurelius the Biſhop of Carthage,
& S. Auguſtine the Biſhop of Hippo, and two hundred and fourteene other
Biſhoppes, that had eſpied, and reueled this falſehedde, were al enflamed, & leadde
by the Diuel.Copus, Pag. 93. And one of your owne ſuddaine Doctoures of Louaine ſaithe, Haec omnia,
tanquam ſomnia, tāquam fabulae, tanquam ſuperflua, abolita, antiquata, calcata ſunt:
Al theſe Decrees (of theſe Councelles, of Carthage, and Aphrica) are aboliſhed, and
repealed, and trodden vnder foote, as Dreames, and Fables, and thinges ſuperfluous.
                      This,
M. Hardinge, is the weighinge of your Councelles. If they like you, they are the
expreſſe Voices of the Holy Ghoſte: If they like you not, they are Dreames, and
Fables, and thinges Superfluous.
                  
                     Camotenſis,
                     Iohan. Camotenſis. yée ſaie, is ſomme woorſhipful Doctour, ſutch as by our owne iudgement, might
paſſe in ye Blacke garde. Yet was he a Biſhop, M. Harding, in al reſpectes far better, thē
either your Leontius, or your Hippolytus, or your newe founde Clemens, whom
yée cal the Apoſtles Felovve, or your vaine fable of Amphilochius. Yée woulde
ſéeme to finde faulte with the name: & thinke, wée ſhould not haue written, Camotenſis,
but rather, Iuo Carnotenſis. Your gheaſſe yée ſhewe vs: but reaſon thereof
yee ſhewe vs none. Yee might as wel haue ſaide, Fulbertus Carnotenſis, who beinge
very mutche conſumed, and ſpente with ſickneſſe, as it is learnedly noted emonge
other your Verities, for a reſtoratiue, ſuckte our Ladies breaſte, and by vertue
thereof was made whole. Yée might likewiſe haue gheaſed, it had benne Io.
Sarisburienſis,
                     Hermann. Rid. 10. Sariſburien. in Polycratico. Corne. Agrippa, De vanit. Scientiarum. otherwiſe called by ſomme, Rupertus Carnotenſis. For he ſaithe,
In Eccleſia Romana ſedent Scribae, & Phariſaei: In the Churche of Rome ſitte the
Scribes, and the Phariſeis.
                      But in déede, this Writers name is Iohannes Camotenſis,
alleged by Cornelius Agrippa. His woordes be theſe: Angelis praecipiunt: poteſtatem
habent in Mortuos: Vim faciunt Scripturis, vt habeant Plenitudinem Poteſtatis.
Ipſe Papa iam factus eſt intolerabilis. Eius pompam, & faſtum nullus Tyrannorum
vnquam ae quauit. Legati Romanorum Pontificum ſic bacchantur in
Prouincijs, acſi ad flagellandam Eccleſiam sathan egreſſus ſit à facie Domini:
Thei ſaie theire Commaundementes vpon the Angels of God: They haue power vpon the
Deade: Thei wreaſt, and racke the Scriptures, that they maie haue the Fulneſſe of Power. The
Pope him ſelfe is nowe becomme vntolerable. No Tyran was euer hable to matche him in
Pompe, and Pride. The Popes Legates keepe ſutche reuel in Kindomes, and Countries, as if
Sathan were ſente abroade from the face of the Lorde, to ſcourge the Churche.
                      This is not
your Iuo
Carnotenſis: It is Iohannes Camotenſis: And this is his iudgemente of
your Churche of Rome.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 1.
               What wil ye ſaie, if the Popes Aduocates, Abbates, and Biſhoppes
diſſemble not the mater, but ſhewe them ſelues open enimies to the
Goſpel, and, though thei ſee, yet wil not ſee, but wrie the Scriptures,
and witingly, and knowingly corrupte, and countrefeite the
VVoorde of God, and fouly, and wickedly applie to the Pope, al
the ſame thinges, whiche euidently, and properly be ſpoken of the

                  Perſonne of chriſte onely, nor by no meanes can be applied to any
other?Hoſt. cap. Quanto. And what though they ſaie, The Pope is al, and aboue al?
Or,Abbas Panor. de Elect. ca. Venerabilis. 
                  That the Pope can doo aſmutche, as chriſte can doo: and,
That one iudgement place, and one coūcel Houſe ſerueth for the
Pope, and for chriſte, bothe togeather? Or, That the Pope is the
ſame Lighte,
                  Cornelius Epiſcopus, in Concil. Tridentino. 
                  vvhiche ſhould comme into the vvorlde: Whiche
woordes chriſte ſpake of him ſelfe alone: and, That, vvho ſo is an
euil doer, hateth, and flieth from that Lighte? Or, that al the other
Biſhoppes haue receiued of the Popes Fulneſſe?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  You haue neuer donne with your what ifs. Your interpreter good Gentil woman, that fauoureth
your pleaſant Diuinitie ſo muche, ſeemeth to be weary of it. her ſelfe. For here ſhee tourneth
your, Quid ſi, into what will ye ſaie, if. And nowe Syr, doo you demaunde of vs, as Madame Interpreter
maketh you to ſpeake, what we will ſaie. Forſooth, for this you alleage againſt the Popes
aduocates, Abbattes, and Biſhoppes, we ſaie, that the moſte parte is very falſe, and ſlaunderous:
ſomewhat maie be taken for truthe in a right ſenſe. As for the aduocates, I minde not to be their
Aduocate,Hoſtienſis. Panormitanus. neither haue they neede of my helpe. Let them anſweare one for an other: Hoſtienſis for
Abbot Panormitan, and he for Hoſtienſis. In good ſooth were thoſe excellent men at this daie liuing,
I thinke verely, they would not doo you that honoure, as to anſwere you them ſelues. Or if they would
voucheſaue to doo ſo muche, I doubt not, but they woulde make ſhorte woorke with you, and take you
vp roundly for haltinge, with one woorde, Mentitis, daſshinge all your allegations. VVhich woorde
in your Diuinitie is a verbe Commune.
                  Thus leauinge Hoſtienſis, and Panormitan to defence of the Canoniſtes, tellinge you by the waie
that in queſtions of Diuinitie wee ſtande not alwaies to their ſaieinges:Cornelius Epiſcopus Bitontinus. wee anſweare you on the
behalfe of Cornelius the Biſhop of Bitonto in Italie, (for him ye meane, I ſuppoſe, puttinge in your
margent the name of Cornelius onely) that he neuer ſaide,Vntruthe, blaſphemouſe, vnaduiſedly defended. For the vvoordes be plaine, papa Lux venit in Mundum. the Pope is the Lighte, whiche ſhoulde
come into the worlde, in that ſenſe, as it is ſpoken of Chriſte. If you were hardely charged to ſhewe,
where he ſaide it, or where be wrote it, * you would be founde a lier, as in many other pointes you
are founde already. That he neuer wrote it in any of his eloquent Italian Sermons, ſet foorthe in
Printe, I am aſſured. And more hath he not ſet foorth. Now it remaineth, that you tell vs where he
ſaithe ſo, * or els confeſſe your ſlaunderous lie.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Where yée ſaie, M. Hardinge, as, I thinke, yee haue learned of a childe, that,
Mentiris, is a Verbe Common, if ye holde on, as yee haue begonne, ye wil ſhortely
alter y• Propertie therof to your ſelfe, & make it hencefoorthe a verbe Priuate.
Touchinge Hoſtienſis, and Panormitane, I wil ſaie nothinge, but onely referre
you to the places.
                  
                     As for Cornelius the Biſhop of Bitonto, for as mutche as, contrarie to your
Nature, yee pleade ignorance, and ſaie, yee cannot finde the place, reade therefore
theſe woordes in his Oration, openly pronounced in your late Chapter at Tridente:
Quis erit tam iniuſtus rerum aeſtimator,Concil. Trident. ſub. Paulo. 3. qui non dicat, Papa Lux venit in
Mundum: ſed dilexerunt homines Tenebras magis 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      Lucem. Omnis, qui malè
agit,Oratio Cornelij Epiſcopi Bitontini. odit Lucem: & non venit ad Lucem: vt non arguantur opera eius, quia mala ſunt:
Who wil ſo vniuſlely weight thinges, but he wil ſaie, The Pope is the Light, that
is comme into the vvorlde? But menne haue loued darkeneſſe, more then (the
Pope, that is) the Lighte. Who ſo euer doothe euil, hateth the Lighte: and commeth
not to the Lighte: leſte his woorkes ſhould be diſcoured, for that they be euil.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 2.
               Shortely, what though they make Decrees expreſſely againſte
Goddes VVoorde, and that not in hucker mucker, or couertly, but
openly, and in the face of the worlde: muſte it needes yet be Goſpel
ſtreight, what ſo euer they ſaie? Shal theſe be Goddes Holy Armie?
Or, wil Chriſte be at hande amonge them there? Shal the
Holy Ghoſte flowe in theire tongues, or can they with truthe ſaie,
Wee, and the Holy Ghoſte haue thought ſo?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  After a greate meany of your fooliſhe and falſe what ifs, you conclude ſhortly, with VVhat if,
they make decrees expreſſely againſte Goddes VVoorde, and that openly in the face of the VVorlde?
Hereto we anſweare, requitinge your what if, with an other what if, and ſaie, VVhat if the
Learned and holy Fathers, &c.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 6. Diuiſion. 3.
               In deede Peter Aſotus, and his companion Hoſius, ſticke not to
affirme,Hoſius contra Brentium, Lib. 2. that the ſame Councel, wherein our Saueour Ieſus chriſte
was condemned to die, had bothe the Sprite of Propheſieinge, and
the Holy Ghoſte, and the Sprite of Truthe: and, that it was neither
a falſe, nor a triflinge ſaieinge, when thoſe Biſhoppes ſaide, VVee
haue a Lavve, and by our Lavve he ought to die: and, that they, ſo
ſaieinge, did lighte vpon the very Truthe of Iudgemente (for ſo be
Hoſius woordes) and, that the ſame plainely was a iuſte Decree,
whereby they pronounced, that Chriſte was woorthy to die. This,
me thinketh, is ſtraunge, that theſe menne are not hable to ſpeake for
them ſelues, and to defende their owne cauſe, but thei muſte alſo take
parte with Annas, & Caiphas. For, if they wil cal that a lauful, and
a good Councel, wherein the Sonne of God was moſte ſhamefully
condemned to die, what Councel wil thei then allowe for falſe,
and naughte? And yet (as al their Councelles, to ſaie truthe, commonly
be) neceſſitie compelled them, to pronounce theſe thinges of
the Councel holden by Annas, and Caiphas.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Suche vnhoneſt toies better become Brentius, that ſhameleſſe railinge Heretike. Now to you, Syr
Defender. You belie Hoſius, as Brentius of whom you borowed this, belied the Reuerente Father
Peter ae Soto. Either you haue readen the place of Hoſius, or you haue not. If you haue not, then are
you to blame, to ſaie ſo mutche euill, that you knowe not. If you haue readen the place, then is your
faulte plaine malice, in puttinge that to Hoſius, the contrary whereof you finde in the place by
your ſelfe alleaged by which you leade vs, as it were by the hande, to beholde and conſider your owne
diſhoneſtie. How iuſte cauſe you haue to reprehende Hoſius, for that he wrote againſte Brentius in
defence of Petrus a Soto, touchinge the Councell in whiche Chriſte was condemned by Caiphas, it
ſhoulde beſte appeare to him, that woulde reade the whole place, where Hoſius treateth that matter.
The ſame would I here haue rehearſed, to the diſcoueringe of your falſe dealinge, and ſhameleſſe lieing,

were not the ſame very longe.The Sprite of Truthe in Annas, and Caiphas.
                  
                  Firſte, this is the Truthe, touchinge the wholeA diſcrete, and a vvoorthy proctoure. The Actes vvere naught, and the ſentence good. The Sentence vvas, That Chriſt ſhould die the deathe. The Actes of thoſe Prieſtes of the Iewes Synagog
were wicked, and contrary to Chriſte. * But their Sentence, though them ſelues were neuer ſo
euil, was not onely true, but alſo to mankinde moſt profitable. And S. Iohn in his Goſpell wi
                        •
                     neſſeth, it
was the oracle of God. For when after longe deliberation of the Councell, Caiphas the highe Biſhop
and preſident of that Councell, had pronounced his ſentence, whereunto all the reſte almoſt gaue their
conſente,Ioan. 19. It is expedient for vs, that one man die for the people, and not that all the Nation periſhe:
the Euangeliſte thereto added his verdite, ſayinge, This he ſaide, not of him ſelfe, but whereas he was
highe Biſhop of that yere, he Prophecied. Therefore let this be the true concluſion of the whole matter.
The actes of that councell were wicked, the ſentence was true and good. Nowe Hoſius treateth
this matter ſo learnedly, and ſo ſubſtantially, as you can not truely take any aduantage of his woordes
to reprehende him. He ſtateth him ſelfe vpon the Scripture, a good grounde to ſtande vpon. VVhiche
Scripture referreth doubt full, and harde queſtions to the Prieſtes of the Leuiticall order. Of whome
it is ſaide, Indicabunt tibi Iudicij Veritatē:
                     This Truthe of Iudgemente vvas, That the Sonne of God vvas a Blahpſemer, and had de
                           ••
                        rued to die. They ſhal ſhewe vnto thee the Truth of Iudgement.
In this iudgement, ſaieth Hoſius, though it were neuer ſo wicked, yet was the truthe of iudgement.
How that might be, there he proueth it to Brentius by moſte manifeſt argumentes.
                  VVhere ye impute to Hoſius, to haue ſaide, that the ſame plainely was a iuſte decree,Vntruthe For thus ſaide Caiphas: And his Iudgemente Hoſius defendeth, as true, and godly. whereby
they pronounced that Chriſte was woorthy to die, that is your ſlaunderous lie, not Hoſius ſaieinge.
* For he ſaieth the cleane contrary, and that ſundry times, that it was a wicked Councell, and moſte
vniuſte decree. God forebidde any Chriſten man ſhould ſaie, that Chriſte was woorthy to die.Chriſte, by Hoſius Iudgemente, vvas guilty of death. He
ſaithe, it might haue benne truely pronounced by Caiphas, that he was gilty of deathe. And there he
ſheweth how, very religiouſly, and wiſely admoniſhinge the reader, that he was moſte innocent, and
deſerued not to die. And thus, Syr, you may ſee, we take not parte with Annas, and Caiphas, as you
raile, and yet be able, God be thanked, to defende our true cauſe, and declare you to the worlde to be
falſe teachers. Therefore belie vs no more.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Good Chriſtian Reader, this whole mater concerneth onely the credite, and
certainetie of General Councelles. Sotus, and Hoſius ſaie, what ſo euer is determined
in Councel, muſt be taken, as the vndoubted Iudgemente, and VVoorde
of God. Hereunto the Godly Learned Father, Iohannes Brentius, replieth thus,
Councelles ſommetimes haue erred, and haue vtterly wanted the
                      Sprite of God: as it maie
appeare by that in a Councel the Sonne of God was condemned, and iudged to die the
deathe. Hoſius anſweareth, When
                      Annas, and Caiphas ſate as Preſidentes in the
Coūcel, and Chriſte y• Sonne of God, was by them condēned to die, yet neuertheleſſe y• ſame
Coūcel had the aſſiſtance of the Holy Ghoſte, and the vndoubted Sprite of Truthe.
For,
                     Hoſius, Li. 2. contra Brentium. 
                     ſpeakinge of the ſame Councel, he ſaithe thus, Vides, Brenti, quemadmodum
non defuerit Sacerdotio Leuitico Spiritus Propheticus, Spiritus Sanctus, Spiritus
Veritatis: Yee ſee, frende Brentius, how that the Leuitical Prieſthoode (that pronounced
ſentence of deathe againſt Chriſte) wanted not the Sprite of Propheſie, the
Holy Ghoſte,Pagi. 62. b. the Sprite of Truthe. Againe he ſaithe, Ex quo tempore Primus
Parēs noſter de vento ligno guſtauit, factus eſt Mortis Reus Chriſtus Dei, &c. Nec falſum
fuit illud,Pagi. 63. a. quod dixerunt, Nos legem habemus, & ſecundum Legem hanc debet
mori: From the tune, that oure Firſte Father taſted of the forebidden fruite Chriſte
the Sonne of God became guilty of deathe: Neither was it falſe, that the Iewes ſaide,
VVee haue a Lavve, and accordinge to that Lavve he ought to die. With this
Sprite, I trowe, he was inſpired, that wrote this Marginal Note vpon your Decrees,
Iudaei mortaliter peccaſſent,Diſt. 13. Item. In Margine. niſi Chriſtum Crucifixiſsent: The levves had
committed mortal ſinne, if they had not nailed Chriſte vnto the Croſſe. Againe,
                      Hoſius
ſaithe,Hoſius contra Brent. Pag. 63. b Nulla eſſe poteſt tanta Pontificum improbitas, quae impedire queat, quo' minùs
vera ſit illa Dei Promiſsio, Qui indicabunt tibi Iudicij Veritatem: Be the wickedneſſe

of Biſhoppes neuer ſo greate, it can neuer hinder, but that this promiſſe of God ſhal euer be
true, The Biſhoppes ſhal ſhevve thee the truthe of Iudgemente.
                  This therefore, M. Hardinge, is your Doctoures meaninge: It is ſufficiente,
that Biſhoppes onely méete in Councel. God wil ſupplie al the reſte. What ſo euer
they determine, the Holy Ghoſte wil aſſiſt them: they cannot erre. Al this is
as true, as that Hoſius your Doctoure ſaithe, Annas, and Caiphas coulde not
erre in pronouncinge Sentence of deathe againſte Chriſte.
                  
                  But, for excuſe hereof, ſommewhat to ſalue a feſtry mater, yée tel vs a longe
tedious tale, without heade, or foote: & that your Reader maie thinke, yée ſaie ſomewhat,
ye crie out alowde, Shameleſſe railinge Heretiques: VVee belie Hoſius:
vvee belie Sotus: Our falſe dealinge: our ſhameleſſe lieinge: vvee are impudente,
and continevve in lieinge. Theſe, M. Hardinge, be the proufes, and
groundes of your Doctrine, and the moſte ſauerie, and faireſt Floures in your
garlande.
                  The ſubſtance of your tale is this: The Actes of the Councel, where Chriſte was
condemned, were lewde, and wicked: But the Sentence of deathe pronounced by the Biſhoppes againſt
Chriſte, was iuſte, and true. And thus by your dalliance in darke woordes, and by
your blinde Diſtinction, bitweene Acte, and Sentence, yée ſeeke ſhiftes, to mocke
the worlde. Yée ſhoulde plainely haue tolde vs, what were theſe Sentences:
and what were theſe Actes: and what greate difference yee canne eſpie bitweene
Acte, and Sentence: or, when euer yee hearde of Sentence in Iudgemente without
Acte: or, of perfite Acte without Sentence: or, howe the Sentence of the Iudge
maie be true, if the Acte be falſe: or, how the Acte maie be righte, if the Sentence
be wronge. For your credites ſake, leaue theſe toies, M. Hardinge. Yee haue vſed
them ouer longe. They are too childiſhe for a childe: they becomme not your grauitie:
they deceiue the ſimple.
                  In deede, I can eaſily beleeue, that neither Sotus, nor Hoſius was euer ſo wicked,
to ſaie, that Chriſte vvas rightly, and vvorthily donne to deathe. How be
it, he, that ſaithe, The sentence of deathe, pronounced in Councel againſte
Chriſte, vvas iuſte, and true, ſeemeth in deede to ſaie no leſſe. The very caſe, and
courſe of your Doctrine vndoubtedly forced them thus to ſaie. For, if al Coūcelles
be good, and Holy, without exception, then muſte that alſo be a good, and a Holy
Councel, that was aſſembled againſte God, and againſte his Chriſte.
                  
                  Hoſius your Doctours,
                     Hoſius in Confeſsione Petricouien. Ca. 29. 
                     to make the mater plaine, ſaithe thus, Iudáſne ſit, an
Petrus, an Paulus, Deus attendi not vult: Sed ſolùm hoc, quo'd ſedet in Cathedra
Petri: quo'd Apoſtolus: quo'd Chriſti Legatus: quo'd Angelus eſt Domini
exercituum: de cuius ore Legem requirere iuſſus es. Hoc ſolùm ſpectari
vult. Si Iudas eſt, quandoquidem Apoſtolus eſt, nihil te moueat, quo'd Fur
eſt: God wil neuer haue thee conſider, whether the Pope be a Iudas, or a Peter, or a
Paule. It is ſufficiente, onely that he ſitteth in Peters Chaire: that he is an Apoſtle: that
he is chriſtes Embaſſadoure: that he is the Angel of the Lorde of Hoſtes: from
whoſe mouthe thou arte commounded to require the Lawe. This thinge onely Chriſte would
haue thee to conſider. Be it Iudas: for as mutche as he is an Apoſtle, let it not moue thee,
though he be a Theefe.
                  But Caiphas ſaide, It is good, that one man die for the people, leſte al the people
periſhe. Ergo,
                      ſaie you, Caiphas had the Sprite of God. Alas, M. Hardinge,
although you litle paſſe for your Diuinitie, yet why haue you nomore regarde
vnto your Logique? Euery childe knoweth, that this is a Paralogiſmus, or
a deceiteful kinde of reaſoninge, called Fallacia Accidentis. And,
that yee maie the better eſpie your ouerſight, Like as yée ſaie, Caiphas propheſied
blindely, him ſelfe not vnderſtandinge, what he ſaide, Ergo, he had the Holy Ghoſte:
                  
                  
                     
                     Euen ſo maie yée ſaie, Balaams Aſſe reproued his maiſter, and ſpake the Truthe, as
Caiphas did. Ergo, Balaams Aſſe had the Holy Ghoſte. S. Paule ſaithe,
                     
No man can ſaie, The Lorde Ieſus, but in the Sprite of God. Hereof, by your Logique,
yée maie reaſon thus: The Diuel ſaide vnto Chriſte, I knowe, that thou arte
Chriſte the Sonne of the Liuinge God:
                     1. Corin. 12. 
                     Ergo, the Diuel had the Sprite of God.
                  
                  It pitieth me, M. Hardinge, to ſée your folies. Although Caiphas vnwares,
and againſt his wil, by the enforcemente, & power of God, at one onely time ſpake
woordes of Truthe, as did alſo Balaams Aſſe, and the Diuel, yet it foloweth not,
that wée ſhould therefore at al times renne to Caiphas, to ſéeke the Truthe.
                  
                     S, Auguſtine ſaithe,Auguſt. Epiſt. 58. Quando Deus voluit, etiam mutum iumentum rationabiliter
loquutum eſt. Nec ideo' admoniti ſunt homines, in deliberationibus ſuis, etiam Aſinina
expectare Conſilia: VVhen it pleaſed God, Balaams Aſſe, beinge a doum be beaſte, was
hable to ſpeake, as a man. Yet are not menne therefore commaunded, in al their Conſultations,
and doubteful caſes to ſeeke Counſel of an Aſſe.
                  As for the Lies, Shames, and Sclaunders, yée would ſo liberally laie vpon vs,
it maie pleaſe you, to take them fréely home againe. If yée be ful freight, and haue
ſtoare ſufficiente of your owne, yet maie you diuide them emonge your poore Louanian
Brethren. It ſhalbe a woorke of Supererogation. For yewiſſe, thei haue of
their owne yenough already. To conclude, your whole drifte herein is, to force
your Reader, to haue a good opinion of Annas, & Caiphas, that condemned Chriſte,
to die the deathe: for that, as Hoſius ſaithe, they had the Sprite of Propheſie, the
Holy Ghoſte, and the Sprite of Truthe: and therefore coulde not erre in their
Iudgemente.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 1.
               But wil theſe menne (I ſaie) refourme vs the Churche, beinge
themſelues bothe the Perſonnes guilty, & the Iudges to? Wil they
abate their owne Ambition, and their Pride? Wil they ouerthrowe
their owne cauſes, & geeue ſentence againſte thē ſelues, that they muſt
leaue of to be vnlearned Biſhoppes, Slowbellies, Heapers togeather
of Benefices, takers vpon them as Princes, and Menne of
warre? Wil the Abbates, the Popes deere darlinges iudge that
Monke for a Theefe, whiche laboureth not for his liuinge: and that
it is againſte al lawe, to ſuffer ſutche a one to liue, and to be founde
either in Cittie, or in Countrie, al of other mennes charges? Or
els, that a Monke ought to lie on the grounde, to liue hardely with
Hearbes, and Peaſon, to ſtudie earneſtly, to Argue, to Praie, to
Woorke with hande, and fully to bende him ſelfe, to come to the Miniſterie
of the Churche? In faithe, as ſoone wil y• 
                  Phariſeis, & Scribes
repaire againe the Temple of God, and reſtore it vnto vs a Houſe
of Praier, in ſteede of a Denne of Theeues.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye leape with a lighte ſkippe from one thinge to an other: neither dwell ye longe in any one
pointe, but in lieinge.
                  But ye ſaie, they be bothe the perſons giltie, and the Iudges alſo. Iudges doubteleſſe they be. For
their vocation is lawfull, ye cannot diſproue it. Guilty alſo they be, we denie not: but whereof?
Of fraile liuinge, not of falſe teachinge. (for commonly they teache nothinge). And where?
In the courte of conſcience,Vntruthe. For their life is notorious to the vvorlde. not in the courte of man. Or if any of them be, bothe before this councell,

and in this councell godly orders haue benne decreed for holeſome reformation.Monkes, Freeres, Nunnes.
                  
                  As for Monckes, ye maie not looke nowe, that either they gette their liuing onely by their hands
labour, or that they be bounde to the harde diſcipline, which Monkes liued in, for twelue hundred yeres
paſte. Now be other daies, other manners. Suche great auſteritie is to be wondred at, and to be wiſſhed
for. But whether the Religious menne of our time be to be compelled thereto, I leaue it to wiſe conſideration.
If it maie be lawfull to direct vs in ſuche ſpirituall caſes, by an olde example of externe
prudencie, me thinketh the diſcretion of Iacobs anſweare to his Brother Eſau is woorth to be thought
on. VVhen 
                        •
                     ſau courteouſly offered his brother Iacob recourninge from Meſopotamia with all his
traine of houſeholde and cattell, to goe with him, and keepe him companie, the reſte of the iourney
that remained from the place of their firſte meetinge: Iacob full mildely ſaide, Syr, you know, if it
like your Lordſhip,Gene. 33. that I haue here with me tender babes,M. Hardinge likeneth his Monkes to droaues of Cattel. ewes with lambe, * and Kine with
calfe. If I ouerlabour them with faſte goeinge, my flockes will die all in a daie. Maye it pleaſe
your Lordſhip to goe before me your ſeruaunt: I will folowe after the flocke fayer and ſofte, ſo as I
ſhal ſee my litle ones able to beare it.
                  Like wiſe if there be not a diſcrete moderation vſed. but al Monckes be rigorouſly driuen to the
auſieritie of life, they liued in of olde time, in this ſo greate looſeneſſe of maners, ſpecially the diſcipline
of all religions beinge ſo farre ſlaked in compariſon of the auncient ſeueritte: it is to be feared,
wee ſhall rather ſee Cloiſters foreſaken (whiche God graunte), then a Godly reformation
procured (whiche wil neuer be).
                  In the ende of this Paragraphe, ye ſhewe your ſelfe to deſpaire of our amendement. God geue you
grace ſo to doo for your partes, as we maye haue good cauſe to hope better of you. But whether we
amende our faultes, or other wiſe, what pertaineth that to the 
                        ••
                     ſtification of your newe Goſpell, and
to the diſproufe of the Catholike Faithe by vs defended? You k
                        ••
                     w, it is no good argumente à moribus
ad doctrinam. VVho would not hiſſe you and trampe you out of ſchooles, if ye made this fonde
reaſon: The Papiſ
                        •
                     es liues be fauliy, Ergo their teachinge is falſe? To this head all the reaſons of
your Apologie in effect maye be reduced: and they holde Per locum topicum noui Euangelij à
malis moribus.
                     Here M. Hardinge compareth the Popes, and his Biſhops vvith the Scr
                           •
                        b
                           •
                        s and Phariſeis. Dothe not Chriſte him ſelfe confute all ſuche your feble reaſons, where he
ſateth.Matth. 23. The Scribes, and Phariſeis ſitte in the chayre of Moſes: what ſo euer they ſaie to you, doo ye,
but after their woorkes doo ye not?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Yée ſaie, If your Monkes, and Freeres ſhoulde now be forced to keepe the olde Diſcipline, and
ſeueritie of their Fundations, they would rather breake their Cloſters, and leaue al togeather. And
therefore by a fitte compariſon, yée reſemble them to the heauy droaues of Iacobs
cattel. Whereby yee ſeeme ſecretely to geeue vs to imagine, that the Monkes
covvle is not alwaies ſo holy a wo
                        •
                     de, as is pretended.
                  
                     S. Hierome, diſcribinge the life, and order of Monkes in his time, ſaith thus,
Nihil arrogant ſibi de continentia ſupercilij.
                     
                     Hieronym. ad Marcellam, vt commigret Bethlehem. 
                     Humilitatis inter omnes contentio eſt. Quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
nouiſsimus fuerit, hic primus putatur In veſte nulla diſcretio: nulla admiratio.
Vicunque placuerit incedere, nec deiractionis eſt, nec laudis leiunia neminem ſubleuant:
nec defertur inediae: nec moderata ſaturitas condemnatur. Suo Domino ſtat vnuſquiſque,
aut cadit. Nemo iudicat alterum, ne à Domino iudicetur: They bragge not
of theire Sole, or single life. Al contention is, who maie be moſte humble. Who ſo euer is
laſte, he is coumpted firſte. There is neither difference, nor woonderinge in Apparel. Howe
ſo euer it pleaſeth a man to goe, he is neither ſclaundered for it, nor commended. Noman
is euanced for his Faſtinge. Neither is abſtinence praiſed, nor ſobre refreaſſinge condemned.
Eche man either ſtandeth, or falleth to his Lorde. Noman iudgeth other, leaſte of the Lorde
he him ſelfe be Iudged.
                  But, yee ſaie, your Monkes now adaies are waxen nice, and cranke. Sutche
extreeme rigoure, and ſeueritie they maie not beare.
                  
                     Sutche Holy menne they were,
                     Sulpitius Seuerus in Chronico. 
                     of whome Sulpitius Seuerus writeth: Sedentes
munera expectant, atque omne vitae decus mercede corruptum habent: dum quaſi venalem

nalem prae ſe ferunt ſanctimoniam:
                      Theſe Freeres ſitte ſtil, and looke for monie: and haue
al the bewtie of theire life corrupted with hiere,Hieronym. Ad Euſtochium de Virginita. ſeruanda. ſettinge theire holineſſe out to ſale. Of
ſutche Holy Nunnes, S. Hierome telleth vs, Poſt Coenam dubiam Apoſtolos
ſomniant:
                      After they haue wel filled their bellies, they dreame of the Apoſtles. In like
ſorte, he writeth of certaine Monkes: Apud hos affectata ſunt omnia: Laxae manicae:
Caligae follicantes: Veſtis craſsior: Crebra ſuſpiria: Viſitatio Virginū: Detractio Clericorum.
Et,
                     
                     In eadem Epiſto. ad Euſtochium. 
                     ſi quando Dies Feſtus venerit, ſaturantur ad vomitum: Emonge theſe men, al
thinges are countrefeite: Theire Wide ſleeues: theire greate Bootes: theire courſe Gowne:
theire often ſighes: theire Viſitinge of Virgines: theire backebitinge of Prieſtes. And, if
there comme a Holy Daie, they eate, vntil they be faine to perbreake. This, no doubte,
is that Holineſſe, that Chriſte brought into the worlde.
                  
                  But youre life, ye ſaie, is no preiudice to youre Faithe: Howe ſo euer you liue, yet
is youre Doctrine right good, and Catholique. And that yee proue by the wordes
of Chriſte:
                     Matthae. 23. 
                     The Scribes, and Phariſeis ſitte on Moſes Chaire. What ſo euer they
ſaie to you, doo yee: but after theire woorkes, doo yee not. If this be the beſte claime, ye
can holde by, then ſuffer vs, M. Hardinge, to ſaie to you, as Chriſte ſommetime
ſaide to them, whome ye confeſſe to bee youre Fathers:
                      Woe bee vnto you, yee
scribes,
                     In eod. Capite. 
                     and Phariſeis, yee Hypocrites. Yee deuoure, and rauen vp poore
VVidovves houſes, vnder the coloure of longe praier. Outwardely yee ſeeme Holy: But
within yee are ful of Hypocriſie, and wickedneſſe.
                  
                     The Valentinian Heretiques, in Olde times, vſed in like caſe to ſaie of them
ſelues:
                     Irenaeus. li. 1. ca. 
                           •
                        
                      
                     Quemadmodum aurum, in coeno depoſitum, non amittit decorem ſuum, ita dicunt,
ſemeripſos, in quibuſcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         materialibus operibus ſint, nihil noceri, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         amittere
Spiritualem Subſtantiam: As goulde, notwithſtandinge it be laide in dounge, yet neuertheleſſe
keepeth his bewtie ſtil, So they ſaie of them ſelues, in what ſo euer corruptible woorkes
they liue, yet are they neuer the woorſe: nor can they loſe the Spiritual Subſtance of theire
Faithe.Auguſt. De morib. Manichae. li. 2. ca. 19. & 20. 
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto the Olde Heretiques, called the Manichees:
Dicitis, non oportere omninò quaeri quales ſunt homines, qui veſtram Sectam profitentur:
ſed qualis ſit ipſa Profeſsio. Quid vobis fallacius, quid infidioſius, quid malitioſius dici,
aut inueniti poteſt?
                      Yee ſaie, we maie not examine, what menne they bee, that profeſſe your
Secte: but onely, what is theire Profeſſion. What thinge can there be founde more falſe,
more deceiteful, more maliceous, then you are?
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 2.
               There haue benne, I knowe, certaine of theire owne companions,
whiche haue founde faulte with many errours in the Churche, as
Pope Adrian, Aeneas Syluius, Cardinal Poole, Pighius, and others,
as is afore ſaid: they helde afterwardes their Councel at Trident,
in the ſelf ſame place, where it is nowe appointed. There aſſembled
many Biſhoppes, and Abbates, and others, whom it behoued,
for that matter. They were alone by them ſelues: what ſo euer they
did, no body gaineſaide it: for they hadde quite ſhutte out, and barred
our ſide from al manner of Aſſemblies: & there they ſate ſixe yeres, feeding
folkes with a maruilous expectation of their doinges. The firſt
ſixe Monethes, as though it were greatly needeful, they made many
Determinations of the Holy Trinitie, of the Father, of the Sonne,
& of the Holy Ghoſte: whiche were godly thinges in deede, but not
ſo neceſſarie for that time. Let vs ſee, in al that while, of ſo many, ſo
manifeſte, ſo often confeſſed by them, & ſo euident Errours, what one
                  
Erroure haue they amended?The Freedome of the Councel of Trident. From what kinde of Idolatrie haue
thei reclaimed the people? What Superſtition haue thei taken away?
What peece of their Tyrannie, and Pompe haue thei diminſhed? As
though al the worlde maie not nowe ſee, that this is a Conſpiracie,
and not a Councel: and that theſe Biſhoppes, whome the Pope hath
nowe called togeather, be wholy ſworne, and become bounde, to beare
him theire faithful allegiaunce, and wil doo no manner of thinge, but
that they perceiue pleaſeth him, & healpeth to auance his Power,
& as he wil haue it: Or, that they recken not of the number of mennes
voices, rather then of the weight, and value of the ſame: Or, that
Might, there dooth not oftentimes ouercomme Right.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As you procede, you talke your pleaſure of the godly and learned Fathers aſſembled in the late
Councel of Trent. By the waie, as your manner is, your droppe lies. Of whiche, one is, that they
hadde quite ſhut out, and barred youre ſide from al manner of aſſemblies:Vntruthe manifeſte, as hereafter at ſhal appeare. whiche is a foule lie.
That the firſte ſixe monethes, they occupied them ſelues with makinge many determinations of the
holy Trinitie, that alſo is an other lie. For then the worlde hadde no nede of any newe determinations
or decrees, concerninge the Trinitie: what it ſhal haue hereafter by occaſion of youre chiefe
Maiſter IohnA ſclaunderous Vntruthe. For M. Caluine vvas euer an enimie vnto the Arians. Caluines Doctrine, it is more feared, then yet perceiued.
                  VVhere ye would faine ſee of ſo manie, ſo manifeſt, ſo often confeſſed by themſelfes, and ſo euident
errours, what one errour they haue amended: they are not like to ſatiſfie your longinge. And
yet they haue taken order for the amendementeVntruthe moſt impudente. For their ovvne confeſſed, and knovven Errours they neuer once touched. of ſo many, as they knowe. Neither is any of the
ſame about any point of our faithe, but about thinges of leſſe weight. Your exaggeration of the
termes ſo many, ſo manifeſt, ſo often confeſſed by them, and ſo euident, reporteth in one ſentence your
ſo many, ſo manifeſt, ſo often confuted by vs, and ſo euident lies. VVhen you folowe your
hote humour, and aſke, from what kinde of Idolatrie the Fathers of the Tridentine Councel haue
reclaimed the people, you go to farre. VVhat ſo euer blaſphemie ye vtter in bookes and Sermons againſt
the adoration of the bleſſed Sacrament of the Aulter, we knowe no kinde of Idolatrie vſed in
the Churche.Vntruthe, Cō
                        feſſed by M. Hardings owne Felovves. Reade the Anſvveare. Neither is any Idolatrie committed by vs in worſhippinge of Sainctes, in praieinge
to them, nor in the reuerence we exhibite to their Images, as ye beare the people in hande.O profounde Diuinitie. As I
can not w
                        •
                     l take a heare from your lieing bearde, ſo wiſhe I, that I could plucke malice from youre
blaſphemous harte.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Whether the Learned menne of oure ſide were ſhut te out from the right, and
libertie of youre Councel,
                     Parte. 1. Diut. 19. Parte 6. ca. 8. Diui. 1. Cicero, In verrem actione. 1. In Concil Triden. Anno. 1562. or no, it maie ſoone appeare, partly by that is already
ſaide: partly by that ſhalbe ſaide hereafter. Verily, the Pope, for his Premunire,
wil not ſuffer any Biſhop, to geeue voice in Councel, on leſſe he haue him firſte ſolemnely
ſworne to the See of Rome: and therefore they be al called his Creatures.
So Cicero ſaithe, Verres, when he hadde bribed, and ſpoiled the whole Ilelande
of Sicilia, thought it not good, to ſuffer his name, or any parte of his dooinges to
comme in hazarde, but onely before a Iudge, or Arbiter of his owne.
                  
                     Therefore, the Frenche Kinges Embaſſadoure, as it is ſaide before, proteſted
thus openly euen in your ſaide Councel, Minùs legitima, minus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      libera dicuntur
fuiſſe illa Concilia: qui aderant, ad voluntatem alterius ſemper loquebantur:
Theſe Councelles are coumpted neither ſo free, nor ſo laweful, as they ought to bee: they
that were there, ſpake euermore to pleaſe an other: (by whiche Other, he meante the
the Pope). And for that cauſe, the Emperoures Maieſtie, by his Embaſſadoure

Hurtadus Mendoza ſolemnely proteſted againſte the aſſemblie of the
ſame Councel. His woordes he theſe: Ego Iacobus Hurtadus Mendoza, uomine
Pientiſsimi, & Inuictiſsimi Domini mei, Caroli Caeſaris Romani Imperatoris, ex illius
ſpeciali mandato, ac nomine totius Sacri Romani Imperij, aliorum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Regnorum, ac
Dominiorum ſuorum proteſtor,Anno. 1547. Citatur ab Illyrico in Proteſtatione contra Cō
                        cil. Triden. Nullam poſſe eſſe Authoritatem aſſetorum legatorum
Sanctitatis Veſtrae, & corum Epiſcoporū, qui ſunt Bononiae, Sanctitati
veſtrae maiori ex parte obnoxiorum, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab illius nutu omninò pendentium,
vt in Religionis, & morum Reformationis cauſa, &c. legem praeſcribant: I lamas
Hurtado Mendoza, in the name of ye moſt godly, and moſt mighty Prince my Lord
Charles, the Romaine Emperour, by his ſpecial Cōmiſsion, and in ye name of y•
                      vvhole
Romaine Empiere, and al others his Realmes, and Dominions doo proteſte, that the
Authoritie of the pretenſed Legates of youre holineſſe, and of ſutche other Biſhoppes, as
be nowe at Bononia, (vnto whiche towne the Councel of Trident was then adiourned)
for the moſte parte bounde vnto youre Holineſſe, and wholy hanginge vpon youre
becke, is of no force, namely to make Lawes in cauſe of Reformatiō of Religion, and maners.
                     
                  
                  And,Paralipomen
                           •
                         Vrſpergen. Aeneas Syluius ad Capitulum Moguntinum. Iohan. Sleidanus Anno. 1523. li. 4. Hoc enim eſſe colligare manus Pontificis. that it maie appeare, in what obedience, & ſeruile ſubiection, al Biſhoppes
be vnto the Pope, Aeneas Syluius, otherwiſe called Pope Pius the Seconde, ſaith
thus, Quo'd ſi Epiſcopus Papae contradicat etiam vera loquendo, nihilominus
peccat contra Iufiorandum Papae praeſtitum: If a Biſhop ſpeake againſt the Pope,
yea, although he ſpeake the truthe, yet neuertheleſſe he ſinneth againſte the Othe, that he hath
made vnto the Pope. Therefore, where as at the late Conference at Norenberg,
it was required by the Princes, and States of Germanie, that al Biſhoppes
comminge to the Councel, might bothe be diſcharged from theire Othe made to
the Pope, and alſo ſworne to ſpeake, and to promote the Truthe, the Popes Legate
there made anſweare in greate diſdeigne, that it might not ſo bee: For that
ſo the Popes handes ſhould be bounde. Hereby, M. Hardinge, a blinde man
maie eaſily ſee the fourme, and Freedome of youre Councelles. If the Biſhoppes
be Free to ſaie the Truthe, then is the Pope leafte in Bondage.
                  Whether youre Fathers, in the Chapter at Tridente, ſate there ſixe whole
Moonethes, debatinge, and reaſoning about the Trinitie, or no, of certaine knowledge,
I cannot telle. But certainely, what thinge els they did, either in al that
time,Caſsāder in Cō
                        ſultatione de Cō
                        munione ſubvtra
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſpecie: In Praefatione: Anno 1562. or longe after, you can hardely ſhewe vs. Therefore, if they did not this,
for as mutche, as nothinge els appeareth of theire dooinges, wee muſt imagine,
thei ſate mute in a Muminerie, and ſaide nothinge. Notwithſtandinge, Caſſander
ſaithe, thei beſtowed one whole Sommer in greate, and holy Diſputations aboute
meaner maters, then the Trinitie: I meane, onely about the Communion
of the Cuppe. Martinus Kemnitius ſaithe, Thei helde Diſputations there, and
kepte greate ſturre Seuen whole Moonethes togeather, about the Iuſtification of
Faith & Workes:Marti. Remmitius in Examine Concil Triden. pag. 638. & yet in the end leaft it worſe, then thei founde it. We ſaie, You
your ſelues haue eſpied mani diſorders in your church of Rome, as it is plain bi
your ovvn Confeſsions. To recken thē al in particular, it were too long. I haue
partely touched thē heretofore. Albertus Pigghius confeſſeth, there be Abuſes in
your Maſſe:
                     Alber. Pigghi. In controuer. De Miſſa Priuata. In Concil. Tridenti. An. 1562. The Frenche Kings Embaſſadour, at youre laie Tridentine Chapter,
ſaithe thus, Vel Praefectorum Eccleſiae incuria, vel etiam (ne quid grauius dicam)
praepoſtera Pietate, irrepſiſſe in Eccleſiam res nonnullas Antiquatione, Abrogatione, vel
Moderatione dignas, fateamur neceſſe eſt: Wee muſt needes confeſſe, that either by the negligence
of the Biſhoppes, or by ſome diſordered opinion of Holineſſe (for I wil ſaie no more:
                     
he meaneth falſehed,Picus Miran. Ad Leonem Pp. 10. In Concil. Lateran. and Mockerie, and Wiltal Auarice) certaine thinges are brought
into the Churche, woorthy either to be put awaie, and aboliſhed, or at leaſte, to be qualified.
                  
                  
                     Picus Mirandula beſoughte Pope Leo. 10. to abate the vaine Multitude of
youre Ceremonies: to refourme youre Praiers: and to cut of youre Fables:
                  
                  One of youre owne Louanian Felovves ſaithe,Copus Dialo. 1. pag 115. 
                     Euen nowe a daies, many good

menne miſlike ſo many Appeales to Rome:
                     
                     Idolatrie in the Churche of Rome. Somme others finde faulte with your
Pardonnes: Somme with youre Simonie: ſome with youre Stevves: ſomme with
youre licenceous keepinge, and mainteininge of Concubines.
                  
                  I wil not enlarge the mater further. Theſe, and other like thinges are confeſſed
by youre ſelues. Other greater maters I wil not touche. For in caſes of
Faith, for your credites ſake, ye maie graunte no manner Erroure. For, otherwiſe
it might be thought, yee haue neither the Faith, nor the Life of Chriſtian menne.
                  Nowe therefore tel vs, M. Hardinge, what one Abuſe of al the Abuſes in your
Maſſe: what one Diſorder, or Deformitie, of ſo many Diſorders, and Deformities
in your Churche: What one vaine Ceremonie: What one Childiſhe Fable: What
Appeale to Rome: What Simonie: What Pardonne: What Stevves: What
Courteghianes: What Concubines haue yee refourmed? If yee redreſſe not thoſe
groſſe, and ſenſible Abuſes, that yee ſee with youre eies: howe then wil yee redreſſe
other more ſecrete maters, that perteine onely to Faithe, and be not ſeene?
If ye wil not refourme your open Stevves, when wil yee refourme the Churche
of God? But yee are bolde to aſſure vs, that there is no kinde of Idolatrie, nor euer
was any in youre whole Churche of Rome. Notwithſtanding, ſomme others of
youre beſte Learned Frendes haue thought otherwiſe, as it ſhal appeare.
                  
                     Firſte,
                     Epiphani. li. 3. In Oratione, De Fide catholica. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Epiphanius ſaithe of certaine Perſians, named Maguſaei, Idola quidem
deteſtantur: tamen Idolis cultum exhibent: Thei abhorre the ſight of Idolles:
yet thei fal downe, and woorſhip Idolles. Againe, he reporteth certaine woordes of
S.
                      Paule, as vttered of him by the Sprite of Propheſie, Erunt Mortuis Cultum Diuinum
praeſtantes, quemadmodum etiam. in Iſrael impiè coluerunt: Thei ſhal geue godly
honoure vnto deade menne, like as alſo thei did in Iſrael.
                  
                     What opinion yee haue had of Sainctes departed, I neede not here to remember.
Cardinal Bembus, in an Epiſtle vnto the Emperour Charles. 5. calleth the
Bleſſed Virgine,
                     
                     Epiphani. contra Collyridian. Bembus in Epiſ. ad Carolum 5. Lipomanus. Pag in 289. Dominam Deam noſtram: Our Lady and Goddeſſe. Youre greate
                     
Hercules, Lipomanus, crieth out in his marginal agonie, Ecce quàm potentiſsima
eſt sancta Dei Genitrix: & quomodò nullus ſaluus fieri poſsit niſi per eam: Beholde,
howe mighty is the holy Mother of God, and howe noman maie be ſaued, but by her.
                  
                  
                     It ſeemeth, this Erroure beganne to ſpringe longe ſithence, euen in the time
of the Olde Fathers: and that hereof Fauſtus, the Heretique, tooke occaſion thus
to charge the Catholiques for the ſame.
                     Auguſt. Contra Fauſtum. li. 20. cap 21. Idola vertiſtis in Martyres: Yee haue changed
the Heathen Idolles into youre Martyrs. Further, yee ſaie, the Reuerence, that
yee geeue vnto
                      Sainctes Images, is no Idolatrie. Yet Polydorus Vergilius, ſpeaking
hereof, ſaithe thus: Quia Sacerdotes populum non docent, & vulgo ex vſu ſuo tacere
putantur,Polydor. Virgil. De Inuentoribus rerum. li. 6. cap. 13. idcirco' eo' inſaniae deuentum eſt, vt haec pars Pietatis parùm differat
ab Impietare: For that the Prieſtes iuſtructe not the people, and are thought to holde theire
peace for gaines ſake, the mater is brought to ſutche a dotage, that this parte of Deuotion differeth
but litle from Extreme Wickedneſſe. And
                      Ludouicus Viues ſaithe, he ſeeth no
greate difference bitweene many Chriſtian menne woorſhipping their Images,Ludo. Viues, in li. De Ciuita. Dei Catharinus in Libello de Imaginibus. 
                     &


an Heathen man adouring his Idolles. Catharinus, one of your greate Doctours
of Tridente, ſaithe thus: An licet Adorare Imagines ipſas, & illis cultū praebere?
Sunt qui hoc omnino' negent, & clament, eſſe Idololatriam. Videntur autem non futilibus
Argumentis moueri: nec abs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Maiorum, imo' etiam Scripturarum Authoritate:
Whether is it lawful to Woorſhip the very Images, or no? Somme menne ſaie, nay: and calle
it Idolatrie. And thei ſeeme to be moued with no light Argumentes, nor without the Authoritie,
as wel of the Fathers, as of the Scriptures.
                  
                  Iacobus Nanclantus ſaithe,
                     Iacob. Nanclantus. in Epiſt. ad Roma. cap. 1. Non ſolùm fatendum eſt, Fideles in Eccleſia Adorare
coram Imagine, ſed & Adorare Imaginem, fine quo volueris ſcrupulo: quin & 
                        •
                     o illam
venerari cultu, quo & prototypon eius. Propter quod, ſi illud habet Adorari Latria, & illa
habet Adorari Latria: We muſt graunte, that the Faithful people in the churche, do not onely
                     
vvoorſhippe before the Image, but alſo vvorſhippe the Image it ſelfe: and that
without any manner ſcruple of Conſcience, whatſoeuer. And further, Thei vvorſhippe the
Image vvith the ſelfe ſame honoure, vvherevvith thei vvoorſhippe the thinge
it ſelfe, that is repreſented by the Image. As if the thing it ſelfe be vvoorſhipped
vvith godly honoure, then muſte the Image it ſelfe likevviſe be vvoorſhipped
vvith godly honoure. Hereto agreeth one other of your late Writers,
Iacobus Payua.Iacob. Payua. li. 9 Fortalitiū Fidei. Rob. Holcote. In librum Sapien. Lectione. 158. 
                     And an other of your like Doctours ſaithe, This is the very vſe, and
practiſe of your Churche of rome. But, Robertus Holcote ſaith, This kinde of vvorſhippinge,
is plaine Idolatrie. Yee wil ſaie, Yee knovve the Image is no God.
And this, ye thinke, is excuſe ſufficiente. But ſo likewiſe ſaide the Heathens of
theire Idoles: & yet, as S. Auguſtine ſaith, thei were Idolaters notwithſtanding.
                  
                  
                     Yee wil ſaie,
                     Augu. De Verb. Domi. Secundum Matt. Sermo 6. Auguſtin. Ad Quodvult deum. Paul. Venet. li. 3. Cap. 27. It is the Image of an Apoſtle of Chriſte, or of God him ſelfe: and therefore
it can be no Idolatrie. But S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Marcellina colebat Imaginem
Ieſu, & Pauli, & Homeri, & Pythagorae, Adorando, Incenſum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ponendo: Marcellina
                     
Woorſhipped the Image of Ieſus, and of Paule, and of Homere, and of Pythagoras, by kneelinge
vnto them, and burninge Incenſe before them. Yet neuertheleſſe ſhe was an Idolater.
The Saracenes this date, make theire Sacrifices in Mounte Mecha, not to
Diuels, or Heathen Goddes: But to Abraham, and Iſaac, and S. Thomas: yet
ace thei not therefore excuſed of Idolatrie.
                     Gregor. Nyſſen. In Orat. funebri de Placilla. 
                     Gregorius the Biſhop of Nyſſa, S.
Baſiles Brother, ſaithe thus: Qui Creaturam Adorat, etſi in Nomine Chriſti id faciat,
tamen Simulachrorum Cultor eſt, Chriſti Nomen Simulachro imponens: He that woorshipper
a Creature, notwithstandinge he doo it in the Name of Christe, yet is he a woorſhipper
of Images, as geeuing the name of Chriſte vnto an Image. By theſe fewe, M.
Harding, it maie ſoone appeare, that your Churches are not voide of al Idolatrie.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 7. Diuiſion. 3.
               And therefore we knowe, that diuers times many good men, and
Catholique Biſhoppes did tarrie at home, & would not come, when
ſutche Councelles were called, wherein menne ſo apparently laboured
to ſerue factions, & to take partes, bicauſe thei knewe, thei ſhould
but loſe their trauaile, and doo no good, ſeeinge wherevnto theire
enimies mindes were ſo wholy bente. Athanaſius denied to comme,
when he was called by the Emperoure to his Councel at Caeſaria,
perceiuinge plainely he ſhould but cōme among his enimies, whiche
deadly hated him. The ſame Athanaſius, when he came afterwarde
to the Councel at Syrmium, and foreſawe what woulde be the ende,
by reaſon of the outrage, and malice of his enimies, he packed vp his
cariage, and went away immediately. Iohn Chryſoſtome, although
the Emperoure Conſtantius,
                  Hiſtor. Tripari. lib. 10. cap. 13. Euſeb. li 1. ca. 17. commaunded him by foure ſundrie letters,
to come to the Arians Councel, yet keapte he him ſelfe at home
ſtil. When Maximus, the Biſhop of Hieruſalem, ſate in the Councel
of Paleſtine, the Olde Father Paphnutius toke him by the hand,
and leadde him out at the doores, ſaieinge: It is not lavvful for vs, to
conferre of theſe maters vvith vvicked menne. The Biſhoppes
of the Eaſte woulde not comme to the Syrmian Councel, after they
knewe, Athanaſius had gotten him ſelfe thence againe. Cyril called
menne backe by letters from the Councel of them, whiche were named
Patropaſsians. Paulinus, Biſhop of Trier, and many others

moe, refuſed to comme to the councel at Millaine, when they vnderſtoode,
what a ſturre, and rule Auxentius keapte there: for they
ſawe, it was in vaine to goe thither, where not reaſon, but faction
ſhoulde preuaile: and where folke contended, not for the Truthe, and
right iudgemente of the mater, but for Partialitie, and Fauour.
               And, al be it thoſe Fathers had ſutche maliceous and ſtiffe necked
enimies, yet if thei had comme, thei ſhould haue had free ſpeache
at leaſt in the councelles.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Firſt,And vvhy not as vvel, as M. Hard. maie calle the vvhole Churche the Popes Vineyarde? pag. 283. b. Or, al the Biſhops through the vvorlde the Popes Sheepe? Pag. 308. b. here I note the falſehed of the Lady enterpreter, who turneth the Latine ſpeaking of Athanaſius.
Cùm vocatus eſſet ab Imperatore ad Concilium Caeſarienſe: VVhen he was called
by the Emperoure to his Councel at Caeſarca. VVhere by addinge the worde his, of her owne, ſhe or a
worſe ſhrewe vnder her name, goeth about to perſwade, as Heretiques doo, that the Councels be to be
accompted the Councels of Temporal Princes, not of Biſhoppes: and that they be the heads of them, not
the Biſhop of Rome. This mutche to her. Nowe Sir to you Defender. Al theſe examples ſerue you to no
purpoſe. It is not denied you, but that in caſes, menne maie refuſe to comme to Councels. Your examples
declare, that Catholique Biſhops ſhunned to come vnto the vnlauful Councels of Heretiques. But ye holdinge
ſtrange opinions, condemned by the Churche, denie to comme to the lauful Councels of Catholike
Biſhoppes. VVhen ye haue proued vs to be Heretiques, I meane the Fathers of the late Councel, then
maie ye iuſtly alleage the example of Athanaſius, Chryſoſtome, Maximus, Paphnutius, Cyril, Paulinu,
and ſutche other, for not comminge to the Councel.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Had you not had a ſhrewde ſharpe witte, M. Hardinge, and a very good likinge
of the ſame, yee coulde neuer haue made your ſelfe ſo greate ſporte of ſo ſmal
a mater. The Lady Interpreter pitieth your caſe, and wiſheth you a litle more
diſcretion: and woulde be mutche aſhamed to anſweare your folies.
                  
                     If the Councel, we ſpeake of, were not the Emperoures Councel, then mutche
leſſe was it the Popes Councel. For in thoſe daies, as hereafter it ſhalbe declared
more at large, Councelles were ſummoned by Emperoures, & not by Popes. And
what reaſon haue you to ſhew vs, that the Councel, being ſummoned by the Emperoure,
might not be called the Emperoure Councel, as wel, as the Pope, being
admitted, & allowed by y•
                      Emperoure, might be called the Emperoures Prieſte?
Odoacer,In Concil. Romano. 3. ſub Symmacho. pp. 
                     in the third Councel of Rome, in the time of Pope Symmachus, ſaide
thus: Miramur, praetermiſsis nobis, quicquā fuiſſe tentatū: Cùm etiā Sacerdote noſtro
ſuperſtite, nihil ſine nobis debuiſſet affumi: Wee ma
                           •
                        ueile, that any thinge was attempted
without our knowledge: for as mutche as, Our Prieſte (he meaneth the Pope) beinge aliue,
nothing maie be donne without vs.
                     Liberat. cap. 11. Liberatus ſaithe, Flauianus Epiſcopus Eutychem ad
Concilium Suum venire praecepit: Flauianus the Biſhop (not of
                      Rome, but of Antioche)
Commaunded Eutyches to comme to his Councel. Hereafter, M. Harding, ye maie
take time, to ſtudie for ſomme better quarel. Surely this was very ſimple.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ye excuſe Athanaſius, Chryſoſtomus, Maximus, Paphnutius, Hilarius, Cyrillus,
Paulinus, & other Learned Biſhoppes, & holy Fathers, for not appearing at
General Councels: for y• thei were ſummoned to appeare before Heretiques. As for
the Fathers of your late Tridentine Chapter, what ſo euer thei were, ye muſt in
any wiſe calle them Catholiques. Yet notwithſtanding, yee maie remember, y• by
ſutche good Catholiques, as you be, the ſame holy Fathers, Athanaſius, Chryſoſtomus.
Maximus,Hilarius contra Arianos, & Auxentium. Paphnutius. Hilarius, Cyrillus, Paulinus, & others were called
Heretiques. Hilarius ſaithe: Congreger nunc Auxentius, quas volet in me Synodos, &
Haereticum me, vt ſaepe iam fecit, publico titulo proſcribat: Nowe let Auxentius, the Arian

Heretique, calle what Councelles he liſte againſt me: and by open Proclamations let him publiſhe
me for an Heretique,
                     Theod. li. 2. ca. 3. 
                     as he hath oftentimes donne already. The
                      Arian Heretiques
ſaide, y• the Catholique Chriſtians, whom thei called Homouſians, whiche in
their meaning was as mutche, as Heretiques, were the cauſe of al diuiſion.
                  
                  S. Hierome ſaithe vnto Marcus,
                     Hieronym. Ad Marcum Preſbyterum Celedenſem. 
                     Haereticus ſum: quid ad te? Quieſce: iam dictū eſt:
I am an Heretique: What is that to thee? Holde your peace: yee haue tolde your tale.
                      By
like right, Chriſte him ſelfe, by certaine your Anciente Fathers, was called a Samaritane,
a Deceiuer of the people, and an Heretique. And, if it maie pleaſe you
ſoberly, & aduiſedly to conſider the mater, ye ſhal finde throughout the whole Body
of the Scriptures, y• no people made euer ſo greate crakes of the Churche, as thei,
that were the deadly Enimies of the Churche: nor none were ſo ready to condēue
others of Hereſie, as thei, that in deede were them ſelues the greateſt Heretiques.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 8. Diuiſion. 1.
               But nowe, ſithence none of vs maie bee ſuffered ſo mutche as to
ſitte, or once to be ſeene in theſe mennes meetinges, mutche leſſe ſuffered
to ſpeake freely our minde: and ſeeinge the Popes Legates, Patriarches,
Archebiſhoppes, Biſhoppes, and Abbates, al being conſpired
togeather, al linked togeather in one kinde of faulte, & al bounde
by one othe, ſitte alone by them ſelues, and haue power alone to geeue
their conſente: and at laſt, when thei haue al donne, as though thei
had donne nothinge, bringe al their opinions to be iudged at the wil,
and pleaſure of the Pope, being but one man, to thende he maie pronounce
his owne ſentence of him ſelfe, who ought rather to haue anſweared
to his complainte: ſithence alſo the ſame Ancient, and chriſtian
Libertie, whiche of al right ſhoulde ſpecially bee in chriſtian
councelles, is nowe vtterly taken away from the councel: for theſe
cauſes, I ſaie, wiſe and good menne ought not to marueile at this
daie, though we doo the like nowe, that, thei ſee, was donne in times
paſt in like caſe, of ſo many Fathers, & Catholique Biſhoppes: which
is, though we chuſe rather to ſit at home, and leaue our whole cauſe
to God, then to iournei thither, where as wee neither can haue place,
nor be hable to doo any good: where as wee can obteine no audience:
where as Princes Embaſſadours be but vſed as mockinge ſtockes:
& where as alſo al wee be condemned already before trial: as though
the mater were a forehande diſpatched, and agreed vpon.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If I wiſhe, ye woulde take my counſel in good parte, and liſten vnto it,A ſage piece of Counſel, and meete for a Doctour of Diuinitie. as it ſtandeth you vpon,
I would aduiſe you to cal in al the bookes of your Apologie, and that with no leſſe diligence, then yee
went about to ſuppreſſe the Bookes of my anſweare to M. Iuelles chalenge, at their firſte comminge abrode.
That done, to caſte bruites abrode, that the Apologie was made and counterfeited by ſome crafty
Papiſt, to bringe you quite out of credite with al the worlde. So might ye perhaps in time recouer
ſome parte of your loſt eſtimation. For whiles your Bookes be in mennes handes, they ſhalbe an euident
witnes to al the worlde, of your ſhameles lieing.
                  The Booke of the Canons, and Decrees of the Councel, hathe benne printed almoſte in al partes of
Chriſtendome. Looke who liſte, in euery Booke he ſhal finde three ſeueral ſolemne Safeconductes, graunted
by the Councel, and confirmed by the three Popes, vnder whome the ſame was celebrated. VVhiche

Safeconductes conteine firſte in moſte ample wiſe ful Libertie, Power, Auctoritie, and aſſurance for al
and ſinguler perſons of al Germanie, of what degree, ſtate, condition, or qualitie ſo euer they bee, that
would come to that oecumenical and general Councel, to conferre, propounde, and treate with al freedome,
of al thinges to be treated there, and to the ſame Councel freely, and ſafely to come, there to tarry
and abide, and to offer and put vp articles, ſo many as they thought good, as wel in writinge, as by
woorde, and with the Fathers, and others thereto choſen, to conferre, and without any reproches, or vpbraidinges
to diſpute, alſo at theire pleaſure ſafely againe from thence to departe.
               
               
                  An extenſion to other Nations.
                  The ſame holy Councel in the holy Ghoſte lavvefully aſſembled,
the ſame Legates de latere of the See Apoſtolike, being preſident
in it, to al and ſinguler others, vvhiche haue not cōmunion
vvith vs in thoſe maters, that be of Faithe, of vvhat ſo euer Kingdomes,
Nations, Prouinces, Citties, and Places, in vvhiche openly,
and vvithout puniſhement, is preached, or taught, or beleued the
contrarie of that, vvhiche the holy Romaine Churche holdeth,
geueth Faithe publique or Safeconducte, vnder the ſame forme,
and the ſame vvordes, vvith vvhich it is geuen to the Germaines.
                  This being moſte true, as the better part of the worlde ſeeth, and the Bookes, and publique inſtrumentes
extant doo witneſſe, your excuſe of your refuſal to come to the Councel, as Biſhoppes of other
Chriſtian Realmes did, is founde falſe.A ful diſcrete kinde of Mockerie. Thei offer menne libertie to comme, and ſpeake: but reſerue the vvhole Iudgemente to them ſelues. Ye had al free libertie and ſecuritie, graunted vnto you for
that behalfe, in ſo ample and large maner, as mans witte coulde deniſe.
                  The ſeconde cauſe why ye came not, is, for that the Popes Legates, Patriarches, Archebiſhoppes.
Biſhoppes, and Abbotes, al being conſpired together, al lincked together in one kinde of faulte, and al
bounde in one Othe, ſitte alone by them ſelues, and haue power alone to geue theire conſent. VVhat is
here that ſhould let you to ioine with others for procuring vnitie, and peace in Chriſtendome? Complaine
ye of the Fathers concorde and agreeinge togeather?Thei agree togeather againſte God, and his Chriſte. That is a ſigne, the ſpirite of God, authour
of charitie and vnitie, gouerneth their hartes. In that reſpect, they ſeeme to comme togeather in
the holy Ghoſte. And in deede, had ye gone thither, your hereſie
                        •
                      had benne confuted, your ſelues required
to yelde, and to conforme you to the Catholique churche or els ye had benne anathematized, accurſed,
and condemned.
                  Your third cauſe is, for that the determinations, and decrees of the Councel, be referred to the
Pope. To that we haue anſweared before. The Pope confirmeth al, being head ouer the Councel.But vvho made youre Pope a Kinge? And vvhē vvil he geeue his Real Conſent againſt him ſelfe? Doth
not the Queene ſo pardy cōfirme your actes of Parlament, by geuing her Roial aſſent vnto them at the
ende of the Parlament? VVhat thinge can be done perfitly by a body without the head? And who
might better confirme Councels, then he, whoſe Faithe in pronouncinge ſentence, rightly and duely,Luke. 
                           •
                        2. in
maters concerning Faithe, we are aſſured by Chriſtes praier, to be infallible?
                  Your fourth cauſe is, for as mutche as the Ancient, and Chriſtian libertie, which of right ſhould
ſpecially be in Chriſtian Councels, is now vtterly taken away. This cauſe is not different frō your firſt.
                  Your fifth cauſe is a falſe lie, that Princes Ambaſſadours be vſed, but as mocking ſtockes.Thei are allovved a place: but touchinge Iudgemente, thei maie ſaie nothinge. Truthe
it is, thei haue moſte honourable ſeates in al Councels. In this Councel thei ſate by the Legates. Euery
Ambaſſadour hath his place there according to the degree of honoure, the kingdomes, common weales,
ſtates, and Princes be of, from whence, and from whom he commeth.
                  The ſixt, and laſt cauſe ye alleage for your not comming to the Councel is, for that ye be cōdemned
already before trial, as though the matter were aforehand diſpatched and agreed vpon. In dedeVntruthe, vvithout any coloure of honeſte ſhame. your
hereſies for the more part be and haue ben condemned about a thouſand yeres paſt. And therefore thei
are not nowe to be called vnto a newe trial, as though the Churche vntil this daie, had benne deceiued,
and ſo many Fathers ouerſeene. This notwithſtanding, maie ye wel ſaie, touching that point, your matter
is afore hand diſpatched, and agreed vpon. For thei knowe, what ye can ſaie, and ſee, that ye ſaie
nothing, but onely ſtande wilfully and ſtubbornly in your falſe opinions, and fleſhly pleaſures.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wee neuer ſuppreſſed any of your Bookes, M. Hardinge, as you knowe:The Popes Saueconducte. but
are very wel contented, to ſee them ſo common, that as nowe, children maie plaie
with them in the Streetes. Your manifeſt Vntruthes: your Simple Concluſions:
your often Contrarieties to your ſelfe: your Newe founde Authoures: your Childiſhe
Fables: your Vncourteous Speaches: your Rackinge, Corrupting, & Miſceportinge
of the Doctours therein couteined, haue mutche bewraied the miſerable
feebleneſſe of your cauſe. Your Felowes haue no cauſe, greately to glorie in ſutche
healpes: nomore then in other your like Pamflettes, vnmeete of any wiſe man to
be anſweared. This was your onely, and ſpecial policie, in the time of your late
Kingdome. Yee ſuppreſſed, and called in, & burnt al our Writinges, what ſo euer,
yea, the very Teſtament, & Goſpel of Chriſte, truely tranſlated into Engliſhe,
naming them Heretical, and Vnlawful Bookes. And, if any man had conceled,
and keapte vnto him ſelfe for his cōforte, any ſutche Booke written by any of our
ſyde, by moſt terrible, & bloudy Proclamations, yee made it Felonie. So mutche
yee deſpaired, and doubted your owne folies.
                  As for the Bookes of our Apologie, they haue ben ſpreadde ſo farre, & printed ſo
often, in Latine, in Italian, in Frenche, in Duitche, in Engliſhe, that, as nowe, it
were hard to ſuppreſſe them. Touchinge the ſhameleſſe lieinge, wherewith yee
charge vs. we are wel content to ſtande to the Iudgement of the wiſe. Certainely,
it ſhameth vs mutche, to ſee ſo litle ſhame in youre Writinges.
                  
                     Yee ſaie, The Pope gaue out his Saueconducte to al the Princes, and Free Citties, and
to the whole people of Germanie, to come to the Councel, to propounde, to diſpute at
theire pleaſure, and, when they ſhoulde thinke it good, freely, and ſafely to returne, with a
large Extenſion to other Nations, as yee ſaie, to like pourpoſe.
                  But firſte, M. Hardinge, what ſafetie can there be in his Saueconducte, that
is not hable to ſaue him ſelfe? Pope Eugenius the fourthe,Concil. Baſilien. Seſsion. 3. & 4. if he had comme to the
Councel of Baſile, as you knowe, had benne quite depoſed from his Popedome,
al his Saueconductes notwithſtandinge. Pope Iohn. 22. gaue oute as ſure a Saueconducte
for the Councel of Conſtance, as Pope Pius could diuiſe any for your
late Chapter of Tridente. Yet notwithſtandinge al his Safetie,
                     Concil. Conſtan. Seſsion. 2. 3. 4. beinge him ſelfe
preſent in the Councel, he was pulled out of Peters Chaire, and depriued of his
Dignitie, and ſtripte out of his Pontificalibus, and turned home againe in his
Minoribus, and allowed onely to be a Cardinal, and no lenger to be a Pope. Yee
maie remember, Cicero ſaithe, Qui multorum Cuſtodem ſe profiteatur, eum ſapientes
ſui primùm capitis aiunt Cuſtodem eſſe oportere:
                     Cicero. Philip. 12 
                     Wiſe menne ſaie, Who ſo wil take
vpon him to ſaue others, oughte firſt to ſaue him ſelfe.
                  
                  And what credite maie wee geeue to youre Saueconductes?
                     Illyricus in Proteſt. contra Concil. Tridentin. pag. 77. 
                     Iacobus Nachiantes.
the Biſhop of Chioca, for that he had ſimpred out one halfe woorde of truthe
to the miſlikinge of the Legates, was faine to renne to Rome, to crepe to the
Popes feete, and to craue Pardonne. Yee ſhamefully betraied, & cruelly murthered
Iohn Huſſe, & Hieronymus Pragenſis in your Coūcel of Cōſtance. Neither
y• 
                     Protection of the Emperoure, nor the Popes Saueconducte was hable to
ſaue thē. No, your ſelues haue already ruled y• caſe in your ſaid Councel. For thus
yee ſaie, Fides non eſt ſeruanda Hereticis: Yee maie holde no Faithe vnto them, that
yee calle Heretiques. Sutche is the Safetie,Concil. Conſtan. Seſsion. 19. and Libertie of your Councelles.
                  
                  Ye ſaie, Our Learned Men were allowed to Propounde, to Talke, to Diſpute.
                      What
ſhoulde this auaile? For yee reſerued the Determination, and whole Iudgemente
to youre ſelues: and youre ſelues are ſworne to ſubmitte yours whole Iudgemente
                     
to the Pope,
                     The Agreement of the Tridētine Fathers. and without his Iudgemente to Iudge nothinge. And howe
maie this ſeeme a Free Councel, were the guilty partie ſhalbe the Iudge?
                  
                  Yee ſaie, There is an Extenſion graunted to other Nations.
                      Al this is true in
deede. But this ſame Truthe diſcrieth youre open Mockerie. For if yee hadde
ſeene the Inſtrumente, in the ende thereof yee ſhoulde haue founde youre ſaide
Extenſion reſtrained onely to them,Io. Fabritius in Recuſatione Cō
                        cil. Triden. Iohan Sleidanus li. 23. Anno 1552. that woulde Repente, and Recante the
Truthe of God, whiche you calle Erroure.
                  Howe be it, not longe ſithence, the Biſhoppes of youre ſaide Chapter at
Tridente were very lothe to allowe any tolerable Sauecondite at al, either to
the Germaines, or to any others.
                  But yee ſaie, if wee hadde comme to youre Chapter, we hadde benne Confounded.
No doubtes, with youre Firy Argumentes. For ſutche proufes muſte healpe
you, when others faile.
                  As for the gaie ſtuffe, that youre Tridentine Fathers, after theire Nature
Deliberation, as they calle it, and more then twentie yeeres ſtudie, haue ſente vs
out lately into the worlde, it is too ſimple to mocke Children.
                  Wee finde no faulte with you, M. Hardinge, for that youre Biſhoppes, and
Abbates agree togeather: but for that they agree togeather, as did Herode,
and Pilate,
                     Matt. 22. &. 26. the Sadduceis, and Phariſeis againſte Chriſte.
                  
                  Neither maie you wel vaunte youre ſelues of youre greate agreementes.
Yee maie remember, that twoo of the Principal Pillers of youre Chapter,
                     Petrus à Soto. Catharinus. 
                     Petrus
à Soto, and Catharinus, diſſented euen there openly, and ſhamefully, and
that in greate pointes of Religion: and wrote, the one mightily againſte the other:
the one charginge the other with Erroure, and Hereſie, and coulde neuer
bee reconciled.
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge, againſte other pointes of Goddes Truthe, bothe they,
and the reſte ioined ſtoutely togeather. S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     Auguſt. In Pſal. 36. Concione. 2. 
                     Tunc inter ſe
concordant, quando in perniciem Iuſti conſpirant. Non quia ſe amant, ſed
quia eum, qui amandus erat, ſimul oderunt: Then they agree togeather, when they
conſpire to deſtroie the Iuſte: not for that they them ſelues loue one an other: but for that
they bothe hate him, whome they ought to loue. Of ſutche kinde of Conſente S.
Hierome, although to a farre contrarie pourpoſe, imagineth Iouinian thus to
ſaie:
                     Hieronym. In Apolo
                           •
                        etico ad Domnionem. 
                     Quo'd me damnant Epiſcopi, non eſt ratio, ſed conſpiratio. Nolo mihi ille, vel
ille reſpondeat, quorum me Authoritas opprimere poteſt, docere non poteſt: That the
Biſhoppes condemne me, there is no Reaſon in theire dooinges, but a Conſpiracie. I would
not, that this man, or that man ſhoulde anſweare mee, whiche maie oppreſſe mee by theire
Authoritie, and cannot teache mee.
                  Whether it bee conueniente, that the Pope, beinge notoriouſly accuſed of
manifeſte corruption in Goddes Religion, ſhoulde neuertheleſſe be the whole,
and onely Iudge of the ſame, and pronounce ſentence of him ſelfe, let it be indifferently
conſidered by the wiſe.
                  The Lawe ſaithe,ff. De Iuriſdict. omniū Iudicum. 
                     Nemo ſibi debet Ius Dicere: No man maie bee his owne
Iudge.
                      Sutche Authoritie, yee ſaie, Kinges haue in Parlamentes. Hereof I am
not hable to diſpute. The Princes right many times paſſeth by Compoſition: and
therefore is not euermore one in al places. Howe be it, the Pope is a Biſhop, and
not a Kinge: and other Biſhoppes be not his Subiectes, but his Brethren.
                  Youre fourthe Obiection is but a Cauil. Yee ſaie, yee mocke not Princes Embaſſadours,
but place them nexte vnto youre Legates: to ſitte ſtil, I trowe, and
to telle the Clocke. For voice in Iudgemēt ye allowe them none. Thus ye proine
their Authoritie, and allowe them Honoure. Notwithſtandinge, whether the
Emperours, and Princes Embaſſadours maie ſitte ſo neare to the Popes Legates,
                     
or no, I can not tel.The placinge of Embaſſadours. Verily the Emperoure him ſelfe maie not be ſo bolde,
to preſſe ſo neare vnto the Pope. For thus it is ordered in youre Booke of Ceremonies:
Aduertendum eſt, quod locus, vbi ſedet Imperator, non ſit altior loco, vbi tenet
pedes Pontifex:
                     Ceremoniarium Roman. li. 1. Sect. 14. cap. 2. 
                     This is to be noted, that the place, where the Emperoure ſitteth (in
General Councel) be no higher, then the place, where the Pope ſetteth his feete. That
is to ſaie, the Emperoure muſt ſitte at the Popes footeſtoole, and no higher.
                  Al the partes of oure Religion, whiche you calle Hereſies, yee ſaie, are already
condemned, iuſte a thouſande yeeres paſte. Here, M. Hardinge, it woulde haue
woonne you ſomme good credite, if yee could haue tolde vs, in what General Councel,
vnder what Emperoure, by what Doctours, by what Catholique Learned
Fathers, theſe greate Errours were thus condemned. As nowe, yee roaue onely at
large, and feede youre ſimple Reader with youre emptie Calendares, of thouſandes
of yeeres, and ſpeake at randonne. If it hadde benne true, yee woulde better haue
ſhewed it: but beinge moſte vntrue, as you knowe it to bee, for very ſhame, yee
ſhould neuer haue ſaide it.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion 1. & 2.
               Neuertheleſſe wee can beare patiently, and quietly our owne priuate
wronges. But wherefore doo thei ſhutte out Chriſtian Kinges,
and good Princes from their Conuocation? Why doo they ſo vncourteouſly,
or with ſuche ſpite leaue them out, and as though they
were not, either Chriſtian menne, or els coulde not iudge, wil not
haue them made acquainted with the cauſes of Chriſtian Religion,
nor vnderſtande the ſtate of their owne Churches?
               
               Or, if the ſaide Kinges, and Princes happen to entermeddle in ſutche
maters, and take vpon them to doo, that they maie doo, that they be
commaunded to doo, and ought of dutie to doo, and the ſame thinges,
that, we know, bothe Dauid, and Salomon, and other good Princes
haue donne, that is, if they, whiles the Pope, and his Prelates ſiugge,
& ſleepe, or els miſcheuouſly withſtande them, doo bridle the Prieſtes
ſenſualitie, and driue them to doo their duetie, and keepe them ſtil to
it: If they doo ouerthrowe Idolles, if they take away Superſtition,
and ſette vp againe the true woorſhipping of God, why doo they by
and by make an outcrie vpon them, that ſutche Princes trouble al,
and preſſe by violence into an other bodies office, and doo therein
wickedly, and malepeartly? What Scripture hathe at any time forbidden
a Chriſtian Prince to be made priuie to ſutche cauſes? Who,
but themſelues alone, made euer any ſutche Lawe?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  
                     Vntruthe, Vaine, and vnaduiſed, Read the Anſvveare. Ye confounde the offices of the Spiritual Gouernours, and Temporal Magiſtrates. VVhat Kinges
and Princes maie doo, what they be commaunded to doo, and ought of dutie to doo: in Gods name let
them doo, and wel maie they ſo doo, VVho is he, that gaineſaithe? If by the pretenſed example of
Dauid and Salomon, yeVntruthe. It is not our Doctririe But vvhy embolden you the Pope, to entermeddle vvith Princes Offices? animate them to intermeddle with Biſhoply offices, then beware they (ſaie
wee) that Gods vengeance light not vpon them for ſutche wicked preſumption, whiche lighted vpon
king Ozias,
                        
                           •
                        . Par. 26. for the like offence.
                  Ye teache Princes to vſe violence againſt Prieſtes, as though theire faultes coulde not be redreſſed
by theYoure Prelates be as blamevvorthy, and as negligente, as the Prieſtes. Prelates of the Clergie, of whom ye ſpeake by ſpiteful ſurmiſe, as though God had vtterly

withdrawen his holy ſpirite from them. But foraſmuche as Chriſte aſsiſteth his Churche alwaies,
and ſhal neuer faile in thinges neceſſary, it is not to be doubted, but the Churche ſhal euer be prouided
of ſomme good Gouernours, ſo as, though ſomme ſlugge and ſlepe, yet ſomme other ſhal wake, and
diligently attende their charge. Prieſtes haue their Eccleſiaſtical courtes, where their defaultes, and
offences maie duely, and Canonically be puniſhed: and the offenders, by Prieſtly diſcipline, be redreſſed.
Neither is it conuenient for a Kinge, to come into Prieſtes conſiſtories,Vntruthe, reproued by the Ancient practiſe of the Churche: as it ſhal appeare nor to cal Prieſtes before
him, to his owne ſeate of iudgement.
                  So many as be neceſſary to miniſter, and performe thoſe thinges, that apperteine to the building
vp of Chriſtes Body the Churche, vntil it comme to his perfection, S. Paule reckeneth by name, in his
Epiſtle to the Epheſians,Ephe. 4. ſaieing that Chriſte hath to that ende, placed in his Churche,Marke, that Popes, and Cardinalles in this ranke are not named. ſomme Apoſtles,
ſomme Prophetes, ſomme Euangeliſtes, ſomme Shepeherdes, and teachers, Kinges, and Princes bee
not there named, as they, who haue their propre rancke. That the people be to be ſtirred by vs, to
more feruent deuotion to worſhip God, and ſomme perhaps, to be warned of ſomme caſes of ſuperſtition,
we graunte. But that any other manner or kinde of woorſhippinge of God, is either by vs, or by
temporal Princes, to be ſette vp in Chriſtes Churche, that wee denie.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Wee Confounde not theſe Offices, M. Hardinge, as yee beſte knowe: but rather
teache eche man, carefully to attende his owne Office. You, and youre Fathers
haue brought Confuſion of Offices into the Churche of God, in that yes
haue made youre Pope Heire Apparente vnto the Empiere: and haue armed him
with al manner Authoritie, Spiritual, and Temporal: and haue geeuen him the
right of Bothe Swerdes.
                  For thus youre owne Pope Nicolas telleth you ſtoutely in his owne behalfe,
Chriſtus Petro,
                     Diſt. 22. Omnes. 
                     Aeternae vitae Clauigero, Terreni ſimul, & Coeleſtis Imperij iura cō
                        miſit:
Chriſte hath committed vnto Peter, the Keiebearer of Euerlaſtinge Life, the right,
as wel of the Earthely, as of the Heauenly Empiere.
                      Thus by youre Doctrine, Prieſtehoode,
Kingdome, Popedome, Empiere, are al conueighed wholy into one
mannes handes: and ſo, by youre handlinge, one man is Prieſte, Kinge, Pope,
and Emperoure, al at once. This perhaps vnto the wiſe, maie ſeeme to be ſomme
Confuſion of Offices.
                  
                  Touchinge that ye write of the raſſhe attempte of Kinge Ozias, yee ſeeme not
to vnderſtande, neither out woordes, nor your owne. For wee teache not Princes,
to Offer vp Incenſe in Sacrifice,2. Paralip. 26. as Ozias did: or by intruſion to thruſte them
ſelues into Biſhoppes roumes: or to Preache, or to Miniſter Sacramentes, or to
Binde, or to Looſe: But onely to diſcharge theire owne Offices, and to doo that
dutie, that Dauid, Salomon, Ezechias, Ioſias, and other Noble, and godly Kinges
did, and euermore was lawful for the Prince to doo. As for Right of Place, and
Voice in Councel, it perteineth no leſſe to the Prince, then to the Pope: as hereafter
it ſhal better appeare.
                  Yee ſaie, Chriſte ſhal alwaies aſsiſte his Churche: and ſhal euermore prouide her of
good Gouernours.
                      Thus, be youre negligence, and careleſſe ſlouthfulneſſe neuer ſo
greate, bee youre liues neuer ſo looſe: bee you Doumbe Dogges, not hable to
barke, bee you Lanternes without Light, bee you Salte without ſauoure, yet yee
euermore dreame ſweetely of Chriſtes Promiſe, and aſſure youre ſelues vndoubtedly
of his aſſiſtance: Euen as he that ſommetime ſaide, Pan curer oues, ouium
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
magiſtros. Woulde God youre Biſhoppes woulde doo their dutie, and doo it faithfully:
The worlde ſhoulde haue leſſe cauſe to complaine. Notwithſtandinge,
Chriſte is euermore mindeful of his promiſe. For when he ſeeth his Churche defaced,
and laide waſte, he raiſeth vp faitheful Magiſtrates, and godly Princes, not
to doo the Prieſtes, or Biſhoppes duties: but to force the Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes,
to doo theire duties.
                  
                     
                     But yee ſaie, Chriſte hath placed in his Churche, ſomme Apoſtles, ſomme Prophetes,A Biſhop cōuented before the Magiſtrate.
                     ſomme Euangeliſtes, ſomme Paſtoures, ſomme Teachers. Kinges, ye ſaie,
and Princes bée not there named. Hereof yée conclude, Ergo, The Prince maie
not cauſe the Abuſes of his Church to be refourmed: nor ouerſee the Prieſtes,Epheſ. 4.
and Biſhoppes, if thei be negligente: nor force them to doo their dueties.
                  
                  I marueile, M. Hardinge, where yée learned ſo mutche Logique. Howe
frame yee this Argumente? In what Moode? In what Figure? With what cement
can yée make theſe ſéely looſe partes to cleaue togeather? It pitieth me to
ſée your caſe. For by like fourme of Argumente, and with mutche more likelihoode
of Reaſon, wée maie turne the ſame againſte your ſelfe, and maie ſaie thus:
Chriſte hath placed in his Churche, ſomme Apoſtles, ſomme Prophetes, ſomme
Euangeliſtes, ſomme Paſtoures, ſomme Teachers: The Pope, and his Cardinalles
are not here named: Apoſtles they are not, For the Apoſtles were but
twelue: Prophetes they are not, for they Propheſie nothinge: Euangeliſtes
they be not, for they Preache not: Paſtours, or Feeders they are not, for they
Feede not: Doctours, or Teachers they are not, for they teache not. Ergo, by
this Authoritie of S. Paule, and by your owne Argumente, The Pope, and his
Cardinalles be vtterly excluded, and maie not meddle with the charge of the
Churche of God.
                  
                  In ſutche good Subſtantial ſorte Pope Paulus. 3. not longe ſithence, reaſoned
againſte the Emperoure Charles the Fifthe,
                     Epiſtola Pauli. 3. ad Carolum. 5. 
                     En ego ſupra Paſtores meos:
Beholde, ſaithe God Almighty, I wil pouniſhe my Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes, for their
negligence, and wickedneſſe: Ergo, ſaithe Pope Paulus, The Prince, or Emperoure
maie not pouniſhe them.
                  In this your manner of Reaſoning, M. Hardinge, there are welneare as many
Errours, as there be woordes. The firſte is, Ignoratio Elenchi: which is the groſſeſt
Fallax of al the reſte: Secondly, yee conclude without either Moode, or Figure:
as a very childe maie eaſily ſee. Thirdely, yée Reaſon á Meris Particularibus,
or, A non Diſtributo ad Diſtributum. Fourthely, theſe woordes, Rule,
or Charge of the Churche, are woordes of double, and doubteful meaninge. And
therefore your Syllogiſmus, ſutche as it is, muſt néedes ſtande of Foure Termes:
whiche erroure in Reaſoninge is too ſimple for a childe.
                  Touchinge theſe woordes, Rule, and Charge, whiche I ſaide, are double, and
doubteful, notwithſtandinge wee ſaie, bothe the Prince, and the Biſhop haue
Charge of the Churche, yet the Prince, and the Biſhop haue not bothe one
kinde of Charge. The Biſhoppes Charge is, to Preache, to Miniſter Sacramentes,
to Order Prieſtes, to Excommunicate, to Abſolue &c. The Princes
charge is, not to doo any of theſe thinges him ſelfe, in his owne Perſonne, but onely
to ſee, that they be donne, and orderly, & truely donne by the Biſhoppes.
                  
                  I graunte, there be many Special Priuileges graunted vpon greate, and iuſte
conſiderations, of the méere fauoure of the Prince, that a Prieſte, being founde neligente,
or otherwiſe offendinge in his Miniſterie, ſhould be conuented, & pouniſhed,
not by the Temporal, or Ciuile Magiſtrate, but by y• diſcretion of the Biſhop.
                  
                  But, that a Prince, or Magiſtrate maie not lawfully calle a Prieſte before
him, to his owne ſeate of Iudgemente, or that many Catholique, and Godly
Princes haue not ſo donne, and donne it lawfully, it is moſte vntrue. The
Emperoure Iuſtinian him ſelfe, who of al others moſte enlarged the Churches
Priuileges,
                     Cod. Li. 1. de Epiſ. & Clericis. Nullus. ſaithe thus: Nullus Epiſcopus inuitus ad Ciuilem, vel Militarem Iudicem,
in qualibet cauſa produeatur, vel exhibeatur: niſi Princeps iubeat: Let no Biſhop
be brought, or preſented, againſte his wil, before the Captaine, or Ciuile Iudge, what ſo
euer the cauſe be: Onleſſe the Prince ſhal ſo commaunde it. The Emperoure

Martianus commaundeth, if the cauſe be criminal, that the Biſhop be conuented
before the Lieutenant: Vt coram Praeſide conueniatur. Pope Innocentius.
3. him ſelfe confeſſeth, that the Pope maie make a Laie man his Delegate, to
heare,Cod. De Epiſ. audi. Si qui ex conſenſu. and determine in Prieſtes Cauſes. The like hereof yée maie finde in your
owne Gloſe: Papa Laico delegat cauſam Spiritualem: The Pope committeth the
hearinge of a Spiritual mater vnto a Laie man.
                      Yea, further yée ſhal finde euen in the
Popes owne Decrees,
                     Cod. De Epiſ. & Clericis. Cum Clericis. that the Pope hath committed a Spiritual mater in a cauſe
of Simonie, to be hearde, and ended by a VVooman: & that Brunichildis, beinge
a VVooman, by vertue of the Popes Commiſsion, ſummoned a Biſhop, to appeare,
and ſolemnely to make his Purgation before her.De Maiorit. & Obedient. Ca. 2. Innocent. Notwithſtandinge, in
your Gloſe vpon the ſame it is noted thus: Fuit tamen hîc nimium Papaliter
Diſpenſatum: The Pope was too Popelike in this Diſpenſation.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Emperoure Conſtantinus wrote thus vnto the Biſhoppes,Il. q. 1. Clericum nullus. 
                     y• had benne
at the Councel of Tyrus: Cuncti quotquot Synodum Tyri compleuiſtis, ſine mora
ad Pietatis noſtrae caſtra properate: ac re ipſa, quàm ſincerè ac rectè iudicaueritis, oſtendatis:2. qu. 5. Mennam. Socrates, Lib. 1. Cap. 34.
Id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Coram me, quem ſincerum eſſe Dei Miniſtrum, ne vos quidem negabitis: Al
yee, that haue benne at the Councel of Tyrus, comme without delaie vnto our Campe, and
ſhewe me plainely, and without Coloure, how vprightly ye haue dealte in Judgemente: and
that euen before me ſelfe, whome you cannot denie to be the true Seruante of God.
                  
                  
                     Iuſtinian the Emperoure, in the Lavve, y• he maketh, touching the Publike
Praiers of the Churche, ſaithe thus:
                      VVee commaunde al Biſhoppes and Prieſtes,
to Miniſter the Holy Oblation,Authen. Conſtitutione. 123. and the Praier at the Holy Baptiſme, not vnder ſilence,
but with ſutche voice, as maie be hearde of the Faitheful People: to the intente, that the
hartes of the hearers maie be ſturred to more deuotion, &c. Afterwarde he addeth further,
And let the Holy Prieſtes vnderſtande, that, if they neglecte any of theſe thinges,
they ſhal make anſweare therefore at the dreadeful Judgement of the Great God, and our Saueoure
Ieſus Chriſte. And yet neuertheleſſe vve ourſelues vnderſtanding the ſame,
vvil not paſse it ouer, nor leaue it vnpouniſhed. Hereby wée ſée, that Godly
Princes maie ſummone Biſhoppes, to appeare before them, euen in Cauſes Eccleſiaſtical,
to receiue ſutche pouniſhment, as they haue deſerued. Likewiſe the
Emperoure Conſtantinus, in his Letters vnto the People of Nicomedia, ſpeakinge
of the wilful Errours, & Hereſies of Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes, ſaithe thus:
Illorum temeraria praeſumptio,
                     Theodoretus Li. 1 Ca. 19. Auguſtin contra Epiſt Parmeniani. Li. 1. Ca. 7. 
                     mea, hoc eſt, Miniſtri Chriſti, manu coercebitur:
Their raſhe attemptes ſhalbe repreſſed by my hande, that is to ſaie, by the hande of Chriſtes
Seruante. So likewiſe ſaithe S. Auguſtine vnto the Donatiſtes: An fortè de
Religione fas non eſt vt dicat Imperator, vel quos miſerit Imperator? Cur ergo
ad Imperatorem Legati veſtri venerunt?
                      It is not lawful, that the Emperours, or the Emperours
deputee ſhould pronounce in a caſe of Religion? Wherefore then wente your owne
Embaſſadoures to the Emperoure?
                  
                  But what ſpeake wee of other Prieſtes, and Inferiour Biſhoppes? The Popes
them ſelues, notwithſtandinge al their Vniuerſal Povver, haue ſubmitted them
ſelues, & made their Purgations before Kinges, & Emperoure. Pope Liberius
made his humble appearance before the Emperoure Conſtantius:
                     Theodor. Lib. 2. Cap. 16. 
                     Pope Sixtus
was accuſed, and made his Purgation before the Emperoure Valentinian: Pope
Leo 3.2. Quaeſt. 4. Man. daſtis. beinge accuſed by Paſchalis, and Campulus, pleaded his cauſe before Carolus
Magnus at Rome, not yet choſen Emperoure. Pope Iohn. 22. was accuſed
of Hereſie,
                     2. Quae. 4. Auditum. and forced to recante the ſame vnto Philip the Frenche Kinge.
                  
                  Pope Leo 4.Gerſon in Sermone Paſchali. 2. quae. 7. Nos ſi. 
                     in this wiſe humbly ſubmitteth him ſelfe vnto the Iudgemente
of Levves the Emperoure: Nos ſi incompetenter aliquid egimus, & in Subditis iuſtae
Legis tramitem non conſeruauimus, veſtro admiſsorum noſtrorum cuncta volumus
emendare iudicio: Yf wee haue donne any thinge oute of order, and if wee haue not

folowed the right courſe of the Lawe ouer our Subiectes, vve vvil amende al our faultes
by your Maieſties Iudgemente.
                  
                     Your owne Gloſe ſaithe, Papa poteſt dare poteſtatem Imperatori, vt deponat
ipſum: & ſeſe in omnibus illi ſubijcere: The Pope maie geeue the Emperoure
power to depoſe him ſelfe:
                     Diſt. 63. In Synodo. In Gloſſ. Franciſ. Zarabella, De ſchemate, & Concil. 
                     and maie in al thinges ſubmit him ſelfe vnto him. To be ſhorte,
                     
Franciſcus Zarabella ſaithe, Papa accuſari poteſt coram Imperatore de quolibet
crimine notorio: Et Imperator requirere poteſt à Papa rationem Fidei:
The Pope maie be accuſed before the Emperoure of any notorious crime: and the Emperoure
maie require the Pope to yeelde an accoumpte of his Faithe.
                  
                  Now therefore, M. Hardinge, I reporte me to your owne indifferent iudgemente,
how true it is, y• yee ſaie, It is not conuenient, for a Kinge to calle Prieſtes before him
to his owne Seate of Iudgemente. Verily, this Note yee might haue founde Gloſed in
your owne Decretalles:
                     Extra. De Maiorita. & Obedie. Ca. 2. In Margin. 
                     Quaeritur, quis exemit Clericum de Iuriſdictione Imperatoris,
cum priùs eſſet illi ſubiectus? Dicit Laurentius, quòd Papa de conſenſu Principis:
A queſtion is moued, VVho hath exempted a Prieſte from the Juriſdiction of the Emperoure,
whereas before he was ſubiecte to the Emperours Courte? Laurence ſaithe, The Pope hath
exempted him, by the Conſente of the Prince. Yee ſee therefore, M. Hardinge, your
Prieſtes, Abbates, and Biſhoppes haue theire Priuileges, and Exemptions, not
by any right of Goddes Woorde, but onely by the Popes Policie, and by the Special
fauoure of the Prince.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 9. Diuiſion. 3.
               Thei wil ſaie to this, I gheaſſe, Ciuile Princes haue learned to gouerne
a Common Wealthe, and to order maters of Warre: but they
vnderſtande not the ſecrete Myſteries of Religion. If that be ſo,
what is the Pope, I praie you, at this daie, other then a Monarch,
or a Prince? Or, what be the Cardinalles, whoe muſt be none other
nowe, but Princes, & Kinges Sonnes? What els be the Patriarches,
&, for the moſte parte, the Archebiſhoppes, the Biſhoppes, the Abbates?
What be they els at this preſent in the Popes Kingedome,
but worldely Princes, but Dukes, and Erles, gorgeouſly accompanied
with bandes of menne, whither ſo euer they goe: Oftentimes
alſo gayly araied with Chaines, and Collars of golde? Thei haue at
times too, certaine Ornamētes by them ſelues, as Croſſes, Pillers,
Hattes, Miters, & Palles: whiche Pompe the Auncient Biſhoppes,
Chryſoſtome, Auguſtine, & Ambroſe neuer had. Settinge theſe
things aſide, what teache thei? What ſaie thei? What doo thei? How
liue they? I ſaie not, as maie become a Biſhop, but as maie become
a Chriſtian man? Is it ſo greate a matter, to haue a vaine title, and
by changinge a garment onely to haue the name of a Biſhop?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The duetie of ciuil Princes conſiſteth in ciuil matters: the duetie of Biſhoppes, in ſpiritual thinges.
That ſerueth to the preſeruation of mens perſons: this to the Saluation of their Soules. Euery high Prieſt
(ſaieth S. Paule) that is taken from amonge men,Heb. 5. is ordeined for men in thinges apperteining to God.
Vntruthe manifeſte. For vvee moue no Prince to take vpon him a Biſhoppes Office. Re moue temporal Princes, to take vpon them the office of the Pope, and Biſhops, as though it were a
thinge ſo indifferent, and ſo common, that when Biſhoppes be negligent, temporal men maie do their
ſteede. But the reaſon, which to this ende ye make, is ſo ſlender, as I wene, fewe Princes that feare God,

wilbe greatly moued to ad
                        •
                     enter that thinge ſo muche ſubiecte and 
                        〈…〉
                     
your reaſon is this,Biſhoppes entangled in vvorldly affaires. conſider it who will: They of the Cleregie 
                        〈…〉
                     
Ergo, Temporall 
                        〈◊〉
                      maie beare the office of Biſhoppes. 
                        〈…〉
                      and
your Antecedent is falſe. For although Biſhoppes 
                        〈…〉
                      changinge
a garment onely, as you ſaie▪ yet that defect in them ſhoulde. 
                        〈…〉
                     
late▪ as to Kinges, and Queenes, to doo the Office of 
                        〈…〉
                     
falſe for the Biſhoppes of the Catholike Churche, 
                        〈…〉
                     
ordinated, and conſecrated.
                  Though the Pope haue a Princely dominion, 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſome other Biſhoppes: of chriſtendome haue
Dukedomes and Erledomes, though they ride well 
                        〈…〉
                      ſome
of them otherwiſe then becommeth that vocation, doo weare 
                        〈…〉
                     
them: though they haue other ornamentes to their 
                        〈…〉
                     . whiche grieueth you
muche in compariſon of theVntruthe. For this is our Reaſon: A Temporal, Prince, ſaie you, maie not, meddle in Eccleſiaſtical cauſes: But the Pope, ſaie vvee, is nothinge els but a Tēporal Prince: Ergo, by your Iudgemente. beggery of your maried eſtate: yet all this imbarreth them 
                        〈◊〉
                      but
that they be Biſhoppes.
                  Though they teache not,The Pope maie not meddle in Eccleſiaſtical Cauſes. though they ſaie not, though they doo not, though they liue not, as becommeth.
Biſhoppes, neither as becometh euen a Chriſten man,Vntruthe. Reade the Anſvveare. as you raile, all this notwithſtanding,
yet be they Biſhoppes, though euill Biſhoppes. Neither for al this may it be latefull for 
                        〈◊〉
                      to take
their office vpon them.O glorious Thraſo. Then vvas the Apoſtles ſtate mutch more beggerly. Iudas was an Apoſtle till the rope choked him. Neither for his wickedneſſe
might Streuen, Mathias, or any other of the Diſciples of his owne preſumpt to haue ſmepte into his r
                        ••
                     me.
Now is this is true, ſo is your railinge talke falſe, whiche malice hath ſtirred you to vtter.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Oui
                           •
                         againe wee tel le you, M. Hardinge, wee confounde not theſe Offices:
notwithſtandinge you ſo often, and ſo lewd
                           •
                        ly reporte vs, to your owne diſcredite.
                     This 
                           ••
                        linge as not ours, but S. B
                           ••
                        nardes.
                     Our Princes neuer tooke vpon them, y• Office of Biſhoppes: But your Biſhoppes
haue taken vpon them the Office of Princes. Of your Biſhoppes it is written
in your owne Councelles:The Pope by M Hardinge compared with Iudas. Ecce, iam pe
                        •
                     e nulla eſt acti
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , quam non Sacerdotes
adminiſtrent: Beholde, there is now in a 
                           〈◊〉
                         no 
                           〈◊〉
                         affaire, but Prieſtes, and
Biſhoppes 
                        
                           •
                        aue it in hande. Sutche
                      Biſhoppes be they, of whom S. Chryſoſtome
writeth thus,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Citatur ab Illyrico inter 
                           〈◊〉
                         Verit. Pag. 121. Chryſoſtom. In Matth. Hom. 35. Hieronym. Contra Qui non credunt Iudicium Dei, nec timen
                        •
                     , abutentes Primatu ſuo
Eccleſiaſtico ſaeculariter, conuertunt eum in ſaecularem: They that neither beleeue,
nor feare the Judgemente of God, 
                           〈◊〉
                         theire Eccleſiaſtical Dignitie in Seculare
ſorte, turne the ſame into Seculare Dignitie: Sutche
                      Biſhoppes they be, of
whome S. Hierome ſaithe thus, Ipſi ſibi & Laici ſunt, & Epiſcopi: They them
ſelues be to them ſelues bothe Laiemenne, and Biſhoppes too. And againe, Adorant
Dominum, & Melchom, qui Saecedo pariter, & Domino putant ſe poſſe
ſeruire, & duobus Dominis ſatisfacere, Deo, & Mammonae: qui Militantes
Chriſto, obligant ſeſe negotijs Saecularibus, & candem Imaginem offerunt & Deo,
& Caeſari: They woorſhip the Lorde, and Melchom bothe togeather, thinkinge, that
they maie ſerue bothe the Woorlde,
                     Hieronym. in Sophontam ca
                           •
                        . Concil. Trident. Sub Paulo 3. Admonitio Legator. 
                     and the Lorde, and ſatiſfie twoo Maiſters at once, God,
and Mammon: who fightinge vnder Chriſte, binde them ſelues to worldly affaires, and offer
vp one Image bothe to God, and to Caeſar.
                  
                     If yée wil beleeue none of theſe, yet your Popes ovvne Legates, in your late
Chapter at Tridente, ſpeakinge of your Prieſtelike Apparel, ſaie thus: Nihil à
Laic
                        •
                     s, praeterquam in Veſtis genere, ac ne in hoc quidem differunt: Our Prieſtes
differ nothinge from Laiemenne, ſauinge onely in Apparel: naie, in deede they differ not ſo
mutche from them, as in Apparel.
                  
                  Yee ſaie,Auentinus. Le. 3. De Ruperto, Chriſtum omnium Deorum eſſe pauperrimum. your Biſhoppes are gaie, and gallante, attended, and garded with
Princelike routes, bothe behinde, and before: And thereof yée make no ſmal accoumpte,
ſpecially in reſpecte of our eſtate, whiche you calle beggerly. In ſutche
diſdeigne the Heathens ſommetime ſaide, That Chriſte was the Beggerlieſt, and

pooreſt of al the Goddes that were in Heauen.
                     Eccleſiaſtical brauerie in Apparel. How be it, our Biſhoprikes, ſauinge
that certaine of your Fathers haue ſhamefully ſpoiled them, are nowe, euen as
they were before. Certainely y• 
                     Pooreſt Biſhoprike in Englande, as it is reported,
is better in reuenewes, theli ſomme thrée of your Popes Italian Biſhoprikes in
the Kingedome of Naples. How be it, the Goſpel of Chriſte ſtandeth not by
Richeſſe, but by Truthe. In compariſon of the one, wée make ſmal reckeninge
of the other.
                  
                     Neuertheleſſe, the Wiſe, and Godly haue euermore founde faulte with the Eccleſiaſtical Brauerie of your Romaine Cleregie.
                     
                     Bernard. in Cantica. Sermo. 33. Holcote in Sapien. Lectio. 23. Bernard in Cantica. Sermo. 77. 
                     S. Bernarde ſaithe, Inde eſt,
quem quotidiè ides, Meretriceus Nitor: Hiſtrionicus habitus: Regius Apparatus. Inde
Aurum in Frenis, in Sellis, in Calcaribus:
                      Therehence commeth theire Whoorelike Fineneſſe:
theire Plaiers VVeede: their Princely Apparel. Therehence commeth their Goulde in
theire Bridles, in their Saddels, and in theire Spurres. Againe he ſaithe, Incedunt nitidi,
& ornati, circumamicti varietatibus, tanquam Sponſa procedens de thalamo ſuo.
Nonnè ſi quempiam talium eminùs procedentem aſpexeris, Spōſam potids putabis, quàm
Sponſae Cuſtodem?
                      They goe trimmely, and finely in their coloures, as if a Spouſe ſhoulde
comme from her Chamber. If thou ſhouldeſt ſuddainely ſee one of them lettinge a farre of,
wouldeſt thou not rather thinke, it were a Spouſe, then the keeper of the Spouſe?
                  
                     Pope Bonifacius 8. in a greate Iubilee,
                     Paralipomena. Vrſpergen. and in a Solemne Proceſſion, wente
apparelled in the Emperours Roabes: and had the Crovvne Emperial on his
Heade, and the Svverde of Maieſtie borne before him, as an Emperoure.
                  
                  
                     This Spiritual Ioilitie, M. Hardinge, liketh you wel. Notwithſtandinge
S. Bernarde ſaithe,
                     Bernard. De Conſideratione ad Eugenium, Lib. 1. Daemonum magis, quàm Ouium, ſunt haec paſcua. Scilicet,
ſic factitabat Petrus: ſic Paulus ludebat: Theſe be Paſtoures for Diuels, not for
Sheepe. No doubte, Euen thus did Peter: euen ſutche paſtime plaide S. Paule.
                  Yee telle vs further, Though they teache not, though they ſaie not, though they doo
not, though they liue not, as becommeth Biſhoppes, nor as becommeth a Chriſtian man,
yet bee they Biſhoppes not withſtandinge. Hereat wee wil not greately ſtriue.
For ſo the VVoulfe, if he once geate a Sheepehooke, and a Cloke, maie be a
Shephearde: and a Blindeman, if he geate once into the Watche Tower, maie
bee a Spie. But miſerable are the Poore Sheepe, that ſo are fedde: miſerable is
that Poore Caſtle, that ſo is watched.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
                     8. quae. 1. Qui Epiſcopatum. Auguſtin. Epiſcopatus eſt nomen Operis, non Honoris: vt intelligat,
ſe non eſſe Epiſcopum, qui praeeſſe dilexerit, non prodeſſe: A Biſhoppes
Office is a name of Laboure, and not of Honoure: that, who ſo loueth to rule, and
not to profite, maie vnderſtande him ſelfe to be no Biſhop. Againe he ſaithe of ſutche
a one,
                     2. quae. 7. qui nec. Auguſtin. Canis impudicus dicendus eſt magis, quàm Epiſcopus: He ought rather
to be called a ſhameleſſe Dogge, then a Biſhop.
                  
                     As for that, yee ſaie, Your Biſhoppes be duely Ordinated, and conſecrated, S.
Auguſtine replieth,
                     Auguſt. contra Donatiſt. Li. 6. 
                     Ipſum Characterem multi, & Lupi, & Lupis imprimunt:
Touchinge the outwarde Conſecration of a Biſhop, many geeue it to VVoulues, and be
VVoulues them ſelues.
                  
                     S. Bernarde,
                     
                     Bernard. De Conſideratione ad Eugeni. Li. 3. 
                     ſpeakinge of your Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes, ſaithe, Habitu Milites:
quaeſtu Clericos: actu neutros exhibent. Nam neque vt Milites, pugnant: neque
vt Clerici, Euangelizant. Cuius ergo Ordinis ſunt? Cùm vtriuſque eſſe cupiunt, vtrunque
deſerunt: vtrunque confundunt. Vnuſquiſque, inquit, in ſuo Ordine reſurget. In quo
iſti? An qui ſine Ordine peccauerūt, ſine Ordine peribunt? Vereor, nō alibi Ordinandos,
quàm vbi nullus Ordo, ſed ſempiternus horror inhabitat:
                      In theire apparel, they are Souldiers:
in their gaines, they are Prieſtes, and Biſhoppe: but in effecte, and in deede, they
are neither of bothe. For neither doo they fighte in the fielde, as doo Souldiers: nor doo
they preache, as Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes. Of whether Order therefore be they? Whereas
they would be of bothe Orders, they foreſake bothe, and confounde bothe. S. Paule ſaithe,

Euery man ſhal riſe againe in his owne Order.1. Corinth. 15. But in what Order ſhal theſe riſe? Whether,
for as mutche, as they haue finned without Order, ſhal they periſhe without Order? I feare
me, they ſhalbe Ordered none otherwhere, but where as is no Order, but diſorder, and horroure
Euerlaſtinge.
                  Thus plainely ſpeake your owne Doctoures, touchinge your Cleregie:
whiche plaineneſſe it pleaſeth you, M. Hardinge, to calle falſe, and malicious
railinge.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 10. Diuiſion. 1.
               Surely, to haue the principal ſtaie, and effecte of al maters committed
wholy to theſe mennes handes, who neither knowe, nor wil
knowe theſe thinges, nor yet ſet a iote by any poincte of Religion,
ſaue that, whiche concerneth their belly, and riot, and to haue them
alone ſitte as Iudges, and to be ſet vp as ouerſeers in the Watche
tower, being no better then Blinde Spies: of the other ſide, to haue a
chriſtian Prince of good vnderſtandinge, & of a right iudgemente,
to ſtande ſtil like a blocke, or a ſtake, not to be ſuffred, neither to geeue
his voice, nor to ſhewe his iudgemente, but onely to waite, what
theſe menne ſhal wil, and commaunde, as one, whiche had neither
eares, nor eies, nor witte, nor harte, and, whatſoeuer they geeue in
charge, to allowe it without exception, blindely fulfilling their Commaundementes,
be they neuer ſo blaſphemous, and wicked, yea, although
they commaunde him quite to deſtroie al Religion, and to
Crucifie againe Chriſte him ſelfe, This ſurely, biſides that it is
proude, and ſpiteful, is alſo beyonde al right, and reaſon, and not to
be endured of Chriſtian, & wiſe Princes. For why, I praie you, maie
Caiphas, & Annas vnderſtande theſe maters, and maie not Dauid,
and Ezechias doo the ſame? Is it lauful for a Cardinal, beinge a
man of warre, and delitinge in Bloude, to haue place in a Councel:
and is it not lauful for a Chriſtian Emperoure, or a Kinge?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Hereto M. Hardinge ſaithe nothinge, but that he hath oftentimes ſaide before.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 1.
               Verely, wee graunte no further Libertie to our Magiſtrates,
then that we knowe hath bothe benne geeuen them by the VVoorde
of God, and alſo confirmed by the Examples of the very beſte gouerned
Common Wealthes.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If a man ſhoulde aſke you, where that woorde of God is, that maketh a temporall Prince Supreme
head of that parte of the Churche, which he hath gournement of in al ciuil matters, I am ſure
you can bringe foortheVntruthe. For vvee allege many other places biſides, as it maie ſooue appeare. no other woorde of God. then that, wherein S. Peter,1. Pet. 2. Rom. 13. and S. Paule willeth al
menne to obeie the Superiour powers, eſpecially Kinges. VVhiche thinge was written to all Chriſtian
men, whiles they liued vnder Heathen Princes, and Infidels, as Claudius Ceſar, and Nero were, whom,
I ſuppoſe, ye wil not ſaie to haue benne heades of the whole Churche, as they were Monarkes and

Princes of the whole worlde.Supreme Heade. Supreme Gouernoure. If then by thoſe Scriptures whiche cannot proue Nero (beinge aThen cannot the Pope be Heade of the Churche: For he hath perſecuted the Church as mutche, as Nero. perſecutour
of Chriſtes Churche) to haue ben heade of the ſame, you wil now proue, that other Princes are
ſupreme heads of the Churche: it ſemeth that either you make Nero heade of the Churche with them,
or geue more vnto them, then the word of God wil beare. And as for examples of good cōmon weales,
ſhewe vs but one ſince Chriſtes aſcenſion, wherein before Luthers time, any Emperour Chriſtian, or other
Prince did attribute that title vnto him ſelfe: and we wil ſaie, that, when you ſpeake of common
weales in the plural number, you make but one lye: but in caſe you ſhew vs no one common weale
that hath ſo done, then you lie in the plural number. Yea further, if at this daie the common weales in
Chriſtendome, not onely that are Catholike, but the beſte alſo of thoſe, that are Lutheriſhe, and newfangled,
do abhorre frō that ſtrange, and vnheard title ofMutche a doo about nothing: For our Prince hath not this Title. But Queene Marie had, and vſed the ſame title of Supreme Heade: as many vvaies it maie be proued. ſupreme head of the Churche, why do you ſaie,
that ye haue, either worde of God for it, or example of approued common weales?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Concerning the title of Supreme Head of the Churche, wée néede not to ſearche
for Scriptures to excuſe it. For, firſte, wée diuiſed it not: Secondly, wée vſe it not:
Thirdly, our Princes at this preſente claime it not. Your Fathers, M. Harding,
firſte entitled that moſte Noble, and moſte Woorthy Prince, Kinge Henrie the
Eighth, with that Vnuſed, and Strange Style, as it maie wel be thought, the rather
to bringe him into the talke, and ſclaunder of the worlde.
                  Howe be it, that the Prince is the Higheſt Iudge, & Gouernoure ouer al his
Subiectes what ſo euer, as wel Prieſtes, as Laie menne, without exception, it is
moſte euidente, by that hath benne already ſaide: by that ſhal be ſaide hereafter:
by the whole courſe of the Scriptures: and by the vndoubted practiſe of the Primitiue
Churche. Verily, the Prince, as it ſhal afterwarde better appeare, had Bothe
the Tables of the Lavve of God euermore committed to his charge: as wel the
Firſte, that perteineth to Religion, as alſo the Seconde, that perteineth to Ciuile
Gouernemente.
                  But nowe, M. Hardinge, if a man would aſke you, by what VVoorde of God
your Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes haue exempted them ſelues from ye Iudgement, and
Gouernement of theire Princes: Or, by what VVoord of God the Princes hande
is reſtreined more from his Cleregie, then from other his Subiectes: or, by what
VVoorde of God, yee woulde ſtabliſhe Tvvoo Supreme Gouernoures in one
Realme, I marueile, in what Scriptures yée woulde ſeeke to finde it. Your owne
Doctoures, and Gloſers ſaie, as it is before alleged:Extra. De maiorita. & obedien. Ca. 2. In margi. 
                     Quaeritur, quis exemit Clericum
de Iuriſdictione Imperatoris, cùm priùs eſſet illi Subiectus? Dicit Laurentius, quòd Papa
de conſenſu Principis: Queſtion is moued, who hath exempted the Prieſte from the Iuriſdiction
of the Emperour, whereas before he was his Subiecte? Laurētius ſaith
                      (not the
VVoorde of God, but) the Pope exempted him, by the Conſente of the Prince.
                     
                  
                  Further, M. Hardinge, we beſéeche you, by what VVoorde of God can your
Pope claime him ſelf, to be the Heade of the Vniuerſal Churche of God? Where
is it recorded? Where is it written? In what parte of the Teſtamente, Newe or
Olde? In what Lavve? In what Prophete? In what Epiſtle? In what Goſpel?
Where is his Headſhip? Where is his Vniuerſal Povver? If yée can finde it,
then maie yee ſhewe it: If it cannot be founde, then ſhoulde yée not ſaie it. As for
that you, and other your Felowes haue alleged before, for proufe hereof, it is ſo
childiſh, & ſo weake, that, I thinke, yée cannot now comme againe with the ſame,
without bluſſhinge.
                  Touchinge the Right, that wée ſaie, belongeth vnto al Chriſtian Princes, it
hath benne inueſted,Epiſt Eleutherij. Citatur inter Leges Edwardi Primi. and planted in them from the beginninge. For, to leaue
other Authorities of the Scriptures, Pope Eleutherius him ſelfe wrote thus vnto
Lucius, ſommetime Kinge of this Realme of Englande: Vos eſtis Vicarius

Dei in Regno, iuxta Prophetam Regium: You are Goddes Vicare vvithin
your ovvne Realme, according to the Prophete Dauid.
                  
                  Paule the Biſhop of Apamea, writeth thus vnto the Emperoure Iuſtinian, in
a cauſe mere Eccleſiaſtical, touchinge Religion: Tranſtulit ipſum Dominus, vt Plenitudinem
directionis veſtrae cuſtodiret Serenitati:Quintae Synodi Act io. 1 pijſsimo. 
                     Our Lorde hath taken Pope Agapetus
awaie, that he might leaue the Fulneſſe of order (concerninge theſe Heretiques,
                     
Dioſcorus, and Eutyches) vnto your Maieſtie.
                  Tertullian ſaith,
                     Tertullian. Ad Scapulam. Colimus Imperatorem, vt hominem à Deo Secundum, Solo
Deo Minorem: Wee Woorſhip the Emperoure, as a man nexte vnto God, and inferioure
onely vnto God.
                  And, nothwithſtanding the name of Heade of the Churche belonge peculiarely,
and onely vnto Chriſte, as his onely Right, and Enheritance (for as the Churche is
the Body, ſo Chriſte is the Heade) yet maie the ſame ſommetimes alſo be applied
in ſober meaning, and good ſenſe, not onely vnto Princes, but alſo vnto others, far
inferiour vnto Princes. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Videntur mihi iſtae mulieres Caput
fuiſſe Eccleſiae,
                     Chryſo. in Epiſt. ad Phili. Hom. 13 A Wooman Head of the Churche. Chryſoſto. ad Populum Antioch. Homil. 2. 
                     quae illic erat: It ſeemeth vnto mee, that theſe vveemen vvere the
Heade of the Churche, that was at Philippi.
                      Likewiſe againe, ſpeaking of the Emperoure,
he ſaithe thus: Laeſus eſt, qui non habet parem vllum ſuper terram, Summitas,
& Caput omnium ſuper terram hominum: Wee haue offended him, that in the
Earthe hath no peere, the Toppe, and the Heade of al menne in the VVorlde. If he
were the Heade of al menne, then was he the Heade, not onely of Biſhoppes, and
Cardinalles, but alſo of the Pope him ſelfe: Onleſſe the Pope were no man.
                  To conclude, our Princes néede nomore to claime their Lawful Authoritie, and
Emperial Righte, by y• Exāple of Nero, whereof yée haue moued mutche vntimely,
and wanton talke, then your Pope néedeth to claime his Vſurped, & Coloured
Power, by the Examples of Annas, and Caiphas.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 2.
               For beſides that, a Chriſtian Prince hath the charge of Bothe
Tables committed to him by God, to the ende he maie vnderſtande,
that, not Temporal maters onely, but alſo Religious, and Eccleſiaſtical
Cauſes perteine to his office, &c.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  You wil proue that Eccleſiaſtical cauſes perteine to a Kinges of fice, becauſe he hath the charge
of bothe tables. If you meane that a Kinge is bounde to kepe bothe tables of the lawe, ſo is alſo euery
priuate man. And yet, as no priuate man is ſupreme heade of the Churche by kepinge them, ſo neither
the Kinge is proued thereby theA graue diſputer. Ye conclude againſte that, that is not auouched. ſupreme heade. If you meane that the Kinge ought to ſee others to
kepe bothe tables of the lawe: that maie he do, either in appointinge temporal paines for the tranſgreſſours
of them, or in executinge the ſaide paines vpon the tranſgreſſours. But as he cannot excommunicate
any man for not apperinge, when he is called, ſo can he not iudge al cauſes of the lawe.
For if a man ſinne onely in his harte, as for example, in murther, or aduoutrie: the Kinge cannot haue
to do with him. And yet the true ſupreme heade of the Church ſhal haue to do with him. For that malicious
and ſinful thoughtVntruthe, fonde, and manifeſte, and leadinge directely to deſperation. ſhal neuer be foregeuen, excepte the party come to be abſolued of theire
Succeſſours, to whom Chriſte ſaide,Iohan. 20. whoſe ſinnes ye forgeue▪ they are forgeuen: and whoſe ſinnes ye reteine,
they are reteined. To committe murder in harte, is a ſinne, and it is reteined vntil it be forgeuen.
Vntruthe ioined vvith blaſphemie. Reade the Anſweare. Neither can it be forgeuen. vntil he that is Iudge, by the keie of diſcretion, perceiue that it is to be
forgeuen. VVhich he cannot know, vntil it be confeſſed with a contrite hart, by him who onely knoweth
it, and is bounde to tel it, for abſolutions ſake. If then there be a iudge, who can ſee the lawe
kepte in an higher pointe, and beyond the reache of the King, ſurely the King ſhal not be ſupreme head▪
                     
ſith an other is more like to God, then he. A
                        •
                      who is iudge of the inwarde conſcience, whereunto no
Kinge reacheth,Matth. 16. butA fonde folie. For this Keie is geeuen no more to the Pope, then to any other Simple Prieſte. onely the miniſter of Chriſte▪ who is the ſpiritual Kinge, and hath geuen the
keies of his Kingdome to his miniſter.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, M. Hardinge, yée roa
                        •
                     e, and wander without a marke, and replie to that,
that was not ſpoken. I marueile, whereof yée can ſpinne your ſelfe ſutch idle talke.
For wée neither calle our Princes the Heades of the Churche of Chriſte: (it was
your Fathers inuention, and not ours) nor ſaie wée, They haue Power, either to
Excommunicate, or to Binde, or to Looſe: nor haue wée leaſure to make ſutche
vaine Concluſians.
                  Thus wée ſaie, the Prince is put in truſte, as wel with the Firſte, as with the
Seconde Table of the Lavve of God: that is to ſaie, as wel with Religion, and
with Temporal Gouernemente: not onely to kéepe, and perfourme the contentes
of Bothe Tables, in his owne Perſone (for ſo mutche euery priuate man is bound
to doo) but alſo to ſée, that al others his Subiectes, as wel Prieſtes, as Laiemenne,
eche man in his callinge, doo dewly kéepe them. This is it, that no Priuate man
is hable to doo.Auguſt. in Epiſt. 50. Ad Bonifac. Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe, In hoc ſeruiunt Domino Reges,
in quantum ſunt Reges, cùm ea faciunt ad ſeruiendum illi, quae non poſſunt facere, niſi
Reges: Herein Kinges ſerue the Lorde, in that they be Kinges, when they doo thoſe
thinges to ſerue him, that noman can doo, but onely Kinges. Wee ſaie not, the Prince
is bound to doo the Biſhoppes deutie: And therefore it is the greatter ſol
                        •
                     e of your
parte, M. Hardinge, to obiecte it ſo often. Wiſe menne vſe not ſo to aduenture their
woordes in vaine. But thus wée ſaie, The Prince to bounde to ſee the Biſhoppes
to doo theire deuties.
                  But what meante you, ſo far out of ſeaſon, to talke ſo fondly of your Priuie
Confeſsions, of Bindinge, and Looſinge, and Povver of Keies? For, as it is
ſaide before, wée ſaie not, that Princes maie, either Binde, or Looſe: or Miniſter
Sacramentes: or Preache the Goſpel: or ſitte downe, and Heare Confeſsions.
Therefore with al this greate adoo, yée foine onely at your owne ſhadowe, and hit
nothinge.
                  
                     Yée ſaie ful diſcretely, Yf a man ſinne onely in his harte, the Kinge cannot haue to doo with
him, for that be cannot enter, to knowe his ſecretes. Here, I beſéeche you, M. Hardinge, what
entrance hath the Pope, to knowe the ſecretes of the Harte? Perhaps yée wil ſaie,
the Pope maie knowe al the worlde by Confeſſion. But S. Auguſtine ſaithe,
Quid mihi eſt cum hominibus,Auguſt. Confeſſ. Lib. 10. Cap. 3. vt audiant Confeſsiones meas, &c. Vnde ſciunt, cùm
à me ipſo de me ipſo audiunt, an verum dicā: quādoquidem nemo ſcit hominū
quid agatur in homine, niſi Spiritus hominis, qui in ipſo eſt: What haue I to doo wt
theſe menne, that they ſhoulde heare my Confeſsions, &c. Howe knowe they, when they
heare mee report of mee ſelfe, whether I ſaie true, or no? For noman knoweth, what is in man,
but the Sprite of man,
                     Aug. in Pſal. 126 
                     that is within him. Againe he ſaithe vnto the people,
                      Intrantes
vos, & exeuntes poſſumus videre. Vſqueadeò autem non videmus, quid cogitetis
in cordibus veſtris, vt neque quid agaris in domibus veſtris videre poſsimus:
Wee maie ſee you comminge in, and goeinge foorth. But wee are ſo far from ſeeinge the
thoughtes of your hartes, that wee cannot ſee, what you doo at home in your houſes. Likewiſe
againe he ſaithe,
                     
                     Aug. in Pſal. 127 Quid ſingulorum quorum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      modò conſcientiae dixerint,
ad aures meas, quia homo ſum, peruenire non potuit. Ille, qui Abſens eſt praeſentia
Corporis, ſed Praeſens eſt Vigore Maieſtatis, audiuit vos: What euery of your Conſciences
hath ſaide, it coulde not enter into my eares, for that I am but a Mortal man. Notwithſtandinge,
Chriſte, that is Abſente, as touchinge the Preſence of his Body, but preſente by
the Power of his Maieſtie, hath hearde you wel. It is, not the Pope, but God onely,

that trieth the reines, and ſearcheth the harte.
                  
                  
                     Yet yée ſaie, the True Supreme Heade of the Churche ſhal haue to doo with
him, that ſinneth onely ſecretely in his harte: For that malitious, and ſinful thought, ſaie
you, ſhal neuer be foregeuen, excepte the partie comme to be Abſolued of theire Succeſſours, to whom
                     
Chriſte ſaid, VVhoes ſinnes yee foregeue, &c. This, M. Hardinge, is the
                      Supreme Folie
of al others Folies. For firſte, where euer hearde you, that the Pope would
lonce voucheſaue to Heare Confeſsions? And, if he woulde, yet by yours owne
Doctoures Iudgemente, the Pope hath nomore Power to Binde, and to Looſe,
then any other Poore Simple Prieſte. As I haue ſhewed you before, Alphonſus
de Caſtro ſaithe,
                     Alphonſ. De Haereſib. Lib. 2. De Abſolutione. Origen. in Matthae. Tractat. 1. Quando Abſoluit Simplex Sacerdos, tantum Abſoluit de
Culpa, ſicut Papa: When a Simple Prieſte Abſolueth, he Abſolueth as mutche, touchinge
the faulte, as if it were the Pope him ſelfe. Origen ſaithe, Quae ſequuntur, velut
ad Petrum dicta, ſunt omnium communia, &c. Quod ſi nos idem loquimur,
quod Petrus loquutus eſt, efficimur Petrus: The woordes, that folowe, as
ſpoken vnto Peter, are common vnto al. If wee ſpeake the ſaine, that Peter ſpake, then
are wee made Peter. Euen in the Popes owne Gloſe vpon his Decretalles it is noted
thus, In neceſsitate Laicus poteſt & Audire Confeſsiones, & Abſoluere: In
caſe of neceſsitie a Laieman maie bothe heare Confeſsions,
                     Extra. De of fic. Iudicis Ordina. Paſtoralis. In Gloſſ. 
                     and alſo geue Abſolution. Yet wil
yée not ſaie, that euery Laieman is
                      Peters Succeſſoure.
                  To what pourpoſe then ſerueth al this your vaine talke, M. Hardinge, The
true Supreme Head of the Churche ſhal haue to doo with him, that ſinneth onely in his
harte? For euery Simple Prieſte, hauinge the keie of Goddes Woorde, entreth into
the harte, & hath to doo with the ſame, as wel, and as mutche, as the Pope: & in reſpecte
of beinge Iudge of y• 
                     Conſcience, is aboue Kinges, & Princes, noleſſe then he.
                  
                     But, where yée ſaie, The malitious, and ſinful thought ſhal neuer be forgeuen, except the partie
comme to be Absolued of theire
                      Succeſſours, to whom Chriſte ſaid, whoes ſinnes yee foregeue,
&c. this Doctrine is not onely ſtrange and falſe, but alſo ful of Deſperation. Your
owne
                      Gratian ſaith,
                     De poenit. Diſt. 1 Quis aliquado. Latentia peccata non probantur neceſſariò Sacerdoti confitēda:
It is not proued (by any ſufficiēt Authoritie either of Scriptures, or of Doctours)
that Secrete Sinnes are of neceſsitie to be vttered in Confeſsion vnto the Prieſte. Againe he
ſaithe,
                     De poenit. Diſ. 1. Conuertimin
                           •
                        . In eodem Cap. Datur intelligi, quòd etiam ore tacente, veniam conſequi poſſumus: It is geuen
vs to vnderſtand, that wee maie obteine pardone, although wee vtter nothing with our
Mouth. And againe,
                      Non Sacerdotali iudicio, ſed largitate Diuinae Gratiae peccator
emendatur: The Sinner is cleanſed, not by the Iudgemente of the Prieſte, but by
the abundance of Goddes Grace.De poenit. Diſ. 1 Omnis qui. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Confeſsio Sacerdoti offertur in
ſignum veniae, non in cauſam Remiſsionis accipiendae: Confeſsion is made vnto the
Prieſt, in token of Foregeueneſſe already obteined: not as a cauſe of Foregeueneſſe to be obteined.
Your very
                      Gloſe ſaithe,
                     De poenit. Diſ. 5. In poeniten. In Gloſſa. Apud Graecos Confeſsio non eſt neceſſaria: quia non
emanauit ad illos Traditio talis: Emong the Chriſtians in Graecia Confeſsion of Sinnes is
not neceſſarie: for that this Tradition neuer came emonge them. Yet, M. Hardinge, I
trowe, yee wil not ſaie, but theire ſinnes maie be foregeuen.
                     
                  
                  
                     Certainely Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. De Cō
                        feſſ. & poenit. 
                     Solus te Deus confitentem videat: Let God
onely ſee thee making the Confeſſion of thy Sinnes.
                  It was very mutche therefore, M. Hardinge, for you, ſo aſſuredly, and ſo preciſely
to ſaie, that ſinnes can neuer be foregeuen without your Priuie Confeſſion:
and ſpecially thereby to proue the Vniuerſal Headeſhip of the Pope.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 3.
               Biſides alſo, that God by his Prophetes often, and earneſtly commaundeth
the King, to cutte downe the Groues: to breake downe the
Images, and Aultars of Idoles: and to Write out the Booke of

the Lavve for him ſelf:The Prince iudgeth in Eccleſiaſtical cauſes. and biſides that, the Prophete Eſaias ſaith,
a Kinge ought to be a Patrone, and a Nurſe of the Churche, &c.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Your ſeconde argumente for the Eccleſiaſtical Power of Kinges is, becauſe God bad them to cut
downe ſuperſtitious groues, and ouerthrowe idols:The Kinge is the Prieſtes Executioner. as though this were not an office of executinge
a commaundemente, rather then of decreeinge any thinge. The Authoritie to diſcerne an image of
Chriſt from an idol of the deuil, belongeth to them, who knowe, that an image is a name of art, which
is of God: an idol is a name of falſe woorſhippinge, whiche is of the Deuil. So that an image is
godly: and idol deuiliſhe. VVhen the Prieſte hath iudged this, or that, to be an idol, or when it is euident,
that ſo it is, then the kinge ſhal do wel to breake it downe.O Vanitie of Vanities: Aaron the Biſhop ſette vp the Golden Calfe, and cried vnto the people, This is thy God. But Moſes the Ciuile Magiſtrate, or Prince, brake it dovvne. But if the Kinge wil breake
downe the image of Chriſte, when the Prieſt telleth him it is a godly repreſentation, and no idol: then
the Kinge dothe more then his office requireth: And ſhal not onely not proue his ſupremacie, but alſo
ſhal incurre danger to be reiected of God,1. Reg. 28. as Kinge Saul was, when he deſpiſed to keepe the commaundement
of Samuel the high Prieſte.
                  VVhereas you alleage for a Kinges Eccleſiaſtical Power, that he was commaunded to write out
the Booke of the lawe for him ſelfe: why lefte ye out that, whiche foloweth there immediately,
accipiens exemplar à Sacerdotibus Leuiticae tribus?
                     Deut. 17. The Kinge muſte write out a Booke of the
Deuteronomie: but the example thereof he muſt receiue of the Prieſtes that be of the tribe of Leut. If
in ſpiritual matters the Kinge were aboue the Prieſtes.Ful diſcretely. As though Kinges had not Officers, to keepe theire Recordes. why had he not the Kepinge of the Lawe in
his owne handes? VVhy muſte he take it of the Prieſtes? why did not rather the Prieſtes come to him,
ſith the inferiour taketh al his right of the ſuperiour? If the Prieſtes muſte geue the holy ſcripture vnto
the Kinge, then verely muſte he take ſutche as they geue him, and with ſuch meaning, as they geue vnto
it. So that if you had notVntruthe. For vvee haue falſified no parte hereof: as it ſhal appeare. falſefied the meaninge of Gods woorde by leauinge out halfe the ſentence,
this place had proued againſte you. It is to be weyed to what ende a Kinge is required to haue, and to
reade that holy Booke. Verely not to take vpon him the parte of a iudge in cauſes of Religion: but as
there it is expreſſed, to thintent he learne to feare his Lorde God,Deut. 17. and kepe his woordes, and ceremomonies
in the lawe commaunded, and that his harte be not lifted vp into pride, aboue his brethren,
&c.Here M. Hard. vvould faine ſaie ſommevvhat if he vviſte vvhat it vvere. Reade the Anſvveare. I omitte, that you reade, Librum legis, whereas the Churche readeth Deuteronomium:
* it were too longe to enter into that diſputation. The booke of the lawe, ſignifieth the whole law: the
Deuteronomie is but one of the fiue bookes.
                  VVhere Eſaie calleth a Kinge a Patrone of the Churche, I haue not founde. But were it he called
him ſo, it betokeneth, that he ſhoulde defende the Churche from worldly ennimies, as in repellinge the
Turkes, in expellinge Heretikes, and ſutche like Kingely actes. VVhiche proueth no spiritual ſupremacie,
but vnder God a fealtie, and ſeruiceable power. I finde where Eſaie ſaith, Et erunt Reges
nutricij tui, & Reginae nutrices tuae.
                     Cap. 49. Kinges ſhal be thy foſterers, and Quenes thy nourſes. But
not euery nourſe, or foſterer is aboue him, who is nouriſhed.By this prety Concluſion, the Kinge is the Seruant: and the Prieſte is the Maiſter. A faitheful ſeruant oftentimes foſtereth
the maiſter. Yet is he not aboue his maiſter. Beſides, S. Hierome vnderſtandeth the Kinges, whom Eſaie
nameth, to be the Apoſtles: accordinge to whiche ſenſe, it maketh nothinge to the purpoſe it is alleaged
for.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Al Chriſtian Princes are mutche beholden to you, M. Harding: yée make them
ſo like to Polyphemus y• 
                     Giante. after his eies were ſtriken out: that is to ſaie, to a
man mighty in body, and greate in boanes: but ſtarke blinde, and no waie hable
to guide him ſelfe. A King, yée ſaie, maie not take vpon him, to Iudge, or Pronounce in maters of
Religion, bee they neuer ſo cleare: but onely muſt hearken, & be ready to execute, what
ſo euer ſhalbe thought good, and commaunded by your Biſhoppes: as if he were
onely your Biſhoppes man. So ſaithe your Holy Father Pope Bonifacius. 8.
Gladius Materialis exercendus eſt manu Regum,
                     De Maior. & Obedien. Vnam Sanctam. 
                     & Militum: Sed ad nutum, & patientram
Sacerdotis: The Material, or Temporal Swerde muſte be vſed by the hande of
                     
                     
Kinges,The Prince iudgeth in Eccleſiaſtical cauſes. and Souldiers: but at the becke, and ſufferance of the Prieſte: By which Prieſte he
meaneth the Pope.
                  
                  But Dauid ſaithe, Now, yee Kinges, haue vnderſtanding: Be learned, yee, that iudge
the Earthe.
                     Pſalm. 2. Good Kinges haue oftentimes refourmed Religion, and haue lawfully
controlled, and corrected, and depoſed idle, and wicked Biſhoppes: as before, in
place conueniente,Authen. Conſtitu. 123. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . it is largely proued. The Emperoure Iuſtinian threateneth,
if the Biſhop offended in ſaieing the publique ſeruice, or in the Miniſtration of the
Sacramentes, that then he him ſelfe woulde vſe his Authoritie ouer him, and ſee
him pouniſhed. Franciſcus Zarabella ſaith, that for any crime notorious, the Emperour
maie ſummone the Pope, to appeare before his Maieſtie, and maie require
him, to yelde a reckening of his Faithe. And yet wil yée ſaie, The Emperoure is
ſtil the Popes man,
                     Fanciſ. Zarabell. De Schemate, & Concil. 
                     and maie iudge nothinge in Cauſes of Religion without him?
                  
                  
                     The Kinge, yée ſaie, is not hable to Iudge, whether an Idole be an Idole, or no, but by
the leadinge, and teachinge of the Prieſte.
                      So wel yée wiſhe al Chriſtian Princes were
inſtructed, that thei ſhould not be hable, either to ſée, or to ſpeake without you. But,
what if you Prieſtes ſaie, as it hath often happened, God is an Idole, & an Idole
is God?
                     Eſai 5. Actor. 19. Iohan. 18. 
                     Light is Darkeneſſe: and Darkeneſſe is Light? what if they ſaie, Greate
is Diana the Goddeſſe of Epheſus? What if they condemne the innocente, and
ſaie, as they ſmometime ſaide of Chriſte, Onleſſe this man were a malefactoure, wee
woulde neuer haue brought him to thy hande?
                      Yet muſte the Prince neuertheleſſe drawe
his Swerde, and ſtrike, when, and whom ſo euer the Prieſte biddeth: and blindely
execute his wicked wil?M. Hardinge, Pag. 302 a. M. Hardinge. Pag. 192 a. Pag. 192. b. In déede, M. Hardinge, you ſaie preciſely: If the mater decreed
be Spiritual, and apperteininge to Faithe, the Prince ought to obeie without queſtion, or
grudge Likewiſe againe yée ſaie, It ſhalbe yenough for you, to doo, as the Succeſſoures of Peter
bid you to doo. Chriſte nowe requireth of you, not to obeie Peter, and Paule: but to obeie him,
that ſitteth in theire Chaire:
                      What ſo euer he ſaie, True, or falſe. For this, no doubte,
muſte be your meaninge.
                  The Kinge was bound to write out the Booke of the Lavve. This,
                      yée ſaie, proueth
not the Kinges Superioritie ouer the Prieſtes.
                      No verily, M. Hardinge: Neither was
it alleged by vs to that pourpoſe. Neuertheleſſe, hereby it appeareth, that God
woulde haue the Kinge to be learned in his Lavves.
                  
                  
                     But the Kinge muſte receiue the Booke of the Prieſte, and of none other: Therefore,
ſaie you, the Prieſte is aboue the Kinge.
                      Mée thinketh, M. Hardinge, euen for your
credites ſake, yée ſhoulde looke better to your Logique. For what auaileth the deliuerie
of a Booke,
                     Ceremoniari. Lib. 2. Sectio. 2. to make the Prieſte, either higher, or lower? When the Pope
is at his Conſecration, the Cardinal, that is his Orderer, deliuereth him a Booke
of the Epiſtles, and Goſpelles. And wil ye thereof conclude, that the ſaide Cardinal
is aboue the Pope? Mary, God forebidde.
                  
                     Goddes meaning,Paul. Phagius in Deuter. Cap. 17. touching this Ceremonie. was this, that the Kinges Booke
ſhoulde he true, and fautleſſe. And therefore God commaunded him to take a Copie
thereof, out of the Regiſtrie, or Recordes, whiche were thought to be voide of al
corruption, and were euermore keapte in the Temple, vnder the Cuſtodie of the
Prieſtes. Paulus Phagius ſaithe, Euery Priuate man was commaunded to haue
one Booke ſeuerally to him ſelfe: But the Kinge was commaunded to haue twoo.
And, for as mutche as the Kinge was a Publique Perſone, therefore God willed
him to take his Copie out of the publique Recordes of the Temple.
                  
                     Your owne Hugo cardinalis ſaithe,
                     Hugo in Deute. Cap. 17. 
                     Accipiet exemplar à Sacerdotibus: non à
quibuſſibet, ſed à bonis: Vbi nihil fucatum eſt: nihil corruptum: He ſhal take his Copie of y•
                     Prieſtes: not of euery Prieſte, what ſo euer: but of the good: that in the ſame Copie there be
nothing, neither coloured, nor corrupted.
                  Al this, M. Hardinge, wil hardely proue your ſtrange Concluſion, that the

                     Prieſte vvas Superioure to the King:
                     Deuteronomie. A copie. A Double. It ſéemeth mutche better to proue the contrarie,
that the Prieſte vvas the Kinges Inferioure, and his Subiecte, and his
Clerke of Recordes, as beinge appointed to keepe his Bookes. So S. Auguſtine
ſaithe,Auguſti. Contra Fauſtum. Lib. 16. Cap. 21. Et in Pſal. 58. Et ſapè alibi. the Ievves this daie kéepe the very true Bookes of the Scriptures: Al
be it, not for theire owne vſe, but onely for ours. And therefore, he ſaithe, they be,
not our Superiours, but our Seruantes.
                  
                  Certainely, concerninge the Kinges, and Prieſtes of the Olde Lavve, one of
your owne frendes, whom for many cauſes yée maie not wel refuſe, ſaithe thus:
In Veteri Lege Sacerdotium indignius erat Poteſtate Regia, & ei Subiectum:
In the Olde Lavve the Prieſtes Office was Inferioure to the Prince,
                     Iohan. De pariſ. De poteſta. Reg. et Papali. Cap. 5. 
                     and Subiecte Vnto
him.
                  
                  Yée ſaie, If the Prieſte muſte geeue the Holy Scriptures to the Kinge, then verily muſte
he take ſutche, as they geeue him: and with ſutche meaninge, as they geeue vnto it. Yea, I trowe,
though they teare theire roabes againſte Chriſte, as Caiphas did, and crie out, He
blaſphemeth, yet muſte wee by your Iudgemente, euermore ſeeke to them for the
ſenſe, and meaninge of the Scriptures. For this is the grounde, and Fundation
of your Diuinitie: The Scripture of God hathe none other ſenſe, but as it ſhal
pleaſe the Prieſte to geeue vnto it. But S. Chryſoſtome, ſpeakinge of the
ſame Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes, from whome we haue receiued the ſelfe ſame Scriptures,
ſaithe thus:Chryſoſto. in Geneſim. Homil. 9. 
                     Literae quidem Legis apud illos ſunt: Senſus autem apud
nos: The Letters, or woordes of the Scriptures are with them: but the true meaninge of
them is with vs.
                     
                  
                  Here you mutche diſaduantage your ſelfe, and, as yée ſaie, omitte, that we reade,
Librum Legis, whereas the Churche readeth, Deuteronomium: for that, as yée ſaie,
it were too longe for you, to enter into that diſputation. Therefore, M. Hardinge, we wil
patiently abide your leaſure, vnt il yée haue founde out the whole myſterie, and cō
                     ſidered
it better. In the meane ſeaſon, it ſhal not be good for you, to be ouer ranke
with your Commentaries, vntil yée better vnderſtande the Texte. Certainely,
the wiſe and learned thinke, that herein yée are mutche deceiued. For, whereas
the Woordes are theſe, Deſcribet ſibi Deuteronomium Legis huius, they
thinke, that, Deuteronomium, in this place, is not put for any one certaine ſeueral
Booke of the Fiue Bookes of Moſes, as it is otherwiſe commonly vſed, but rather
for a Copie, or a Draught of the Whole Lavve. And in this ſenſe they
ſaie, that, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , is none other, but 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is to ſaie, a Copie, or
a Double.
                     Queſto Doppio. Le Double. The Italian Tranſlation hathe thus, Eſſo ſi ſcriuera queſto Doppio de la
Legge.
                      The Frenche Tranſlation hath. Le double. Leo Iudas tranſlateth it thus,
Deſcribet ſibi Exemplum Legis huius: He ſhal write out for him ſelfe a Copie of
this Lawe.
                      And, for ſomme proufe hereof, it is thus written in the Booke of Ioſua:
Afterwarde Ioſua readde out of the woordes of the Lavve, bothe the Bleſſinges, and the
Curſes,
                     
                     Ioſua. 8. 
                     accordinge to euery thinge, that is written in the Booke of the Lavve. And
there was not one woord of al the thinges, that Moſes Commaunded, but Joſua readde the
ſame before the whole congregation of Iſrael.
                     
                  
                  Where we allege the woordes of the Prophete Eſai, Kinges ſhal be thy Foſterers,
and Queenes thy Nurces:
                      yée ſaie, Euery Nurce, or Foſterer, is not aboue him, that is nouriſhed.
A faitheful ſeruante oftentimes foſtereth his Maiſter. Yet is not he aboue his Maiſter. So
lothe yee are, the Kinge ſhoulde be Superioure to a Prieſte. And thus hanc yée
brought about by your handſome Concluſions, that your Prieſtes be the Maiſters,
and Kinges theire Seruantes. And therefore it is diſcretely noted in your Gloſe,
Imperator Romanus eſt Procurator,
                     Diſ. 98. Si Imperator. In Gloſſa. 
                     ſiue Defenſor Romanae Eccleſiae: The Emperoure
of Rome is the Stewarde, or Bailife of the Churche of Rome.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 4. & 5.
               I ſaie,The Pope a Kinge. Moſes a Prieſte. biſides al theſe thinges, we ſee by Hiſtories, & by Examples
of the beſte times, that good Princes euer tooke the Adminiſtration
of Eccleſiaſtical maters to perteine to theire duetie.
               
                  Moſes,
                  Exod. 32. beinge a Ciuile Magiſtrate, and chiefe Guide of the people,
bothe receiued from God, and deliuered to the people al the order for
Religion, and Sacrifices, and gaue Aaron the Biſhop a vehemente,
and ſoare rebuke for makinge the Golden Calfe, and for ſufferinge
the Corruption of Religion.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Moſes was not onely a Ciuile Magiſtrate.Vntruthe. For at that time he vvas no Prieſte. but alſo a Prieſte. In that he had both offices,Vntruthe. For it proueth the cōtrarie. Reade the Anſvveare. it proueth
that a Prieſt may haue both: but not cōtrariwiſe, that a King may haue both For the greater may
include the leſſe, but the leſſe can not include the greater.Vntruth, confeſſed by M. H. frendes. For in the time of Moſes Lavve, the Prieſte vvas inferiours to the Prince. The office of a Prieſt is the higheſt of al.
Subſtantial Argumentes, vvhereby to proue the Pope a Kinge. And Chriſte comming naturally of the Kinges line from Dauid in the tribe of Iuda, yet eſtemed that
honor nothinge in reſpecte of that he was a Prieſte according to the order of Melchiſedech. Therefore
Melchiſedech alſo beinge both Prieſte and Kinge, was not yet ſaide to be the figure of Chriſte ſo mutche
concerninge his Kingedome,Pſal. 109. as his Prieſthoode. For Dauid ſaid of Chriſte, Thou art a Prieſte for euer
after the order of Melchtſedech. As for his Kingedome, it was included in his Prieſtes office. And
therefore when we speake of Chriſtes Kingedome, though in euery reſpecte he be the very Kinge in
dede of al Kinges,Iuſtinus in Dial. aduerſus Typh. Exod. 19. 1. Pet. 2. and Lord of al Lordes: yet we aſsigne it alſo to haue ben vpon the Croſſe, vbiregnauit
à ligno Deus, where God reigned from the woodde. Accordinge to the ſame meaninge,
whereas the people of Iſrael were called Regnum Sacerdotale, a Prieſtly Kingedome: S. Peter
writing to the Chriſtians, tourned the order of the wordes, calling the Churche of Chriſt, Sacerdotium
Regale, a Kingely Prieſthoode. Moſes was both a Prieſte and a Ciuile Gouernoure, as beinge a
figure of Chriſte, who ioined both together, makinge the tribe of Iuda, which was before kingly, now
alſo to be Prieſtly. Therefore S. Auguſtine vpon thoſe wordes of Dauid, Pſal. 98. Moſes and Aaron are in the
number of his Prieſtes, concludeth, that Moſes muſte nedes haue benne a Prieſte.Diſcretely reaſoned. For al this perteineth as vvel to a Simple Prieſte, as to the Pope. For (ſaithe he) if he
were not a Prieſt, what was he? ‡ Nunquid maior sacerdote eſſe potuit, could he be greater
then a Prieſte? ‡ As who ſhoulde ſaie, there is no greater dignitie, then prieſthoode. And, ſeinge Moſes
had the greateſt dignitie, for he ruled al, and conſecrated Aarō high Biſhop, and his ſonnes Prieſtes,
therefore him ſelfe muſte nedes haue ben a Prieſte.Louaniā Logique. Moſes Conſecrated Aaron: Ergo, The Pope is a Kinge. Nowe if Moſes were bothe, and his chiefe office
was Prieſthoode, it foloweth by that example, that the Pope maie rule temporally, but not that a
Kinge maie rule ſpiritually. This you haue gained nothinge by this example.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here M. Hardinge hath many greate woordes of ſmal weight. The final Concluſion,
and Summa ſummarum is this: The Pope muſte needes be a Kinge.
And that he proueth, as his manner is, by theſe his yonge vntiedy Argumentes:
Moſes, being a Ciuile Magiſtrate, or a Prince, had alſo the Prieſthoode, & was a
Prieſte: Ergo, ſaithe he, The Pope, beinge a Prieſte, muſte haue alſo the Kingedome,
& be a Kinge. And thus he peeceth theſe maters handſomely togeather, as
though, what ſo euer were once in Moſes, ought of neceſſitie to be alſo in y• 
                     Pope.
But if a man ſhoulde deſire him to proue his Argumente, & to make it good, and to
ſhewe vs, howe theſe péeces maie be framed togeather, I thinke, he would be faine
to take a daie. Firſte, whether Moſes were a Prieſte, or no, it is not certaine.
As for that,Pſal. 98. M. Harding allegeth theſe woordes of Dauid, Moſes, & Aaron in Sacerdotibus
eius, he him ſelfe wel knoweth, that the Hebrewe woorde there, is
doubteful, and ſignifieth as wel a Prince, as a Prieſte. S. Hierome ſaithe, Vnus

                     Legis,
                     The Pope is a Kinge. Moſes a Prieſte. 
                     alte
                           •
                         Sacerdotij Regulam tenuit: Moſes helde the Rule of the Lawe: Aaron
the Rule of Prieſthoode. Againe he ſaithe, Emiſit ante faciem noſtram Moſen
Spiritualem Legem, & Aaron magnum Sacerdotem: God ſente out before our face,
Moſes (not as the Prieſte, but as) the Spiritual Lawe,
                     Hiero, in Pſal. 98 Hierony in Micheam Cap. 6. Hugo. in Pſal. 98. 
                     and Aaron the greate Prieſte.
Euen Hugo, your owne Doctoure, touching the ſame woordes, ſaithe thus, Moſes
etſi, &c. Notwithſtandinge Moſes vvere not a Prieſte, yet bicauſe he halowed the peoples
praiers, &c. he was called a Prieſte. For in the Scriptures Greate, and Noble menne are
called by the name of Prieſte. Who ſo liſteth to knowe more hereof, let him reade
Sanctes Pagninus, Dauid Kimchi, Nicolaus Lyra, &c.
                  But, if Moſes in déede were a Prieſte, yee ſhoulde doo wel, M. Hardinge, to reſolue
vs, Fieſt, whether he were a Prieſte borne, or els afterwarde made a Prieſte.
A Prieſte borne, I trowe, yée wil not ſaie. If yée ſaie, he was afterwarde made a
Prieſte, then tel vs, by what Biſhop, or other Creature was he Conſecrate? At
whoes handes receiued he Authoritie? When, where, & to what pourpoſe? What
Prieſtelike Apparel euer ware he? Or, in what Office, or Miniſterie euer ſhewed
he him ſelf to be a Prieſte?
                     Hebrae. 5. S. Paule ſaith, A Prieſte is appointed to offer vp Oblations,
and Sacrifices for ſinne.
                      What Oblations, or Sacrifices for ſinne, can yée tel vs, that
Moſes offered? If he were neither Borne a Prieſte, nor made a Prieſte, nor euer
knowen by office to be a Prieſte, then was he, I trowe, a very ſtrange Prieſte.
                  
                  If Moſes were the Higheſt Prieſte, and Head of the Churche, and Aaron likewiſe
the Higheſt Prieſte, and in ſo mutche the Heade of the Churche too, as wel
as he, then had y• 
                     Churche tvvoo higheſt Biſhoppes, and tvvoo Heades bothe
togeather: Whiche thinge were monſtrous, not onely in ſpeache, but alſo in
Nature.
                  Notwithſtandinge, whether Moſes at any one certaine time were a Prieſte,
or no, it is a mater not woorthy the ſtriuinge. Certaine it is, that before the Lavve
was written Kinges, & Princes, and the beſte borne, and Enheritours, & y• wealthieſt
of the people,Hierony. in Qu Hebraici, in Geneſim. were euer Prieſtes. S. Hierome ſaithe, Hebraei tradunt, Primogenitos
functos Officio Sacerdotum, & habuiſſe Veſtimentum Sacerdotale: quo induti,
Deo Victimas offerebant, antequam Aaron in Sacerdotium eligeretur: The Hebrevve
Rabbines ſaie, that the Firſte borne children did the office of the Prieſtes, and had
the Prieſtelike Apparel, and wearing the ſame, offered vp theire Sacrifices vnto God, vntil
the time,
                     
                     Hierony. in Iob. Cap. 1. 
                     that Aaron was choſen into the Prieſtehoode.
                      Againe he ſaithe, Priuilegium
Offerendi Primogenitis, vel maximè Regibus debebatur: The Priuilege of
offering vp Sacrifices was dewe to y• Firſt borne of the children, but moſt of al vnto Kinges.
The Heathen Romaine Emperours,
                     Diſt. 10. De Capitulis, in Gloſſ. Inter acta Gelaſij. as Veſpaſianus, Traianus, and others, to
encreaſe their Maieſtie towardes their Subiectes, biſide the ſtate of the Emprere,
woulde alſo be called Pontifices Maximi.
                  
                  Therefore wee wil graunte M. Harding, ſéeinge he hath taken ſo mutch paines,
about a mater not woorthy ſo longe talke, that Moſes for ſomme litle ſhorte time
was a Prieſte.
                     Exod. 29. Yet, neuertheleſſe had he no Ordinarie Prieſthoode: neither was
he a Prieſte more, then for the ſpace of twoo, or thrée houres, onely vntil he had
Conſecrated Aaron, and his children: & no lenger. Immediately afterward, al this
greate Prieſtehoode was at an end. One of your owne Doctours, M. Hardinge,
ſaithe thus,Heruaeus, de Poteſtat. pp. Ca. 18. 
                     Non erant Sacerdotes Legales, Dignitate, & Officio, ſicut Aaron: Licet
in neceſsitate, & propter defectum Sacerdotum, aliquos actus Sacerdotum fecerint:
vt, quòd Moſes inunxit Aaron: propter quod Moſes Sacerdos dicitur in Pſalmo:
The Firſtborne were not Prieſtes in Office, and Dignitie, as Aaron was: notwithſtanding,
in caſe of neceſsitie, and for lacke of Prieſtes, they did ſomme parte of the Prieſtes Office: as,
that Moſes anointed, or Conſecrated Aaron: for whiche thinge Moſes in the Pſalme
is called a Prieſte.
                  
                  
                     
This,The Pope is a Kinge. M. Hardinge, is that Fundation, that muſt néedes beare the burthen of
your whole Churche of Rome. The Pope, yée ſaie, muſte be a Kinge,
                      bicauſe Moſes
was bothe Prince, and Prieſt. And yet your own Felowes ſaie, Moſes by Office,
and Dignitie, vvas neuer Prieſte. Yée ſaie, The Pope, being a Biſhop, maie be a
Kinge: But of the other ſide, a King maie in no wiſe be a Biſhop:
                      & thus, either vnwitingely,
or willingly, yée ſeeme to ouerthrowe your owne Poſition. For the Example,
that yée grounde vpon, of Aaron, and Moſes, proueth quite the contrarie. For
Moſes, being a Prince, did alſo the Office of a Biſhop. But Aaron, beinge the Biſhop,
did neuer ye Office of a Prince. Therefore hereof yée might better Conclude,
ye a Prince maie be a Biſhop: But a Biſhop maie not be a Kinge. Streighten your
boltes therefore, M. Harding, & ſhaue thē better, before yée ſo ſuddainely, I wil not
ſaie, ſo rudely, ſhoote them from you. Neuertheleſſe, yée ſaie, the Prieſthoode,
whiche is the more, maie conteine the Kingedome, beinge y• leſſe. In this reſpecte,
I trowe,Extra. De Maiorita & Obedien. Solitae, In Gloſſa. your Gloſe, as it is ſaid before, compareth the Pope to the Sonne, and the
Emperoure to the Moone: & findeth out ſubſtantially by good Geometrical Proportion,
that the Pope is iuſt ſeuen and fiftie times greater, then the Emperour.
How be it, your owne Doctours ſaie, as I haue likewiſe ſhewed before, that in the
Lavve of Moſes,
                     Iohan. De Pariſ. De poteſtat. Regia & Pap ca. 5. the Prince was greater then the Prieſte.
                  
                  That ye allege of the Prieſthoode, and Kingedome of Chriſte, ſerueth you
to ſmal purpoſe. For, I beſeche you, what Crovvne, what Scepter, what Svverde
bare Chriſte? What Eccleſiaſtical Prieſthoode had he, but onely, that he executed
vpon the Croſſe? Verily touching any Ciuile ſhewe, or outward Office, as he was
no Kinge,
                     Iohan. 18. ſo was he no Prieſte. As he ſaid, My Kingdome is not of this world:
So might he alſo haue ſaid, My Prieſthoode is not of this vvorld. Otherwiſe, he
was bothe King, & Prieſt, in Power, & Vertue: but not apparētly in outward office.
                  
                     One of your Felowes ſaithe thus,
                     Heruaeus de Poteſtat. Pp. Cap. 8. 
                     Pater, per Sanctos Expoſitores, quòd Chriſtus
non habuit in Temporalibus Authoritatem, vel Iudicium. Sed dare potuit, & dare habuit
Virtutis Documentum: It appeareth by the Holy Expoſitours, that Chriſte had neither
Authoritie, nor Iudgemente in thinges Temporal. But he coulde bothe geeue, and had to geeue
Inſtructions of Vertue.
                  As for theſe twoo woordes of S.1. Pet. 2. 
                     Peter, Yee are a Kingely Prieſthoode, yée
woulde not haue alleged them to this pourpoſe, had yée not benne in your dreame.
For thinke you, that S. Peter called the whole Body of the Churche of Chriſte, a
Kingely Prieſthoode, for that you fanſie your Pope to be togeather bothe Prieſt,
and Kinge? Certainely, the Churche of God was a Kingely Prieſthoode, before
either the Churche of Rome was a Churche, or the Pope of Rome was a Pope.
Yee ſhould haue ſomme care to deale more reuerently with the VVoorde of God:
For it is Holy. S. Peters meaninge is this, that euery Faithful Chriſtian man is
now, after a Spiritual, or Ghoſtly meaning, not onely a Prieſte, but alſo a King:
and therefore he calleth the whole Churche a Kingely Prieſthoode. Tertullian
ſaithe thus,Tertul. in Exhorta. ad Caſtit. Apocal. 1. 
                     Nónne & Laici Sacerdotes ſumus? Regnum quoq
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nos, & Sacerdotes
Deo, & Patri ſuo fecit: And wee, that be Laiemen, are wee not Prieſtes? Truly
Chriſte hath made euen vs a kingdome, and Prieſtes vnto his Father.
                      S. Auguſtine
ſaith,Aug. Q Euang. Lib. 2. Cap. 40. 
                     Hoc Sacerdotio Regali conſecrantur omnes pertinentes ad Corpus Chriſti,
Summi, & Veri Principis Sacerdotum: With this Roial Prieſthoode al thei are
conſecrate, that perteine to the Body of Chriſte, whiche is the high, and true Prince of
Prieſtes.
                     Augu. De Ciuit. Dei Li. 20. Ca. 10 Ambroſ. in Lucā. Lib. 5. ap 6. Againe he ſaith, Omnes ſunt Sacerdotes, quia Membra ſunt vnius Sacerdotis:
Al be Prieſtes, becauſe thei are the Members of one Prieſte. S. Ambroſe ſaith,
Omnes Filij Eccleſiae Sacerdotes ſunt: Al the Children of the Churche be Prieſtes.
                     
                  
                  
                     S. Hierome ſaithe, Genus Sacerdotale, & Regale ſumus omnes, qui Baptizati
in Chriſto,Hierony. in Malachi. Cap. 1. Chriſti cenſemur Nomine: Al we are that Prieſtely, and Kingely

                     Kinred,
                     The Pope is a kinge. kingely Prieſtehoode. 
                     that beinge Baptized in Chriſte, are called Chriſtians, by the name of Chriſte.
                  Chryſoſtome ſaith, Et tu in Baptiſmo, & Rex efficeris, & Sacerdos, & Propheta:
Euen thou in thy Baptiſme art made both a King, and a Prieſte, and a Prophete.
                  Nowe, M. Hardinge, let vs take the vlewe of youre Prieſtely Concluſions.
                  
                     Moſes once did one parte of the Biſhoppes Office,Chryſoſt. 2. Cor. Homil. 3. to Conſecrate Aaron, & his children: & that▪ neuer at any time els▪ neither after, nor before: Christ Rath a Spiritual
Prieſthoode, & a Spiritual Kingdome: for otherwiſe Ordinarie Prieſthood,
and Earthely Kingedome he had none: S. Peter calleth the whole Churche
of Chriſte, a Kingely Prieſthoode: Ergo, ſaie you, The Pope beareth bothe the
Office of a Prieſte, and alſo the Righte, and State of an Earthly Kinge.
                  
                  
                     To diſſemble al other the fonde weakeneſſe of theſe folies, Chriſte him ſelfe ſaith
to the Pope,
                     
                     Matth. 20. 
                     and to al other Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes:
                      The Kinges of Nations rule ouer
them: and they, that are greate, exerciſe Authoritie ouer the people: But it ſhal not be
ſo emongeſt you.
                     Diſt. 10. Quoniam idem. 
                     S. Cyprian ſaithe, as he is alleged by Gratian, Chriſtus actibus
proprijs, & Dignitatibus diſtinctis officia Poteſtatis vtriuſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            diſcreuit:
                      Chriſte by ſeueral
deuties, and diſtincte honoures, hath ſet a difference bitweene the Offices of bothe Powers.
                  
                     Whereupon your owne Gloſe ſaithe, Hic eſt Argumentum, quòd Papa non habet
vtrun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            Gladium:
                     
                     Gloſſa. Here is a good Argument, that the Pope hath not bothe Swerdes.
                  
                     S. Bernarde ſaith thus vnto Pope Eugenius,Bernar. De Conſidera. Lib. 2. Planū eſt, quòd Apoſtolis interdicitur
Dominatus. Ergo tu tibi vſurpare aude, aut Dominās Apoſtolatum, aut Apoſtolicus
Dominatum. Planè ab alterutro prohiberis. Si Vtrunque ſimiliter habere vis,
perdes vtrun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Alioqui ne te putes exceptum illorum numero, de quibus conqueritur
Dominus, dicens: Ipſi regnauerunt, & non ex me: It is plaine, that Temporal Dominion
is forebidden the Apoſtles. Nowe therefore, thou, being Pope, dare to vſurpe, either the
Apoſtleſhip, beinge a Prince: or the Princehoode, beinge the succeſſoure of the Apoſtles.
Doubteleſſe from the one of them thou arte forebidden. If thou wilte indifferentely
haue bothe, thou ſhalte loſe bothe. Otherwiſe thinke not, thou canſte bee excepted from the
mimber of them, of whom the Lorde complaineth, Thei haue made them ſelues kinges,
and not by mee.
                  Concerninge the place of S. Peter, one of your companie ſaithe, it nothinge
furthereth the Popes Kingedome.
                     Heruaeus, de Poteſtat. Pp. Ca. 18. Thus he ſaithe, Sacerdotium dicitur Regale, à
Regno, non huius mundi, ſed Coeli: S. Peter calleth vs a Kingely Prieſthoode,
of the Kingedome of Heauen, not of the Kingedome of this worlde.
                      Yet is this the
ſelfe ſame Kingdome, that the Pope craueth, & that by the Authoritie of S. Peter.
                  
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge one of your companie there, hath ſente vs home lately other
newes from Louaine.
                     
                     Dorman. Fol. 40. 
                     His woordes be theſe: Vos eſtis Regale Sacerdotium,
                      You
are a Kingly Prieſthoode: as who ſhould ſaie, the Prieſthoode before, was not Kingly,
for that then Kinges ruled ouer Prieſtes: But now is the Prieſthoode Kingely, for that
to it be ſubiecte euen Kinges themſelues. Thus, onleſſe your Prieſtes maie rule Kinges,
& Princes, & al the world at theire pleaſure, yée thinke, thei haue no Kingly Prieſthoode.
In the Councel,
                     
                     Conc. Macrenſe. Citatur ab Illyrico inter Teſtes Verita. Pag. 121. 
                     holden at Macra in France, it is written thus: Solus
Dominus noſter Ieſus Chriſtus verè fieri potuit & Rex, & Sacerdos. Poſt Incarnationem
verò, & Reſurrectionem, & Aſcenſionem eius in Coelum, nec Rex Pontificis Dignitatem:
nec Pontifex Regiam Poteſtatem ſibi vſurpare praeſumpſit:
                      Onely our
Lorde Ieſus Chriſte might truly be bothe Prieſt, and King. But ſithence his Incarnation,
and Reſurrection, and Aſcenſion into heauen, neither hath the King preſumed to take vpon him
ye Dignitie, or office of a Biſhop, nor hath the Biſhop preſumed to vſurpe the Power, and
Maieſtie of a Prince.
                  To be ſhorte, M. Hardinge, wée ſaie not, as you ſo often, & ſo vntruly haue reported,
that the Kinge maie in any wiſe execute the Biſhoppes Office. But thus
we ſaie, and bicauſe it is true, therefore wée ſaie it: The Kinge maie lawfully

correcte,Ioſua. and chaſtice the Negligence, & Falſehedde of the Biſhoppes: and that in
ſo dooinge, he dooth onely his owne Office, and not the Biſhoppes.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 6.
               
                  Ioſua alſo,Ioſua. Cap. 1. though he were none other, then a Ciuile Magiſtrate,
yet as ſone as he was choſē by God, and ſet as a Ruler ouer the people,
he receiued Commaundementes, ſpecially touching Religion,
and the Seruice of God.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  There is no doubte, but Ioſue receiued commiſsion, and commaundemente to woorſhip God, but
none to rule Prieſtes in ſpiritual matters.Num. 27. Ye rather he was commaunded to go foorthe, and come
in at the voice and worde of Eleazarus the high Prieſte, he and al the Children of Iſrael. Do not theſe
men proue their matter handſomly?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Ioſua was commaunded to goe in, and out, and to be directed by the voice of
Eleazarus the High Prieſte: Therefore,
                      yée ſaie, in Spiritual Cauſes, the Prieſtes maie
not be controlled by the Prince.
                      Yée deliuer out youre Argumentes, M. Hardinge,
before they be ready. Theſe péeces would haue benne better tied togeather.
                  Though the Prince be commaunded to heare the Prieſte, yet if the Prieſte be
negligente, or deceiue the people, he maie by his Ordinarie Authoritie controlle
the Prieſte.
                  
                  When Aaron, the High Prieſte, had conſented to the makinge, and woorſhippinge
of the Golden Calfe,Exod. 32. 
                     Moſes, beinge then the Temporal Prince, rebuked
him ſharpely vnto his face: and in ſo dooinge, did not the Biſhoppes Office, but
onely his owne. As touchinge Ioſua, whom ye woulde faine haue reſtreined
from al Eccleſiaſtical Cauſes, he cauſed the people to be Circumciſed: He cauſed
Aultars for theire Bloudy Sacrifices to be erected: He cauſed the Prieſtes to make
theire Sacrifices: He cauſed the Deuteronomie to be written in ſtoanes: He
cauſed bothe the Bleſſinges, and the Curſſes of God to be pronounced: He
ſpake openly to the people, and fraied them from Idolatrie. Al theſe were caſes,
not of Ciuile Policie,Auguſt. Contra Creſconium, Li. 3. Cap. 51. but of Religion. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, In hoc Reges Deo ſeruiūt,
ſicut eis Diuinitùs praecipitur, in quātum ſunt Reges, ſi in ſuo Regno bona iubeant,
mala prohibeant: non ſolùm quae pertinent ad Humanam Societatem, verùm etiam,
quae ad Diuinam Religionem: Herein Kinges ſerue God, as it is commaunded
them from aboue, in that they be Kinges, if within theire Kingedome they commaunde
good thinges, and forebidde euil: not onely in thinges perteininge to Humaine Felovveſhip,
or Ciuile Order, but alſo in thinges perteining to Goddes Religion.
Yée maie ſee therefore, M. Hardinge, howe handſomely ſo euer wée proue our maters,
that▪ of your parte, hitherto thei are but vnhandſomely, & courſely anſweared.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 7.
               
                  Kinge Dauid, when the whole Religion of God was altogeather
brought out of frame by wicked Kinge Saule,
                  1. Paralip. 13. brought home againe
the Arke of God, that is to ſaie, he reſtoared Religion againe: and
was not onely amongeſt them him ſelf, as a counſeller, and furtherer
of the woorke, but he appointed alſo Hymnes, and Pſalmes, put in
order the companies, and was the onely dooer in ſetting foorth that
whole Solemne Triumphe, and in effecte ruled the Prieſtes.
               
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As Dauid reſtored all thinges to good order,Kinge Dauid ordereth maters of Religion. after the euill Kinge Saule,An il compariſon. For that the one ſet vp, the other pluckte dovvne. ſo did Queene Marie
redreſſe diſorders before committed.1. Paral. 15. But as Queene Marie did it by the meane of Prieſtes, ſo Kinge
Dauid in prieſtly matters called for Sadoch, and Abiathar. In deede Dauid paſſed other Princes herein,
becauſe he had theA ſimple ſhifte God vvote. For other Kinges, that did the like, vvere no Prophetes. gifte of Prophecie, whereby he wrote Pſalmes, whiche to this daie we ſinge.
But all this maketh nothinge to proue him Iudge of Spirituall matters. He did not vſurpe the Auctoritie
to Sacrifice, to diſcerne the lepre, and to doo the like thinges of Prieſtly charge.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Kinge Dauid, yee ſaie, reſtoared Religion by meane of the Prieſtes. Nay, verily, M.
Hardinge: for by meane of the Prieſtes, the Religion vtterly was decaied. Therefore
yée ſpoile that Moſte Noble Prince of his woorthy prayſes: and geue them to
others, that neuer deſerued them. The Holy Tabernacle was broken, and loſte:
ye 
                     Arke of God was keapte, not in the Temple, but in a Priuate mannes houſe:
the people had no common place to reſorte vnto, to heare Goddes VVil: they had
eche man his owne Priuate chaple in their Hilles, and Groaues.
                  
                  
                     Dauid therefore called the Biſhoppes, & Prieſtes togeather: He ſhewed them,
in what ſorte the Religion of God was defaced: he willed them to bring the Arke
into Sion: he was preſente him ſelfe: he appointed, and ordered the whole Triumphe:
He aſſigned,1. Paralipom. 16. 1. Paralipom. 24. whiche of the Leuites, and in what order they ſhoulde ſerue
before the Arke: He alloted Aarons Children, whiche were the Prieſtes, to walke
eche man in his ſeueral office.
                  
                     So likewiſe it is written of Kinge Salomon, touchinge the ſame: Kinge Salomon,
                     
accordinge to the decree,2. Paralipom. 8. and order of his Father Dauid, appointed the Offices of the
Prieſtes in their ſeueral Miniſteries, and the Leuites, eche man in his Order: that they
ſhoulde praiſe God, and miniſter before the Prieſtes. For ſo Dauid, the man of God, had
commaunded.2 Paralipom. 19. 
                     Likewiſe it is written of Kinge Ioſaphat,
                      He appointed, and ordered
the Leuites, and Prieſtes.
                  
                  Thus then did theſe godly Princes: and thus dooinge, they vſurped not the
Biſhoppes office, but onely did that, they lawfully mighte doo, and apperteined
wholy vnto them ſelues.
                  Where yee ſaie, Dauid was a Prophete, and not onely a Kinge, as though he
had donne theſe thinges by the vertue of his Propheſie, and not by the righte of
his Princely Power, this poore ſhifte is very ſimple. For notwithſtanding Kinge
Dauid were a Prophete, yet Kinge Ioſaphat, & other Princes, that did the like,
were no Prophe
                           •
                        es: neither doo wee reade of any other Prophete, that euer attempted
to doo the like: nor did Dauid theſe thinges, as a Prophete, but as a
Kinge.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 8.
               
                  Kinge Salomon builte vnto the Lorde the Temple, which his
Father Dauid had but pourpoſed in his minde to doo:2. Paral. 6. and after the
finiſhinge thereof, he made a godly Oration to the people, concerninge
Religion, and the Seruice of God:
                  3. Reg. 8. He afterwarde diſplaced
Abiathar the Prieſte, and ſet Sadok in his place.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Salomons buildinge of the Temple,3. Reg. 2. and prayinge therein proueth no Supremacie ouer the Prieſtes
in Spirituall thinges
                        •
                      His puttinge of Abiathar out of his dignitie and rome,Vntruthe. For vvhat Superiour Biſhoppes Authoritie vſed Salomon in the Depoſition of Abiathar? was like to that

Queene Marie did to Cranmere.Kinge Salomon Judgeth in Spiritual caſes. VVhome ſhee might haue remoued for treaſon, as Salomon laide the
like to Abiathar: yet ſhe choſe rather to burne him for Hereſie. But this prouethVntruthe manifeſte. Reade the Anſvveare. onely an our warde
execution of iuſtice, without any preiudice to the Subſtance of our queſtion: VVhiche is, whether a
temporall Prince may determine the cauſes of Religion, or no.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The depoſinge of Abiathar, yée ſaie, was onely the execution of outwarde
Iuſtice: like to that, Queene Marie did to Doctoure Craumere the Archebiſhop
of Canturburie. Wherein ye ſhewe your ſelfe to be mutche ouerſéene. For
theſe compariſons are in no wiſe like. Salomon, by his Princely Authoritie, lawfully
depoſed the Highe Prieſte Abiathar: But Queene Marie depoſed not, nor
could ſhe by your Canonnes lawfully depoſe ye 
                     Archebiſhop of Canturburie: nor
doo you thinke it in any caſe lawful, that a Biſhop ſhoulde be depoſed by a Prince.
For, Depoſition, yée ſaie, is a Spiritual po
                        •
                     niſhement, and onely belongeth vnto
a Biſhop. And your Lawe ſaithe, Eius eſt Deſtituere, cuius eſt Inſtituere: He maie
Depoſe a Prieſte, that hath Authoritie to place a Prieſte.
                      Therefore theſe twoo Princes
dooinges were not like. But, touchinge the Highe Prieſte Abiathar, Kinge
Salomon ſummoned him to appeare before him: Kinge Salomon ſate in Iudgemente,
and hearde the Accuſations, wherewith he was charged: Kinge Salomon
pronounced Sentence againſte him: Kinge Salomon depoſed him: Kinge Salomon
appointed Sadoch to ſucceede him. It al this be not ſufficient, ouer and
biſides theſe thinges,2. Parali. 5. 6. 7. 8. 
                     Kinge Salomon placed the Arke of God: Kinge Salomon
Sanctified, and Halowed the Temple: Kinge Salomon offered vp burnte Sacrifice:
Kinge Salomon directed, and ordered the Prieſtes in their ſeueral Offices:
Kinge Salomon bleſſed the whole people.2. Paralip. 8. And, as it is written, The Prieſtes,
and Leuites leaftes nothinge vndonne, of al, that was commaunded them by the Kinge.
If theſe caſes be not Spiritual, telle vs then, what caſes maie be allowed for Spiritual?
Thus the Godly Kinge Salomon thought it lawful for him, to deale,
not onely in maters of Temporal Gouernemente, but alſo in Eccleſiaſtical, or
Spiritual caſes of Religion. Therefore, M. Hardinge, it is but a teie, that yee
tel vs of the execution of outwarde Iuſtice.
                  Concerninge that moſte Graue, and Godly, and Learned Father, the Archebiſhop
of Canturburie, with whom yée did, what ſo euer your pleaſure was, God
graunte, his bloude be neuer required at your handes.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 9.
               After this, when the Temple of God was in ſhameful wiſe
polluted throughe the naughtineſſe,2. Paral. 29. and negligence of Prieſtes,
Kinge Ezechias commaunded the ſame to be cleanſed from the rubble
and 
                     •
                  ilthe, the Prieſtes to light vp Candelles, to burne Incenſe, and
to doo their Diuine Seruice, accordinge to the olde allowed cuſtome.
The ſame Kinge alſo commaunded the Braſen Serpente,
                  4. Reg. 18.
whiche then the people wickedly woorſhipped, to be taken downe,
and beaten to pouder.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  How often ſhall I tell you, that this proueth nomore, but that good Kinges doo good deedes, mainteine
true Religion, and pull downe the falſe, as the Conſtable of Fraunce burned the Pu
                        •
                     pites of the
Huguenots in Paris? But theſe factes proue not, that Kinges and Conſtables be iudges of Religion,

whiche is good,Ezechias. and whiche is euill:4. Reg. 20. 4. Reg. 9. whiche true, whiche falſe: For therein theyVntruthe. For the Prieſtes did nothinge, but againſte their vvilles. Reade the Anſvveare. folow the iudgemente
and aduiſe of Prieſtes, and Prophetes, who 
                        •
                     e about them, asThis is farre from the pourpoſe. For Eſaias, and Elizaeus neither vvere Prieſtes, no
                           •
                         had the e
                           •
                        ecution of Prieſtly Offices. Eſaias was at hande with good
Kinge Ezechias to direct his doinges: and ſo was Elizaeus with Kinge Iehu.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Kinge Ezechias, yée ſaie, and other Kinges folowed the aduiſe, and Iudgemente
of the Prieſtes, and Prophetes. This tale, M. Hardinge, is not onely vnlikely,
but alſo vntrue. For yée knowe, that Eſaias, and Elizaeus, notwithſtandinge
thei were the Prophetes of God, yet were thei neither Prieſtes, nor Biſhoppes,
nor had any manner of Ordinarie Miniſtration in the Churche. The Biſhoppes,
and Prieſtes, of whome yée ſpeake, had diſordered, and waſted Goddes whole Religion.
The Holy place of God was fulle of filthineſſe: the Gates of the Temple
were ſhut vp,2. Paralip. 29. that no man might enter in: The people had turned awaie theire
faces from the Tabernacle of the Lorde: There was no Incenſe: There was no
Sacrifice. Al theſe thinges had happened through the negligence, and wickedneſſe
of the Prieſtes.
                     2. Paralip. 30. In the Olde Latine Texte it is written thus: Sacerdotes,
& Leuitae tandem Sanctificati obtulerunt Holocauſta: The Prieſtes, and Leuites,
at the laſte, or with mutche adoo, were Sanctified, and offered vp Sacrifices.
                      Vpon
whiche place the Later Tranſlation ſaithe thus: Sacerdotes, & Leuitae pudore
ſuffuſi, Sanctificauerunt ſe: The Prieſtes, and Leuites, euen for very ſhame, Sanctified
them ſelues.
                      So ready were thei, to calle vpon, and to further the Kinge in his
godly pourpoſe. They helde backe, what they coulde, and yelded to nothinge, but
with mutche adoo, and for very ſhame. They did nothinge, but by the Kinges
Commaundemente: and made him a reckeninge of their dooinges.
                  How be it, perhaps yee wil diſcharge this whole mater with one ordinarie excuſe,
and tel vs, that al theſe were but Temporal Caſes.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 10.
               
                  Kinge Iehoſaphat ouerthrew, and vtterly made awaie the Hille
Aultars,
                  1. Paralip. 17. & Groaues, whereby he ſawe Goddes Honoure hindered,
and the people holden backe with Priuate Superſtition from the ordinarie
Temple, whiche was at Ieruſalem: whereto they ſhould by
ordre haue reſorted yeerely from euery parte of the Realme.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Yee put vs in minde to conſider, how that your ſelues are thoſe Priuate Hille Aulters, and darke
Groaues. For ye be they, that ſtoppe the people from the common Temple of Chriſtendome, the Catholike
Churche: out of which is no Saluatiō, the heade whereof ſitteth in Peters chaire at Rome. For ſettinge
order bothe in matters of Common VVeale, and others, Iehoſaphat ſaide thus, concerninge Religion:
Amarias Sacerdos & pontifex veſter in ijs,
                     2. Par. 19. 
                     quae ad Deum pertinent, praeſidebit:
Amarias the Prieſte and Highe Biſhop for ſuch matters as perteine to God, he ſhall be heade ouer you.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Al this whole mater, touchinge as wel Kinge Iehoſophat, as alſo Amarias
the Highe Prieſte, is anſweared in that is paſte before.
               
               
                  The Apologie, Cap. 11. Diuiſion. 11.
                  Kinge Ioſias with greate diligence put the Prieſtes, & Biſhoppes
in minde of their dueties:4. Reg. 12. 4. Reg. 10. Kinge Iohas bridled the Riote, and Arrogancie
of the Prieſtes: Iehu put to deathe the wicked Prophetes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The puttinge of Prieſtes,loſias. Iohas. Iehu. and Biſhoppes in minde of their dutie, is not a Supremacie in determininge
Eccleſiaſticall cauſes. And whereas you ſaie, that Kinge Ioas bridled the r
                        •
                     ot, and arrogancie
of the Prieſtes, if it were ſo, it was well donne. ButYe mighte haue founde it, 4 Reg. Ca. 12. I finde not thoſe woordes in the texte. Concerninge
that Iehu did, it is aBut he Iudged them, and condemned them for Falſe Propheres. This vvas no mere Temporal office. mere temporall Office, to put falſe preachers, and Heretikes to death.
Neither can it belonge to Prieſtes, onleſſe they haue alſo ciuill iuriſdiction. Muche leſſe dothe that acte
proue, that Kinges be Supreme heades ouer the Churche, and ought to be Iudges in controuerſies and
queſtions of Religion.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Concerninge the ſtorie of Kinge Iohas, I reporte me to that is written of him
in the Booke of Kinges.
                     4. Regum. 12. He ſequeſtred the Oblations of the people, whiche the
Prieſtes had beſtowed lewdely, and wantonly vpon them ſelues, and, by his owne
Authoritie, turned the ſame to the Reparations of the Temple. Of Kinge
Ioſias,
                     2. Paralipom. 35. it is written thus: Conſtituit Ioſias Sacerdotes in officijs ſuis: Kinge Ioſias
appointed the Prieſtes to miniſter in theire ſeueral Offices.
                      And againe, Mundauit
Iudam, & Hieruſalem ab Excelſis, & Lucis: Kinge Ioſias cleanſed, and ridde
Iuda, and Hieruſalem from their Hille Aultars, and their Groaues.
                  
                  But yée wil ſaie, He did al thinges by y• diſcretion of the Prieſtes, & Biſhoppes.
This thinge in deede is neceſſarie, while the Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes be, learned,
and godly.4. Regum. 21. But Kinge Ioſias did far otherwiſe: for he ſent the Biſhop him ſelfe
vnto Olda the Prophetiſſe, to learne the diſcretion, and Iudgemente of a VVooman:
and ſo was directed in maters of Higheſt Religion, by a VVooman, and not
by a Prieſte. Theſe Examples be ſo manifeſte, that one of your Felowes there
is faine thus to excuſe the mater,Dorman. Fol. 37. by ouer mutche Antiquitie. If we woulde in theſe
daies, ſaithe he, vſe in all pointes the Examples of the Olde Lawe, there woulde folowe an huge
number of inconueniences.
                     Dorman. Fol. 39. 
                     It is no good reaſon, to ſaie, that therefore our Kinges nowe a daies
muſte haue the like Authoritie. Thus ſaithe he, As though the Princes righte were
now abated, and altered, as the Ceremonies of the Lawe: & were otherwiſe nowe,
then it was before: Or, as if the Comminge of Chriſte into the worlde, and the
Preachinge of the Goſpel, had pourpoſely benne to repreſſe and pulle downe the
State of Kinges.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 1.
               And, to rehearſe no more Examples out of the Olde Lawe, let vs
rather conſider ſithence the Birthe of chriſte, howe the churche
hath benne gouerned in the time of the Goſpel.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  If we conſider the Office of a Kinge in it ſelfe, it isEuen ſo I
                           •
                        ppiter, or Baa
                           •
                        s Biſhop, vvas as vvel a Biſhop, as the Biſhop of Rome. one euery where, not onely amonge Chriſten
Princes, but alſo amonge Heathen. * The definition of a Kinge, whiche agreeth to Iulius Ceſar, or
to Alexander the Greate, as they were Monarkes, and Princes, is one with the definition of a Kinge
whiche agreeth to Henry the Eight, or to Charles the Fifthe.Neither can the Pope meddle more vvith Religion, then Annas, or Ca
                        
                           •
                        phas. So that no more could Kinge Henry as
Kinge, meddle with Religion, then Alexander, or Iulius Ceſar. * His place is chiefe amonge the
laie, euen when they are in the Churche at the Seruice of God: andVntruthe▪ For if the Biſhop had offended, he vvas ſub
                           •
                        ecte to the Prince, as vvel vvithin the Churche, a
                           •
                         vvithout▪
                      without the Churche in all
Temporall thinges and cauſes, he is ouer the Prieſtes themſelues.
                  And becauſe all theſe examples are taken out of the Olde Teſtamente, I will geeue thee a true
reſolution out of the ſame Booke, what auctoritie Prieſtes had, and what auctoritie Kinges had.
Moſes gaue this rule,Deut▪ 17. concerninge the ſame matter. If (ſaithe he) thou perceiue an harde, and doubtfull
iudgement to be with thee betweene bloude and bloude, cauſe and cauſe, Lepre and Lepre, and
ſeeſt the woordes of the iudges within thy gates to varie, ariſe, and goe vp to the place, whiche thy

Lorde God ſhall choſe,The Prince a ludge in Eccleſiaſtical cauſes. and thou ſhalte come to the Prieſtes of the ſtocke of Leui, and to the Iudge that
ſhall be for the time, and thou ſhalte demaunde of them: who ſhall ſhewe the truthe of iudgemente
to thee.
                  But neither the Prieſte by this place may medle with that iuriſdiction, whiche belonged to the
Temporall iudge, neither the Iudge with that whiche was ſpirituall and belonginge onely to the
Prieſte.1. Paral. 26. For of ſuch cauſes Azarias the Prieſt and Biſhop ſaide to Kinge Ozias, It is not thy office, Ozias,
to burne incenſe vnto our Lorde. It is the office of the Prieſtes: That is to ſaie, of the Sonnes of
Aaron: VVho are conſecrated to doo ſuche Miniſteries. But this the Kinge mighte doo euen in matters
of Religion.The Prince is Executioner to the Prieſte. VVhen the High Prieſt had geuen ſentence, he might ſee the execution thereof
to be donne. ButVntruthe euident. Reade the Anſvveare. otherwiſe what ſo euer Kinge or Temporal iudge might not doo in his owne perſon,
‡ muche leſſe mighte he iudge, whether an other did well therein, or no. And this concerninge
the Olde Teſtament.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The Office of a Kinge, yée ſaie, was no more in Kinge Henry the Eighth, or
in Charles the Fifthe, then it was in the Heathen Princes, Iulius Caeſar, or Alexander
the Greate. And therefore, yée ſaie, a Chriſtian Princes Office ſtandeth
onely in Maters Temporal: and for that cauſe yee ſo often calle him a Mere,
Laie, Temporal Prince: as if he were in Authoritie not mutche better, then an
Heathen Magiſtrate.
                  
                  Euen ſo, M. Harding, is your Pope no more a Biſhop, or perhaps, mutche leſſe
a Biſhop, then Annas, and Caiphas: Neither is your Prieſte more a Prieſte, then
the Prieſte of Dagon, or Baal. The difference ſtandeth, not in Office, but onely
in Truthe. Yet neuertheleſſe, yée knowe, that Heathen Princes had euermore a
Soueraine Authoritie, not onely ouer theire Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes, but alſo
ouer al Caſes of Religion.
                     Ariſtotel. Foliticor. Li. 3. Socrates, Lib. 5. in Prooemio. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Ariſtotle ſaithe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
The Kinge, that is Lorde, and Ruler of thinges, that perteine vnto the Goddes.
                  
                  
                     And therefore Socrates in his ſtorie ſaithe, Imperatores vnà complexi ſumus, &c.
                     
Wee haue alſo herein compriſed the Emperours Liues, for that, ſithence the Emperours
were firſt Chriſtened, the affaires of the Churche haue hanged of them, and the greateſt
Councelles bothe haue benne, and are keapte by theire aduiſe.
                  Yee ſaie, The Prince in doubteful Caſes was commaunded to take Counſel of
the Higheſt Prieſte. This is true. But wil yée conclude hereof, that the Higheſt
Prieſte maie ſaie, & doo, what he liſteth, without controlmente? What if the Highe
Prieſte woulde anſweare thus, as he anſweared ſommetime in déede, This Chriſte
is a Samaritane, a deceiuer of the people, and hath a Diuel?
                      What if he teare his
owne roabes for anger, and crie oute, He Blaſphemeth: he is vvoorthy to die?
Yet muſte the Emperoure néedes geue eare vnto him, and beleeue him without
exception? Certainely, in the Olde Lavve, if the Biſhop either had benne negligente
in his Office, or of malice, or ignorance had anſweared vntruthe, he was euermore
vnder the General controlmente of the Prince.
                  
                  
                     VVithin the Churche, yée ſaie, the Prince is inferioure to the Prieſte: notwithſtandinge, without
the Churche he is in Temporal caſes aboue the Prieſte. Thus yee fetche your mater
rounde, within, without, and rounde aboute, with al the Circumſtances: as if
Princes were as changeable, as your ſelfe: and woulde be other without, then
they are within.
                  In déede, in that the Prieſte dothe his Office, in that he either openeth Goddes
VVil, or declareth his threates, or rebuketh ſinne, or Excommunicateth, and cutteth
of a deade member from the Body, ſo farre foorthe the Prince, be he neuer ſo
mighty, is infe
                        •
                     iour vnto him. But in this reſpecte the Prince is infertoure, not
onely to the Pope, or Biſhop, but alſo to any other ſimple Prieſte: And the Pope
                     
him ſelfe,The Prince is a ludge in Eccleſiaſtical cauſes. in this reſpecte, is inferioure to his Confeſſoure, be he neuer ſo poore a
Prieſte. So the Emperoure Conſtantinus was woonte to ſaie to the godly Biſhoppes:
Bee you Biſhoppes within the Churche: and I wilbe Biſhop without.
But if the Biſhop had beene faulty, either in Negligence, or in Falſehedde, whether
he had benne within the Churche,
                     9. Quaeſt. 3. Nemo, in Gloſſ. Abb. Euſeb. De vita Conſtant. Orat. 4 De Maiorita & Obedient. vnam Sanctam. or abroade, he was alwaies to be controlled
by the Prince.
                  
                  
                     Yee ſaie, VVhen the Highe Prieſte had geeuen Sentence, the Prince mighte ſee the Execution
thereof to be donne. And thus yée make the Emperoure the Popes man, to put his
Sentence in Execution. So Pope Bonifacius S. telleth you, Materialis Gladius
exercendus eſt manu Regum, & Militum, ſed ad nutum, & Patientiam Sacerdotis:
The Temporal Swerde muſte be drawen by the hande of Kinges, and Souldiers:
but at the becke, and ſufferance of the Prieſte.
                  
                  But, I beſeehe you, at whoſe becke did Kinge Salomon depoſe Abiathar the
Highe Prieſte? At whoſe becke did Ioſias, and other godly Princes, of whome wée
haue ſaide before, redreſſe the Religion of God, whiche they founde ſhamefully decaled?
At whoſe becke did they rebuke the careleſſe negligence of the Prieſtes?
Verily,Heruaeus De Poteſtate Papae, Cap. 18. Auguſtin. Epiſt. 166. ad Donatiſtas. one of your owne Doctours ſaithe, In Veteri Lege Sacerdotes, qui Reges
inungebant, indubitanter Regibus ſubdebantur: In the Olde Lawe, the Biſhoppes,
that a
                              •
                           ointed the Kinges, out of doubte were ſubiecte vnto the Kinges.
                     
                  
                  
                     And S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Quando Imperatores Veritatem tenent, & ipſa Veritate
contra Errotem iubent, quiſquis illud contempſerit, ipſe ſibi iudicium acquirit. Nam
& inter homines poenas Iuit, & apud Deum frontem non habebit, qui hoc facere noluit,
quod ei per Cor Regis ipſa Veritas iuſsit: When the Emperoure holdeth the Truthe,
and by force of the ſame Truthe geeueth out Lawes, and Proclamations againſte Erroure,
who ſo euer deſpiſeth the ſame, procureth iudgemente againſte him ſelfe. For he ſhalbe pouniſhed
before menne, and before God he ſhal haue no face, that refuſed to doo that thinge,
that the Truthe it ſelfe, through the harte of the Prince, hathe commaunded
him.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 2.
               
                  The Chriſtian Emperours in the olde time, appointed the Councelles
of the Biſhoppes. Conſtantine called the Councel at Nice:
Theodoſius the firſte, called the Councel at Conſtantinople:
Theodoſius the ſeconde, the councel at Epheſus: Martian, the
Councel at Chalcedon.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The callinge or ſummoninge of Councelles maie be donneA diſcrete Diſtinction: As if the Emperour receiued his Authoritie from the Pope. either by waie of auctoritie, whiche
the caller himſelfe hath: or by waie of auctoritie, whiche he taketh of an nother. If Conſtantine, the
two Theodoſians, and Marcian called the foure firſte generall Councelles by their Auctoritie onely,
then were they no generall Councelles. Neither coulde their decrees binde the whole worlde. For although
they were greate Emperours, yet was not the whole Chriſtian worlde vnder them. And
therefore thoſe Chriſtian Biſhoppes, who liued in Perſia, in Ethiopia, in Scotland, in Scythia, or in any
other lande not ſubiect to the Emperour, were neither bounde to come, nor bounde to obey the Lawes
made by them, who were not their Superiours. But if it be farre from reaſon, that a generall Councell
ſhoulde not binde all Biſhoppes and all Chriſtians, it is alſo farre reaſon, to ſaie, that Emperours
called generall Councelles by their owne onely auctoritie. In deede they called them by the
aſſent of the Biſhop of RomeVntruthe manifeſte, as it ſhal appeare. VVho beinge the generall Shepeherde of Chriſtes ſtocke, and therefore
alſo of all Biſhoppes, might commaundeAl the Biſhoppes througout the vvhole vvorlde are the Popes Sheepe. all his Sheepe to come togeather, excepte they were reaſonably
to be excuſed: and they were bounde to be heare his voice, and to obey his decree. So that, although

ye proued the Emperours to haue ſummoned and called the foure firſte Councels, yet were ye not able
to proue, they did itVntruthe. For the Emperoure maie ſummone Councels vvhether the Pope vvil, or no. without the aſſent of the Biſhoppes of Rome, which for the time ſate in Peters
chaire. And by the force of that aſſent the deede muſt take effecte. And this muche generally.
                  Now to prooue vnto you, thatVntruthe. For Sylueſter vvas dead longe before the ſummoninge of the Councel. S. Sylueſter aſſented to the callinge of the firſte Councell at Nice, it
is to be conſidered, that he onely hath auctoritie to ratifie, who hath auctoritie to commaunde, and to
geue aſſent and ſtrength from the beginninge. For none other difference is betweene commaundinge,
aſſentinge, auctorizinge, and ratifying, but that aſſentinge is common to them al, commaundinge is a
thinge that goeth before the facte, auctorizinge is the makinge of a thinge good by preſent agreeinge
to it, whiles it is donne, ratifyinge is the allowinge of it, when it is donne. If then I ſhewe, both that
the Pope did ratifie the callinge of the generall Councels, and auctorize them: I ſhewe muche more
that he aſſented to the callinge of them. The auctorizinge is proued, by reaſon he ſente his Legates to
euery of them. AsVntruthe, vaine, and vnaduiſed. For neither vvas Hoſius Sylueſters Legate, nor vvas Sylueſter then aliue. S. Sylueſter ſent Oſius Cordubenſis of the prouince of Spaine vnto Nice, with Victor
and Vincentius, Pr
                        •
                     eſtes of the Citie of Rome. Of which the laſt twoo, beinge them ſelues no Biſhops,
yet for that they were Legates of the chiefe Biſhop, did inVntruthe impudente. For they had the fourthe place in the Councel, and ſubſcribed after Euſtathius. the firſte place put vnto the decrees
of that councell their conſent and names, writinge after thus ſorte: Pro venerabili vito Papa &
Epiſcopo noſtro Sylueſtro ſubſcripſimus: VVe haue ſubſcribed for the reuerent man our Pope
and Biſhop Sylueſter. And at the veryVntruth. Onleſſe a dead man maie Summone Councelles. ſame time, that the generall councell was kepte at Nice, S.
Sylueſter called an other Councell in Rome, at the whiche two hundred ſeuenty and fiue Biſhops were
aſſembled. And it is expreſſely written in the ſame Councell, Sylueſter collegit vniuerſam Synodum
Epiſcoporum cum conſilio Auguſti, vel matris eius: Sylueſter gathered together the
whole Synode of the Biſhoppes with the Counſell of theBy the Counſel of the Emperoure, or of his Mother: vviſely: He vvoteth not vvhether. And yet the Emperours Mother vvas dead before: Sozom. Lib. 2. Ca. 2. &. 3. Emperour or * his mother. VVhy his counſell
was needeful, it appereth there. Becauſe the Emperoure bare the charges of their diete, and carriage.
So that his counſell was neceſſary, not chiefely for Religion, but rather for ſupportation of the
charges of ſo greate a iourney. For then neither was the Biſhop of Rome, nor other Biſhoppes endewed
with ſo large poſſeſsions, as they were afterwarde.
                  Now to retourne to the Councell of Nice. The Emperour was in deede the cauſe of their comming
togeather, aſwel for that him ſelfe perſuaded that meane of concorde, as alſo for that liberally, he defraied
the charges. Yet called he not the Biſhoppes of his owne head. And that theſe men might haue
ſeene in the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorie,Lib. 10. ca. 1. Marke, ex ſacerdotum ſententia. where Rufinus writeth: Tum ille ex Sacerdotum ſententia
apud vrbem Nicaeam Epiſcopale concilium conuocat: Then the Emperour calleth together a
Councell of Biſhoppes accordinge to the determination of the Prieſtes. He did it accordinge as it ſeemed
Ful Clerkely proued. For Ruffinus ſaithe, The Emperoure herein folovved the aduiſe of Alexander the Biſhop of Alexandria, &c. But of the Pope there is no mē
                        tion. good to the Biſhoppes. ‡ And ſhall we thinke the Biſhop of Rome was none of them that conſented
to the callinge? ‡ Ye as verely he was the chiefeſt of al. How can it otherwiſe ſeeme? For when
all the decrees were made,In ſumm. Nice. Cōcil. 
                     Placuit vt haec omnia mitterentur ad Epiſcopū vrbis Romae Sylueſtrum:
It was thought good, that all thoſe actes, and decrees ſhould be ſente toVntruthe ſōdly forged. For Sylueſter vvas dead longe before. Sylueſter Biſhop
of the Cittie of Rome. If he were the laſt, that had the vewe and confirminge of all thinges, there
is no doubte, but he had a voice and great auctoritie in callinge the Councell.
                  VVhat other is that, which Socrates in his Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorie witneſſeth, ſayinge, Cum vtique
regula Eccleſiaſtica iubeat, non oportere
                     Vntruth, ſtandinge in plaine corruption of the vvoordes. See the Anſvvear. 
                     praeter ſententiam Romani Pontiſicis
‡ concilia celebrari: VVhereas the Eccleſiaſticall rule commaundeth, ‡ that no councels ought to be
kepte beſides the determinate conſente of the Biſhop of Rome? VVe knowe (ſaithe Athanaſius, and
the Biſhoppes of Aegypte aſſembled in Councell at Alexandria) that in the greate councell of Nice of
318 Biſhoppes,Hiſt. trip. li. 4. ca. 9. Epiſtola Aegyptior. pōtificum. Ruf. Li. 10. cap. a. Hiſt. trip. Li. 7. ca. 12. it was with one accorde by all confirmed there, that without the determination of the
Biſhop of Rome, neither councels ſhould be kept, nor Biſhoppes condemned. I omitte here as a thinge
well knowen, how Conſtantine the Emperour refuſed in expreſſe woordes, to be iudge ouer Biſhoppes,
ſaying, that God had geuen them power to iudge of him: much leſſe did he arrogate to him ſelfe onely
and chiefly auctoritie to ſummon councels, or to iudge Biſhoply affaires. As for me (ſaithe Valentinian
the Emperour) in aſmuch as I am but one of the people, it is not lawful to ſearch ſuche matters:
(he ſpeaketh of the Heretikes Doctrines) but let the Prieſtes, to whome this charge belongeth, be gathered
together within them ſelues, where they will, &c.
                  Concerninge the ſeconde Councell, whiche was the firſte of thoſe that were kept at Conſtantinople,

it may be, that Theodoſius called it, as Conſtantine called the firſte at Nice. But what auctoritie
Damaſus bare in the ſame, it appeareth partely by that he had hisSo had ſundrie other Biſhoppes. Legates there, partly alſo
by that Photius Patriarke of Conſtantinople writeth in his Epiſtle to Michael Prince of Bulgaria.
VVhere hauinge declared the comminge together of the Patriarkes of Alexandria, and Ieruſalem, he
ſaithe thus:Photius in Lib. de concilijs. 
                     Quibus haud mult
                           •
                         poſt & Damaſus Epiſcopus Romae eadem confirmans,
atque idem ſentiens acceſsit. To whiche (Patriarkes of Alexandria and Ieruſalem) not longe after,
Damaſus the Biſhop of Rome ioyned him ſelfe, confirmingeOther Biſhops likevviſe gaue their Cōſentes, and Confirmed &c. Yet had thei no Authoritie to Summone Councelles. and determininge the ſame matter.
This much ſaithe Photius of the ſeconde Councell, the confirmation whereof he dothe attribute, not
to Theodoſius the Emperoure, but to Damaſus the Pope.
                  But what did Theodoſius then? (will ſome man ſaie). Did he nothinge? yeas verely he did very
muche, as in the ſaide Epiſtle Phot
                        •
                     us recordeth. Then did greate Theodoſius (ſaithe he) in deede woorthy
of great praiſe rule the Empire, who was him ſelfe alſo a defender, and a mainteiner of Godlineſſe.
Beholde what the Emperours parte was, not to ſitte in iudgement of matters of Religion,
andVntruthe manifeſte. For Theodoſius the Emperoure expreſſely determined, vvhat ſhoulde be holden for Chriſtian Faithe. determine, whiche was the true Faithe, but to defende it, and mainteine it. And that thou maiſt
ſee, reader, plainely, what Theodoſius thought of Religion, whome theſe Defenders woulde make a
iudge in cauſes of Religion:Cap. 7. I aduiſe thee to reade the ninth Booke of the Tripartite Hiſtorie, where
appeare many greate argumentes of his owne Faithe: VVhiche he publiſheth to the worlde from
Theſſalonica, in a publike lawe, to be ſuche, as Peter had taught the Romaines,Vntruthe, guilefully encloſed. For Theodoſius vvilled his Subiectes, to folovve as vvel the 
                           •
                        aithe of ſundrie other Biſhoppes, as the Popes. and as Damaſus who
ſucceded Peter, taught at that daie, requiringe all his ſubiectes to beleue the ſame. He required not
them to folow his owne Priuate Faithe,Ruf. Lib. 11. Cap. 3. but Peters Faith, and the Popes Faithe. And whereas there
were two Biſhoppes of Alexandria at that time, the one, whoſe name was Peter, holdinge with the
Biſhop of Rome, the other named Lucius, not ſo: Theodoſius commaunded his ſubiectes to beleue, as Peter
did, who folowed the firſte Peter, and Damaſus the Biſhop of Rome.
                  Touchinge the thirde generall Councell, it was kepte in deede vnder Theodoſius the yonger at Epheſus.
But he was not ſupreme head there. Yea rather who knoweth not, that Cyrillus being him
ſelfe Patriarke of Alexandria, yet was preſident at Epheſus, bearinge the ſteede, and perſon of Pope
Celeſtine? If Cyrill was in ſteede of the Biſhop of Rome there preſident,A fonde folie. For the Biſhop of Rome had euermore the Firſte Place in Councelles: Yet vvas he not therefore the Heade of the Churche. who maie doubt, but that
he was Supreme Head of the Churche, in whoſe name the Preſident ſate? Dothe the Preſident of the
Queenes Maieſties Counſell vſe to ſitte at her counſell in the name of any other inferiour perſon? If
Theodoſius were ſupreme and chiefe, why ſate not Cyrill in his name, as preſident? But ſeinge that
Photius writeth,Li. 14. c. 34. and Nicephorus alſo, that Cyrill Archebiſhop of Alexandria ſate in the ſteede of Celeſtine
Pope of Rome ouer that Councel kepte at Epheſus, vndoubtedly it can not be denied, but that Celeſtine
was ſupreme head, as well of the Churche, as of the Generall Councell.
                  It is not therefore onely to be conſidered, that Theodoſius ſente abroade his meſſengers to ſummon
the Fathers to the Generall Councell, but alſo it is to be conſidered,No doubte by the Authoritie of the Pope. And ſo vvas the Emperoure onely the Popes man. by whoſe auctoritie it was donne.
If in our time it had pleaſed the Emperoure Ferdinande of Famouſe Memorie to haue ſente his Meſſengers
to the Kinges and Princes of Spaine, Fraunce, Englande, Hungarie, Bemelande, Pole, and to the
Eſtates, and Dukes of Italie, and Germanie, to ſummon them to the Councell, whiche the Pope thought
good to indict at Trente: I thinke verely the Pope woulde haue thanked the Emperoure for it, and
him ſelfe ſhould haue ſaued ſo muche charges, as men of experience know, ſuche an enterpriſe to require.
But now, ſith the Pope hath of his owne ſufficient to beare the charges of ſuche affaires, he
aſketh not any more of the Emperoure ſuche expenſes, as in olde time to that neceſſarie pourpoſe by
the Emperours were allowed.
                  Laſte of all Martian (ſaie you) called the fourthe Generall Councell at Chalcedon. VVe anſweare.
He called it not in ſuche ſorte as ye meane, to witte, as ſupreme Head and ruler thereof, but as one
hable to ſende meſſengers for the Biſhoppes about the worlde, and to ſuſteine the charges, alſo willinge
to ſee peace, and concorde in the Churche of God. VVho liſte to reade the Epiſtles of Pope Leo to
Pul
                        ••
                     eria the Empereſſe, to Martian himſelfe, to Theodoſius, to Flauianus Archebiſhop of Conſtan
                        ••
                     nople,
to the Synode firſte aſſembled at Epheſus, afterwarde for certaine cauſes at Chalcedon: in the
ſame Epiſtles he may ſee bothe the cauſe of the councell, and whatVntruthe. For the Councel vvas ſummoned to Chalcedon, quite contrarie to the Popes vvil. Reade the Anſvveare. conference was had thereof
with the ſaide Leo Biſhop of Rome, who ſente firſte to Epheſus, Iulianus a Biſhop, Renatus a Prieſte,

and Hilarius a Deacon:The Summoninge of Councelles. and afterwarde to Chalcedon, Paſchaſinus, and Lucentius Biſhoppes, and
Bonifacius a Prieſte, to repreſente hius perſonne. In one of the ſaide Epiſtles written to the Seconde
Synode at Epheſus,Leo Epiſt. 15. Leo ſaithe thus: Religioſiſsima Clementiſsimi principis Fides &c.
The moſte religious Faithe of our moſte element Prince knowinge it to perteine chiefely to his re
                     
                        •
                     me,
if within the Catholike Churche no branche of errour ſpringe, hath deferred this reuerence to
Gods ordinaunces, as to vſe the auctoritie of the ſee Apoſtolike, to achieue the effect of a Holy purpoſe.
as though he were deſirous by the moſte bleſſed Peter himſelfe, that to be declared, whiche in his confeſsion
was praiſed. By whiche woordes It is plaine, that in matters of Religion the Emperoure
proceeded not vpon his owne Head, butVntruthe moſt manifeſte: Reade the Anſvveare: was directed by the See of Peter. VVhat ſhal I ſaie more?
                  If the Emperoure firſt Chriſtened the Pope, let the Emperour be ſuperiour in thinges to Godward.
But if the Pope Chriſtened the Emperour, (asVntruthe. For he vvas Chriſtened by Euſebius the Biſhop of Nicomedia, longe after that Sylueſter vvas dead. Sylueſter did Conſtantine) let the ſpirituall Father in
that degree of rule be aboue the ſpirituall Childe.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  No man coulde vtter ſo many Vntruthes togeather, with ſutche aſſiance,
without ſomme cunninge. Firſte, M. Hardinge, yée beare vs in hande, that the
Emperours of the Worlde, in thoſe daies, ſummoned Councelles, not by their
owne Authoritie, but by the Authoritie, & Warrante of the Pope: As if the Popes
Authoritie at that time, had benne many degrees aboue the Emperoure. Notwithſtandinge,
Pope Pius. 2.Aeneas Syluius in Epiſt. as you knowe, ſaithe thus, Ante Nicenam Synodum
vnuſquiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſibi vixit: & paruus reſpectus ad Romanam Eccleſiam habebatur:
Before the Councel of Nice, eche Biſhop liued ſeuerally to him ſelfe: and little regarde
was there then had to the Churche of Rome.
                     
                     Inter 
                           •
                        piſtolas Auguſtin. Epiſ. 96. 
                     Pope Innocentius complaineth,
that he had not Authoritie ſufficient, to force Pelagius, beinge but one man, to
comme before him: mutche leſſe had he Authoritie ſufficient, to commaunde, & calle
the whole worlde. Pope Leo bothe was an humble ſuiter himſelfe vnto y• 
                     Emperoure
Martianus, that it would pleaſe his Maieſtie to commaunde a Councel,
and alſo entreated other Biſhoppes to promote the cauſe. Thus he writeth, Humiliter,
ac ſapienter expoſcite,Leo ad Clerum & pleb
                           •
                        m Conſtan. Epiſt. 23. 
                     vt Pet
                           •
                        tiom noſtrae, qua Plenariam indici Synodum poſtulamus,
Clementiſsimus Imperator dignetur annuere: Make ſuite with diſcrete,
and humble Praier, that our moſte Gracious Emperoure woulde voucheſaue to
graunte oure requeſte, in that wee haue deſired a General Councel. It is not likely,
that Pope Leo woulde thus haue written, if his owne Authoritie had benne
ſufficiente.
                  Naie, it is the more vnlikely, that the Emperoure ſhoulde herein at any time
vſe the Authoritie of the Pope, for that the Pope him ſelfe was neuer hable to
ſummone Biſhoppes, as hereafter it ſhal appeare, but onely by the Authoritie
of the Emperoure.
                     Theodoret. Li. 5. Cap. 9 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Euſebius. Lib. 10 Cap. 5. 
                     Pope, Damaſus commaunded the Biſhoppes of the Eaſte,
to comme to Rome: How be it, not in his owne name, for that had benne no warrante,
but by the Emperours ſpecial letters. Euſebius ſaith thus, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
Exemplar
Regiarum Literarum, quibus iubet Romae Epiſcoporum Concilium celebrari:
This is a Copie of the Emperours VVrite, whereby he commaunded a Councel to be keapte
In Rome.
                      As for the Pope, notwithſtandinge al his Vniuerſal Povver, he
was commaunded by the Emperours Summone, to be preſente at Councelles,
as wel as others.
                  
                     In the Councel of Chalcedon it is written thus: Eodem tenore à Pijſsimis,
& Chriſtianiſsimis Imperatoribus,Concil. Chalcedonen. Actio
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        . Pag. 748. Sanctiſsimus noſter Papa, Romanae Eccleſiae
praepoſitus Leo, vocatus eſt: By order of the ſame VVrite, Oure moſte Holy
Pope Leo, ruler of the Churche of Rome, was called to the Councel by the moſte Godly,
and moſte Chriſtian Emperours.
                  
                  
                     
Sozomenus ſaithe,
                     The Summoninge of Councelles. Conſtantinus ſcripſit ad omnes Praeſides Eccleſiarum,
vt ad diem adeſſent: Ad Epiſcopos Apoſtolicarum Sedium: Ad Macarium Hieroſoly
mitanum: ad Iulium Romanum, &c. The Emperoure Conſtantinus ſente
out his Letters vnto al the Rulers of the Churches,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Lib. 1. Cap 17. Theodoret. Lia. Cap. 7. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     that they ſhould meete al at Nice vpon a
da
                           •
                        e: vnto the Biſhoppes of the Apoſtolike Sees: vnto Macarius y• Biſhop of Hieruſalem:
and vnto Iulius the Biſhop of Rome &c. But ſulius excuſed his abſence
becauſe of his age. Otherwiſe of Obedience, and Dewtie towardes the
                      Emperoure,
he was as mutche bounde, to haue made his appearance there, as the reſte of his
Brethren.
                  
                  Yee ſaie, If the Emperoure ſhoulde haue ſummoned the Councel by his owne Authoritie,
then the Biſhoppes of Perſia, and Scotlande, whiche Countries were not then vnder the Obedience
of the Romaine Empiere, woulde not haue appeared vpon the Summone, and ſo had it benne no General
Councel. This cauil wanteth bothe truthe, and ſauoure. For proufe whereof,
I wil bringe foorthe your ſelfe, M. Hardinge, to reprooue your ſelfe. Yée ſhould
not ſo ſoone haue foregotten your owne Decree, ſpecially conceiued, and publiſhed
in this ſelfe ſame Booke. Thus you ſaie: theſe be your owne woordes: A
Councel is not accoumpted General,
                     M. Hardinge. 
                           〈◊〉
                         32. 
                           •
                        . 
                     bicauſe Biſhoppes of al Countries vnder Heauen be aſſembled: but
bicauſe many be aſſembled, and al be lawfully called. Otherwiſe your Late Chapter of
Tridente, with your woorthy number of Fourtie Prelates, whereof certaine
were onely Maie Biſhoppes, otherwiſe by you called Nullatenſes, coulde neuer
haue benne a General Councel.
                  
                  Certainely it cannot appeare, that there was any Biſhop, either of Scotlande,
or of Englande, then called Britaine, at any of the firſte foure Councelles, either
at Nice, or at Epheſus, or at Conſtantinople, or at Chalcedon. Yet are
theſe Councelles neuertheleſſe called General.
                  
                  Touchinge the reſte, the Emperoure was then the onely Monarke of the
worlde:Chryſoſt. Ad Popul. An
                           ••
                        othe. Homi. 2. and, as Chryſoſtome calleth him, Summitas, & Caput omnium ſuper
terram hominum: The Toppe, and Heade of al menne in the worlde.
                      No doubte,
who ſo euer woulde then haue refuſed the Emperours Summone, mutche more
woulde he haue refuſed the Summone of the Pope.
                  
                  To quali
                        ••
                     e the mater, yée ſate, the Emperoure did theſe thinges, although
not by the Popes vvarrante, yet, at th
                        •
                      leaſte, by the Popes Conſente, and neuer
otherwiſe. Here likewiſe is an other Vntruthe. For the Emperoure commaunded
Councelles, bothe when he woulde, and whither he would, whether the
Pope woulde, or no, many times without any manner of regarde had to his pleaſure.
Pope Leo wrote thus vnto the Emperoure Theodoſius, Omnes noſtrae
Eccleſiae,
                     
                        
                           •
                        eo ad 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſeon, 
                           •
                        piſ. 24. 
                     Omnes Manſue
                           •
                        udini Veſtrae cum gemitibus, & Lachrymis ſupplicant
Sacerd
                           ••
                        es, vt Generalem Synodum iubeatis intra Italiam celebrari: Al our
Churches, and al our Prieſtes moſte humbly beſeeche your Maieſtie with ſobbes, and teares,
that yee wil commaunde a General Councel to be holden within Italie.
                      In like ſorte he
cauſed the Cleregie of 
                           •
                        onſtantinople, to be ſu
                        •
                     ters vnto his Maieſtie for the
ſame: yet neuertheleſſe the Emperoure continewed ſtil in his pourpoſe: and, contrarie
to the Popes humble petition, kepte the Councel, not in Italie, but at Chalcedon:
where alſo, as it is ſaide before, Pope Leo him ſelfe was ſummoned to appeare
by the Emperours Commaundemente, with other Biſhoppes.
                  
                     Of ſutche Authoritie was the Popes conſente in Summoninge of Councelles.
He humbly craued it vpon his knees, with ſighes, and teares: and coulde
not geate it. Hereof Aeneas Syluius, whiche afterwarde was Pope Pius. 2,
ſaithe thus,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Syluiu
                           •
                        . De 
                           ••
                        on
                           ••
                        l. Baſilien. Lib. 1. Ex hiſce Authoritatibus mirum in modum ſe putant armatos, qui Concilia
negant ſieri poſſe ſine conſenſu Papae. Quorum ſententia, ſi, vt ipſi volunt,
inuiolata perſiſtat, ruinam ſecum Eccleſiae trahit. Quid enim remedij

erit,The Summoninge of councelles. ſi criminoſus papa perturbet Eccleſiam: ſi animas perdat: ſi animas peruertat
malo exemplo populos: ſi deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      contraria Fidei praedicet, Haereticiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Dogmatibus
imbuat ſubditos? Sinemúſne cum ipſo cuncta ruere? At ego, dum veteres lego
Hiſtorias, dum Actus perſpicio Apoſtolorum, hunc equidem morem non inuenlo, vt
Soli Papae Concilia conuocauerint: Nec pòſt, tempore Conſtantini Magni, &
aliorum Auguſtorum, ad Congreganda concilia quaeſitus eſt magnoperè Romani
conſenſus Papae: By theſe Authorities they thinke them ſelues armed, that ſaie,
no Councel maie be keapte without the conſente of the Pope. Whoſe Iudgemente, if it ſhould
ſtande, as they woulde haue it, woulde drawe with it the decaie, and ruine of the Churche.
For what remedie were there then, if the Pope him ſelfe were vitious, deſtroied Soules, ouerthrewe
the people with euil examples, taught Doctrine contrarie to the Faithe, and filled his
Subiectes ful of Hereſies? Shoulde we ſuffer al to goe to the Diuel? Verily, when I reade the
Olde ſtories, and conſider the Actes of the Apoſtles, I finde no ſutche order in thoſe daies, that
onely the Pope ſhould Summone Councelles. And afterwarde, in the time of Couſtantine the
Greate, and of other Emperours, when Councelles ſhoulde be called, there was no greate accoumpte
made of the Popes conſente.
                     Cuſanus, De Concordia Cathoſica, Lib. 3. Ca. 15. Cardinal Cuſanus ſaith, Negligente, aut Contradicente
papa, Imperator poteſt praeceptiuè Synodos indicere, ad prouidendum
fluctuanti Eccleſiae: If the Pope be negligente, or, if he ſaie naie, the Emperoure, to ſtaie the
w
                           •
                        ueringe ſtate of the Churche, maie commaunde Councelles by his ovvne Authoritie.
Thus ye
                      Emperoure Sigiſmunde called a Councel at conſtance: notwithſtandinge
it ſtoode Pope Iohn mutche vpon, neuer to yáelde his conſente vnto it.
For in the ſame Councel he was depriued, and of a Pope was made a Cardinal.
                  Yee ſaie, y• 
                     Pope had Authoritie to Confirme Councelles, Ergo, Mutche more he
had Authoritie to calle Councelles.
                      And here yée tel vs a very ſolemne tale, what is Cō
                     maūdinge:
what is Aſſentinge: what is Authorizinge; what is Ratifieinge: as if it
had benne ſomewhat to the pourpoſe. But if your reaſon holde, then muſt General
Coūcelles haue many Callers. For as I ſhal hereafter ſufficiētly prooue, not onely
y• 
                     Pope, or the other principal Patriarkes, but alſo al other Biſhoppes, y• were preſente,
yea Emperours, Kinges, Lieutenantes, & Counſellers had Authoritie to
Confirme Councelles.
                     Sozomen. Lib. 6. Cap. 23. 
                     Sozomenus ſaith, Nec Romanus, nec Vicentinus, nec
alij confirmarunt: This Councel was Confirmed, neither by the Biſhop of Rome, nor by
the Biſhop of Vicentia, nor by the reſte of the Biſhoppes.
                      And the Emperoure
Martianus ſaith,Concil. Chalcedon. Actio. 3. Pag. 804. 
                     Sacroſancto noſtrae serenitatis Edicto venerandam Synodum
Confirmamus: Wee Confirme the Reuerende Councel by the Holy Edicte of oure
Maieſtie.
                      Yee ſaie, Pope Sylueſter ſente that Famous Learned Father Hoſius,
the Biſhop of Corduba, to the Councel of Nice, to repreſente his perſonne. This
maie wel paſſe emonge the reſte of your Truthes. For neither was Hoſius there
in the Popes behalfe, but in his owne: nor was Pope Sylueſter then aliue, or hable
to ſende him, duringe the whole time of the Nicene Councel: notwithſſtandinge
any thinge, that your Fabulare, Peter Crabbe, hath ſaide to the contrarie. As
for Hoſius, the Biſhop of Corduba, of what Authoritie, and eſtimation he was in
al Eccleſiaſtical Aſſemblies, it maie appeare by theſe woordes of Athanaſius: In
qua Synodo Dux ille,
                     Athanaſi. Apologia. 2. 
                     & Anteſignanus non fuit? Quae Eccleſia iſtius Praeſidentiae
non pulcherrima monumenta retinet? In what Councel hath not Hoſius benne
Chiefe, and Preſidente? What Churche is without ſomme notable remembrance of his gouernmente?
                     
Certainely, M. Hardinge, it ſeemeth, he was a greate deale too good, to be
ſente ſo farre in a deade mannes errante.
                  Notwithſtandinge,Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 17. 
                     Iulius, beinge then Biſhop of Rome, for that he was vnhable
to trauaile, bicauſe of his age, ſente thither twoo Prieſtes. Vitus, and Vincentius,
to ſupplie his roume. Thus he did, not of pride, the better by his abſence
to maineteine a ſtate, but onely for that he was forced of neceſſitie ſo to doo. For

if he had benne hable to trauaile ſo farre,The Summoninge of councelles. he had benne forced to goe thither him
ſelfe. Therefore Pope Agatho afterwarde thus excuſed his Abſence vnto the
Emperoure: Chriſtianiſsimi Domini Filij, ſecundum Pijſsimam Iuſsionem Manſuetudinis
veſtrae,
                     Concil. Conſtantinopolitan. Actio. 4. Ad Heraclium. & Tiberium Imper. Pag. 288. Athanaſi. ad Antiochen. to. 2. 
                     pro Obedientia, quam debuimus, praeſentes confamulos noſtros
miſimus: My moſte Chriſtian Lordes, and Children, accordinge to the moſte godly Commaundement
of your Maieſties, and accordinge to the Obedience, that wee owe of dewtie,
we haue ſente theſe preſente oure Felowe Seruantes.
                     
                  
                  Other Biſhoppes in like caſes of age, or infirmitie, did the like. For example,
Lucifer, the Biſhop of Sardinia, ſente Herennius, and Agapetus: and Paulinus
ſente Maximus, and Calemerus to the Councel of Nice, to be in their ſtéedes.
                  Yee ſaie, Vitus, and Vincentius, for that they were the Popes Legates, had
therefore the Firſte place in Subſcription emonge the Biſhoppes. Here is an other
greate Vntruthe.
                     Theodoret, Lib. 1. Cap. 7. For Theoderetus ſaithe, the Firſte, and Chiefe of al that
companie, bothe in place, & in ſpeache, was, not Vitus, or Vincentius, the Popes
Legates, but Euſtathius the Patriarke of Antioche.
                  Touchinge theſe twoo the Popes Legates,
                     Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 17. Athanaſi. Apologia 2. 
                     Sozomenus placeth them onely
in the Fourthe roume: Athanaſius ſaithe, Subſcripſerunt, Hoſius ab Hiſpania,
Iulius Romanus per Archidamum, & Philoxenum Preſbyteros: They Subſcribed
their names to the Councel, Hoſius that came out of Spaine, and Iulius the Biſhop
of Rome, by Archidamus, and Philoxenus Prieſtes, that were his Legates:
                      By
whiche woordes he alloweth the Biſhop of Romes Legates the Seconde place in
Subſcription: but not the Firſte. And thus, yee ſee, Hoſius the Biſhop of Corduba
ſubſcribeth before Iulius the Biſhop of Rome.
                  
                  In the Councel of Aphrica,
                     Concil. Aphric. Ca. 100. Concil. Chalcedon. Actio. 1. Sancta. 
                     Philippus, and Aſellius the Popes Legates, had
the Laſte Place in Subſcription after al others. In the Councel of Chalcedon,
Philippus, one of the Popes Legates, had a hundred, & ſeuen and fiftie others
to Subſcribe before him.
                  Theſe Fathers, I trowe, woulde not haue benne ſo vnmannerly in their dealinge,
if thei had taken the Pope for the Heade of the vvhole Vniuerſal Churche,
                     Sozom. li 1. ca. 17 Athanaſ Apologia. 2. Theodoret. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. Micephor. Lib. Cap. 14.
to haue placed his Legate behinde ſo many. Further, yee ſaie, At the very ſame
time, that the General Councel was keapte at Nice, S. Sylueſter called an other Councel in Rome.
This, I trowe, M. Hardinge, is an other Vntruthe: Onleſſe yee haue power to
raiſe vp deade menne, to keepe Councelles, For Sylueſter was dead longe before.
                  
                     Sozomenus ſaith, Vitus, & Vincentius were ſente to Nice, not by Pope Sylueſter,
who then was deade, but by Pope Iulius, y• was y• ſeconde after him. The
like maie eaſily appeare by Athanaſius,
                     Tabula Hermāni Contracti:
                           Sylueſter Papa motitur.
                           Marcus Papa Vixit octo Menſes.
                           Iulius Papa. Hoc tempore Conſtant
                                 •
                              
                              nus
indixit Nice 
                                 •
                              um Concilium.
                           Anno Domi. 324.
                        
                      
                     Theodoretus, Nicephorus, and others.
Therefore, M. Hardinge, you muſte néedes diuiſe twoo Councelles of Nice aboute
one time: two Sylueſters Popes: twoo VVriters of this one ſtorie,
the one true, the other falſe. Otherwiſe, this fraile ſtuffe wil neuer holde.
Yee are ouer eaſy to credite Fables.
                  
                     The Councel, that yee imagine, was holden in Rome by Pope Sylueſter,
is nothinge els but a heape of childiſhe Vanitises. The Holy diſcrete
Learned Fathers ſaie there, Nemo Preſbyterorum Chriſma conficiat:
quoniam Chriſtus à Chriſmate vocatur: Praeſul Summus non iudicabitur
à quoquam: Quoniam ſcriptum eſt, Non eſt Diſcipulus ſupra Magiſtrum.
Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab Auguſto, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab omni Clero, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      à Regibus, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
ab omni Populo Iudex iudicabitur:Co
                           •
                        c. Rom. Ca. 5. Ca. 3. Ca. 12. 
                     No Prieſte maie make, or halowe the Chriſme:
For Chriſte of Chriſme hath his name. The Higheſte Prelate (that is, the Pope) more
be iudged of nomā: For it is written, The Scholar is not aboue his Maiſter. The Iudge
(that is, the pope) ſhal not be iudged, neither by the Emperoure, nor by al the Cleregie, nor
by Kinges, and Princes, nor by the whole people. Sutche and other like good ſtuffe
haue you in your
                      Councel of Rome.
                  
                     
Notwithſtandinge,The Summoninge of Councelles. of what credite ſo euer this Councel were, yet, M. Hardinge,
it vtterly ouerthroweth your whole pourpoſe. For, if euer there were any
ſutche Councel ſummoned in Rome, it was ſummoned, not by Sylueſter y• 
                     deade
Pope, but by the Authoritie of the Emperour y• thē was aliue. So Euſebius writeth
of the Councel of Rome, holden in the time of Pope Meltiades, as it is ſaid
before:Euſeb. Li. 10. ca. 5. 
                     Exemplar Regiarum Literarum, &c. Here is a Copie of the Emperoures
VVrite, whereby he hath commaunded a Councel of Biſhoppes to be keapte at Rome.
                  
                  Likewiſe the Biſhoppes aſſembled in the Councel of Conſtantinople, wrote
vnto the Biſhoppes in the Councel of Rome:
                     Theodoretus, li. 5 Cap. 9. 
                     Cùm indixiſſetis, &c. After yee had
called a Councel to Rome, yée warned vs alſo to comme thither, as the Members of
your owne Body, by the moſte godly Emperours VVrite.
                     
                  
                  By theſe it appeareth, if there were any ſutche Councel called to Rome, it
was called by the Emperoure, and not by the Pope.
                  
                  Yée ſaie, the Emperoure in ſutche affaires was aduiſed euermore by the Biſhoppes.
This is not vnlikely, and therefore eaſily maie be graunted. Notwithſtanding,
for ought, that maie appeare, he was more aduiſed oftentimes by ſomme
other Biſhoppes, then by the Pope, as it ſhal appeare. Euſebius, touchinge the
Emperoure Conſtantinus, writeth thus: Quaſi Communis quidam Epiſcopus
à Deo conſtitutus,
                     Euſeb. Devita Conſtantini, Oratione. 1. Ruffin. li. 1. ca. 1. 
                     Miniſtrorum Dei Synodos conuocauit: As if he had benne one
Common Biſhop appointed by God, he appointed Councelles of Biſhoppes to aſſemble
togeather. Ruffinus ſaithe, The Emperoure was aduiſed hereto by Alexander,
the Biſhop of Alexandria, and by other Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes of Egypte.
Here is no mention of the Pope. In the like caſes of Eccleſiaſtical Affaires, Athanaſius
was an earneſt ſuiter vnto the Emperoure Conſtantius: Dioſcorus,
vnto Theodoſius: and ſo others, vnto other.
                  But of the Popes omnipotente conſente, without which, yée telle vs, no Emperoure
maie ſummone a Councel, there is noman that maketh mention.
                  Yee ſaie, There ought no Councel to be keapte without the determinate conſente of the Biſhop
of Rome.
                      This alſo is an other of your Vntruthes, ſtanding in the manifeſte
corruption of the wordes of Socrates: as in my Former Replie I haue declared
more at large.Arti. 4. Diui. 26 Socrat li. 
                           •
                         ca. 17 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Caſsiodor. Lib. 4. Cap. 19. Regula Iuris, Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus debet approbari. The woordes of Socrates be theſe, Non licet ſcribere Eccleſiaſtica
Decreta praeter ſententiam Epiſcopi Romani: It is prouided, that Eccleſiaſtical
Lavves be not made without the conſente of the Biſhop of Rome: For that the
Biſhop of Rome was one of the Foure Greate Patriarkes, whoes aſſentes in al
General Councelles were thought neceſſarie. But Socrates meaneth ſutche
Eccleſiaſtical Lavves, as perteine to the whole Churche of God. For this is a
Rule agréeable to reaſon, That toucheth al, muſte be allovved by al.
                  
                  Nowe, whereas yée haue exchanged the Allovveinge of Canons, into the
Summoninge, or Callinge of Councelles, it maie pleaſe you to remember, that
Allovveinge of Canons was common to al the Members of the Councel, and ſpecially
to the Foure Principal Patriarkes, as it is ſaide before: But the Authoritie
of Callinge Councelles belonged onely to the Emperoure.
                  
                  That yée allege of Athanaſius, is a vaine, and a ſhameleſſe Forgerie: as I
haue otherwhere declared more at large. Sutche Religion, ſutche Doctours.
Sutche Folie is woorthy no other anſweare.
                  
                     Valentinian the Emperoure,
                     Sozom. Li. 6. ca. 7 yee ſaie, accoumpted him ſelfe as one of the people: and
therefore ſaide, It was not lawful for him, to Examine maters of Religion.
                      Thus he ſaid,
either of humilitie, or els for wante of time. His foretne Enimies, his Warres,
and his Ciuile Cares had filled his heade with other thoughtes. Nicephorus
imagineth him thus to ſaie,Nicephor. Lib. 1
                           •
                         Cap 3. 
                     Mihi negotijs occupatio, & Reipublicae curis diſtento,
res huiuſmodi inquirere non eſt facile: For me, beinge thus occupied with Buſineſſe, and
                        
Publique Cares,
                     The Summoninge of Councelles. 
                     it is not eaſy to enquire of ſutche maters. Otherwiſe, that
                      Eccleſiaſtical
Cauſes bée within the Princes Charge, I doubte not, but hereafter it ſhal wel appeare.
Kinge Odoacer ſaide vnto Pope Symmachus, and vnto the Cleregie of
Rome,Concil. Roman. 3 Cap. 2. 
                     as it is alleged once before: Miramur, quicquam tenratum fuiſſe ſine nobis.
Nam, viuente noſtro Presbytero, ſine nobis nihil tentari oportuit: Wee marueile,
that any thing was attempted without vs: For without vs nothing ſhould haue benne donne,
ſo longe as Our prieſte (he meaneth the Pope) was aliue.
                  
                  After this yée fille the houſe ful with Patriarkes of Conſtantinople, Patriarkes
of Alexandria, Patriarkes of Hieruſalem, Princes of Bulgaria, and with other
like great, & ſtately perſons. The Concluſion hereof is this, That Pope Damaſus
gaue his conſente to the Councel of Conſtantinople. Al this, M. Hardinge, yée
might ſoone haue obteined with more fauoure, and leſſe a doo. Howe be it, yee maie
not hereof wel reaſon thus, The Pope conſented vnto the Councel: Ergo, The
Pope had Authoritie to calle the Councel: leſt children woonder at your Logique.
                  In the meane while, yée ſaie, the Emperoure Theodoſius ruled the Empiere:
whereby yée gene vs to vnderſtande, that he had no charge ouer the Churche. And
thus yée continewe ſtil to enriche your ſelf, & to heape your Reader wt 
                     Vntruthes.
                  
                  
                     Certainely the Biſhoppes in the Councel of Conſtantinople wrote thus in
humble wiſe vnto the ſame Emperoure Theodoſius: Obſecramus Clementiam
tuam,Poſt Conci. Epheſinum Primum. vt, quemadmodum Literis honoraſti Eccleſiam, quibus nos Conuocaſti, ita finalem
Concluſionem noſtrorum Decretorum corroboves ſententia tua, & Sigillo: Wee
beſeeche your Maieſtie, that, as ye haue honoured the Churche by your Letters, wherewith
yee haue called vs togeather, ſo it maie pleaſe you, to Confirme the final Concluſion of
our Decrees with your Sentence, and with your Seale.
                  Further, as it appeareth by your owne Allegation, the ſame Emperoure
Theodoſius tooke vpon him,The Emperoure limiteth the Catholique Faithe. to bounde, and to limite the Catholique Faith, & that
euen in the Body of his Ciuile Lavves: whiche thing neither could he haue donne
without Iudgemente: nor woulde he haue donne without Authoritie. But, if yée
ineane, that by this Determination of the Emperoure Theodoſius, that Faithe
onely ſhoulde be taken for Catholique, that was then profeſſed by Pope Damaſus,
and ſhould afterwarde be profeſſed by others ſucceding in Peters Chaire, then
haue yée ſecretely conueighed vs in an other Vntruthe. The place it ſelfe wil ſoone
reproue you.Cod. Theodoſian. Lib. 16. Titu de Fide Catholic. Cunctos Populos The Emperours woordes be theſe, Cunctos populos in tali volumus
Religione verſari, quam Diuinum Petrum Apoſtolum tradidiſſe Romanis, Religio
vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nunc ab eo inſinuata declarat: quam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Pontificem Damaſum ſequi claret, &
Petrum Alexandriae Epiſcopum, Virum Apoſtolicae sanctitatis: Wee wil el menne
to walke in that Religion, whiche Holy Peter the Apoſtle deliuered to the Romaines, as
the Faithe firſte enkendled by him, and ſtil contine wed vntil this daie, dooth declare: whiche
Religion alſo it is plaine, that Pope Damaſus foloweth, and Peter the Biſhop of Alexandria,
a man of Apoſtolique holineſſe. Here the Emperoure Theodoſius commaundeth
his Subiectes to folowe, as wel the Faithe of Peter the Biſhop of Alexandria,
as of Damaſus the Biſhop of Rome.
                  
                  
                     And yet in the nexte title folowinge, he openeth his owne meaning in this
wiſe by other Eramples,
                     Cod. Theodoſi. li. 16. Titu. 3. Sozom. li. 7. ca 9 
                     more at large: Epiſcopis tradi omnes Eccleſias mox iubemus,
quos conſtabit vti Communione Nectarij Epiſcopi Conſtantinopolitanae
Eccleſiae, & Timothei, &c. Wee commaunde, that foorthwith the Churches be reſtoared
to al Biſhoppes, of whom it ſhal appeare, that they Communicate with Neſtorius
the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, or with Timotheus: or ſutche as ſhal haue felowſhip, or
agreemente in Faithe, with the Biſhoppes of Alexandria in Egypte: and with Pelagius
the Biſhop of Laodicea: and with Diodorus the Biſhop of Tarſus in Aſia:
and with Amphilochius the Biſhop of Iconium: and with Optimus the Biſhop of

Antioche: and with Helladius the Biſhop of Caeſaria: and with Otreius the Biſhop
of Melite: and with Gregorius the Biſhop of Nyſſa: and with Terennius the Biſhop
of Scythia: and with Marmarius the Biſhop of Martianopolis. Euery of theſe
ſeueral Biſhoppes, M. Hardinge, by the Emperoures iudgemente, in trial of the
Catholique Faithe, had as greate Authoritie, and weighte, as the Biſhop of
Rome.
                  
                     But Pope Coeleſtinus, yée ſaie, deſired Cyrillus the Biſhop of Alexandria, to
repreſente his perſone, and to ſupplie his rouine in the Councel of Epheſus, that
is to ſaie, to haue the Firſte place in the Councel. For the Firſte Place in al Eccleſiaſtical
Aſſemblies was alloted to the Biſhop of Rome:Diſ. 22. Renouā
                        tes. 
                     The Seconde, to the Biſhop
of Conſtantinople: The Thirde, to y• Biſhop of Alexandria: The Fourth,
to the Biſhop of Antioche: The Fifthe, to the Biſhop of Hieruſalem.
                  This packinge of places therefore bitwéene Coeleſtinus, and Cyrillus, was a
Myſterie, pourpoſely canueſſed, to kéepe the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, whom the
Pope euermore enuied, out of countenaunce. For by this Policie, the Biſhop of
Alexandria, that ſhoulde haue had the Thirde Place, was handſomely ſhifted into
the Firſte: and the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, whiche, in the Biſhop of Romes
abſence, ſhoulde haue had the Firſte Place, was remoued downe to the Seconde.
                  
                  Howe be it, what auaileth al this, M. Hardinge, to further your pourpoſe, & to
proue, that Councelles were ſummoned by the Pope? Verily it appeareth not hitherto,
that either Coeleſtinus, or Cyrillus, or any other Biſhop had any ſutche
Power, or Authoritie to ſummone Councelles. This is it, that yée ſhoulde haue
proued. As for the Firſte, or Seconde Place, wée moued no queſtion.
                  Againe, yée ſéeme to ſaie, the Pope of righte was euermore Preſidente in al
Councelles. This, if yée knowe it, is an other Vntruthe: If yée knowe it not,
it is an erroure.Theodoretus, li. 3. Cap. 7. For it is plaine, that in the Firſte Councel of Nice Pope Iulius
was not Preſidente, but Euſtathius the Biſhop of Antioche. The Popes Legates,
as it is ſaid before,Euagri. Lib. 4. Cap. 38. were placed beneath in the fourthe roume: In the Fifthe
Councel of Conſtantinople, Menna the Biſhop of the ſame Cittie, was Preſident,
& not the Pope.
                     Nicephor. Li. 17. Cap. 27. In the Second Epheſine Councel, Dioſcorus the Biſhop of
Alexandria was Preſidente. In the Seconde Councel of Carthage it ſeemeth
Gennedius was the Preſidente.
                  
                  This Dignitie then paſſed not by Enheritance,Concil. Chalced. Acti. 1. Dioſcoro. Exactis Conci. Carthag. 2. or by Succeſſion, as the Pope
nowe woulde ſéeme to claime it: but, either by choiſe of the Councel, or by fauoure
of the Prince. Thus Hoſius the Biſhop of Corduba in Spaine, not by right of
his place,Sozom. li. 3. ca. 12. Socra. li. 2. ca. 20. Athanaſ. Apologia 2. but for the woorthineſſe of his perſone, was appointed Preſidente in the
Councel of Sardica. And Athanaſius ſpeaketh of him in this wiſe with greate
admiration, Cuius non fuit ille Concilij Princeps? In what Councel hath not Hoſius
benne the Preſidente, or Chiefe?
                  
                  Yée ſaie, Pope Sylueſter Chriſtened the Emperoure Conſtantinus, and
therefore was his Spiritual Father. This maie paſſe emonge other your
Truthes. For your Popes, by theire Omnipotente Power maie Miniſter Sacramentes,
being deade. And yet, notwithſtandinge al this were true, M. Hardinge,
yet your cauſe thereby were litle furthereo. Onleſſe perhaps yée wil reaſon
thus: Pope Sylueſter Chriſtened the Emperoure: Ergo, The Pope hathe Authoritie,
to Calle Councelles. Howe be it, onleſſe this Argumente be better digeſted,
your very Sophiſters of Louaine wil hardely allowe it.
                  But in déede, that whole tale, touchinge the Chriſteninge of the Emperoure
Conſtantine,
                     Inter Acta Liberij. Cap. 6. Euſeb. De vita Conſtan. Orat. 4. is nothing els, but a péeuiſhe fable. Conſtantius, the Emperours
owne Sonne, vtterly denieth, that Sylueſter euer Baptized Conſtantinus his Father.
Euſebius ſaithe, Conſtantinus was Chriſtened, not in the flooriſhing ſtate

of his age, but onely a litle before he died: not in Rome, but at Nicomedia, in the
Kingdome of Epirus: not in a corner, but in the preſence of many Biſhoppes: and,
as S. Hierome ſaithe, not by Pope Sylueſter, that then was deade, but by Euſebius
the Biſhop of Nicomedia.
                     Socra. Anno Aetatis ſuae. 65. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . For proufe whereof, S. Ambroſe ſaithe, Conſtantino
in vltimis conſtituto, Gratia Baptiſmatis omnia peccata dimiſit: The Grace
of Baptiſme foregaue Conſtantine al his ſinnes, euen at the ending of his life.
                      Therefore,
M. Hardinge, wee muſt néedes ſaie, that, either your tale is vntrue, whiche is not
ſtrange: or els Conſtantine was twiſe Baptized, whiche is very vnlikely.
                  
                     Cardinal Poole,
                     Hieronym. in Chronico. ſéeinge the mater to paſſe ſo cleare, telleth vs roundely in one
woorde, that Euſebius, and Conſtantius were Ariane Heretiques, and therefore
refuſeth the whole ſtorie written by Euſebius,
                     Ambro. de obit
                           ••
                         Theodoſij. touching the Chriſtening of Conſtantine.
But, ſommewhat to ſoothe you in your tale, let a Fable ſtand for Truth: &
let vs graunt you an impoſſibilitie,Cardinal. Polus de Baptiſmo Cō
                        ſtantini, Pag. 87. y• 
                     Conſtantine was Baptized by Pope Sylueſter
being dead. Yet wil you néedes geather hereof, that the Emperour is Subiecte
to the Pope? Or, that the Pope hath Authoritie to calle Councelles? What wil
you then ſaie, when the Emperoure is Baptized by ſomme other Prieſte, or Biſhop,
or by a Midvvife? Shal euery of theſe therefore require to haue, and to doo y•
like? Or, muſte wée beléeue, that ſutche a Prieſte, Biſhop, or Midvvife ſhal haue
Authoritie to calle Councelles? In déede, this were a good ſhorte waie to geate Supremacie.
But it might haue pleaſed you, to remember, that y• 
                     Cardinal of Oſtia
vſeth alwaies of Office to Conſecrat the Pope. Yet, I trow, yée wil not therefore
place him aboue the Pope. Elizaeus anointed King Iehu: yet was he not therefore
aboue the Kinge.
                     Heruaeus de Poteſtat. Pp. Ca. 18. Your owne Doctoure ſaithe, Quòd hoc Argumentum non concludat,
patet: quia in Veteri Lege, Sacerdotes, qui Reges inungebant, indubitanter
Regibus Subdebantur: It appeareth, that this Argumente concludeth nothinge. For
in the Olde Lavve, the Prieſtes, that anointed the Kinges, were vndoubtedly ſubiecte
to the Kinges.
                  
                  
                     To conclude, what right Emperoures had in Summoninge of Councelles,
by theſe fewe Authorities, and Examples folowinge, it maie ſoone appeare. Euſebius
ſaith,
                     Euſeb. de Vita Conſtan. Orat. 3. Cōſtantinus Synodū Oecumenicā Collegit, & Epiſcopos, vt Vndi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
accelerarent, honorificis literis conuocauit: (Not the Pope, but) Conſtantine
geathered a General Councel, and by honorable Writes called y•
                      Biſhoppes of al Countries
to repaire thither.
                     Theodor. Lib. 1. Cap. 9. Theodoretus ſaithe, A greate, and a Holy
                      Councel was geathered
to Nice, by the Grace of God, and (not by the
                      Pope, but) by the
                      Godly Emperoure.
Sozomenus ſaithe,
                     Sozom. li. 1. ca. 17. (Not the Pope, but) The
                      Emperoure Conſtantine
wrote vnto al the Rulers of the Churches, that they ſhoulde be at Nice by a daie: to the Biſhoppes
of the Apoſtolique Sees, to Macarius the Biſhop of Hieruſalem, and to
Iulius the Biſhop of Rome. In which woordes this alſo maie be noted, that y• Pope
then was vnder the Emperours Summone, no leſſe then others.
                  
                  
                     In the Councel of Conſtantinople, the Biſhoppes wrote thus vnto the Emperoure,
Ex mādato tuae Pietatis Conſtantinopolim cōuenimus:Concil. Conſtantinopoli. 1. 
                     Wee are comme
to Conſtantinople, (not by y• Popes Authoritie, but) by your
                      Maieſties Commiſsion.
Athanaſius ſaithe,
                     Athana. de Synodis Artmin. & Seleuceen. Ab Imperatore, praefectiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Literae ſequentes in omnem partem
miſſae ſunt, eos, qui illuc ituri eſſent, conuocantes: Theſe Letters, or Writes
folowinge were ſente out into al places (not from the
                      Pope, but) from the
                      Emperoure,
and his Lieutenantes, ſummoning them, that ſhould comme vnto the Councel. S. Chryſoſtome
ſaith,
                     Chryſoſt. Epiſt. 1. Ad Innocentiū. Ambroſ. in Concil. Aquileien. 
                     Wee wente in, and humbly beſought (not
                      y• Pope, but) the moſte
                      Chriſtian
Prince, to calle a Councel. S. Ambroſe, ſpeakinge of him ſelfe, and of other Biſhoppes,
beinge then at the Councel of Aquileia, ſaithe thus: Nos conuenimus
Aquileiam iuxta Praeceptum Imperatoris: Were are mette togeather at Aquileia, by
the Commaundemente of the Emperoure, (and, not of the Pope).
                  
                     
                     S. Hierome ſaithe, Orientis, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Occidentis Epiſcopos ob quaſdam Eccleſiaſticas
diſſenſines Romam Imperiales Literae contraxerunt: To ſtaie certaine Eccleſiaſtical
diſſenſions (not any the
                      Popes Letters of Commaundemente, but) the
                      Emperours
VVrites cauſed the Biſhoppes,Hierony. in Epitaphio Paulae. 
                     as wel of the Eaſte, as of the VVeaſte, to
drawe to Rome.
                  
                     Of Pope Leo, wee haue ſaide before. Beinge Pope, and, as M. Hardinge imagineth,
hable to ſummone the world with a becke, thus he writeth to the Emperoure
Theodoſius:Leo, Epiſt. 9. Ad Theodoſium Imperatorem. Dignetur pietas veſtra ſupplicationi noſtrae annuere, vt intra
Italiam haberi iubeatis Epiſcopale Concilium: We beſeeche your Godly Maieſtie,
to graunte vnto our humble requeſte, that it maie pleaſe you to commaunde a Councel
of Biſhoppes to be holden within Italie.
                  Sozomenus ſaithe,
                     The Pope hūbly deſireth the Emperoure to ſummone a Councel. 
                     The Arians beſought (not the
                      Pope, but) the
                      Emperoure
Conſtantius, to commaunde a Councel, to be holden at Antioche. The ſame Arians afterwarde
beſought (not the
                      Pope, but) the ſame
                      Emperoure Conſtantius, to ſummone
an other Councel to Millaine. Againe sozomenus ſaithe, The
                      Catholique
Biſhoppes ſente Hypatianus theire Embaſſadoure, to entreate (not the
                      Pope, but) the
                     
Emperoure,Sozom li. 4. ca. 22 Socrat. li. 2. ca 8. Theodoret. Li. 2. Cap. 15. 
                     that, to redreſſe certaine Erroures, they might haue leaue to meete togeather.
Pope Liberius ſaithe, A Councel is holden at Millaine (not by my Authoritie, but)
by the
                      Commaundemente of the Prince. Pope Leo ſaithe, The
                      greate Councel
of Chalcedon was ſommoned (not by him ſelfe, but) by the trauaile of Martianus the
Emperoure.Ruffi. li. 1. ca. 19. Sozom. li. 6. ca. 7. Inter Acta Liberij. 
                     The Emperoure Conſtantius Commaunded twoo ſeueral Councelles
to be keapte at one time: the one at Seleucea in Iſauria in the Eaſt: the other
at Ariminum in Italie in the VVeaſte. Socrates ſaith, Sithence the
                      Emperours
were firſte Chriſtened, the ſtate of the Churche hathe hanged of them: and the greateſte
Councelles haue benne,
                     Leo ad Anatoliū. Socra. li. 2. ca. 37 Socrates, Lib. 5. in prooemio. 
                     and be keapte by theire aduiſe.
                  
                  Thus many Anciente Councelles wée are hable to ſhewe you, ſummoned by
Emperours. Nowe ſhewe you, M. Hardinge, either that the Emperoure did
al theſe thinges by the Authoritie of the Pope: or, that the Emperoure was onely y•
                     Popes Summoner, to calle to Councel ſutche, and ſo many, as it ſhoulde like his
Holineſſe to commaunde: Or, that the Pope did euer ſommone any one Ancient
General Councel by his owne onely right, without further Commiſſion from the
Emperoure, then wil wée ſaie, yée haue ſaide ſomme thing. As for al, that ye haue
nowe ſaid, in good ſoothe, it is leſſe, then nothinge.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 3.
               
                  And when Rufine, the Heretique, had alleged for his Authoritie
a Councel, whiche, as he thought, ſhould make for him: S. Hierome
his Aduerſarie, to confute him, Tel vs (quod hee) vvhat Emperoure
commaunded that Councel to be called? The ſame S. Hierome
againe in his Epitaphe vpon Paula, maketh mention of the Emperours
Letters, whiche gaue commaundemente, to cal the Biſhoppes
of Italie, and Graecia to Rome, to a Councel.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Biſides that yeVntruthe, prceding of Ignorance: as it maie ſoone appeare. doo ſtrangely, to cal Rufine an Heretike, wee ſaie, that S. Hierome might wel
demaund, what Emperoure ſummoned that Councel, which was neuer ſummoned. Againe we confeſſe,
that ſome Emperours haue ſummoned both Latine and Greeke Biſhops.Reade the former Anſvveare. But ye proue not, that any did
it as ſupreme heade, and as iudge in matters of Religion, but by the conſent of the Biſhops of Rome, as
I haue declared before.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Were you not a ſtranger in your owne Bookes, M. Harding, yée would not thinke
it ſo ſtrange a mater, to heare Ruffinus called an Heretique. S. Hierome doubted
not ſo to calle him.Hierony in Apologia contra Ruffinum. Thus he ſaith: Dum mihi inconſtantiae crimen impingit, ſe Haereticū,
&c: Ita verrit Origenē, vt, qui in Trinitate Catholiquum legeret, in alijs Haereticū
non caueret: While Ruffinus chargeth me with inconſtancie, he proueth him ſelfe to be an
Heretique, &c. Ruffinus hath ſo tranſlated Origen into Latine, that who ſo findeth
him Catholique touchinge the Trinitie, ſhoulde neuer ſuſpecte him, in any thinge els, to be an
Heretique.
                     
                     In eadem Apologia. Againe he ſaith vnto him, Solos Haereticos non recipimus, quos vos ſolos
recipitis: Onely
                      Heretiques wee receiue not into our houſes: And yet them onely you receiue.
                  
                  Anaſtaſius, the Biſhop of Rome, hath thus publiſhed his Iudgemente of the
ſame Ruffinus:Anaſtaſius ad Epiſcopum Hieroſolymorū. Apud Hieronym. To. 4. Omni ſuſpicione ſepoſita, Ruffinum ſcito, quòd proptia mente Origenis
dicta in Latinū tranſtulit, ac probauit. Nec diſsimilis ab eo eſt, qui alienis vitijs
praeſtat aſſenſum. Illud tamen ſcire te cupio, ita haberi à noſtris partibus alienum, vt
quid agat, vbi ſit, nec ſcire cupiamus: Al ſuſpiciō ſette aparte, knowe thou, yt
                      Ruffinus hath
tranſlated Origen (the Heretiques) woordes into Latine, accordinge to his owne likinge,
and vvel allovveth the ſame. And, who ſo euer geueth his conſente vnto an other mannes
faulte, it not vnlike vnto him. Notwithſtandinge thus mutche I woulde haue thee to knowe,
that Ruffinus is ſo far from our felowſhip, or profeſsion of Faithe, that wee deſire not to
knowe, neither what he dooth, nor where he is.
                  
                  Vincentius ſaithe,
                     Vincent. in Speculo, li. 17. ca. 99. 
                     that S. Hierome charged Ruffinus with the Pelagian Hereſie.
Eraſmus ſaith, Ruffinus non fuit alienus ab Origeniſtarum Haereſi: Ruffinus
was not cleare from the Origenians Hereſie. Againe, ſpeakinge of the ſame
Heretiques,Eraſmus in Vita Hieronymi. 
                     he ſaithe, Huius reī Dux, & ſignifer Aquileienſis Ruffinus fuit. Againe,
Notat, neſcio quem: ipſum, opinor, Ruffinum, qui in eam Haereſim inductus eſt
à Magiſtro quopiam,Eraſm in Epiſt. Hieronym. ad Principiam. In Schol. &c. Againe, Monet, vt exploſa factione Origeniſtarum, cos etiam
eijciat, qui clam, & oblique eſſent Origeniſtae, Ruffinum, & illius amicos: The Captaine,
and ſtandarde bearer of this Hereſie, vvas Ruffinus of Aquileia, &c. Againe, S. Hierome
here noteth ſomme body, I knowe not whom: but I thinke, Ruffinus him ſelfe: that
was brought into this Hereſie by ſomme teacher,
                     Eraſm. in Argumento Epiſtolae Theophili ad Hieronym. 
                     &c. Againe, He warneth his frende, that
hauinge renounced the Origenian Heretiques, he woulde likewiſe renounce them, that
priuily, and in ſecrete were Origenian Heretiques, meaninge Ruffinus, and his frendes.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe, Ruffinus grauiſsima ſuſpicione premebatur, quòd eſſet
Origeniſta. Sub hoc enim titulo Arianorum Haereſis conata eſt repullulaſcere:
Ruffinus was greeuouſly ſupected to be an Origenian Heretique.Eraſm. De Libris Origenis. 
                     For vnder that name
the Arian Hereſie beganne to reuiue. Thus yée ſée, M. Hardinge, it was not ſo greate
an Hereſie, to ſaie, that
                      Ruffinus was an Heretique.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion. 4.
               Continually for the ſpace of Fiue Hundred yeeres, the Emperour
alone appointed the Eccleſiaſtical Aſſemblies, and called the Councelles
of the Biſhoppes togeather.
               We nowe therefore marueile the more at the vnreaſonable dealinge
of the Biſhop of Rome, who knowinge, what was the Emperours
right, when the Churche was wel ordered, knowing alſo that
it is nowe a common right to al Princes, for ſo mutche as Kinges
are nowe fully poſſeſſed in the ſeueral partes of the whole Empire,
                  
doothe ſo without conſideration, aſſigne that office alone to him ſelfe,
& taketh it ſufficient in Summoning a General Councel, to make
that man, that is Prince of the whole worlde, no otherwiſe partaker
thereof, then he woulde make his owne ſeruaunte.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhere you ſaie, The Emperoure alone celebrated, kepte, or helde Councelles, for ſo is your Latine,
This is M. Hardinges modeſtie. Reade the Anſvveare nexte goinge before this, ſauing one. it is too impudently faced, without any face, without proufe, without Truthe. Thei were Celebrated,
or holdenvntruthplaine, and euident. For many times the Popes Legares vvere Vnderlings and Inferiours vnto others. by the popes Legates, the Patriarkes, and Biſhoppes, and not by Emperours. Al be it,
Emperours might 
                        〈◊〉
                      them,Vntruthe. For the Emperoures Embaſſadours ſitting in Councel, vvere called Illuſtriſsimi Iudices. but not as Iudges. And thei haue euer benne called Epiſcopalia
Concilia, notNomore vvere thei called Cō
                        cilia Papalia. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      cratoria, Councelles of Biſhoppes, not of Emperours. And diuerſe Councels, not
accompted General 
                        〈◊〉
                      kepte by Biſhoppes before any Emperour was Chriſtened. As thoſe, whiche
were kepte by S. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Hieruſalem,Actor. 15. mentioned in the Actes of the Apoſties: in the time of victor
the Pope, in Paleſtina and other places, concerning the kepinge of Eaſier: At Rome about the time of
Pope Fabian, againſt the Nouatian Hereſie: At Antioche, againſte Paulus Samoſatenus, and many
others. Al whiche 
                        〈◊〉
                      were kepte, not onely without the preſence of the Emperoures perſon, but
So vvere the moſte parte of the ſame Councelles keapte vvithout, either the Preſence, or the Povver, or Authoritie of the Pope. alſo without his Power, or Authoritie. And yet, if he were head of the Churche, it coulde not haue
benne donne without him.
                  If you ſaie, He was not then Chriſtened, I anſweare, that Chriſtianitie is no parte of his Imperial
Power. It is a ſpiritual Power, whereby he is made the ſonne of God. He maie thereby be ruled by a
Chriſtian Biſhop. But verely, he hath no Power geeuen to him, whereby he maie rule Biſhoppes.
O folie of folies. As if the Emperours Povver vvere either enceaſed, or empaired by his Baptiſme. Baptiſme maketh a man the Childe of the Churche. But * it is Impoſition of handes, in conſecratinge
a Chriſtian Prieſie to be a Biſhop, that geueth him rule ouer others, and not the Sacramente of
Baptiſme. Therefore, Emperours were not the holders or kepers of Councelles, the firſte fiue hundred
yeares. Yea, three hundred were fully expired, before the Emperoure profeſſed openly the Chriſtian
Faithe. So mutche the leſſe maie you marueile, that nowe the Biſhop of Rome, calleth and kepeth Councelles,
chiefely by his owne authoritie.A ſubſtantial good reaſon. But vvhat if S. Ambroſe ſaie, He Succedeth Iudas? For he ſuccedeth Peter, not Nero. He tooke his authoritie of
Chriſte imm
                        •
                      diatly, not of the people of Rome. Be the Emperoure Chriſtian, or not Chriſtian, the Biſhop
of Rome byThe Pope a Chriſtian man by Nature of Office. nature of his Biſhoppes office, is not onely alwaies a Chriſtian man, but alſo a
chiefe Prieſte.
                  VVhere you ſaie, the Biſhop of Rome in ſummoning the late Councel, did beſides good conſideration,
in that he made a man, that is Prince of the whole world, no other wiſe partaker thereof, then he
would make his owne ſeruainte: you forgette your ſelfe fouly, and ſeeme to recke litle what you
ſpeake, ſo you vtter your malice For who is that, whome you cal Prince of the whole worlde? VVhat
contradiction is this? Saide you not in the ſame ſentence before, that kinges are nowe fully poſſeſſed
in the ſeueral partes of the whole Empire? Howe then cal you FerdinandeIt is vvritten in your ovvn Gloſe, Iura commentia decunt, quòd Imperator eſt Dominus Mundi. Prince of the whole
worlde? VVel, this is but one of the common ornamentes of your Rhetorique. Sir the Emperour Ferdinande,
of famous memorie, was not ſo abuſed of Pius the fourth, that bleſſed man, Biſhop of Rome in
theſe our daies. Ye rather are they, who abuſe the Emperours Maieſtie. For ye depoſe him cleane from
his ſeate: ye finde faulte that euer Leo the thirde made an Emperoure in the VVeſte. Ye complaine
openly that the Emperial Maieſtie had not continued ſtil at Conſtantinople. Bilike, to the intent the
Turke might nowe haue had it, who is knowen to ſuffer in his Dominions al Faithes, and Religions:
for whiche cauſe it maie ſeeme, ye fauer him. As for Pope Pius that nowe is, he deferred the olde
priuilege of honoure vnto the Emperoure Ferdinande, without the olde burthen. For where as in olde
timesVntruthes tvvo togeather. For nether vvas it ſo, not dothe Socrates recorde it ſo. Councelles were holden by authoritie of the Pope, * as Socrates witneſſeth, yet the Emperour
bare the charge of calling the Biſhoppes togeather.Lib. 8. ca. 2. But nowe the Pope him ſelfe bare a greate parte
of that burthen, and communicated his propoſe fully with the Emperoure.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Whether it were the Emperoure alone, that appointed Eccleſiaſtical Councelles,
it maie appeare by that wee haue already ſaide. The Pope alone, I aſſure

you,pererssucceſſours. it was not. Maie, the Emperoure, as it is ſaide, and proued before, oftentimes
helde ſutche Aſſemblies, when, & where him ſelfed liſted, whether the Pope would,
or no. The Popes dutie was onely to appeare emongeſte other Biſhoppes, when
he was called.
                  I graunte, ſutche Councelles had theire name of Biſhoppes, and were called
Concilia Epiſcopalia, for that maters there were ſpecially ordered by the diſcretion,
and iudgement of the Biſhoppes. But wil you therefore conclude, that the
ſame Councelles perteined nothing to the Prince? Certainely, the Emperoure
Conſtantinus Commaunded al the Biſhoppes to appeare before him, and to yelde
him a reckeninge of theire Determinatiōs in the Councel. This was the tenoure
of his Write:Sozomen. li. 2. ca. 28. 
                     Quotquot Synodum Tyri habitam compleuiſtis, ſine mora ad Pietatis
noſtrae Caſtra properetis: ac re ipſa, quàm ſincerè, ac rectè iudicaueritis, oſtendatis:
Id
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Coram me:
                     Socrat li. 1. ca. 33. 
                     quem ſincerum eſſe Dei Miniſtrum, ne vos quidem ipſi negabitis:
As many of you, as haue keapte the Councel at Tyrus, repaire to our Campe without deſaie:
and ſhewe me in deede, howe ſincerely, and rightly yee haue proceded: And that, euen
before me: whom yowe your ſelues cannot denie to bee the Sincere Seruante of God.
                  
                  
                     Athanaſius was the greatteſte trauailer in the Councel of Nice againſte the
Arians:
                     Triparti. Hiſto. li. 2. ca. 2. yet was he then no Biſhop, but onely a Deacon. But hereof wee haue
ſufficiently ſaide before.
                  
                     Chriſtianitie, yee ſaie, is no parte of the Emperial Povver. Yee might likewiſe
haue ſaide, Chriſtianitie is no parte of the Papale Povver. Verily, it can
not wel appeare, that Peter, and Paule had euer any ſutche Chriſtianitie. The
Emperours right is neither encreaſed, nor abated by his Baptiſſne. Whether he
be Faithful, or Vnfaithful, he is the Miniſter of God, and beareth the Swerde to
pouniſhe ſinne.
                  Yee ſaie, The Pope ſuccedeth Peter, and not Nero: Therefore he calleth, and keepeth
Councelles chiefely by his owne Authoritie. Of ſutche proper Argumentes, M.
Hardinge, wee marueile not mutche, though yee make no ſtoare. Howe be it,
ſomme menne haue thought, yee doo S. Peter greate wronge, appointinge him
ſutche Children, to be his Heires. For many of them, in al theire dealinges, haue
reſembled Nero,
                     Bernard. De Cō
                        ſideratione. li 4. Citatur ab Illyrico inter Teſt. veritat. pag. 387. Eraſmus, In Adagio, Sileni Alcibiadis. more then Peter. S. Bernarde ſaithe thus vnto Pope Eugenius:
In his ſucceſſiſti, non Petro, ſed Conſtantino: In theſe thinges yee haue ſucceded,
not Peter the Apoſtle, but the Emperoure Conſtantine. Pope Adrian the fourth
was woonte to ſaie: Succedimus, non Petro in docendo, ſed Romulo in parricidio:
Wee ſucceede, not Peter in teachinge, but Romulus in killinge our Brethren.
                  
                  Eraſmus ſaithe, Pontifices nunc ſunt Vicarij lulij Caeſaris, Alexandri Magni,
Croeſi, Xerxis: non Chriſti, non Petri: The Popes nowe are the Vicares of Iulius
Caeſar, of Alexander the Greate, of Croeſus, and of Xerxes: not of Peter. It is
written in a Sermon, bearinge the name of S.
                      Ambroſe: Qui debuerint eſſe
Vicarij Apoſtolorum,Ambro. Citatur ab Illyrico inter Teſt. pag. 142. Robert. Gallus, cap. 5. factiſunt Socij Iudae: Thei, that ſhoulde haue benne the Apoſtles
Vicares, are nowe becomme Iudas Felowes. Robertus Gallus, that liued wel-neare
three hundred yeeres paſt, imagineth, Chriſte thus to ſaie of the Pope: Quis
poſuit Idolum hoc in Sede mea, vt imperaret Gregi meo? Who ſette this Idole
in my roume, and made him Ruler ouer my Flocke?
                  
                  Yet,Dis. 19. Sic omnes. In Gloſs. Cardinal. Cuſanus, De Autho. Eccle. & concilij Supra & contra Scripturam 
                     you ſaie, the Pope is alwaies, not onely a Chriſtian man, but alſo a Chiefe Prieſte,
(not by Faithe, but) by the nature of his Office. Euen ſo your Gloſe telleth you, Papa
Sanctitatem recipit à Cathedra: The Pope receiueth his holineſſe of his Chaire: that is
to ſaie, of the nature of his Office. Cardinal Coſanus ſaithe, Veritas adhaeret Cathedrae,
&c. Veritas per Chriſtum Cathedrae alligata eſt, non Perſonis. Ait enim:
Super Cathedram Moſi ſederunt Scribae, & Phariſaei: The Truthe cleaueth faſte to
the Popes Chaire, &c. Chriſte hathe nailed his Truthe to the Popes Chaire, and not to his

perſone. For he ſaithe, The Scribes, and Phariſeis are placed in Moſes Chaire. An other
ſaithe,
                     Diſ. 40. Non nos. In Gloſs. Tameiſi Papa non ſit bonus, tamen ſemper praeſumitur eſſe bonus. In Papa ſi deſint
bona acquiſita per meritum, ſufficiunt, quae a loci praedeceſſore praeſtantur: Notwithſtandinge
the Pope be not good,
                     Parte hereof hathe benne touched before. 
                     yet he is euer preſumed to be good. If the Pope lacke
good vertues of his owne, the vertues of Peter, his Predeceſſoure, are ſufficiente.
                  
                  
                     There were neuer ſo many Heretiques in any one See, as haue benne in the
See of Rome: as I haue already ſufficientely, and fully proued. And yet, yee ſaie.
The Pope cannot erre. There were neuer ſo notorious Examples, or, as Platyna
calleth them,
                     Platyna. In Benedict. 4. 
                     Monſters of filthy life: Yet, yee ſaie, they are al Holy Fathers, and holde
theire Chriſtianitie by Nature of office. Howe be it, youre Doctoure Alphonſus
ſaithe,
                     Alphonſus, Aduerſus Hareſes. li. 1. ca. 9. 
                     Quamuis credere teneamur ex Fide, Verum Petri Succeſſorem eſſe Supremum
Paſtorem Totius Eccleſiae, non tamen tenemur eadem Fide credere. Leonem,
aut Clementem eſſe Verum Petri Succeſſorem: Although wee be bounde to beleue, that the
True Succeſſoure of Peter is the Higheſte Paſtoure of al the Churche, yet are wee not bounde
with like Faithe to beleue, that Pope Leo, and Pope Clemente are the True Succeſſoures of
Peter.Matthae. 3. 
                     Iohn the Baptiſte ſaide rightly vnto the Phariſeis, that likewiſe made
vauntes of theire Succeſſion, Neuer ſaie, Abraham is your Father. For God is hable
euen of theſe ſtones to raiſe vp Children vnto Abraham.
                     Chryſoſtom. In Opere Imperficto. Homi. 43. Diſt. 41. Multi. Gregori. Naziā. In Sanctum Lauacrum. 
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe: Non
locus Sanctificat hominem, ſed homo locum: Nec Cathedra facit Sacerdotem,
ſed Sacerdos Cathedram: The place ſanctifieth not the Man, but the Man ſanctifieth
the Place: Neither doothe the Chaire make the Prieſte, but the Prieſte maketh the Chaire.
Nazianzene ſaithe: Non locorum eſt Gratia, ſed Spiritus: The grace of God goeth
not by Place, but by the Holy Ghoſte.
                  
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe: Omnis Chriſtianus, qui ſuſcipit Verbum Petri, fit
Thronus Petri:
                     Chryſoſt. In Mat. Homi. 33. 
                     et Petrus ſedet in eo: Euery Chriſtian man, that receiueth the woorde
of Peter, is made Peters Chaire: and S. Peter reaſteth in him.
                  But here haue you founde out a foule contradiction in our woordes. Who is he,
ſaie you, whom yee cal the Prince of the worlde? Not the Pope, M. Hardinge: Leſte
yee ſhoulde happily be deceiued: Notwithſtandinge, youre Felowes haue ſo often
tolde vs,In ſexto. li. 3. Tituil. 16. ca. vnica. 
                     Papa rotius Orbis obtinet Principatum: The Pope hath the Princehoode
of al the worlde.
                     
                  
                  The Emperoures Maieſtie wee finde oftentimes entitled by this name:
But your Popes Holineſſe, ſo entitled, wee finde neuer: Onleſſe it be in ſomme
certaine late Decrees, and Gloſes of his owne. Al be it, you of late haue mutche
abated the Emperoures Honoure, and haue made him onely the Popes man. For
thus yee ſaie: Imperator (Occidentis) eſt Procurator, ſiue Defenſor Romanae
Eccleſiae:
                     Diſt. 98. Si Imperator. In Gloſs. 
                     The Emperoure (of the Weaſte) is the Proctoure, or Stewarde of the
Churche of Rome.
                  
                  
                     Yet,
                     Chryſoſtom. Ad Popul. Antiochē. Homi. 2. 
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Imperator eſt Summitas, & Caput omnium ſuper
terram hominū: The Emperoure is the Toppe, and Heade of al menne vpon the Earthe.
In the Councel of Chalcedon, the Emperoure is called, Dominus Vniuerſi
Mundi:
                     Concil. Chalce. Actio. 1. In nomine. The Lorde of the Whole Worlde.
                  
                     Perhaps ye wil ſaie, The State of the Empiere is nowe empoueriſhed: And
therefore the Emperoure hathe loſte his Title. Yet your owne Doctours, & Gloſers
coulde haue tolde you:
                     Extra de Maiorita. & Obediē. vnam ſanctam. In Gloſs. Iura communia dicunt, quòd Imperator eſt Dominus
Mundi: Notwithſtāding the decaie of y• Empiere, The Common Lawes ſaie, that the
Emperoure is the Lorde of the Worlde.
                      Rob. Hol
                        •
                     ote, ſpeakinge of the Emperoure
of Germanie, ſaithe thus: Hic eſt Rex Regum, cui omnes ſubditae ſunt Nationes, &
Populi,Holcote, In Sapien. Lectio. 199. Otho Iriſingēſis &c. The Emperoure is the Kinge of Kinges, vnto whom al Nations, and Countries
be in ſubiection. The Romaines of late yeeres wrote thus vnto the
                      Emperoure
Conradus: Excellentiſsimo, & Praeclariſsimo Vrbis, & Oibis totius O
                        •
                     mino, &c. Vnto

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     the moſte excellente,
                     The Emperour the Lorde of the vvorld 
                     and moſte Noble Emperoure, the Lorde bothe of the Cittie, and alſo
of al the whole Worlde. Therefore, M. Hardinge, to moue this vaine quarrel, without
ſomme cauſe, it was great folie.
                  
                     Councelles, ye ſaie, In olde times were holden by Authoritie of the Pope. For proufe
whereof, yee allege Socrates in the eight booke, and the ſeconde Chapter: But
Woorde, or Sentence, yee allege none. Howe be it, it was a great ouerſight, to allege
the Eighth Booke of Socrates, whereas Socrates him ſelfe neuer wrote but
Seuen, and ſo far to ouerleape your Authoure. Notwithſtandinge, this ſmal Erroure
maie wel be diſſembled emongeſt ſo many. How be it, touchinge the thing it
ſelfe, yee maie as eaſily finde it in the Eighth Booke of Socrates, that neuer was
written, as els where. For in deede emongeſte al, that euer he wrote, this thinge
certainely, that you allege, he wrote neuer.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 12. Diuiſion, 5. & Ca. 13. Diui. 1.
               And, although the modeſtie, and mildeneſſe of the Emperoure Ferdinando
be ſo greate, that he can beare this wronge, bicauſe peraduenture
he vnderſtandeth not wel the Popes packinge, yet ought
not the Pope of his holineſſe to offer him that wronge, nor to claime
an other mans right, as his owne.
               But hereto ſomme wil replie: The Emperoure in deede called
Councelles at that time, yee ſpeake of, bicauſe the Biſhop of Rome
was not yet growen ſo greate, as he is nowe: but yet the Emperour
did not then ſitte togeather with the Biſhoppes in Councel, or once
bare any ſtroke with his Authoritie in theire conſultations. I anſweare,
nay, that it is not ſo. For, as witneſſeth Theodorete, the
Emperoure Conſtantine, ſate not onely togeather with them in
the councel at Nice, but gaue alſo aduiſe to the Biſhoppes, howe it
was beſt to trie out the mater by the Apoſtles, and Prophetes vvritinges,
as appeareth by theſe his owne woordes. In diſputation
(ſaithe he) of maters of Diuinitie, vvee haue ſet before vs to folovve,
the Doctrine of the Holy Ghoſte. For the Euangeliſtes,
and the Apoſtles vvoorkes, and the Prophetes ſaieinges ſhevve
vs ſufficiently, vvhat opiniō vve ought to haue of the vvil of God.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  For the ſittinge of Emperoures in Councelles, you treate a common place not neceſſarie. No man
euer denied, but Emperoures maie ſitte in them. we acknowledge two ſortes of ſettinge: one for the
aſſeſſours, an other for the IudgeVntruthe For Cuſanus ſaith, Inuenio Imperatores in Cō
                        cil
                           ••
                        s iudicia fec ſſe. Reade the Anſvveare. No Emperoure euer ſate as a Iudge in Councel: but many, both Emperoures
in perſon, and their Lieutenauntes for them haue ſitten, as being ready to aſsiſte and defende
that,In vita Cō
                        ſtant. lib. 3. Theodorit. Lib. 1. ca. 7. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . whiche the Biſhoppes had Iudged and decreed.
                  VVhat maner a ſeate greate Conſtantine had in the firſte Councel at Nice, Euſebius in his life, and
Theodoritus doth declare. After that al the Biſhoppes were ſette in their ſeates, to the number of 318
in came the Emperoure laſt with a ſmal companie.Vntruthe encloſed. For this lovve litle Chaire vvas al of beaten golde, and vvas lette in the higheſt place of the Councel. A lowe litle chaire beinge ſette for him in the
middeſt, he would not ſitte downe, before the Biſhoppes had reuerently ſignified ſo mutche vnto him,
and as Theodoritus writeth, not before he had deſired the Biſhoppes to permitte him ſo to doo. Nowe
thinke you that the Supreme head of the Churche ſhould haueVaine folie. For the Prince neuer commeth into the Parlament Houſe, before the Lordes b
                           •
                         ſette comme in laſt, and hane ſittenVntruthe. For S
                           •
                        zomen ſaith, 
                           ••
                        at thro
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        , ille 
                           ••
                        ximus, Salios omnes ſuperaus. beneath
his ſubiectes, and haue ſtaied to ſitte, vntil thei had as it were geuen him leaue?
                  
                     
Neither conſulted he with the Biſhoppes,Conſtantine in the councel of Nice. but required them to conſult of the maters, thei came
for, as Theodorite witneſſeth. Neither ſpake he there ſo generally as you reporte, nor framed his tale
in that ſorte as you faine,Vntruthe euident. For Caſſiodorus expoū
                        deth it thus, Quid de Diuina Lege ſapere debeamus. vniuerſally of the wil of God, ‡ but of the Godhed, ſaieinge, that the
bookes of the Goſpels, and of the Apoſtles, and the Oracles of the Prophetes doo plainely teache vs,
what we ought to thinke of the Godhed, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . For the cōtrouerſie about whiche the Arians
made ſo mutche adoo, was touchinge the equalitie of Godhed in Chriſte, and his conſubſtantialitie
with God the Father. And by thoſe wordes and other, whiche there he vttered, he tooke not vpon him
to define, or Iudge, but onely to exhorte them, to agree together in one Faithe. For amonge thoſe Biſhops
certaine there were, that fauoured the Hereſie of Arius. Suche examples you bringe for defence of
your parte, as make mutche againſt you. Not that you delight in making a rodde for your ſelfe, but
bicauſe you haue no better: and ſomwhat muſt you needes ſaie, leſt the ſtage you plaie your parte on,
ſhoulde ſtande ſtil.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Emperoures, ye ſaie, ſate in Councelles, as Aſſeſſours onely, but not as Iudges:
That is to ſaie, thei ſate by the Biſhoppes, & helde theirpeace, & tolde the clocke, &
ſaide nothinge. Yet youre Doctours ſaie, Aſſeſſor Epiſcopi non poteſt eſſe Laicus:
The Aſſeſſoure of a Biſhop maie not be a Laieman.
                     De Reſcriptis. Statutum. §. Aſſeſſorem. Geminianus. Euſeb. In vita Conſtant. Ora. 3. 
                     But, touchinge the mater it ſelfe,
Euſebius, that was alwaies neare aboute the Emperoure Conſtantine, & wrote
his life, and was preſente at the Councel, ſaithe thus: Conſtantinus, quaſi Communis
quidam Epiſcopus à Deo conſtitutus, Miniſtrorum Dei Synodos conuocauit: Nec
dedignatus eſt adeſſe, & conſidere in medio illorum, conſors
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fieri ipſorum, &c. Conſtantine,
as if he had benne a Common Biſhop appoited by God, called togeather Councelles
of Goddes Miniſters: and diſdeigned not him ſelfe to ſitte in the middes emongeſt them,
and to be partetaker of theire dooinges.
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Euſeb. eodē loco. 
                     Againe, Conſtantinus him ſelfe ſaithe thus:
Ego intereram Concilio, tanquam vnus ex vobis: I was preſente at the Councel emongeſte
you, as one of you. Againe
                      Euſebius ſaithe, Vnus, & Vnicus Deus inſtituit Conſtantinum
Miniſtrum ſuum, & Doctorem Pietatis omnibus terris: The One, and Onely
God hath appointed Conſtantine to be his Miniſter, and the Doctoure of true Godlineſſe
vnto al Nations. And
                      Theodoretus ſaithe, Laudatiſsimus Rex Apoſtolicas curas
ſuſcipiebat animo ſuo:Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 24. At Pontifices, nō ſolùm non ae dificare Eccleſiam, ſed etiā illus fundamenta
labefactare conabantur: The good Emperoure hadde Apoſtolique Cares in his
harte: But the Biſhoppes did not onely not builde vp the Churche of God, but alſo ouerthrew
the fundations of the ſame.
                  
                  
                     And againe Euſebius ſaithe:
                     Euſeb. In vita Conſtanti. Ora. 1. Nicepho. in praefatione ad Emmanuelem. Conſtantinus erat Vocaliſſimus Dei praeco, &
quaſi Seruator, ac Medicus animarum: Conſtantine the Emperoure was a moſte
Cleare Preacher of God, and as it were, the Saueoure, and Phyſicion of Soules. In this
ſorte Nicephorus writeth vnto the Emperoure Emmanuel Palaeologus: Tu es
Dux Profeſsionis Fidei noſtrae, &c.
                      Youre Maieſtie is the Captaine of the Profeſſion
of our Faithe: youre Maieſtie hath reſtored the Catholique, and vniuerſal Churche. Your
Maieſtie hath refourmed the Temple of God from Marchantes, and Exchaungers of the
Heauenly Doctrine, and from Heretiques, by the woorde of Truthe.
                  
                     Yee ſaie, When the Biſhoppes were ſette, in came the
                      Emperoure laſte with a ſmal
companie.
                     Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 7. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Whereof yee would haue vs to geather, y• he came onely as ſomme inferioure
perſonne, and not as a Iudge. Howe be it,
                      Theodoretus ſaithe, Conſtantinus
iuſsit Epiſcopos ingredi: Conſtantine Commaunded the Biſhoppes to goe in.
                  
                     And Euſebius ſaithe: Sedit tota Synodus reuerenter, vt par fuit, cum ſilentio
expectans aduentum Principis:
                      The whole Councel ſate in reuerent, and comely
order, quietely, and in ſilence lookinge for the Princes comminge.
                  
                     This is no good proufe, M. Hardinge, that the Emperoure in the Councel
                        
was inferioure to the Biſhoppes. Nay, the Biſhoppes were commaunded to take
their places, to ſitte in ſilence, and to waite for the Emperoures comminge, as
his Subiectes. Againe he ſaithe: Signo, quo aduentus Imperatoris indicatus
eſt,
                     
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     dato, omnibus exuergentibus, ipſe deinde ingreſſus eſt medius, tanquàm aliquis
Dei coeleſtis Angelus: When the watche woorde was geuen, that the Emperoure
was comme, the Biſhoppes ſtoode vp from their places, and his Maieſtie paſt along through
the middes of them, as if he had benne an Angel of God.
                  
                     But the Emperoure, yee ſaie, ſate vpon a litle lowe ſtoole, and therein ſhewed him ſelfe
inferioure to the Biſhops. Yea, M. Hardinge, but Euſebius ſaithe, that the ſame litle
lowe ſtoole was made of whole beaten gould:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . And therein, I trowe, he was ſommewhat
aboue the Biſhoppes.
                  Yee ſaie, he ſate alowe, and in the middes of the Biſhoppes: and hereof yee conclude,
he was theire Inferioure. So Iulius Caeſar, notwithſtandinge he were the Emperoure
of Rome, yet, when he came into the College of Poetes, he was wel
contented, to be placed in the loweſt roume: And yet was he not therefore thiere
Inferioure.
                  
                     But, touching the Emperoure Conſtantines place in the Councel, Euſebius
ſaithe thus:
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      Acceſſit ad ſummum gradum ordinum: He went vp to the higheſt riſing
of al the benches. Sozomenus ſaithe: Imperator peruenit ad Caput Concilij:
& ſedit in Throno quodam, quem ipſe ſibi fecerat. Erat autem Thronus ille
Maximus, & alios omnes ſuperans: The Emperoure went vp to the headde, or
higheſt place of the Councel: and ſate downe in a Throne of eſtate, that he had prepared for
him ſelfe. But this Throne was very greate, and farre paſſed al the reſt. In the meane ſeaſon,
the
                      Popes Legate ſate, as it is ſaide before, neither in the Firſt place, nor in
the Seconde, nor in the Thirde, but in the Fourthe. Hereby it ſeemeth, to appeare
plainely, that Conſtantinus the Emperoure had his place in the Councel aboue
the Biſhoppes.
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge, ſithence that time the Pope hathe determined, it muſte
nowe be otherwiſe.
                     Ceremoniarium. li. 1. Sect. 14. ca. 2. 
                     His order is this, as it hath benne alleaged before: Sedes
Imperatoris parabitur, &c. The Emperoures Seate ſhalbe prepared nexte vnto the
Popes Seate, and ſhal haue twoo ſteppes ioined vnto the ſame: but neither ſo broade, nor
ſo longe, as bee the Popes. It ſhalbe apparelled with clothe of golde: but Canopie euer the
heade it ſhal haue none.Et aduertendum, quo'd locus, vbi ſedet Imperator, non ſit altior loco, vbi tenet pedes Pontifex. Howe be it, this thinge is ſpecially to be marked, that the place,
whereupon the Emperoure ſittethe, maie be no higher, then the place, where the Pope
ſetteth his Feete. Thus wee ſee, the Emperoure is allowed, to ſitte at the Popes
foote ſtoole: but in any caſe to mounte no higher.
                  
                  
                     The Emperoure,
                      yee ſaie, ſtoode ſtil (no doubte, with Cappe in hande) and durſte
not ſitte downe without leaue: And thereby teſtified, him ſelfe to be Inferioure to the
Biſhoppes. Theſe colde Concluſions wil hardely ſerue. For Traianus, beinge the
Emperoure of Rome, was contented him ſelfe to ſtande afoote, and, for honours
ſake, commaunded the Conſulles to ſitte downe. Yet was he not therefore Inferioure
in dignitie to the Conſulles.
                  
                  
                     Helena the Empreſſe,
                     Ruffinus. li. 1. ca. 7. apparelled her ſelfe like a Seruante, and miniſtred
vnto the Holy Virgines, and gaue them water to theire handes, as if in deede ſhe
had benne theire Seruaunte: yet was ſhee not therefore Inferioure vnto the
Virgines.
                  
                  The ſame Emperoure Conſtantine at the time of the Sermons,Euſeb. In vita Conſtant. Ora. 4. ſtoode vpright,
and woulde not ſitte: for the reuerence, that he bare to the VVoorde of
God. Yet was he not Inferioure to the Preacher. This was that good Emperoures
modeſtie, and Humilitie, M. Hardinge: but not his dewtie. It were wiſedome

for Princes, to take heede, they committe not ouermutche to youre handes.
For, what ſo euer they once yeelde of meere Courteſie, ſtreight waie ye claime it,
as youre owne.
                  
                     Howe be it, touchinge the Emperoures Sittinge in the Councel, it was farre
otherwiſe, then you reporte it. Sozomenus ſaithe: Imperator reſedit in Throno,
qui illi paratus fuerat: & Synodus iuſſa eſt ſedere: The Emperoure ſate downe in
his Chaire of eſtate prouided for him:
                     Sozome li. 1. ca. 19. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . and (then) the Councel was Commaunded to ſitte
downe. Hereby it appeareth, the
                      Emperoure needed not the Biſhoppes leaue: but
rather gaue leaue to the Biſhoppes.
                  
                  No doubte, that Godly, and Milde Prince, beeinge in that Reuerende aſſemblie,
bare him ſelfe with mutche Reuerence. And therfore Euſebius ſaithe, He ſate
not downe,Euſeb. In vita Conſtanti. Ora. 4. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . before the Biſhoppes had beckened vnto him. But he addeth withal, Poſt
Imperatorem, idem fecerunt omnes: (Not before, but) After that the Emperoure
was ſette, they ſate downe al togeather.
                     
                  
                  Now, M. Hardinge, if he that ſate Firſte in the Councel, were the Heade of
the Churche, as you ſeeme to ſaie, then maie I reaſon thus: The Pope, or his
Legate in that Councel ſate not Firſt: Ergo, the Pope then was not Heade
of the Churche.
                  
                  
                     Againe, The Emperoure in that Councel ſate Firſte: Ergo, by youre owne
Concluſion, the Emperoure was the Heade of the Churche. Certainely, the
Pope him ſelfe ſaithe plainely, The Emperoure Conſtantine vvas the Preſident,
or Ruler of the Nicene Councel. His woordes be theiſe: Conſtantinus
Praeſidens Sanctae synodo,12. Quae. 1. Fitturam. Gregor. quae apud Nicaeam congregata eſt: Conſtantinus
the Emperoure, beinge Preſidente of the Holy Councel, that was keapte at Nice.
Theſe be not our woordes, but the Popes, regiſtred euen in his owne Recordes.
Therefore, I truſte, yee wil not refuſe to geeue them credite.
                  
                  
                     But you ſaie, The
                      Emperoure determined, and defined nothinge. Yet the
                      Emperoure
him ſelfe,
                     Euſeb. In vita Conſtant. Orat. 2. 
                     contrarie to youre ſaieinge, ſaithe thus: Ego ſuſcepi, & perfeci
res ſalutiferas, perſuaſus Verbo tuo: O Lorde, I tooke in hande, and
broughte to paſſe vvholeſome thinges, beinge perſvvaded by thy VVorde.
                  
                     And againe, writinge hereof vnto the Biſhoppes of ſundrie Churches, he
ſaithe: Ego vobiſcum interfui, tanquàm vnus ex vobis. Non enim negauerim,
conſeruum me veſtrum eſſe:Euſeb. In vita Conſtan Orat. 3. Qua de re mihi maximè gratulor: I was preſente at
the Councel with you, as one of you. For I cannot denie mee ſelfe to bee youre Felovve
Seruante. In whiche thinge I moſte reioiſe.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe againe he ſaithe: Ego Nicaeam contraxi magnum numerum
Epiſcoporum:Socra. li. 1. ca. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Cum quibus, cùm eſſem vnus ex vobis, & Conſeruus veſter
vehementer eſſe cuperem, etiam ipſe ſuſcepi inquiſitionem Veritatis: I cauſed a
greate companie of Biſhoppes to come to Nice: with whome togeather I tooke in
hande the Examination of the Truthe, beinge mee ſelfe one of you, and mutche
deſieringe to be therein youre Felowe Seruante.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Euſebius, Imperator, quaſi Iuculentam facem accendens, ne quae
occultae Erroris reliquiae ſupereſſent,
                     
                     Euſeb. In vita Conſtan. Orat. 3. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     oculo Regio circumſpexit: The Emperoure, as hauing
enkendled a greate flame, lookte wel aboute with his Princely Eie, that no priuie remnantes
of erroure ſhoulde reaſte behinde.
                  The Biſhoppes in the ſame Nicene Councel, beinge at variance emongeſte
them ſelues, offered vp theire Bookes of accuſation, not vnto the Pope, or to his
Legates,
                     Socrat. li. 1. ca. 8. of whom they had then no greate regarde, but vnto the Emperoure.
Neither did the Emperoure put ouer theire quarelles vnto the Popes Iudgemente,
but vnto the Iudgemente of God.
                  
                  
                     
                     Againe, the ſame Emperoure Conſtantine ſaithe, If any Biſhop vvickedly
offende, by the hande of Goddes ſeruante, that is to ſaie, by my hande, he
ſhalbe pouniſhed.
                  
                     To be ſhorte,
                     Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 19. 
                     Cardinal Cuſanus ſaithe: Sciendum eſt, quòd in vniuerſalibus
octo Concilijs, vbi Imperatores interfuerunt, & non Papa, ſemper inuenio Imperatores,
& Iudices ſuos cum Senatu Primatum habuiſſe,
                     Cardinal. Cuſae. De praeſidentia. 
                     & officium Praeſidentiae
per interlocutiones, & ex conſenſu Synodi, ſine mādato, concluſiones,
& iudicia feciſſe. Et non reperitur inſtantia in octo Concilijs, praeter quam in
tertia Actione Concilij Chalcedonenſis: Wee muſte knowe, that in the Eight General
Councelles, where the Emperoures were preſent, and not the Pope, I euermore finde,
that the Emperoures, and theire Iudges, with the Senate had the Gouernemente,
and Office of Preſidence, by hearinge, and conferring of maters: and that they made Concluſions,
and Iudgementes, with the conſente of the Councel, and without any further Commiſsion.
And there is no manner inſtance, or exception to be founde in the firſte Eight
Councelles, ſauinge onely in the thirde Action of the Councel of Chalcedon.
                  
                  Here yee ſee plainely, by the Authoritie of Cardinal Cuſanus, one of youre
owne ſpecial Doctours, that in the Eight firſte General Councelles, the Emperoure
was Preſidente, and not the Pope.
                  
                  
                     Where as the Emperoure willed the Biſhoppes to conclude theire maters
by the Apoſtolical, and Prophetical Scriptures, He ſpeaketh not, ſaie you, ſo generally,
as wee reporte him, nor frameth his tale in that ſorte, as wee ſaine, vniuerſally of the
vvil of God, but of the Godhedde. For, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in your fanſie ſignifieth onely the
Subſtance, and Nature of God, and not Goddes VVil, or his Religion. Here,
M. Hardinge, it were ſomme pointe of Learninge, to knowe, what ſkilful Greke
Reader told you this tale.
                     Tripar. Hiſto. lib. 2. cap. 5. 
                     Verily, Caſſiodorus, in plaine wiſe, trāſlateth it thus:
Euangelici, & Apoſtolici libri erudiunt nos, quid de Sacra Lege ſapiamus: The
Bookes of the Euangeliſtes, and Apoſtles, teache vs, what wee ought to thinke (not
onely of the
                      Subſtance, and Nature of God, but alſo) of the
                      Holy Lavve.
                  
                     Therefore Theodoretus addeth further theſe woordes: Accipiamus Explicationes
quaeſtionum noſtrarum ex dictis Sancti Spiritus:Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 7. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Let vs take the reſolution
of our queſtions, out of the woordes of the Holy Ghoſte. And immediately before
he ſaithe: De rebus Diuinis diſputantes, praeſcripram habemus Doctrinam
Sancti Spiritus: In our Diſputations (not onely of the
                      Godhedde, but alſo) of
                      Godly
maters, wee haue laide before vs the Doctrine of the Holy Goſpel. In like ſenſe S.
Hilarie ſaithe: Non eſt relictus hominum eloquijs de Dei rebus alius, praeterquam
Dei Sermo.Hilari. De Trinitat. li. 7. De rebus Dei. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Omnia reliqua & arcta, & concluſa, & impedita ſunt, & obſcura:
In maters, touchinge God, there is no ſpeache leafte vnto menne, but onely the woorde
of God. Al other Authorities be ſhorte, and narrowe, and darke, and troubleſome. Beleue
them not hencefoorth therefore, M. Hardinge, that tel you, that,
                      
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſignifieth
onely the Subſtance, and Nature of Goddes Diuinitie. For, as yee maie eaſily
ſee, your Gloſe is vaine, and fighteth directely againſte the Texte.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 13. Diuiſion. 2.
               The Emperoure Theodoſius (as ſaithe Socrates) did not onely
ſitte amongeſt the Biſhoppes, but alſo ordered the whole argueinge
of the cauſe, and tare in peeces the Heretiques Bookes, and allowed
for good the Iudgemente of the Catholiques.
               
               
                  
                  M. Hardinge.
                  It is wonder to ſee, howe theſe menne abuſe the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtories. VVhereas thei talke a
litle before of the ſitting of Emperours in general Councelles, a man would thinke, that now alſo Theodoſius
had benne ſaide to haue ſitten among BiſhoppesAs if a priuate Councel, vvere no Councel. in ſome general Councel. But there is no ſutche
mater.Hiſt. tripar. lib. 9. ca. 19. Theodoſius the Emperour conferred with Nectarius the Biſhop of Conſtantinople, howe al
Chriſten men might be brought to an vnitie in Faithe. And after that Nectarius had lerned of Siſinnius
a greate Clerke, the beſt way to be, if al the heades of eche Hereſie and Secte, might be induced to
be iudged by the olde Fathers and Doctours of the Churche: the godly Emperoure hearing this aduiſe,
cauſed bothe the Heretikes, and Catholiques alſo, to write eche of them ſutche thinges, as eche of them
had to ſaie for his Belefe. And after praier made, reading ouer al the writinges,Fonde folie. As though the Emperoure could Condēne the Heretiques or allovve the Catholiques, vvithout Iudgemente. he reiected the
Arians, the Macedonians, and the Eunomians, ‡ embracing onely thier ſentence, who agreed vpon the
Conſubſtantialitie of the ſonne of God. Here (ſaie theſe Defenders) Theodoſius did not onely ſitte amongeſt
the Biſhoppes, but alſo ordered the whole arguing of the cauſe, tearing the papers of the Heretikes,
and allowing the Iudgemente of the Catholiques. To whiche obiection I make this anſweare.
Firſt, that Theodoſius here tooke counſel of Nectarius the Biſhop, and folowed it: Secondely, that he intended
not to Iudge, whether opinion of al the Sectes were truer,A vvorthy reaſon. The Emperoure ſought meanes to abandon Hereſies: Ergo, He iudged not, vvhether parte vvas the truer. but onely ſought howe to ridde the
Churche of cōtrouerſies. Otherwiſe he would not onely haue taken counſel of Nectarius the Catholike
Biſhop, but alſo of the Arians, Macedonians, and Eunomians. For he is not a right Iudge, that calleth
one ſide onely to him, and in iudgemente is ruled by it. If then it be plaine, that the Emperoure
onely conſulted with Catholiques, it is no leſſe plaine,Vntruthe, Cō
                        trarie to the plaine ſtorie. that he ſate not Iudge vpon the Catholiques.
VVhat did he then? Verely he entended to execute that iudgement, whiche the Biſhops had pronounced
at Nice, and therefore he conferred onely with menne of that ſide. And becauſe he was enſtructed,
that by diſputation no good ſhould come, he choſe this way, to make al to write their opiniōs.
Not that he minded nowe to lerne his Faithe out of their writinges, ſith he had lerned that longe before,
and profeſſed the ſame in his Baptiſme: but he ſought a way, whereby to put al Heretiques to ſilence.
Therefore, hauing read al the writinges, and hauinge made his praier to God for grace,And hovve could he make choiſe vvithout Iudgemente? to
choſe the better ſide,Iacob. 1. 1. Cor. 6. whiche alſo he made not doubtinge of his Faithe (for els he were an Infidel, and
vnworthy to be a Iudge, euen in the Temporal matters among Chriſtians) but partely he declared, that
al goodnes is to be aſked of God,Thus M. Hardinge maketh the Emperoure a diſſemblinge Hypocrite. partely he would the Heretiques to vnderſtande, that he wont not to
worke with affection, but with the feare of God. Thus hauing praied and readen the writinges, he
executed the iudgemente of the Nicene Councel, and reiected thoſe Heretiques.
                  Nowe to retourne to the wordes of the Apologie, how ſaie thei, that the Emperoure not onely ſate
among Biſhoppes, but alſo cauſae diſceptationi praefuit, was chiefe Ruler and moderatour of the
reaſoning, and debating of the mater? Thei cannot ſaie thus, as of a Councel, whereof thei talke.A fonde cauil. It vvas a priuate Councel of ſundrie Biſhoppes, and the Iudgemente thereof vvas ſpecially directed by the Emperoure. For
there was no Councel indicted, not onely by the Pope, but neither by the Emperoure, nor by any other
Archebiſhop. ‡ It was a priuate callinge together of certaine heades of eche Secte, and not a ſolemne
ordinarie councel. If there were no Councel of Biſhoppes, no ſittinge of Biſhoppes: if no ſitting, no preſidence
at al. Howe then was Theodoſius Preſident, and Iudge of Eccleſiaſtical cauſes?
                  If we ſhal reporte the thinge, as it was in truthe done, onely Theodoſius vſed a politike way, to put
Heretiques to ſilence.In Actis cō
                        cilij Aquileienſis. Other iudgement he tooke not vpon him, as he that proteſted alwaies, that Spiritual
cauſes, and controurſies of Doctrine could not better be decided, then by Biſhoppes. For whiche
ſaieinge, S. Ambroſe praiſed him. So that we are ſure of Theodoſius, that he neuer meante to intermedle
with Eccleſiaſtical maters,Thus the Emperour is becom the Biſhoppes man. otherwiſe then to execute the Biſhoppes Decrees.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here, yee ſaie, it is a woonder, to ſee, howe theſe menne abuſe the Eccleſiaſtical ſtories.
It was a Priuate Councel, yee ſaie, whereat Theodoſius was preſent, and not a General:
As if this poore healpe were ſufficiente, to ſalue the mater: or, as if a Priuate
Councel, were no Councel: Or, as if an Emperoure might ſitte as a Iudge in
priuate Councelles, but not in General. The ſtorie in briefe is this, Theodoſius
                     
the Emperoure,
                     Theodoſius Iudgeth Eccleſtical cauſes. the better to bringe his Churches into Vnitie, Commaunded
an Aſſemblie of y• Biſhoppes, and beſte Learned, to appeare before him,
and eche parte to write a ſeueral Confeſſion of his Faithe, that he him ſelfe might
Iudge bitweene them, whiche Faithe were the beſte. Hauing receiued theire writinges,
he willed Publique Praiers to be made,Sozomen li. 7. ca. 12. and alſo bothe openly, & priuately
praied him ſelfe, that it might pleaſe God,Socrat. li. 5. ca. 10. to aſſiſte him with his Holy Sprite,
and to make him hable to Iudge iuſtely.
                  Then he peruſed, and conſidered eche Confeſſion a ſunder by it ſelfe: allowed
onely the Catholiques: and Condemned the Confeſſions, that were written by
the Arians, and Eunomians, and tare them in peeces. This is the true reporte of
the ſtorie, M. Hardinge. Whatſoeuer yee haue added hereunto, as your manner
is, it is your owne. Nowe, whether the Emperoure Theodoſius tooke vpon
him, to Heare, and Determine Eccleſiaſtical Cauſes of Religion. or no, I reporte
me to your owne indifferente iudgemente.
                  But yee wil ſaie, The Emperoure preſumed not, to Iudge any thinge of him
ſelfe: but was wholy ruled by the Biſhoppes, as the executoure of their willes. And hereof,
yee ſaie, yee are wel aſſured. Thus by your handlinge, yee make the Prince
onely your Biſhops man: to ſtrike blindely, whomſoeuer your Biſhop ſhal Commaunde:
to Condemne, to Depriue, to Spoile, to Kille his owne Subiectes: not of
any Iudgemente, or Knowledge, but onely vpon the doubteful Credit, and at the
pleaſure of your Biſhop. So ſimple yee make this Godly Emperoure in his
dealing. He willed the Cōgregation to praie: He praied him ſelfe, that God would
directe him with his Sprite, and geeue him wiſedome, to diſcerne the Truthe: He
Conferred the Confeſſions: He weighed eche Reaſon: He allowed one ſide for
true and godly: Al the reſte he Condemned for falſe, and wicked. And yet, ye ſaie,
yee are ſure of Theodoſius, that he intended not to Iudge, whether of al theſe Sectes were
the truer. And ſo, by youre diſcretion, he bothe Allowed, and Condemned withoute
Iudgemente, he knewe not, what.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 1.
               In the Councel of Chalcedon a Ciuile Magiſtrate Condemned
for Heretiques, by the Sentence of his owne mouthe, the Biſhoppes,
Dioſcorus, Iuuenal, & Thalaſſius, and gaue Iudgemente,
to put them downe from theire Dignities in the Churche.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhere true, and good mater wanteth, for defence of this cauſe, theſe menne care not what thei
bringe, ſo they make a ſhewe of ſome Learning, to deceiue the vnlearned. Firſte, for condemnation of
Heretiques, by ſentence of a Ciuil Magiſtrate, they alleage the name of the long Councel of Chalcedon,
not ſhewing in what Action or parte thereof it maie be founde. True it is, that al theſe three are named
in that Councel, Dioſcorus, Iuuenalis, and Thalaſsius.Vntruthe encloſed, ſtanding in ignorance. For if M. Hard. had read the Councel, he might haue ſounde it. But that al three were condemned, wee
finde not. Mutche leſſe, that were condemned by any Ciuil Magiſtrate, doo we finde. The condemnation
of Dioſcorus Archebiſhop of Alexandria, was pronounced by the Legates of the Pope of Rome,
in forme as foloweth.
                  Paſchaſinus,Actio. 3. hauinge aſked the conſent of the Fathers preſent in the Councel to the condemnation
of Dioſcorus, after his faultes rehearſed, with his two felowes Lucentius Biſhop of Tuſculum, and
Bonifacius Prieſte of the greate Churche of Rome, ſaide: The moſte holy, and bleſſed Archebiſhop of the
great, and elder Rome Leo, by vs, and by this preſent holy Synode, with the thriſe moſte bleſſed and
worthy of al praiſe, Peter the Apoſtle,This vvas ſpoken euen like the Popes Legate. For S. Paule ſaithe, Chriſte vvas the Rocke, &c. who is the rocke and ‡ higheſt toppe of the Catholique
Churche, and who is the ‡ foundation of the right Faithe, hath depriued Dioſcorus, as wel of the

dignitie of his Biſhoprike,Dioſcorus, Iuuenaſis, Thalaſsius. as alſo of his Prieſtly miniſterie. This was the ſentence pronounced by
the Popes Legates, in the name of the Biſhop of Rome, vnder the Authoritie of Peter. VVhiche ſentence
the whole Councel allowed. This beinge true, howe did the Ciuil Magiſtrate condemne Dioſcorus?
VVas then the Biſhop of Lilybaeum, or the Pope, in whoſe name he gaue ſentence, a Ciuil Magiſtrate?
This is the patiēce of M Hardinges Sprite. VVhen he ſhal reade the Councel, and ſee his ovvne erroure, he vvilbe colder. VVhat is impudencie, what is licentious lieinge, what is deceitful dealinge, if this be not?
                  Of Iuuenalis Archibiſhop of Hieruſalem, and Thalaſsius Archebiſhop of Caeſaria in Cappadocia,
thus mutche I ſaie. They might wel haue a rebuke for miſuſinge them ſelues in the ſeconde Councel
at Epheſus,Actio. 1. ex noua tranſlat. where they ſate, like Iudges,Vntruth, vaine and childiſhe. For then there belōged no ſutch Authoritie to the See of Rome. without authoritie of thee See of Rome (whiche, as Lucentius
ſaide in the Synode of Chalcedon, was neuer orderly donne, neither was it lauful to be donne)
they might, I ſaie, take a rebuke for ſo preſuming beſides the Popes authoritie: but for as mutche as
theyVntruthe, ſhameleſſe aboue meaſure. For thei neuer aſked pardonne, for ſitting vvithout the Popes Authoritie. mainteined not thiere fact, but among other Biſhoppes of the Eaſtcried out. Omnes peccauimus,
Omnes veniam poſtulamus: VVee haue al ſinned, VVee al beſeche pardonne: Yea for as
mutche as Iuuenalis reiected the faulte vpon Elpidius, who did not commaunde Euſebius the accuſer of
Eutyches to comme in, and Thalaſsius ſaide, he was not cauſe thereof: it maie wel be, they were pardonned,
although the honorable Iudges, and Senate ſaide vnto them: In Iudicio Fidei non eſt defenſio:
In a Iudgement of Faithe, this is no excuſe. But in caſe they were depoſed,M. Harding is vvel aſſured, before he knovve. then are we ſure,
Manifeſte vntruthe Reade the Anſvveare. it was not donne by the Ciuil Magiſtrates otherwiſe, then that they might allowe, and execute the
ſentence of Depoſition before geeuen.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  If the Councel of Chalcedon ſeeme ouer longe, with better reading yee maie
make it ſhorter. That Dioſcorus, Iuuenalis, and Thalaſſius were al three condemned
in that Councel, that, yee ſaie, yee finde not. Howe be it, if 
                        •
                     ee had ſought
it better, yee might ſoone haue founde it. One of your owne Frendes of Louaine
ſaithe, that herein yee were toomutche ouerſeene. The very woordes, truely recorded
in the Councel, are theſe: Videtur nobis iuſtum eſſe, eidem poenae Dioſcorum
Reuerendum Epiſcopum Alexandriae,
                     C
                           •
                        pus. Dialo. 1. pag. 28. 
                     & Iuuenalem Reuerendum Epiſcopum
Hieroſolymorum, & Thalaſsium Reuerendum Epiſcopum Caeſariae Cappadociae
ſubiacere:
                     Concil. Chalice. Act. 1. pag. 831. 
                     & à Sancto Concilio, ſecundum Regulas, ab Epiſcopali dignitate
fieri alienos: Vnto vs it ſeemeth right, that Dioſcorus, the Reuerende Biſhop of Alexandria,
and Iuuenalis, the Reuerende Biſhop of Hieruſalem, and Thalaſsius, the Reuerende
Biſhop of Caeſaria in Cappadocia, ſhoulde be put to the ſame pouniſhemente: and by the holy
Councel, accordinge to the
                      Canons, ſhoulde be remoued from their Epiſcopal dignities.
                     
                     Euagrius. li. 2. cap. 4.
The which woordes yee might alſo haue founde fully reported in Euagrius.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe alſo ſaithe Pope Leo, touchinge the ſame: De nominibus Dioſcori,
Iuuenalis,Leo Epiſt. 40. Ad Anatolium. & Euſtachij (vel potiùs, Thalaſsij) ad Sacrum Altare non recitandis, dilectionem
tuam hoc decet cuſtodire: Touchinge the names of Dioſcorus, Iuuenalis, and
Euſtachius (or rather, Thalaſſius) not to be rehearſed at the Holy Aultar (whiche was
the
                      Communion Table) yee muſt keepe this order.
                  
                  But yee ſaie, Notwithſtanding theſe Biſhoppes were condemned in the Councel,
yet the Ciuile or Laie Iudges condemned them not. For they were there (ye ſaie) onely to
ſee good order, and to keepe peace. This, M. Hardinge, is your owne onely idle gheaſte,
without any manner further Authoritie, onely grounded vpon your ſelfe. Certainely,
the woordes of the Councel be plaine: Glorioſiſſimi Iudices, & ampliſſimus
Senatus dixerunt: The moſte Noble Iudges, and moſte woorthy Senate ſaide.
                     
Likewiſe ſaithe Euagrius,
                     Concil. chalce. Actio. 1. Euag. li. 2. ca. 4. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : The
Lordes of the Emperours Councel decreed theſe thinges.
                  
                  
                     Neither were the Ciuile Iudges then ſo ſcrupulous, to thinke, thei might not
deale in Caſes of Religion, as it maie wel appeare by theire woordes. For thus
they ſaie: Glorioſiſſimi ſudices, & Ampliſſimus Senatus dixerunt. De Recta, &
Catholica Fide,Concil. Chalce. Act. pag. 831 perfectiùs ſequenti die, conuenienti Concilio, diligentiorem Examinationem

fieri opottere, perſpicimus:Dioſcorus, Iuuenalis, Thalaſsius. 
                     The moſte Noble Iudges, and moſte vvoorthy Senate
ſaide, Wee ſee, that, touchinge the Right Catholique Faithe, the nexte daie, when
the Councel ſhal meete, there muſte be had a more diligente Examinatione.
                  
                  
                     And when the maters were concluded, and publiſhed, the Biſhoppes of the
Eaſt brake out into fauourable ſhootes, in this ſorte: Iuſtum, & Rectum Iudiciū
Vita longa Senatui: Multi anni Imperatori: Iuſte, and Righte is this Iudgemente:
Longe life vnto the Senate: Many yeeres vnto the Emperoure. For in al caſes, as wel
                     
Eccleſiaſtical, as Temporal, the Emperoure was Iudge ouer al. What ſo euer
the Councel had determined, without the Emperoures conſent, it had no force.
And therefore bothe the Biſhoppes, and other Temporal Iudges in the Councel,
vſed oftentimes to ſuſpende, & to ſtaie their Decrees in this ſorte: Videtur nobis
iuſtum,Concil Chalced. Actio. 1. pag. 831. Euag
                           •
                        i. li. 2. ca. 4. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . ſi placuerit Diuiniſſimo, & Pijſſimo Domino noſtro: Vnto vs it ſeemeth
right, if it ſhal alſo like our moſte vertuous, and moſte Godly Lorde (the Emperoure). In the
ende, thei conclude thus:
                      Omnibus, quae acta ſunt, ad Sacrum Apicem referendis:
So that al our dooinges be remitted to the Emperoures Maieſtie. Al whiche woordes
are borowed, as the recte, out of the
                      Eccleſiaſtical ſtorie of Euagrius.
                  Yee ſaie, luuenalis, and Thalaſſius might wel haue a rebuke, for ſittinge like Iudges
in the Seconde Councel of Epheſus, without Authoritie of the Pope. O M. Harding,
either yee are mutche deceiued, and prefume to ſpeake before yee knowe, whiche
were great folie: or els yee ſpeake directely againſt your knowledge, & Conſcience,
and willingely ſeeke to deceiue others: whiche were greate wickedneſſe. Verily, ye
might eaſily haue knowen, that theſe three Biſhoppes were condēned, not for intruding
vpon the Popes authoritie, as ye haue imagined, but onely for Condemninge
other Godly Biſhoppes, wickedly, and without cauſe. The woordes of the
Councel are plaine: Glorioſiſſimi Iudices dixerunt, Vos quidem primitùs docuiſtis,
quia per vim,
                     Concil. Chalcedonen. Action. 1. 
                     & neceſsitatem, in pura Charta Coacti eſtis ſubſcribere ad damnationem
Sanctae memoriae Flauiani. Orientales, &, qui cum ipſis erant. Reuerendiſsimi Epiſcopi,
clamauerunt, Omnes peccauimus: Omnes veniam poſtulamus: The moſte Nolſe
Iud 
                              〈◊〉
                            lande, yee haue here proued before vs, that yee were driuen by force, and violence,
in a 
                              ••
                           anke paper to ſubſcribe your names to the Condemnation of Flauianus of godly memorie.
The Biſhoppes of the Eaſte, and other Reuerende Biſhoppes, that were with them,
cried out, VVe haue al offended: VVe al deſire pardōne. This in dede was theire
faulte, M. Hardinge: Al that you imagine of vſurpinge the Popes Authoritie, is
but a fanſie. For the Popes Huge, and Vniuerſal Authoritie, whereby nowe he
clamen
                        •
                     a the whole Iuriſdiction of al the worlde, at that time was not knowen.
                  
                     The ſame Councel of Chalcedon maketh him Equal in Authoritie, and Dignitie
with the Biſhop of Conſtantinople.Concil. Chalced. 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      
                     The woordes be theſe: Sedi Senioris
Romae, propter Imperium Ciuitatis illius, Patres conſequenter Priuilegia reddiderunt.
Et cadem intentione permoti Centum quinquaginta Deo amantiſsimi Epiſcopi,
aequa Sanctiſſimae Sedi Nouae Romae Priuilegia tribuerunt: rationabiliter
iudicantes, Imperio, & Senatu Vrbem Ornatam, aequis Senioris Regiae Romae Priuiulegijs
frui, & in Eccleſiaſticis, ſicut illa, Maieſtatem habere negotijs: Vnto the
See of the Olde Rome, in conſideration of the Empiere of that Cittie, Our Fathers haue accordingly
geeuen Priuileges. And vpon like conſideration, the hundred and fiftie godly Biſhoppes
haue geeuen equal, and like Priuileges to the Cittie of Nevve Rome:
(whereby is meante the Cittie of Conſtantinople): For that thei thought it reaſonable,
that the ſame Cittie of Conſtantinople, being nowe adourned with Empiere and
Senate, ſhoulde alſo alſo haue Priuileges, Equal vvith Rome the Elder: and haue
the ſame Maieſtie, and Authoritie in Eccleſiaſtical affaires, that Rome hathe.
                  Thus, yee ſee, your Pope had not then a Power Peereleſſe ouer al the Worlde:
but was made Like, and Euen, and Equal in al reſpectes to one of his Brethren.

Therefore, if the Biſhop of Rome were the Heade of the Churche, then was the
Biſhop of Conſtantinople likewiſe y• 
                     Heade of the Churche. And if the Biſhop of
Romes Povver vvere Vniuerſal, then was the Biſhop of Conſtantinoples Povver
Vniuerſal, as wel as his. For the Councel alloweth as mutche Eccleſiaſtical
Authoritie to the one Biſhop, as to the other.
                  Nowe, ſhortely to conſider the whole ſubſtance of your talke, Firſte, yee ſaie,
Theſe three Biſhoppes, Dioſcorus, Iuuenalis, and Thalaſsius were neuer condemned in
the Councel of Chalcedon:
                      This, yée ſée, is One Vntruthe. Secondely, yée ſaie,
The Ciuile Magiſtrate neuer condemned them. This is an Other Vntruthe. Thirdely,
yée ſaie, Iuuenalis, and Thalaſsius were rebuked for ſitting as Iudges in Councel without
the Popes Authoritie. Theſe are tvvoo other Vntruthes. For neither had
the Pope any ſutche Prerogatiue at that time, nor was this the Cauſe of theire
Condemnation. And yet, as if ye woulde renne vs ouer with terroure of woordes,
yée crie out with a courrage, vvhat is Impudencie, what is Licenceous Lieing, what
is deceitful dealinge, if this be not?
                  
                  Touchinge theſe firy termes, M. Hardinge, I dare not Anſweare you. But, as
for Plaine lieinge, without a difference, if ye knowe not, what it is, looke through
your owne Bookes: & ye cannot faile of it. Verily, it is, to publiſhe Vntruthes ſo
largely, & ſo liberally, as you haue donne, onely vpon affiance of the ſimplicitie, &
ignorance of your Reader, without regarde, or feare, of God, or Man.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 2.
               In the Chirde Councel at Conſtantinople, Conſtantine a Ciuile
Magiſtrate, did not onely ſitte amongeſt the Biſhoppes, but did
alſo Subſcribe with them. For, ſaithe he, VVe haue bothe readde, &
Subſcribed.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The ſubſcribing is not the matter, but the iudginge. Conſtantine ſubſcribed to the Councel, as now
al Chriſten Princes, beinge required, ought to ſubſcribe to the Tridentine Councel.A Vaine Diſtinction. But Conſtantine
vſed not this ſtile, when he ſubſcribed, Definiens ſubſcripſi, I haue ſubſcribed with geuing definittiue
ſentence.Vntruthe manifeſte. Reade the Anſvveare. For ſo to ſubſcribe, it apperteined onely to Biſhops.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 3.
               
                  In the Seconde Councel called Arauſi canum, the Princes Embaſſadours,
beinge Noble Men borne, not onely ſpake their minde,
touchinge Religion, but ſette to theire handes alſo, as wel as the Biſhoppes.
For thus it is written in the later ende of that Councel:
Petrus, Marcellinus, Felix, and Liberius, being Moſt Noble Men,
and famous Lieurenantes, & Captaines of Fraunce, & alſo Peeres
of the Realme, haue geuen their conſent, and ſer to their handes.
Further, Syagrius, Opilio, Pantagathus, Deodatus, Cariattho, and
Marcellus, menne of very greate honoure, haue Subſcribed.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  vvhat if al the laiemen of the worlde had ſubſcribed by the worde of conſenting, or agreeing to
the Biſhops decrees, eche one writinge thus, as in that caſe, the olde manner was, conſentiens ſubſcripſi?
VVhat other thinge is proued thereby, then that they thought it neceſſarie to allowe that,

whiche Biſhops had determined?The Temporal Magiſtrate Subſcribeth in coucel. VVhiche we wiſh ye woulde do.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 4.
               If it be ſo then, that Lieutenantes, Chiefe Captaines, and Peeres
haue had Authoritie to Subſcribe in councel, haue not Emperours,
and Kinges the like Authoritie
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Kinges, and Quenes, not onely might, but ought to ſubſcribe, when they are required.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Here, M. Hardinge, yée are driuen to many ſhiftes. Somme of you ſaie, that
Princes Embaſſadours, & Ciuile Magiſtrates had no right to Subſcribe in Councel,
but onely by licence, & ſufferance of the Biſhoppes. Somme others haue found
out a certaine difference in Subſcriptions. The Biſhop, yée ſaie, Subſcribed in one
Fourme, & the Ciuile Magiſtrate in an other: The Biſhop thus, Definiens Subſcripſi,
By geuing my Definitiue Sentence, I haue Subſcribed: The
                      Laie Magiſtrate thus,
Conſentiens Subſcripſi, Geuinge Conſente hereto, I haue Subſcribed. Thus haue you
found out a knotte in a ruſſhe: & diuiſed a
                      Diuerſitie without a Difference. Certainely
in the Olde councelles there appeareth onely one Fourme of Subſcriptions,
& no moe. And afterwarde theſe Two Woordes, Definiens, and Conſenriens,
wherein you imagine ſo greate a difference, were vſed indifferently, as wel
of Biſhoppes,Conſentiens Subſcripſi. Conci. Chalced. Actio. 1. Pa. 780. Conc. Pariſien. 1. 
                     as of others: as eche man was beſt affected. Sommetime the Biſhop
Subſcribed, Cōſentiens: Sommetime the Laieman Subſcribed, Definiens, without
ſeruple. In the Councel of Chalcedon it is written thus, Ego Dorotheus
Epiſcopus Conſenſi, & Subſcripſi: I Biſhop Dorothee haue Conſented, & Subſcribed.
Likewiſe it is written in the Councel of Pariſe, Ego Probianus Epiſcopus
Bituricēſis conſenſi, & Subſcripſi: I Probiane the Biſhop of Bourges haue
Conſented,Marius Victorinus Contra Arianos, Lib. 2. Definiens Subſcripſi. Euag. Li. 2. Ca. 4. Sozom li. 4. ca. 16 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Aeneas Syluiut de Geſtis Concil. Conſtantien. li. 1. and Subſcribed. Marius Victorinus ſaithe, Nicenae Fidei multa Epiſcoporum
milia Conſenſerunt: Many thouſande Biſhoppes Conſented vnto
the Nicene Faithe.
                  
                     Of the other ſide, the Laie Prince in Councel hath had Authoritie, not onely
to Conſente, and agrée vnto others, but alſo to Define, and Determine, and that
in Caſes of Religion, as by many euidente Examples it maie appeare. Euagrius
ſaithe, as it is before alleged, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : They, y•
were of y• Senate, or the Lordes of ye
                      Councel, Determined theſe thinges. Sozomenus
ſaithe, Imperator Conſtantinus iuſsit decem Epiſcopos Orientis, & totidem Occidentis,
quos Synodus deſignaſſer, ad Aulam ſuam venire, & ſibi exponere Decreta
Concilij: vt ipſe quoq
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      conſideraret, an ſecundum Scripturas inter ſe conueniſſent:
& de rebus agendis, quae optima viderentur, Determinaret: The Emperour
Conſtantine commaunded, that tenne Biſhoppes of the Eaſte, and tenne of the Weaſte,
choſen by the Councel, ſhoulde repaire to his Courte, and open vnto him the Decrees of
the Councel: that his Maieſtie might conſider, whether they were agreed accordinge to the
Scriptures: and that he might further, (not onely
                      Conſente, or agrée, but alſo) Determine,
and Conclude, what were beſte to be donne. Aeneas Syluius, whiche afterwarde
was Pope Pius. 2. ſaithe thus: Viſum eſt Spiritui Sancto, & nobis: vnde apparet,
alios, quàm Epiſcopos, in Concilijs habuiſſe vocem Decidentem: It ſeemeth good
to the Holy Ghoſte, and to vs. Hereby it appeareth, that ſomme other, biſide Biſhoppes,
had a voice Definitiue in Councelles. And againe he ſaithe, Nec ego cuiuſuis
Epiſcopi mendacium,Eodem Loco. quamuis ditiſsimi, Veritati praeponam Pauperis Preſbyteri.
Nec dedignari debet Epiſcopus, ſi aliquando ignarus, & rudis, ſequacem non habeat

multitudinē: Neither w
                           •
                        l I ſette more by any Biſhoppes lie, be he neuer ſo riche, then
I woulde ſette by any Prieſtes Truthe, be he neuer ſo poore. Neither more the ignorante,
and vnlearned Biſhop diſdeigne, if he ſee the people va willinge to folowe him.
                  
                  Gerſon ſaith, Iudicium, & Concluſio Fidei, licet Authoritatiue ſpectēt ad Praelatos,
& Doctores, ſpectare tamen poſſunt ad alios, quàm Theologos Deliberatio,
ſicut & Cognitio ſuper his, quae Fidem reſpiciunt. Ita, vt ad Laicos etiam hoc
poſsit extendi:Gerſon, Quae veritates ſint credendae. & plùs aliquando, quàm ad multos Clericorum: Notwithſtandinge
the Iudgemente, and Concluſion of Faithe belonge by Authoritie vnto Biſhoppes,
and Doctours, yet as wel the Deliberation hereof, as alſo the knovvledge,
and Iudgemente, concerninge maters, that touche the Faithe, maie belonge vnto others
too biſides the Diuines, or Doctoures, and Profeſſours of Diuinitie. Yea, it more ſommetimes
be extended euen vnto the Laiemenne: And more ſommetimes vnto them, then
vnto many Prieſtes.
                  
                     The Emperoure Iuſtinian in Eccleſiaſtical Cauſes, oftentimes vſeth theſe
woordes,
                     Authen Collaet. Tit. 6. Quomodo opor. Epiſcop. Definimus, Mandamus, lubemus, &c. Wee Determine, wee Conclude,
wee Commaunde, wee Bidde. Touchinge Biſhoppes, he writeth thus, Definimus,
vt nullus Deo amabilium Epiſcoporum foris a ſua Eccleſia, plus quàm per totum
annum abeſſe audeat: Wee Define, or Determine, that none of the Godly Biſhoppes
ſhal dare to be abſent from his Church, more then by the ſpace of one whole yeere.
Here, yée ſée, the
                      Temporal Prince, in an Eccleſiaſtical Cauſe ſaithe, Definimus.
To be ſhorte, Pope Nicolas him ſelfe ſaithe, writinge vnto the Emperoure Michael,
Vbinam legiſtis,Diſ 96. Vbinam. Imperatores Anteceſſores veſtros Synodalibus Contentionibus
interfuiſſe? Niſi fortè in quibuſdam, vbi de Fide tractatum eſt: quae Vniuerſalis
eſt: quae omnium Communis eſt: quae non ſolùm ad Clericos, verùm
etiam ad Laicos, & ad omnes omninò pertinet Chriſtianos: VVhere haue you
readde, that your Predeceſſours, being Emperours, were euer Preſent at our Diſputations
in Councelles? Onleſſe happily it vvere in certaine caſes, vvhereas mater vvas
moued touchinge the Faithe. For Faithe is Vniuerſal, and Common to al: and
perteineth not onely vnto Prieſtes, but alſo vnto Laiemen: and generally, and
thorovvly to al Chriſtians Thus yée ſee, M. Hardinge, by the Popes owne Iudgemente,
that Caſes, and Diſputations of the Faithe, belonge as wel to the Temporal
Prince, as to the Pope.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 5.
               Truely, there had benne no neede to handle ſo plaine a mater, as
this is, with ſo many woordes, & ſo at lengthe, if wee had not to doo
with thoſe menne, who for a deſire they haue to ſtriue, and to winne
the maiſterie, vſe of courſe to denie al thinges, be thei neuer ſo cleare,
yea, the very ſame, whiche they preſently ſee, and beholde with theire
owne eies.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The matter, ye speake of, is ſo cleare, that from the beginninge of the worlde to this daie,Vntruthe euident, as by ſundrie examples i
                           •
                         ſhal appeare. no ſecular
Prince can be named, who by the ordinary power of a Prince, without the gifte of prophecie, or
ſpecial reuelation, did laudably intermeddle with Religion, as a iudge and ruler of ſpiritual cauſes.
The reaſon thereof is cleare. Religion is an order of Diuine worſhippinge, belonginge to God onely:
whereupon no man hath power, but he that is called thereto by God. He is called in the iudgemente of
men, who can ſhewe his callinge out wardly, as by conſecration, and impoſition of handes. Prieſtes and
Biſhops are called to be the diſpenſatours of the myſteries of God.Mat. 16. & 18. In that conſecration the keies of
knowledge, and diſcretion, the power of blindinge and looſinge is geuen.O Vaine mao. VVhat pertein
                           •
                         theſe keies to General Councelles? For by them euery poore Prieſte hath as good right in Councel, as the Pope. If a ſecular Prince can
not ſhewe the keies geuen to him, howe dareth he aduenture to breake vp rather then to open

the claſped booke of God,The Prince maie deale in Eccleſiaſtical Cauſes. the dore of the Churche, and the gates of the Kingedome of heauen? VVherefore
S. Ambroſe ſaide vnto Valentinian. Quando audiuiſti, Imperator, in cauſa Fidei Laicos de
Epiſcopo iudicaſſe?
                     Li. 5. epiſ. 32 VVhen haſte thou hearde, Emperoure, Laymen to haue ben iudges of a Biſhop
in the cauſe of Faithe? And yet nowe theſe menne thinke, that whiche S. Ambroſe neuer hearde of, not
onely to haue ben vſed continually the firſte fiue hundred yeres after Chriſtes birthe, but alſo to be as
cleare a matter, as if we behelde it with our eies.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     The Temporal Prince, yée ſaie, hath not the Keies of the Kingdome of Heauen:
                      Ergo, he
maie not iudge in Eccleſiaſtical Cauſes, nor geeue Definitiue Sentence in General Councel.
This is a very ſely poore Argumente, M. Hardinge, as hereafter it ſhal appeare.
But S. Ambroſe ſaithe vnto the Emperoure Valentinian: When did your Maieſtie
euer heare, that in a Cauſe of Faithe, a Laiemenne were Iudges ouer Biſhoppes?
Here, M. Hardinge, by the waie, S. Amrboſe géeueth you to vnderſtande, that onleſſe
it be in a Cauſe of Faithe, a Laieman maie be Iudge ouer a Biſhop: whiche
thinge is contrarie,Parte 6. Cap. 9. Diui. 2. 
                     not onely to your Former Doctrine, but alſo to the whole
courſe, and practiſe of your Churche of Rome.
                  Howe be it, touchinge the meaning of theſe woordes, it behoueth vs to knowe,
Firſte the cauſe, wherefore S. Ambroſe ſo ſhunned, and fledde the Emperours
Iudgemente: Nexte, before what Iudges he deſired to be tried.
                  Firſt, the Emperoure Valentinian, at that time, was very yonge, as wel in
Age, as alſo in Faithe: He was not yet Baptized: He knewe not the Principles of
Chriſtes Religiō:
                     Ambroſ. Lib. 5. Epiſt. 33. Mandatur deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Trade Baſilicam. Allegatur, Imperatori licere omnia. He was an Arian Heretique, and beleued not the Godhedde of
Chriſte, but bent al his ſtudie, and power to mainteine the Arians: He woulde
haue thruſte out the Chriſtianes, & woulde haue poſſeſſed the Heretiques in theire
Churches: and to that ende had raiſed his Power, and filled Millaine ful of Souldiers:
He ſaide, It was lawful for him, to doo, what him liſted. Briefely, his whole dealinge
was ful of force, & violence, ſutche as hath benne ſéene in ſomme Countries,
not many yéeres ſithence.
                  
                     In conſideration hereof,
                     Ambroſ. Li 5. Epiſt 32. Ad Valentinian. Lib. 5. Epiſt. 33. 
                     S. Ambroſe woorthily refuſed him to be his Iudge.
And therefore he ſaide vnto him, Tolle Legem, ſi vis eſſe Cerramen: Take awaie
the rigoure of your Lavve, if ye wil haue the mater tried by Diſputation. Againe,
                      Noli te
grauare, Imperator, vt putes te in ea, quae Diuina ſunt, Imperiale aliquod ius
habere: Noli te extollere: Eſto Deo ſubiectus. Scriptum eſt, quae Dei, Deo: quae
Caeſaris, Caeſari: O my Lorde, trouble not your ſelfe, to thinke, you haue any Princely Power
ouer thoſe thinges, that perteine to God. Ʋaunte not your ſelfe: be ſubiecte vnto God. It is
written, Geue vnto God, that belongeth vnto God: Geue vnto Caeſar, that belongeth
vnto Caeſar.
                  
                     But, as S. Ambroſe ſaithe, The Emperoure hathe no Povver ouer Goddes
cauſes, ſo maie wee likewiſe, and as truely ſaie, The Pope hathe no Povver ouer
Goddes cauſes. S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Siquidem eſt in Cauſa Fidei, fuge illum,
& euita:Chryſoſt. ad Hebrae. Homil. 34. non ſolùm ſi homo fuerit, verùm etiam ſi Angelus de Coelo deſcenderit: If it be
a Mater of Faith, (wherein he ſéeketh to abuſe thée) flee him, and ſhunne him: not onely,
if he be a man, but alſo if an
                      Angel ſhould comme down from Heauen. Thus it appeareth,
S.
                      Ambroſe refuſed not the Emperours Povver, and Authoritie of Iudgemente
in Caſes Eccleſiaſtical, but onely his wilful Ignorance, & his Tyrannie: For that
he knewe,
                     Ambroſ. Lib. 5. Epiſt. 32. Dicentes, de Pide in Eccleſia coram populo debere trae
                           •
                        tari. 
                     his Iudgemente was corrupted, and not indifferente.
                  
                  
                     And for that cauſe he ſaithe, Veniſſem, Imperator, ad Conſiſtorium Clementiae
tuae, &c.
                      O my Lorde, I woulde haue made mine appearance at your Conſiſtorie, to haue
vttered theſe thinges in your Preſence, if either the Biſhoppes, or the People woulde haue
ſuffered me. For thei tolde me, that Maters of Faith ought to be diſputed in the Churche

openly before the people. Againe he ſaithe, Veniant ſanè, ſi qui ſunt, in Eccleſiam:
Audiant cum Populo: nō, vt quiſquā reſideat Iudex, ſed vt vnuſquiſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            de
ſuo affectu habeat examen, & eligat, quem ſequatur:
                      Let them hardely comme to the
Churche: let them hearken togeather with ye People: not that any man ſhould ſitte as Iudge:
but y• euery man mai after his own minde examine the mater, & ſo chuſe, whom he maie folow.
Of ſutche Tyrannie in Councelles Athanaſius likewiſe complaineth:
                     In Eadem Epiſto. Athanaſ. Apolo. 2. Poteramus. 
                     Quo iure cō
                        tra
nos Synodum vllam conſtituere potuerunt? Aut qua fronte talem Conuentum Synodum
appellare audent, cui Comes Praeſedit? Vbi Spiculator apparebat? Vbi Commentarienſis,
ſiue Carcerarius pro Diaconis Eccleſiae aduentantes introducebat? Comes
imperio vtebatur: Nos à Militibus ducebamur: By what Lawe coulde they keepe a
Councel againſte vs? Or with what face coulde they calle ſutche an Aſsemblie by the name
of a Councel? Where as the Lorde Lieutenante was Preſidente? Where the Hangeman
was Apparitoure? Where the Iailer preſented the ſuiters in ſteede of the Deacons of the
Churche? The Lieutenante did al thinges by Authoritie and Commaundement: VVee were
taken by the Souldiers, and carried to Priſon.
                  
                     Therefore he ſaithe, Fiat Eccleſiaſtica Synodus longè à Palatio: vbi nec Imperator
praeſto eſt:Athanaſ. Ad Solitariam vitam agentes. Has Literas. nec comes ſe ingerit: nec Iudex minatur: & vbi Solus Timor
Dei ad omnia ſufficit, &c. Let there be made an Eccleſiaſtical Synode, far from the
Emperours Palaice: where as neither the Emperoure is Preſent: nor the Lieutenante
thruſteth in him ſelfe: nor the Iudge with his threates maketh menne afraide: but where as the
feare of God to al pourpoſes is ſufficiente. For this cauſe S.
                      Ambroſe refuſed to be tried
by the Emperoure Valentinian: That is to ſaie, as then it was, by a raſshe yong
man: by a man Vnbaptized, and therefore no Chriſtian: by a Tyranne: and by an
Arian Heretique, that vtterly denied the Godhedde of Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     Otherwiſe Athanaſius him ſelfe was wel contented to committe his whole cauſe
vnto the Emperoure. For thus he ſaithe, Poſtulamus, cauſam iſtam Pientiſſimo
Imperatori reſeruari:
                     
                     Athanaſ. Apol. 2. Cùm multas. 
                     apud quem licebit, & iura Eccleſiae, & noſtra proponere. Planè
enim confidimus, eius Pietatem, cognitis noſtris rationibus, nequaquam nos coudemnaturam
eſſe: VVee require, that the Emperoures moſte godly, and moſte Religious
Maieſtie maie haue the hearinge of the ſame mater: Before whom we maie open bothe our
Churches Right, and alſo our owne. For wee haue good hope, that his Godlineſse,
vnderſtandinge our Reaſons, wil neuer condemne vs.
                  
                     Likewiſe S. Auguſtine ſaithe vnto the Donatian Hereriques, An fortè
de Religione fas non eſt,Auguſti. contra Epiſt. Parme
                        
                           •
                        iani. Lib. 1. vt dicat Imperator, vel quos miſerit Imperator? Our
ergo ad Imperatorem veſtri venere legati? Cur eum fecerunt Cauſae ſuae Iudicem?
Is it not lawful, for the Emperoure, or his Deputee, to geue Sentence in a
mater of Religion? VVherefore then went your Embaſsadours to the Emperoure?
Why made they him the Iudge of their cauſe?
                  
                  Thus, M. Hardinge, it appeareth, that you, in defraudinge Emperours,
and Kinges of theire Emperial, and Princely Right, are faine to take parte
with the Donatian Heretiques.
                  
                  As for vs, wée claime no other right in Eccleſiaſtical Cauſes vnto our Chriſtian
Princes this daie, then that maie wel appeare, hathe benne iuſtely vſed,
bothe by Conſtantinus the Emperoure, and alſo by other Catholique, and Godly
Princes.
                  
                  
                     The Emperoure Theodoſius wrote thus vnto the Councel of Chalcedon:
Quoniam ſcimus,Liberatus. Ca. 1
                           •
                        . Magnificentiſsimum Florentium Patritium eſſe Fidelem, & probatum
in Recta Fide, volumus eum intereſſe audientiae Synodi: quoniam ſermo
de Fide eſt: For that wee knowe, the moſte Noble Florentius to be faitheful, and wel

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
approued in the Right Faithe, therefore wee wil, that he be preſente at the hearing, and debatinge
of Caſes in the Councel: for as mutche as the Diſputation is of the Faithe.
                  
                     For Pope Nicolas himſelfe ſaithe, as it is alleged before, Fides Vniuerſalis
eſt: Fides omnium Communis eſt: Fides nō ſolùm ad Clericos, verùm etiam ad
Laicos,Diſ. 96. Vbinam. & ad omnes omninò pertinet Chriſtianos:Heſpeaketh of queſtions of Faith moued in Coū
                        celles. Faithe is Vniuerſal: Faithe
is common to al: Faithe perteineth, not onely vnto Prieſtes, but alſo vnto Laiemenne, and
generally to al Chriſtians.
                  
                     As touching the Pope, and his Vniuerſalitie of Povver, in, and ouer al
Councelles of Biſhoppes, wée maie rightly ſaie, as Athanaſius ſaithe of Conſtantius
the Arian Emperoure, Obtendit in ſpeciem Epiſcoporum Iudicium:
ſed interim facit,Athanaſ. Ad Solitariam Vitam agentes. quod ipſi libet. Quid opus eſt Hominibus Titulo Epiſcopis?
He maketh a ſhew of Iudgementes, or Determinations of Biſhoppes: In the meane
while he doothe, what he liſteth him ſelfe. VVhat are wee the neare for theſe menne, that
beare onely the name of Biſhoppes? Sutche commonly be the Popes Prelates.
What ſo euer Learninge they haue biſides, Diuinitie is commonly the leaſt parte
of theire ſtudie. And therefore, when they are aſſembled in Councel, they maie
wel iudge by Authoritie, but not by Learninge.
                  
                     Verily,
                     Luitprandus. Luitprandus ſaithe, Imperator, vti experientia didicimus, intelligit negotia
Dei, & facit, & amat ea: & tuetur omnibus viribus, & Eccleſiaſticas res, & Ciuiles.
Sed Iohannes Papa facit contra haec omnia: Wee ſee by experience, that
the Emperoure vnderſtandeth Goddes cauſes,Iohan. 13. 
                     and fauoureth, and perfourmeth the
ſame: and with al his Power mainteineth bothe Eccleſiaſtical, and Temporal maters.
But Pope Iohn dooth al the contrarie.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 6.
               The Emperoure Iuſtinian made a Lawe to correcte the behaueour
of the Cleregie, & to cutte ſhorte the inſolente Iewdeneſſe of the
Prieſtes. And, albeit hee were a Chriſtian, and a Catholique Prince,
yet putte hee downe from theire Papal Throne, twoo Popes, Syluerius,
and Vigilius, notwithſtandinge they were Peters Succeſſours,
and Chriſtes Vicars.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Iuſtinians lawe concerninge good order to be kepte amonge Priſtes morally was good, and bound
them by the force of reaſon. If he made any other Lawe touchinge matters of Religion, Pope Ioannes
then beinge, approued it, or at the leſte, IuſtianianVntruthe. For he did but conferre vvith the Pope, touching his Lavves. Touchinge the aſkinge of allovvance, ther appeareth nothinge. aſked approbation thereof,Vntruthe. For he did but conferre vvith the Pope, touching his Lavves. Touchinge the aſkinge of allovvance, ther appeareth nothinge. as it maie appeare
in his owne Epiſtle, wherein he confeſſeth in the facte it ſelfe, that his Lawes could not binde
in ſupernatural cauſes belonginge to faithe, except the heade of the Vniuerſal Churche confirme them.
Syluerius and Vigilius were depoſed rather by Theodora the Empereſſe, then by Iuſtinian the Emperoure.
Vntruthe. For it vvas not tyrannie, but iuſte Iudgemente. And Iuſtinian gaue Baliſarius greate thankes for ſo dooinge. Ye do wronge to impute that wicked tyrannie vnto him.Vntruthe. For it vvas no tyrannie, but iuſte Iudgemente. And Iuſtinian gaue Baliſarius greate thankes for ſo dooinge. He is not to be burthened
there with, onleſſe the man be countable for his wiues iniquities.
                  Howe ſo euer it was, that extraordinary violence and tyrannie can not iuſtly be alleaged to the
defence of your falſe aſſertion. Neither woulde your ſelfe haue mentioned the ſame, if ye coulde
haue founde better matter. As hungrie Dogges eate durty puddinges, accordinge to the prouerbe,
cleane yenough for ſutche vncleane writers, ſo your fowle matters be defended by fowle
factes.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Iuſtinian, yée ſaie, might wel make ſomme Moral Lawe, to keepe Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes in
good order. Wherein neuertheleſſe Pope Paule.
                      3. condemneth you vtterly: For
thus he writeth, and reaſoneth ſubſtantially againſt the Emperoure Charles the
Fifthe:
                     
                     Ezechiel. 34. Paulus 3. in Epiſtola ad Carol. 5. 
                     Ecce ego ſuper Paſtores meos: Beholde, ſaithe Almighty God, I mee ſelfe
wil ouerſee my Sheepheardes: Ergo, ſaithe Pope Paulus, The Emperoure maie not deale
with the manners of Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes.
                  How be it, the Emperours made Lavves, Touchinge the Holy Trinitie:
Touchinge the Faithe: Touchinge Baptiſme: Touchinge the Holy Communion:
Touchinge the Publique Praiers: Touchinge the Scriptures: Touchinge the
keepinge of Holy daies: Touchinge Churches, & Chaples: Touchinge the Conſecration
of Biſhoppes: Touchinge Non Reſidences: Touchinge Periurie, &c.
It were mutche for you, M. Hardinge, to ſaie, as nowe yée woulde ſéeme to ſaie,
Al theſe were Moral Lawes,
                     Cod. De Sacroſanct. Eccleſijs. Omni innouaetione. 
                     and perteined onely to good order. But the Pope, yee ſaie,
allowed the Emperours Eccleſiaſtical Lawes: Otherwiſe, of the Emperours owne Authoritie, they
had no force. The truthe hereof, by the Particulares, maie ſoone appeare.
                  By one of the Emperours Lavves it is prouided, That the Biſhop of Conſtantinople
ſhal haue Equal Povver,
                     
                     Liberatus, Ca. 13. Imperatoris Patrocinio. 
                     and Prerogatiue with the Biſhop of Rome.
This Lavve the Pope coulde neuer brooke. And yet that notwithſtandinge, Liberatus
ſaithe, It holdeth ſtil by the Emperours Authoritie, whether the Pope
wil, or no:Cod. De Sacroſanct. Eccleſiis. Omni innouatione. Againe, it is prouided in the ſame Lavve, that the Churches of Illyricum,
in their doubteful caſes, ſhal appeale to Conſtantinople, & not to Rome:
                  
                  
                     The Emperoure Conſtantine ſaithe, If the Biſhop moue trouble (by Doctrine,
or otherwiſe,) by my hande he ſhalbe pouniſhed: For my hande is the hande of Goddes
Miniſter:Theodoret. Li. 1. Cap. 20. Miniſtri Dei, hoc eſt, meae manis, coercebitur.
                  
                  
                     Iuſtinian the Emperoure in his Lavve commaundeth,
                      That the Prieſte, or Biſhop
in pronouncinge the Publique Praiers, and in the Miniſtration of the Sacramentes, lifte
vp his voice, and ſpeake alowde, that the people maie ſaie, Amen, and be ſturred to more
Deuotion: Againe, he ſaithe, as it is noted in the Gloſe vpon the Authentiques,
Papa Temporalibus immiſcere ſe non debet:
                     
                     Authen. Titul. 123. The Pope maie not intermeddle with Temporal
Cauſes:
                  
                     In the ſame Lawes,
                     Authen. Colla. 1. Quomodo oporteat Epiſcopos. 
                     the ſame Emperoure Iuſtinian ſaithe, Wee Commounde
the moſte Holy Archebiſhoppes, and Patriarkes, of Rome, of Conſtantinople, of Alexandria,
of Antioche, and of Hieruſalem: The ſame Emperoure Iuſtinian commaundeth,
That al Monkes,Authen. Colla. 9. Titu. 15. De Sanctiſs. Epiſcopis. Iubemus Beatiſsimos Archiepiſcopos, Senioris Romae, &c. either be driuen to ſtudie the Scriptures, or els be forced to Bodily
Laboure: Carolus Magnus made a Lavve, That nothinge ſhoulde be readde openly
in the Churche, ſauinge onely the Canonical Bookes of the Holy Scriptures: And that the
Faitheful People ſhoulde receiue the Holy Communion euery Sonnedaie. I leaue the rehearſal
of infinite other like Examples.
                  
                  Nowe, M. Hardinge, wil you ſaie, or maie wee beleue, that al theſe, and other
like Lavves were allowed by the Pope?
                  
                  
                     In déede your Gloſer ſaithe,
                     Authen. Tit. 133. Anſigiſus Lib. 1. Cap. 19. 
                     Ad quid intromittit ſe Imperator de Spiritualibus, vel
Eccleſiaſticis, cùm ſciat ad ſe non pertinere? VVherefore doothe the Emperoure thus buſie
him ſelfe with theſe Spiritual, or Eccleſiaſtical maters, ſeeinge he knoweth, they are no parte
of his Charge?Carolus Magnus Lib. 6. Cap. 162. Authen. Colla. 1. Titu. 6. Quomodo oporteat. 
                     To ſo profounde a queſtion, after a longe ſolemne ſtudie, he diuiſeth
this anſweare: Dic, quòd Authoritate Papae hoc facit:
                      Scie thou, that he doothe it
by the Popes Authoritie: And then the whole mater is diſcharged, and al is wel.
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge, ſomme likelihoode hereof yee would ſeeme to geather, euen
out of Iuſtinians owne woordes.Gloſſ. in verbu
                           •
                         Sancimus. For thus he ſaithe vnto the Pope, although far
otherwiſe, then you haue forced him to ſaie: Omnia, quae ad Eccleſiarum ſtatum pertinent,
                     
approued in the Right Faithe,
                     The Prince maie deale in Eccleſiaſtical Cauſes. therefore wee wil, that he be preſente at the hearing, and debatinge
of Caſes in the Councel: for as mutche as the Diſputation is of the Faithe.
                  
                  
                     For Pope Nicolas him ſelfe ſaithe, as it is alleged before, Fides Vniuerſalis
eſt: Fides omnium Communis eſt: Fides nō ſolùm ad Clericos, verùm etiam ad
Laicos,Diſ. 96 Vbinam. & ad omnes omninò pertinet Chriſtianos:He ſpeaketh of queſtions of Faith moued in Coū
                        celles. Faithe is Vniuerſal: Faithe
is common to al: Faithe perteineth, not onely vnto Prieſtes, but alſo vnto Laiemenne, and
generally to al Chriſtians.
                  
                     As touchinge the Pope, and his Vniuerſalitie of Povver, in, and ouer al
Councelles of Biſhoppes, wée maie rightly ſaie, as Athanaſius ſaithe of Conſtantius
the Arian Emperoure, Obtendit in ſpeciem Epiſcoporum Iudicium:
ſed interim facit, quod ipſi libet. Quid opus eſt Hominibus Titulo Epiſcopis?
He maketh a ſhew of Iudgementes,Athanaſ. Ad Solitariam Vitam agentes. 
                     or Determinations of Biſhoppes: In the meane
while he doothe, what he liſteth him ſelfe. VVhat are wee the neare for theſe menne, that
beare onely the name of Biſhoppes? Sutche commonly be the Popes Prelates.
What ſo euer Learninge they haue biſides, Diuinitie is commonly the leaſt parte
of theire ſtudie. And therefore, when they are aſſembled in Councel, they maie
wel iudge by Authoritie, but not by Learninge.
                  
                     Verily,
                     Luitprandus. Luitprandus ſaithe, Imperator, vti experientia didicimus, intelligit negotia
Dei, & facit, & amat ea: & tuetur omnibus viribus, & Eccleſiaſticas res, & Ciuiles.
Sed Iohannes Papa facit contra haec omnia: Wee ſee by experience, that
the Emperoure vnderſtandeth Goddes cauſes,Iohan. 13. 
                     and fauoureth, and perfourmeth the
ſame: and with al his power mainteineth bothe Eccleſiaſtical, and Temporal maters.
But Pope Iohn dooth al the contrarie.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 14. Diuiſion. 6.
               The Emperoure Iuſtinian made a Lawe to correcte the behaueour
of the Cleregie, & to cutte ſhorte the inſolente lewdeneſſe of the
Prieſtes. And, albeit hee were a Chriſtian, and a Catholique Prince,
yet putte hee downe from theire Papal Throne, twoo Popes, Syluerius,
and Vigilius, notwithſtandinge they were Peters Succeſſours,
and Chriſtes Vicars.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Iuſtinians lawe concerninge good order to be kepte amonge Prieſtes morally was good, and bound
them by the force of reaſon. If he made any other Lawe touchinge matters of Religion, Pope Ioannes
then beinge, approued it, or at the leſte, IuſtinianVntruthe. For he did but conferre vvith the Pope, touching his Lavves. Touchinge the aſkinge of allovvance, ther appeareth nothinge. aſked approbation thereof,Vntruthe. For he did but conferre vvith the Pope, touching his Lavves. Touchinge the aſkinge of allovvance, ther appeareth nothinge. as it maie appeare
in his owne Epiſtle, wherein he confeſſeth in the facte it ſelfe, that his Lawes coulde not binde
in ſupernatural cauſes belonginge to faithe, except the heade of the Vniuerſal Churche confirme them.
Syluerius and Vigilius were depoſed rather by Theodora the Empereſſe, then by Iuſtinian the Emperoure.
Vntruthe. For it vvas no tyrannie, but iuſte Iudgement. And Iuſtinian gaue Beliſarius greate thankes for ſo dooinge. Ye do wronge to impute that wicked tyrannie vnto him.Vntruthe. For it vvas no tyrannie, but iuſte Iudgement. And Iuſtinian gaue Beliſarius greate thankes for ſo dooinge. He is not to be burthened
there with, onleſſe the man be countable for his wiues iniquities.
                  Howe ſo euer it was, that extraordinary violence and tyrannie can not iuſtly be alleaged to the
defence of your falſe aſſertion. Neither woulde your ſelfe haue mentioned the ſame, if ye coulde
haue founde better matter. As hungrie Dogges eate durty puddinges, accordinge to the prouerbe,
cleane yenough for ſutche vncleane writers, ſo your fowle matters be defended by fowle
factes.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Iuſtinian,
                     The Prince maie deale in Eccleſiaſtical cauſes. 
                     yée ſaie, might wel make ſomme Moral Lawe, to keepe Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes in
good order. Wherein neuertheleſſe Pope Paule.
                      3. condemneth you vtterly: For
thus he writeth, and reaſoneth ſubſtantially againſt the Emperoure Charles the
Fifthe:
                     
                     Ezechiel. 34. Paulus 3. in Epiſtola ad Carol. 5. 
                     Ecce ego ſuper Paſtores meos: Beholde, ſaithe Almighty God, I mee ſelfe
wil ouerſee my Sheepheardes: Ergo, ſaithe Pope Paulus, The Emperoure maie not deale
with the manners of Prieſtes, and Biſhoppes.
                  How be it, the Emperours made Lavves, Touchinge the Holy Trinitie:
Touchinge the Faithe: Touchinge Baptiſme: Touchinge the Holy Communion:
Touchinge the Publique Praiers: Touchinge the Scriptures: Touchinge the
keepinge of Holy daies: Touchinge Churches, & Chaples: Touchinge the Conſecration
of Biſhoppes: Touchinge Non Reſidences: Touchinge Periurie, &c.
It were mutche for you, M. Hardinge, to ſaie, as nowe yée woulde ſéeme to ſaie,
Al theſe were Moral Lawes,
                     Cod. De Sacroſanct. Eccleſijs. Omni innouaetione. 
                     and perteined onely to good order. But the Pope, yee ſaie,
allowed the Emperours Eccleſiaſtical Lawes: Otherwiſe, of the Emperours owne Authoritie, they
had no force. The truthe hereof, by the Particulares, maie ſoone appeare.
                  By one of the Emperours Lavves it is prouided, That the Biſhop of Conſtantinople
ſhal haue Equal Povver,
                     
                     Liberatus, Ca. 13. Imperatoris Patrocinio. 
                     and Prerogatiue with the Biſhop of Rome.
This Lavve the Pope coulde neuer brooke. And yet that notwithſtandinge, Liberatus
ſaithe, It holdeth ſtil by the Emperours Authoritie, whether the Pope
wil, or no:Cod. De Sacroſanct. Eccleſiis. Omni innouatione. Againe, it is prouided in the ſame Lavve, that the Churches of Illyricum,
in their doubteful caſes, ſhal appeale to Conſtantinople, & not to Rome:
                  
                  
                     The Emperoure Conſtantine ſaithe, If the Biſhop moue trouble (by Doctrine,
or otherwiſe,) by my hande he ſhalbe pouniſhed: For my hande is the hande of Goddes
Miniſter:Theodoret. Li. 1. Cap. 20. Miniſtri Dei, hoc eſt, mea manis, coercebitur.
                  
                  
                     Iuſtinian the Emperoure in his Lavve commaundeth,
                      That the Prieſte, or Biſhop
in pronouncinge the Publique Praiers, and in the Miniſtration of the Sacramentes, lifte
vp his voice, and ſpeake alowde, that the people maie ſaie, Amen, and be ſturred to more
Deuotion: Againe, he ſaithe, as it is noted in the Gloſe vpon the Authentiques,
Papa Temporalibus immiſcere ſe non debet:
                     
                     Authen. Titul. 123. The Pope maie not intermeddle with Temporal
Cauſes:
                  
                     In the ſame Lawes,
                     Authen. Colla. 1. Quomodo oporteat Epiſcopos. 
                     the ſame Emperoure Iuſtinian ſaithe, Wee Commounde
the moſte Holy Archebiſhoppes, and Patriarkes, of Rome, of Conſtantinople, of Alexandria,
of Antioche, and of Hieruſalem: The ſame Emperoure Iuſtinian commaundeth,
That al Monkes,Authen. Colla. 9. Titu. 15. De Sanctiſs. Epiſcopis. Iubemus Beatiſsimos Archiepiſcopos, Senioris Romae, &c. either be driuen to ſtudie the Scriptures, or els be forced to Bodily
Laboure: Carolus Magnus made a Lavve, That nothinge ſhoulde be readde openly
in the Churche, ſauinge onely the Canonical Bookes of the Holy Scriptures: And that the
Faitheful People ſhoulde receiue the Holy Communion euery Sonnedaie. I leaue the rehearſal
of infinite other like Examples.
                  
                  Nowe, M. Hardinge, wil you ſaie, or maie wee beleue, that al theſe, and other
like Lavves were allowed by the Pope?
                  
                  
                     In déede your Gloſer ſaithe,
                     Authen. Tit. 133. Anſigiſus Lib. 1. Cap. 19. 
                     Ad quid intromittit ſe Imperator de Spiritualibus, vel
Eccleſiaſticis, cùm ſciat ad ſe non pertinere? VVherefore doothe the Emperoure thus buſie
him ſelfe with theſe Spiritual, or Eccleſiaſtical maters, ſeeinge he knoweth, they are no parte
of his Charge?Carolus Magnus Lib. 6. Cap. 162. Authen. Colla. 1. Titu. 6. Quomodo oporteat. 
                     To ſo profounde a queſtion, after a longe ſolemne ſtudie, he diuiſeth
this anſweare: Dic, quòd Authoritate Papae hoc facit:
                      Scie thou, that he doothe it
by the Popes Authoritie: And then the whole mater is diſcharged, and al is wel.
                  
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge, ſomme likelihoode hereof yee would ſeeme to geather, euen
out of Iuſtinians owne woordes.Gloſſ. in verbu
                              •
                            Sanc
                              •
                           mus. For thus he ſaithe vnto the Pope, although far
otherwiſe, then you haue forced him to ſaie: Omnia, quae ad Eccleſiarum ſtatum pertinent,

feſtinauimus ad notitiam deferre Veſtrae Sanctitatis. Neceſſarium ducimus, vt
ad notitiam Veſtrae Sanctitatis peruenirent. Nec enim patimur, quicquam, quod ad
Eccleſiarum Statum pertinet, vt non etiam Veſtrae innoteſcat Sanctitati: quae Caput
eſt omnium Sanctarum Eccleſiarum:
                      What ſo euer thinges perteine to the ſtate of
the Churches,Cod. De Summa Trinita. & Fide Catho. Inter Claras. wee haue ſpedily brought to the knowledge of your Holineſſe. VVee thought
it neceſſarie, that your Holineſse ſhould haue knowledge thereof. VVe ſuffer not any thing,
that concerneth the State of the Churches, but it be brought to the knowledge of your
Holineſſe: whiche is the Heade, or Chiefe of al the Holy Churches.
                  
                  The Emperoure willeth the Pope, to take knowledge of his Lavves, for that
he was the Chiefe of the Foure Principal Patriarkes, and, in reſpecte of his See,
the greateſt Biſhop of al the Worlde: for whiche cauſe alſo he calleth him, the
Heade,
                     Cod. De Veteri Iure Enucleando. Chryſoſtom. ad Romanos. Homi. 18. 
                     or Chiefe of al Churches. So Iuſtinian ſaithe, Roma eſt Caput Orbis
Terrarum: Rome is the Heade of al the VVorlde.
                      So S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
Caput Prophetarum Elias: Elias, the Heade of the Prophetes.
                      So ſaithe Prudentius,
Sancta Bethlem Caput eſt Orbis: The Holy towne of Bethlem is the Heade
of the VVorlde.
                     
                  
                  
                     So Nazianzene calleth S. Baſile,Prudentius in Enchiridio. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Oculum Orbis
Terrarum: The Eie of al the Earthe. So
                      Iuſtinian calleth the Biſhop of Conſtantinople,
an Vniuerſal Patriarke:Nazianzenus in Epiſt. ad Baſili. Epiphanio Vniuerſali Patriarchae.
                  Theſe, and other like woordes, paſſe oftentimes in fauoure, as Titles of Honoure.
But they importe not alwaies that Vniuerſal Gouernemente,
                     Authen. Colla. 1. Vt determinatus. or Infinite
Authoritie, that the Pope ſithence hath imagined. But, touchinge the Confirmation,
and allowance of the Emperours Lavves, in theſe woordes of Iuſtinian
yee finde nothinge: Onleſſe yee wil ſaie, Notitia, is Latine for, Allovvance: or,
Peruenire, is Latine to Confirme.
                  
                  
                     The Emperours pourpoſe was, as it plainely appeareth by his woordes, by
theſe, & al other meanes, to bringe the See of Rome into credite. For thus he ſaith,
Properamus,Cod. De ſumma Trinita. & Fide Cath. Inter Claras. Honorem, & Authoritatem Creſcere Sedis Veſtrae: Omnes Sacerdotes
Vniuerſi Orientalis Tractus, & ſubijcere, & vnire Sedi Veſtrae Sanctitatis properauimus.
Plus ita Veſtrae Sedis creſcer Authoritas: VVe laboure, to auance the Honoure, and
Authoritie of your See: VVee laboure to ſubdewe, and to ioine al the Prieſtes of ye Eaſte Parte
vnto the See of your Holineſſe. Thus ſhal the Authoritie of your See the more encreaſe.
                  
                  Notwithſtandinge,Gregor. Haloander, Et Azo. it is noted by the Learned of your owne ſide, that theſe
Epiſtles bitweene the Emperoure, & the Pope, in the Oldeſt Allovved Bookes
are not founde: and therefore are ſuſpected to ſauoure of ſomme Romaine forgerie.
Hereby it is eaſy to vnderſtande, that vntil the time of the Emperoure Iuſtinian,
which was welneare ſix hundred yeeres after Chriſte, the Biſhoppes of the Eaſte
Churche were not ſubiecte to the Biſhop of Rome: and, that for ſo longe time, the
Pope was not yet knowen for the Heade of the Vniuerſal Churche of God.
                  
                  One of your owne Allowed Doctours ſaithe thus,Heruae. De Poteſt. Papae. Ca. 17. Dicere, quo'd Princeps non poteſt
facere Leges, vel eis vti, quouſque fuerint approbatae per Papam, falſum eſt: To ſaie,
that the Prince cannot, either make, or vſe his Lawes, before the Pope haue allowed them,
it is plainely falſe.
                  
                  
                     Abbate Panormitane,
                     Extra. De Conſtituti. Eccleſiae Sanctae Mariae. Numero 9. 
                     to qualifie the mater, ſaithe thus, Lex Principis Praeiudicialis
Eccleſijs, non extenditur ad Eccleſias, niſi expreſsè approbetur per Papam:
Sed, ſi fauet Eccleſijs, intelligitur approbata, niſi expreſsè reprobetur:
                      The Princes
Lawe, if it be Preiudicial, or hurteful to the Churche, is not extended vnto the Churche,
onleſſe it be expreſſely allowed by the Pope: But if it be profitable for the Churche, wee muſte
thinke, it is allowed, onleſſe it be expreſſely diſallowed.
                  But here, M. Hardinge, this one thinge yee maie note by the waie: that, notwithſtandinge
you cannot finde, by any ſhifte, or coloure, whereof ye lacke no

ſtoare, that the Pope hath Authoritie to allovve the Emperours Lavves: yet,
of the other ſide, wee are hable readily to finde, that the Emperoure hath Authoritie
to allovve the Popes Lavves. For ſo the Emperoure Iuſtinian him ſelfe
ſaithe: A praecedentibus nos Imperatoribus, & à nobis ipſis rectè dictum eſt, Oportere
Sacras Regulas pro Legibus valere: It is wel ſaide, bothe by other Emperours our
Predeceſſours,
                     
                     Authen. Colla. 1. Quomodo oporteat. 
                     and alſo by vs, that the Holy Canons muſte be holden for Lawes.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Pope Honorius. 3. Imperator Iuſtinianus decreuit, vt Canones
Patrum vim Legum habere oporteat:Extra, De Iuramen. Calum. Inhaerentes. 
                     The Emperoure Iuſtinian hath decreed,
that the Canons of the Fathers ſhal haue the force of Lawes.
                  
                  
                     But, what can be ſo plaine, as that Iuſtinian hereof writeth him ſelfe? Theſe
be his woordes:
                     Authen. De Eccleſ. diuerſis Capitulis. Niſi intra praeſcriptum tempus ad Eccleſias ſuas redeant, deponantur,
& alij in illorum locum ſurrogentur, id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Authoritate, & vi huius Praeſentis
Legis: Onleſſe Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes, repaire againe vnto their Churches by a daie
appointed, let them be depriued from their liuinges, and let others be placed in their roumes,
(not by the
                      Authoritie of the Pope,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Auguſt. Epiſt. 48. Cod. De veteri Iure Enuclean. L. 1. 
                     but) by the force, and Authoritie of this
Preſente Lavve. So ſaithe S. Auguſtine, Reges in Terris ſeruiunt Chriſto, faciendo
Leges pro Chriſto: Kinges in the worlde ſerue Chriſte, in that they make Lawes
for Chriſte. Likewiſe ſaithe
                      Iuſtinian, Legum Authoritas & Diuinas, & Humanas
res bene diſponit: By the Authoritie of the (Emperours) Lawes bothe Heauenly,
and worldly thinges are wel ordered. And againe,
                      Nullum genus rerum
eſt, quod non ſit penitùs quaerendum Authoritate Imperatoris. Is enim recipit
à Deo communem gubernationem,Authen. Titu. 133 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . & Principalitatem ſuper omnes homines:
There is no kinde of thinge, but it maie be thorowly examined by the Authoritie
of the Emperoure. For he receiueth from God a General Gouernemente, and
Principalitie ouer al menne: that is, as wel of the Cleregie, eas of the Laitie.
                  
                     So ſaithe Paulus the Biſhop of Apamea vnto the ſame Emperoure Iuſtinian,
vpon the deathe of Agapetus the Biſhop of Rome:Concil Conſtantinop. 5. Actione. 1. Tranſtulit ipſum Dominus, vt
Plenitudinem directionis Veſtrae cuſtodiret Serenitati: Our Lorde hath taken the Pope awaie,
that he mighte reſerue the whole f
                           •
                        lneſſe of order vnto your Maieſtie.
                  
                     Touchinge the Depriuation of the twoo Popes, Syluerius, and Vigilius, yee
ſaie, It was donne onely by Theodora the Empreſſe, and not by the Emperoure
Iuſtinian: and therein, yee thinke, yée haue taken vs in ſomme greate aduantage.
Notwithſtandinge in your owne Pontifical it is written thus,
                     Concil. Tomo. 2. in vita Vigilij. Beliſarium interrogauit
Imperator, quomodò ſe haberet cum Romanis: vel quomodò in loco Syluerij ſtatuiſſet
Vigilium. Tunc gratias ei egerunt Imperator, & Auguſta: The Emperoure
demaunded of his Captaine Beliſarius, howe he had donne with the Romaines:
and howe he had depoſed Pope Syluerius, and placed Vigilius in his ſteede. Vpon his
anſweare, bothe the Emperoure, and the Empreſſe gaue him thankes. Nowe yee
knowe,
                     
                     ff. In Regulis Iuris. 
                     it is a Rule in Lavve, Ratihabitio retrotrahitur, & mandato comparatur:
The Allovvance of a thinge donne, is as good, as a Commiſsion for the dooinge.
                  
                  
                     Somme of your Frendes haue ſaide,
                     Petrus De Palud. De Poteſta. Papae, Arti. 4. Eutropij appendix, De Syluerio. Totus Mundus non poteſt Deponere,
aut Iudicare Papam: The whole worlde cannot Depoſe, or Iudge the Pope. Yet
                     
Eutropius ſaithe, Si quando Imperialis Legatus mitteretur à Principe, vt Romanus
Pontifex proficiſceretur Conſtantinopolim ad Imperatorem, omni neglecta
occaſione, ibat: etiamſi pro certo ſciret, ſe iturum in exilium: If the Emperours Embaſſadoure
had cōmaunded ye
                      Biſhop of Rome to appeare at Conſtantinople before the
Emperoure, he wente ſtreight waie without excuſe: Yea, although he certainely knevve,
that he ſhoulde be banniſhed. Here I leaue ſundrie Examples of Emperours,
that by their Authoritie haue Depoſed, not onely other Biſhoppes, but alſo
Popes:Ennodius: Inter Decreta Bonifacij. 1. 
                     As the Example of Honorius, that Depoſed Pope Bonifacius: Of
Theodoricus, that Depoſed Pope Symmachus: Of Otho, that Depoſed Pope

Iohn, 12: Of Henrie, that Depoſed Pope Benedictus. 9. and that, as it is recorded,
not by wilful might, or Tyrannie, but, Imperiali, & Canonica Cenſura: By
his Emperial, and by ye Canonical Cenſures. Yea, one of your owne Frendes ſaith thus:
                     
Populus commendabiliter Zelo Fidei commotus, Conſtantinum Papam, qui erat Eccleſiae
in ſcandalum, priuauit oculis, & Depoſuit: The people of Rome, moued with the
Zele of Faithe,
                     Iohannes De Pariſijs, De Poteſt. Regia, & Papali. 
                     tooke Pope Conſtantine, and pulled out his eies, and Depoſed him,
for that he was ſclaunderous vnto the Churche: and they deſerued greate Praiſe for the
ſame.
                  
                  How be it,Idem, eodem Ioco. yée ſaie, theſe twoo Popes, Syluerius, and Vigilius were Good
Menne, and Godly Fathers: and therefore the remouinge of them was Violence,
and Tyrannie. And hereto yee apply the vnſauerie Similitude of your
Homely Puddinges. Notwithſtandinge, what Vertue, or Holineſſe was in
either of theſe menne, it maie ſoone appeare by the ſtorie. Pope Syluerius was
choſen Pope by Corruption,Concil. Tom. 2. In Syluerio. Euagrius, Lib. 4. Cap. 19. and Simonie, contrarie to the wil of the Cleregie:
Pope Vigilius accuſed him of Treaſon, for that he woulde haue betraied the
Cittie of Rome to the Gotthians. As for Pope Vigilius, youre Pontifical
ſaithe, He was a Falſe Witneſſe againſte his Predeceſſoure, Pope Syluerius:
He ſought vndewe meanes to remoue him, and to place him ſelfe: He keapte him
in Priſon, and ſterued him for hunger: He gaue a greate ſomme of monie to procure
the Popedome to him ſelfe: He killed his owne Notarie: He killed a yonge
man, beinge a Widowes Sonne: And of theſe crimes he was accuſed before the
Emperoure. Sutche Vertue, and ſutche Holineſſe the worlde founde in them.
Therefore the Godly Emperoure in remouinge of them, vſed neither Extraordinarie
Violence, as you ſaie, nor Iniurious Tyrannie.
                  
                     Your owne felowes ſaie,
                     Heruaeus, De Poteſt. Papae. Ca. 13. 
                     Si Papa ſit incorrigibilis, nec Cardinales poſsint
per ſe amouere ſcandalum de Eccleſia, tunc in ſubſidium iuris, deberent ſupplicando
inuocare Brachium Saeculare. Et tunc Imperator, requiſitus à Cardinalibus, deberet
procedere contra Papam: If the Pope be vncorrigible, and the Cardinalles
be not hable of them ſelues to remoue the offenſe from the Churche, then ought they, for
aide of the Lawe, by waie of intreatie, to calle vpon the Seculare Power. And then the
Emperoure, beinge thus deſired, ought to proceede orderly againſte the Pope.
                  Franciſcus Zarabella ſaithe, as he is alleged before, Papa poteſt accuſari
coram Imperatore,Franc. Zarabella De Schemate, & Concilio. de quolibet crimine notorio: Et Imperator requirere poteſt
à Papa rationem Fidei: The Pope in any notorious crime maie be accuſed before
the Emperoure: And the Emperoure maie require the Pope, to yelde a reckeninge of
his Faithe.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 1.
               Lette vs ſee then, ſutche menne, as haue Authoritie ouer the Biſhoppes,
ſutche menne, as receiue from God Cōmaundementes cō
                  cerninge
Religion, ſutche, as bringe home againe the Arke of God,
make Holy Hymnes, ouerſee the Prieſtes, builde the Temple, make
Orations touchinge Diuine Seruice, cleanſe y• 
                  Temples, deſtroie the
Hil Aultars, burne the Idolles Groues, teache the Prieſtes their duetie,
write them out Preceptes, how they ſhould liue, kille the wicked
Prophetes, diſplace the High Prieſtes, cal togeather the Councelles
of Biſhoppes, ſitte togeather with the Biſhoppes, inſtructinge them
what thei ought to doo, condemne, and pouniſhe Heretical Biſhopes,
                  
be made acquainted with maters of Religion,
                  The Popes Povver Supernatural. whiche Subſcribe,
and geeue Sentence, & doo al theſe thinges, not by any other Mans
Commiſsion, but in their owne name, and that bothe vprightly,
and Godly: Shal we ſaie, It perteineth not to ſutche menne, to haue
to doo with Religion? Or, ſhal wee ſaie, A Chriſtian Magiſtrate,
whiche dealeth amongeſt others in theſe maters, doothe either
naughtily, or preſumptuouſly, or wickedly? The moſte Aunciente,
and Chriſtian Emperours, & Kinges, that euer were, did occupie
them ſelues in theſe maters: and yet were they neuer, for this
cauſe, noted either of wickedneſſe, or of Preſumption. And what is
hee, that canue finde out, either more Catholique Princes, or more
Notable Examples?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Now then Kinges, and Emperours,Vntruthes three togeather. Open, and Manifeſte. Reade the Anſvveare. who haue their firſte auctoritie by the poſitiue Lawe of
Nations,Vntruthes three togeather. Open, and Manifeſte. Reade the Anſvveare. not by ſupernaturall grace from God, as Prieſtes haue: who can haue no more power then
the people hath,Vntruthes three togeather. Open, and Manifeſte. Reade the Anſvveare. of whome they take their Temporall iuriſdiction: VVho haue euervntruth, Confeſſed by M. Hardinges ovvne Doctours. benne annoincted
and Bleſſed by Biſhoppes, who ſo euer bleſſeth beinge greater then he that is bleſſed: Shall
wee ſaie, that ſuche Kinges, and Emperours haue auctoritie to rule the Churche,And is not the Pope a Sonne of the Church? Then is he not the Sonne of God. whoſe Sonnes they
are? To be Supreme Heads ouer them, whome they ought to kneele vnto for Abſolution? To controll
their ſpirituall Iudges, whome if they Sinne by humaine frailtie, theyVntruthe. For that the Prince ought ſo doo, Conſtantinus neuer ſaide it. Diſt. 22. Omnes.
                      ought to couer with their
clokes,Vntruthe. For that the Prince ought ſo doo, Conſtantinus neuer ſaide it. Diſt. 22. Omnes.
                      as the Greate Conſtātine ſaide: to degrade them, of whome they muſt be Baptized, Anoincted,
Crowned, and Buried?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Nowe, M. Hardinge, yée huddle vp haſtily your poore Argumentes in heapes
togeather. One, or twoo of them onely I minde to touche: The reſte are not woorth
the ſturringe. Firſte yée ſaie, The Popes Power is of God, The Princes Power is onely of
Man. The one Supernatural, the other Natural. In ſutche ſorte your Pope Nicolas adourneth,
& magnifieth his owne Chaire. For thus he ſaith with a ioily courrage:
Illud Verbum, quo conſtructum eſt Coelum, & Terra, quo deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         omnia ficta
ſunt Elementa, Romanam fundauit Eccleſiam: The Woorde of God, whereby Heauen,
and Earthe was made, and whereby al the Elementes were faſhioned, the ſame Woorde
founded the Churche of Rome. As if the Churche of Rome, and other Churches,
were not al of one Fundation. An other of your Popes Reteiners ſaithe,
Papatus eſt Summa Virtus Creata:
                     Iohan. De Pariſijs, De Poteſta. Regia. & Papali. 
                     The Popedome is the Higheſt Vertue, or Power,
that euer God made: that is to ſaie, the Popedome is aboue Angels, Archangels,
Thrones, Dominations, and al the Povvers, in, vnder, or aboue the Heauens.
                     
                  
                  
                     An other ſaithe, euen as you ſaie, and, as I haue partely ſaide before: Rex per
Hominem fit: Sacerdos autem proximè naſcitur ex Deo ipſo: Quantùm Deus praeſtat
Sacerdoti,
                     
                     Staniſlaus Orichouius in Chimaera. Fo. 97, & 99. 
                     tantùm Sacerdos praeſtat Regi: The Kinge is made by Man: But the Prieſte
is immediately begotten of God. As mutche as God excelleth the Prieſte, ſo mutche the
Prieſte excelleth the Kinge.
                  And, notwithſtandinge al this Supernatural Povver be as wel in the Simpleſt
Prieſte,
                     Petrus De Palude De Poteſtate Curator. Arti. 6. as in the Pope, yet an other of your Doctours ſaithe, Papa eligitur ſecundum
Ius Diuinum: alij verò Epiſcopi, ſecundum Ius Humanum: The Pope is choſen
by the Lavve of God: But other Biſhoppes are choſen by the Lawe of Man.
                      Thus
yee thinke no coloure too deere, to painte oute the Popes face, and to make it faire
and glorious.
                  
                     
                     But the Princes Power, yee ſaie, is Temporal, and Natural, and onely from beneathe, and
onely of Man: and therefore can be no greatter, then Man maie geeue him. This is youre
Louanian Diuinitie, M. Hardinge: So highely yée eſteeme the Dignitie, & Maieſtie
of the Prince.Prouerb. 8. Rom. 13. 
                     But God him ſelfe ſaithe, Per me Reges regnant: Kinges
rule by me (and not by Man). S. Paule ſaithe, Non eſt Poteſtas, niſi à Deo:
There is no Povver, or Princehoode, but from God. Likewiſe Chriſte him ſelfe
ſaid vnto Pilate,Iohan. 19. 
                     Thou couldeſt haue no Power ouer me, onleſſe it were geuen thee (not
from man, but)
                      from aboue. To like pourpoſe the Emperoure Iuſtinian ſaith,
Maxima in omnibus ſunt Dona Dei,Authen. Colla. 1. Quomodo oporteat Epiſcopos. Maxima. à Superna collata Clementia, Sacerdotium, & Imperium
&c. Ex vno codemqúe Principio vtraque procedentia Humanam exornant vitam:
Prieſtehoode, and Princehoode be in al thinges the greatteſt giftes of God, geuen vnto
vs from the Mercie aboue. Theſe two floweinge (not the one onely from Man, & the other
from
                      God, but) bothe from one Original, doo adourne and bewtifie the Life of Man.
Vpon whiche woordes it is noted in your Gloſe, Idem Principium habent, & parum
differunt:Gloſa, In verbum, Vtra
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        . Prieſtehoode, and Princehoode haue one Original, and ſmal difference.
He ſaithe not, as you ſaie, The oddes bitwéene theſe twoo is ſo greate, as is
bitweene
                      Natural, and Supernatural: bitweene Heauen, & Earthe: or, bitweene
God, and Man: But he ſaithe plainely, Prieſtehoode, and Princehoode haue
one Original, and little oddes, and ſmal difference. And therefore an other
of your Doctours ſaithe, Supponunt, quòd Poteſtas Regalis ſit Corporalis, &
non Spiritualis:Heruaeus, De Poteſta. Papae. Ca. 
                           •
                        5. & quòd habeat Curam Corporum, & non Animarum: quod falſum
eſt: They imagine, that the Princes Povver is onely Bodily, and not Ghoſtely:
and, that the Prince hath the Charge of mennes Bodies, but none of their Soules: But
this is ſtarke falſe.
                  And whereas you ſo highly extolle your Popes Vniuerſal Povver, as if it were
Supernatural, and Heauenly, and came onely from God, An other of your Doctours
ſaithe,Iohan. De Pariſijs, De Poteſta. Regia, & Papali. 
                     Ea, quae ſunt Iuriſdictionis Papae, non ſunt ſupra Naturam, & Conditionem
negotij, nec ſupra Conditionem hominum. Quia non eſt ſupra conditionem
hominis, quòd homines praeſint hominibus. Imò naturale eſt quodammodò:
Sutche thinges, as belonge to the Popes Iuriſdiction, are not aboue Nature, nor aboue the
Condition of the thinge it ſelfe, nor aboue the Capacitie of a Man. For it is not aboue the
Nature of a Man, for Man to rule ouer Menne. Naie rather, in a ſorte, it is Natural.
                     
Nowe, M. Hardinge, if the Princes Povver be from God, as wel, as the Popes:
If the Popes Povver concerninge Iuriſdiction, be Natural, as wel as the Princes:
If they flowe bothe from one Original: If they haue ſo ſmal difference, what
meante you then, by theſe odious Compariſons, ſo highly, and ſo ambitiouſly to
auance the one, & ſo diſdeignefully, and ſcornefully to abaſe the other? Touchinge
the Princes Povver, wée are certainely aſſured by Goddes Holy VVoorde, It is
from God. As for the Popes Infinite, and Vniuerſal Povver, throughout the
whole Scriptures, from the Geneſis vnto the Apocalyps, onleſſe it be the Povver
of Darkeneſſe, yee can finde nothinge.
                  
                     Yée ſaie, Kinges haue euermore benne Anointed, and Bleſſed by Biſhoppes. This is an other
fowle Vntruthe. For you might eaſily haue knowen, ye 
                        Chriſtian Kinges in olde
times were neuer Anointed.
                     
                     Heruaeus, De Poteſtae. Papae. Ca. 18. 
                     Your owne Doctoure ſaith, In Nouo Teſtamento
non legimus, quòd Sacerdotes debeant inungere Reges: Nec etiam nunc obſeruatur in
omnibus Regibus Chriſtianis: vt patet in Regibus Hiſpaniae:
                      Wee reade not in the
Newe Teſtamente, that Prieſtes, or Biſhoppes ought to anointe Kinges. Neither is that
order at this daie vſed emongeſt al Kinges, that be Chriſtened: as it appeareth by the Kinges
of Spaine. Againe yee ſaie, and that yée bringe in, as a ſpecial good Argumente
of your ſide, The Emperoure kneeleth to the Prieſte for Abſolution: Ergo, The Emperoure
is not the Heade of the Churche. Howe maie a man anſweare ſutche Folies,
better then with the like Folie? The Pope him ſelfe, by your owne Decrees, is bounde to

Confeſſe his Sinnes, and kneeleth to a Simple Prieſte for Abſolution. For your Canoniſtes
ſaie, Papa tenetur Confiteri peccata ſua vni Sacerdoti: Et Simplex Sacerdos
poteſt illum Ligare, & Abſoluere:
                      The Pope is bounde to confeſſe his Sinnes to ſomme
one Prieſte: and a Simple Prieſte maie bothe Binde him, and Abſolue him. Ergo, by your
owne Concluſion, The Pope is not Heade of the Churche. Sutche a handeſome
proctoure the Pope hathe gotten to promote his Cauſe.
                  
                  With ſutche prety ſtuffe, M. Hardinge, yee thinke to ouerrenne, and to conquere
the worlde.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 2.
               Wherefore, if it were lawful for them to doo thus, beinge but
ciuile Magiſtrates, & hauinge the chiefe rule of common VVeales,
what offence haue oure Princes at this daie made, whiche maie
not haue leaue to doo the like, beinge in the like Degree? Or what
eſpecial gifte of Learning, or of Iudgemente, or of Holineſſe haue
theſe menne nowe, that they, contrarie to the Cuſtome of al the Aunciente
& Catholique Biſhoppes, who vſed to conferre with Princes,
and Peeres, concerninge Religion, doo nowe thus reiecte and caſte
of Chriſtian Princes from knowinge of the cauſe, and from their
meetinges?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVee anſweare, it wasVntruthe, As it maie eaſily appeare by that, hath benne ſaide before. neuer lawfull in any Temporall Prince, to iudge in cauſes of Religion.
Vntruthe, As it maie eaſily appeare by that, hath benne ſaide before. Neither did any Prince before this time euer vſe it.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  This is an other of your Abſolute Truthes, M. Hardinge. For anſweare
whereof,Parte. 6. Cap. 14. Diuiſ. 4 & 5. it maie pleaſe you indifferently to weighe, that I haue written alitle before
touchinge the ſame.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 15. Diuiſion. 3.
               Wel, thus dooing, they wiſely, & warily prouide for them ſelues,
and for their Kingedome, whiche otherwiſe they ſee is like ſhortly
to comme to naught. For if ſo be they, whome God hathe placed in
greateſt Dignitie, did ſee, and perceiue theſe mennes practiſes, how
chriſtes commaundementes be deſpiſed by them, how the Lighte
of the Goſpel is darkened, and quenched out by them, and howe
them ſelues alſo be ſubtilly beguiled, and mocked, and vnwares be
deluded by them, and the waie to the Kingedome of Heauen ſtopped
vp before them, no doubte they woulde neuer ſo quietly ſuffer them
ſelues, neither to be diſdeined after ſutche a prowde ſorte, nor ſo deſpitefully
to be ſcorned, and abuſed by them. But now through their
owne lacke of vnderſtandinge, and through their owne blindeneſſe,
theſe menne haue them faſte yoked, and in their daunger.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  BiſhoppesOthervviſe it vvere not the Kingedome of Darkeneſſe. can not vpholde their kingdome by wronge doinge:VVhen they be once eſpied: and not before. that is the waie to pull them
downe. Therefore we are well aſſured that your Schiſmaticall Superintendentſhip can not ſtande,
though al the power of the world were bente to holde it vp. Your wicked ſtate is not planted of God,

and therefore it ſhalbe rooted out.Affiance in Darkeneſſe. It is God, that ruleth: it is God that ſetteth vp, and putteth downe.
This ſtate of Chriſtes Churche hath continewed, and the ſucceſſour of Peter hath gouerned it, whereas
the groundleſſe buildinge of all the Heretikes from Simon Magus downewarde to this daie hath
failed. Luther is rotten, and his newe founde Religion decaied, and the Pope ſitteth in Peters
chaire, and ſo ſhall his ſucceſſours to the ende.
                  Ye woulde men to beleue, that Emperours, and Kinges are deceiued by the Popes, and Biſhoppes.
But I praie you, what is the cauſe, that Princes can not eſpie theſe deceites (if any ſuche were) as well
as ye? If them ſelues lacke your knowledge, yet haue they wiſe menne aboute them, who for their
dueties ſake, and their alleagiance to them▪ would ſoone aduertiſe them▪ how by the Biſhoppes they be
ſubtilly beguiled, and mocked.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Of the maineteinance of your Kingedome, M. Hardinge, Chriſte ſaide vnto
certaine your Forefathers, Hoc eſt tempus Veſtrum, & Poteſtas Tenebrarum:
This is your time,
                     
                     Luke. 22. Matthae. 15. 
                     and the Power of Darkeneſſe. Blinde they are, and the Guides of the
Blinde. If the Blinde leade the Blinde, they wil bothe falle into the diche. The Lion,
or wilde Bulle, be they neuer ſo cruel, or greate of courrage, yet, if yee maie once
cloſely couer theire eies, yée maie eaſily leade them, whither yee liſte, without reſiſtance.
Euen ſo dooth the Pope hoodevvinke, and blindefolde the Princes of
the world: whiche donne, he maketh them to holde his Stirope, to leade his Horſe,
to kneele downe, and to kiſſe his Shooe, and to attende vpon him, at his pleaſure.
But, if they knewe, either him, or them ſelues, they would not doo it.
                  
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe,
                     Chryſoſt. in Opere imperfecto. Homil. 44. 
                     as it is noted before, Haeretici Sacerdotes claudunt
Ianuas Veritatis. Sciunt enim, ſi manifeſtara eſſet Veritas, quòd ipſorum Eccleſia
eſſet relinquenda: & ipſi de Sacerdotali Dignitate ad Humilitatem venirent
popularem: Heretical Biſhoppes ſhut vp the gates of the Truthe▪ For thei know,
that, if the Truthe be once laide open, their Churche ſhalbe foreſaken: And they from theire
Pontifical Dignitie, ſhalbe brought downe to the baſeneſſe of the people.
                  
                  Petrus Ferrarienſis,Petrus Ferrarien. Citatur ab Illyrico, Inter Teſtes Veritatis. 
                     in conſideration hereof, complaineth thus, O miſeros Imperatores,
& Saeculares Principes, qui haec, & alia ſuſtinetis, & vos ſeruos Eccleſiae facitis:
Et Mundum per eos infinitis modis vſurpari videtis: nec de remedio cogitatis:
Quia prudentiae, & Sapientiae non intenditis: Alas, miſerable are yee, the Emperours,
and Princes of the vvorlde, that abide theſe, and other like thinges (at ye
                        
                      Popes
handes,) and make your ſelues ſlaues vnto the
                      Churche. Yee ſee, the worlde is by innumerable
waies miſerably abuſed by them: yet yee neuer bethinke your ſelues of any remedie: Bicauſe
yee applie not your mindes to vviſedome, and knovvledge.
                  
                     S.
                     Hieronym. in Eſaiam, Lib. 9. Cap. 30. 
                     Hierome ſaithe, Vt ſagittent in obſcuro rectos corde. Iſti tantam ſibi aſſumunt
Authoritatem, vt ſiue Dextra doceant, ſeu Siniſtra, id eſt, ſiue bona, ſiue mala, 
                           •
                        olint
Diſcipulos ratione diſcutere, ſed ſe praeceſſores ſequi. Tunc hi, qui priùs decipiebant,
nequaquam vltrà ad eos valebunt accedere, poſtquam ſe ſenſerint intellectos: To ſtrike
in the darke, them, that be ſimple of harte. Theſe menne challenge vnto them ſelues ſutche Authoritie,
that, whether they teache with the Right hande, or with the Leafte, that is to ſaie,
whether they teache good thinges, or badde, they wil not haue their Diſciples, or Hearers, with
reaſon to examine their ſaieinges, but onely to folowe them, beinge their Leaders. For then
they, whiche before deceiued the people, can no more comme vnto them, after they once perceiue,
they be eſpied.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 1.
               Verely, we for our partes, as we haue ſaide, haue donne nothinge
in alteringe Religion, vpon either Raſhneſſe, or Arrogancie: nor nothinge,
but with good leaſure, and greate conſideration. Neither
had we euer entended to doo it, excepte bothe the manifeſt, & moſt aſſured

                  VVil of God, opened to vs in his Holy Scriptures, and the regarde
of our owne Saluation had euen conſtreined vs thereunto.
For though wee haue departed from that Churche, whiche theſe
menne cal Catholike, and by that meanes geate vs enuie amongeſt
them, that wante ſkil to iudge, yet is this yenough for vs, & it ought
to be yenough for euery wiſe, and good man, and one that maketh accompte
of Euerlaſtinge Life, that we haue gonne from that churche
whiche had power to erre: whiche chriſte, who can not erre, tolde ſo
longe before, it ſhoulde erre: and whiche we our ſelues did euidently
ſee with our eies, to haue gonne from the Olde Holy Fathers, and
from the Apoſtles, and from Chriſte him ſelfe, and from the Primitiue
and catholique churche of God: & wee are comme, as neare,
as we poſſibly coulde, to the Churche of the Apoſtles, and of the
Olde catholike Biſhoppes & Fathers: whiche Churche, we know,
hathe hitherto benne ſounde, and perfite, and, as Tertullian termeth
it, a Pure Virgine, ſpotted as then with no Idolatrie, nor with
any foule, or ſhameful faulte: and haue directed, accordinge to theire
Cuſtomes, and Ordinaunces, not onely our Doctrine, but alſo the
Sacramentes, and the Fourme of common Praier.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye haue treated hereof, after your accuſtomed manner, that is to ſaie, with al Vntruthe, and Lies.
                  Yee comme in with many gaie woordes. VVhereto with guilty conſcience in wardely yee ſaie
yea, thereto with lieinge tongue out wardely doo yee not ſaie naie?
                  This generation of looſe Apoſtates, inceſtuous Vowbreakers, Sacrilegious Churcherobbers,
deſpiſers of all Holineſſe, breakers of the deade mennes willes, ouerthrowers of all aunciente order,
and diſcipline.
                  If it be ſo, where be your Signes? where be your Miracles? where be the examples of your
rare Vertue, and Holineſſe?
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The reſte of your ſpeache wee wil paſſe ouer, as talke of courſe. Touchinge
your curious demaunde of Signes, and Miracles, Pope Leo maie anſweare you.
For,Matthae. 27. whereas certaine of your Forefathers in olde times ſaide, If he be the Kinge
of Iſrael, lette him comme downe from the Croſſe, and wee wil beleeue him: Pope Leo
                     
ſaithe thus vnto them,Leo in Sermon. De Paſsione Domini. 
                     Non erat veſtrae coecitatis arbitrio, Stulti Scribae, & Impij
Sacerdotes, oſtendenda potentia Saluatoris: Yee fooliſhe Scribes, and wicked
Prieſtes, the Power of our Saueour was not to be ſhewed at the diſcretion of your Blindeneſſe.
                     
God ſheweth his Miracles when, and where, and to whome he wil.
                  
                     S.
                     Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homi. 49. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, In fine temporis concedenda eſt poteſtas Diabolo, vt
faciat Signa vtilia: vt iam Miniſtros Chriſti non per hoc cognoſcanius, quia vtilia
faciunt Signa, ſed quia omninò haec Signa non faciunt: In the ende of time
Power ſhalbe geuen to the Diuel, to woorke profitable Signes, and Miracles: So that
then wee cannot knowe the Miniſters of Chriſte, by that they woorke profitable Miracles,
but by that they vvoorke no Miracles at al.
                  
                     S.
                     Auguſtin. De Vnitate Eccleſiae. Ca. 16. Auguſtine ſaithe, Non dicat, Ideo verum eſt, quia illa, vel illa mirabilia
fecit, vel iſte, vel ille: aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum noſtrorum orant, & exaudiuntur:
aut quia illa, vel illa ibi contingunt, &c. Remoueantur iſta, vel Figmenta

mendacium hominum,Miracles. vel portenta Fallacium Spirituum: Lette no man ſaie,
Therefore it is true, for that this man, or that man hath wrought this, or that Miracle: or,
for that menne make their Praiers at the Toumbes of our deade, and obteine their deſires:
or, for that theſe, or theſe Miracles be wrought there &c. Awaie with theſe thinges: they
maie be either the Iugglinges, and Mockeries of deceiteful menne, or els Illuſions
of Lieinge Sprites.Chryſoſtom. in Matth. Hom. 49. 
                     Againe, S. Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Per Signa cognoſcebatur,
qui eſſent Veri Chriſtiani, qui Falſi. Nunc autem Signorum operatio omnino' leuata
eſt: Magis autem inuenitur apud eos, qui falſi ſunt Chriſtiani: In olde times it
was knowen by Miracles, who were the True Chriſtians, and whoe the Falſe. But
nowe the woorkinge of Miracles is taken quite awaie: and is rather founde emonge them, that
be falſe Chriſtians.
                     Auguſtin. in Iohan. Tracta. 13. 
                     Therefore S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Contra iſtos Mirabiliarios
cautum me fecit Deus meus, dicendo: In nouiſsimis diebus exurgent Pſeudoprophetae
facientes Signa, & Portenta, vt inducant in errorem, ſi fieri poſsit, etiam Electos: Againſte
theſe Moungers of Miracles my God hath armed me,
                     Matthae. 24. 
                     ſaieinge: In the later daies there ſhal
riſe vp Falſe Prophetes woorkinge Signes, and woonders, to deceiue the Electe of God, if
it be poſſible.
                  
                  
                     Neither is the Goſpel of Chriſte preached this daie vtterly without Miracles.
The Blinde ſee: the Doumbe ſpeake: your Idolles are fallen: your Greate Babylon
is comme to grounde. Theſe, M. Hardinge, if you haue eies to ſée them, are
no ſmal Miracles.Chryſoſtom. in. 1. Corin. Homil. 6. Auguſt. De Verbis Domi. Secund. Matthae. Serm 18. Eodem loco. 
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaith, The Conuerſion of the vvorlde is a
Miracle. S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Modò Caro Coeca non aperit oculos Miraculo
Domini: Et Cor Coecum aperit oculos Sermone Domini: Nowe adaies the
Blinde fleaſhe openeth not her eies by the Miracle of our Lorde: Put the Blinde harte
Openeth his eies at the VVoorde of our Lorde. And againe, Modò Aures Corporis
ſurde
                        •
                      non aperiuntur. Sed quàm multi habent clauſas Aures Cordis, quae
tamen, Verbo Dei penetrante, pateſcant? Nowe adaies the deafe Eares of the Body
be not opened: yet many there are, that haue the Eares of their harte ſhut vp: whiche Eares
not withſtandinge are opened by entringe of the VVoorde of God.
                  
                     Therefore wèe maie rightly ſaie to you with other woordes of S. Auguſtine,
Quiſquis adhuc Prodigia,
                     
                     Auguſtin. De Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 22. Cap. 8. 
                     vt credat, inquirit. Magnum eſt ipſe prodigium: qui, mundo
credente, non credit: Who ſo euer yet requireth Miracles, to bringe him to the Faithe,
is him ſelfe a greate Miracle: that, the worlde beleeuinge, remaineth ſtil in vnbeliefe.
                  
                     Where as the Phariſeis ſaide of Chriſte, Lette
                      him nowe comme downe from
the Croſſe,Hieronym. in Matthae. 27. and we wil beleue him, S. Hierome ſaithe vnto them, Etiamſi de Cruce
deſcenderet, ſimiliter non crederetis:
                      Yea, although he ſhoulde comme downe from
the Croſſe, yet woulde ye not beleeue him.
                  But it were a worlde, to beholde the Glorious Countenance of your Miracles.
Your Croſſes can ſpeake: youre Idolles can goe: your Images can lighte
their owne Lampes: your Holy VVater is hable to calme the Sea, to chaſe awaie
Miſe, and to make barren Wemen to conceiue. If yée doubte hereof, conferre
with M. Cope,
                     Copus, Dialog. 1. Pag. 18. one of your owne Louanian companie: or with that
Woorthy Prelate the Biſhop of Verona, your Holy Father Lipomanus. I am
aſhamed to remember, that you are not aſhamed euen nowe, in theſe daies, to publiſhe
in Writinge. How be it, ſutche Religion, ſutche Miracles. S. Hierome
ſaithe,Hieronymus ad Algaſiam. 
                     Mendacium Antichriſti Chriſti Veritas deuorabit: The Truthe of
Chriſte ſhal deucure, and conſume the Falſehedde of Antichriſte.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 16. Diuiſion. 2.
               And, as wee know, bothe Chriſte him ſelfe, & al good menne heretofore
haue donne, we haue called home againe to the Original, and

firſte Fundation, that Religion, whiche hathe benne fowly neglected,
and vtterly corrupted by theſe menne. For wee thought it
meete, thence to take the Paterne of Refourminge Religion, from
whence the grounde of Religion was firſte taken: Bicauſe this one
Reaſone, as ſaithe the moſte Auncient Father Tertullian, hathe
greate force againſte al Hereſies, Looke, vvhat ſoeuer vvas firſte,
that is trevve: and vvhat ſoeuer is later, that is corrupte. Irenaeus
oftentimes appealed to the Oldeſt Churches, whiche had benne
neareſt to Chriſtes time, & whiche, it was harde to beleue, had benne
in erroure. But why, at this daie, is not the ſame common regard, &
conſideration had? Why returne wee not to the Paterne of the
Olde Churches? Why maie not we heare, at this time amongeſt
vs, the ſame ſaieinge, whiche was openly pronounced in times paſte
in the Councel at Nice, by ſo many Biſhoppes, & Catholique Fathers,
and no body once ſpeakinge againſte it? 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  Holde ſtil the Olde Cuſtomes.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye ſaie muche in your owne commendation, but lies be no proufes. Ye haue not called Religion
home againe to the Original and firſte Fundation, as ye ſaie: but ye haue quite ouerthrowen all true
Religion from the fundation. As for your apiſhe noueltie, ye haue taken the paterne thereof from
Satan auctour of diuiſion, the auncient ennemie of Chriſte, and of his true religion. VVee admitte the
ſaieinge of Tertullian (though it be not altogeather as ye alleage it) that this reaſon hath greate
force againſt all hereſies,Contra Praxeam. VVhat ſo euer was firſte, that is true. what ſo euer is latter, that is corrupt.
Of the Bleſſed Sacramente, Chriſte ſaide firſte &c.Here folovved ſommevvhat, touchinge the Sacramente, and Sacrifice: vvhiche maters are othervvhere anſvveared more at large.
                  
                  Ye woulde ſeeme to be faine, that we folowed the aduiſe of Irenaeus. VVe are contente with all
our hartes. And with Irenaeus we appeale to that tradition, whiche is from the Apoſtles, whiche (as
he ſaieth) is kepte in the Churches by Prieſtes,Lib. 3. ca. 2. that ſucceded them. VVith Irenaeus leauinge other
Churches, whoſe ſucceſsions of Biſhoppes it were a longe woorke to rehearſe, we require to haue recourſe
for triall of our Faithe to the Tradition of doctrine of the Romaine Churche, whiche he termeth,Lib. 3. ca. 3.
Greateſt, Oldeſt, beſt knowen to al, founded, and ſet vp by the twoo moſte glorious Apoſtles, Peter,
and Paule. VVe appeale to the Faithe of that Churche, taught abrode in the world, and by ſucceſsions
of Biſhoppes brought downe vnto vs. For to this Churche,Irenaeus neuer knevve the diſorders, and deformities, that novve are in the Churche of Rome. ſaithe Irenaeus, muſt all the Churche of
Chriſte repaire, where ſo euer it be: for that it is the chiefe of all, and for that the tradition of the true
doctrine, which the Apoſtles leaft behinde them,Vntruth. For, as novve, it is al vnfaithefully peruerted. is there faithfully kepte. VVherefore if ye would
after the councell of Irenaeus reſorte to Rome for deciſion of the controuerſies, that be bet wixte you
and vs, and would them to be tried by that ſenſe of doctrine,Vntruthe manifeſte, and apparente to al the vvorlde. which hath continewed by ſucceſsions
of Biſhops euen from Peter to Pius the fourth, now Pope, and would ſtande to the auctoritie of that See
Apoſtolike: al ſtrife were ended, we ſhould be at accorde. But we haue litle hope ye will folowe this
godly counſel of S. Irenaeus that bleſſed Martyr, whoſe body your brethren the Huguenotes of Fraūce,
vilanouſly burned at Lions, Anno Dom. 1562. after it had reſted there thirten hundred yeeres and more.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  The Preeminence,Irenae. Li. 3. ca. 3. Valdè longum eſt, omnit
                           •
                        n Eccleſiarum cnumerare Succeſſiones. that Irenaeus geueth to the Churche of Rome, ſtandeth
in Conſente, and Vnitie, and Agreemente of Doctrine, not in Superioritie, or
Gouernmente ouer al the worlde. For proufe whereof, yee maie vnderſtande, that
Irenaeus in the ſame place likewiſe ſpecially noteth the Churche of Smyrna planted
by Polycarpus: & the Churche of Epheſus, planted by S. Iohn: and generally

ſundrie other Greate Churches,
                     The Paterne of the Faithe. planted by menne of Apoſtolical Dignitie: vnto
whiche he willeth vs in like māner to repaire: & not onely to y• 
                     Churche of Rome.
                  
                  
                     The Emperoure Theodſius willeth his Subiectes, to conforme them ſelues
in Doctrine,Cod. Theodoſij, Li. 16. Titul. 3. 
                     not onely to the Romaine Biſhop, but alſo, either to Nectarius the
Biſhop of Conſtantinople: or to Timotheus the Biſhop of Alexandria: or to Pelagius
the Biſhop of Laodicea: or to Diodorus the Biſhop of Tharſus: or to
Amphilochius the Biſhop of Iconium: or to Optimus the Biſhop of Antioche:
or to Helladius the Biſhop of Caeſarea: or to Otreius the Biſhop of Melite: or to
Gregorius the Biſhop of Nice: or to Terennius the Biſhop of Scythia: or to
Marmarius the Biſhop of Martianopolis. Vnto al, and euery of theſe notable
greate Churches, y•
                      Emperoure willeth al other inferioure Churches to repaire.
                  
                  
                     By ſutche Examples the Fathers in the Councel of Chalcedon were contented,
to directe their Faithe. For thus they brake out in a general ſhoote, Omnes
ita credimus:
                     
                     Concil. Chalicedonen. Actio. 2. 
                     Leo Papa ita credit: Cyrillus ita credit: Leo, & Anatolius
ita credunt: Al wee beleue thus: Pope Leo beleueth thus: Cyrillus (the Biſhop of Alexandria)
beleueth thus: Leo, and Anatolius (the Biſhop of Conſtantiaople) beleue thus.
                  
                     So ſaithe Tertullian,Tertul Contra Marcion. Li. 4. Videamus, quod lac à Paulo Corinthij hauſerint: ad quam
Regulam Galathae ſint recocti: quid legant Philippenſes, Theſſalonicenſes, Epheſij:
quid etiam Romani de proximo ſonent: quibus Euangelium Petrus,
& Paulus ſanguine quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſuo ſignatum reliquerunt: Lette vs ſee, what milke the
Corinthians ſuckte of S. Paule: after what Paterne the Galathians were refourmed:
what the Philippians reade, what the Theſſaloniens, what the Epheſiens: what
ſounde the Romaines geeue, that are ſo neare vs: vnto whom Peter, and Paule haue
leafte the Goſpel ſealed, and confirmed with their Bloude. In like ſorte
writeth
                      Gregorie Nazianzene of the Churche of Caeſarea:Nazianzen. Epiſtol. 30. Cuiuſlibet Eccleſiae,
tanquam Corporis Chriſti, habenda eſt ratio: maximè verò noſtrae (Caeſarienſis)
quae & ab initio fuit, & nunc eſt, Mater propè omnium Eccleſiarum: Eam Chriſtiana
Reſpublica, velut Centrum ſuum Circulus, vndi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      obſeruat, non ſolùm
propter Orthodoxam Doctrinam vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab initio praedicatam, ſed etiam propter
conſpicuam Concordiae Gratiam, quam diuinitùs accepit: We muſte make
greate accoumpte of al Churches, euen as of the Body of Chriſte: but ſpecially of this our
Churche of Caeſarea: for that it hath benne frō the beginninge, and ſtil is in a manner the
Mother of al Churches. The whole Chriſtian Common VVeale beholdeth this
Churche of euery ſide, euen as the Circle beholdeth the Center: not onely for the Catholique
Doctrine, that from thence hath benne publiſhed euerywhere, but alſo for the notable
Grace of Concorde, that it hath receiued from aboue.
                  
                  
                     Thus the Aunciente Godly Fathers willed the Faitheful, to haue recourſe
vnto euery of theſe Churches, of Smyrna, of Epheſus, of Conſtantinople, of Alexandria,
of Laodicea, of Tharſus, of Iconium, of Antioche, of Caeſarea, of Melite,
of Nice, of Scythia, of Martianopolis, of Corinthus, of Galatia, of Philippi,
of Theſſalonica, of Epheſus, & of Rome: not for any ſecrete vnremoueable vertue
in them conteined,
                     Irenae. Li. 3. ca. 3. In qua ſemper conſeruata eſt ea, quae eſt ab Apoſtolis Traditio. 
                     but onely, as Irenaeus ſaith, for y• the Tradition, & Doctrine of
the Apoſtles had continewed there ſtil without corruption. Therefore Tertullian
ſaith, Percurre Eccleſias Apoſtolicas, apud quas ipſae adhuc Cathedrae Apoſtolorum
ſuis locis praeſidentur: apud quas ipſae Authenticae Literae eorum recitantur,
ſonantes vocem, & repraeſentantes faciem vniuſcuiuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Proxima eſt tibi
Achaia: Habes Corinthum. Si non longè es à Macedonia, habes Philippos,
habes Theſſalonicenſes.Tertul. De praeſcriptionib. contra Haereticos. Si pores in Aſiam tendere, habes Epheſum. Si autem Italiae
adiaces, liabes Romam: vnde nobis quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Authoritas praeſtò eſt: Renne ouer,
and beholde the Apoſtolique Churches, where as the Apoſtles Chaires are yet ſtil continewed,
and where as the Authentical VVritinges of the Apoſtles are openly pronounced,

ſoundinge out the voice,The Paterne of the Faith. and repreſentinge the face of eche one of them. The nexte
Countrie to you is Achaia: There haue you the Churche of Corinthe. If yee be not for
from Macedonia, there haue yee the Churche of Philippi, and the Churche of Theſſalonica:
If yee maie goe ouer into Aſia, there haue yee the Churche of Epheſus. If yee
border neare to Italie, there haue yee the Churche of Rome: from whence wee alſo (dwellinge
in Aphrica) maie with ſpeede receiue Authoritie.
                  
                  
                     Againe, touchinge the name of a Churche Apoſtolique, whereby yée woulde
euermore ſéeme to vnderſtande the Churche of Rome, he ſaithe thus: Tot, ac tantae
Eccleſiae,Tertul. De Praeſcription, contra Haereticos. vna eſt illa ab Apoſtolis Prima, ex qua omnes. Sic omnes prime, & omnes
Apoſtolicae, dum vnam omnes probāt Vnitatem: Theſe ſo many, and ſo great
Churches, are al that ſame one firſte Churche, planted by the Apoſtles, from whence
iſſued al the reſte. And ſo are they al Firſte Churches, and al Apoſtolique, in that they al
folowe one Vnitie.
                  Thus the Anciente Fathers taught the People to refourme them ſelues by
the Example, and Doctrine, not onely of the Churche of Rome, but alſo of al other
Notable Apoſtolique Churches.
                  
                  Neither were they directed onely by the Authoritie of Anciente Churches,
but alſo by the Authoritie of certaine particulare VVoorthy Menne. For Reſolution
in caſes of doubte, ſomme ſente to S. Auguſtine: ſomme to S. Hierome:
ſomme to the Biſhoppes of France:
                     Euſeb. Li. 5. Ca. 3. ſomme to the Biſhoppes of Rome: and ſomme
to others. S. Hierome thus writeth vnto S. Auguſtine: Tu, vt Epiſcopus in toto
Orbe notiſsimus,
                     Auguſt. Epiſt. 11. 
                     debes hanc promulgare Sententiam, & in aſſenſum tuum omnes
Coepiſcopos trahere: Thou, as the moſte notable Biſhop in al the worlde, oughteſte to publiſhe
this Decree, and to drawe al thy Felowbiſhoppes vnto thy Iudgement.
                      Yet was
S. Auguſtine the Biſhop of Hippo in Aphrica, and not of Rome. Certainely,
whereſoeuer any flame of Truthe, and Learning maie appeare, out of what place
ſo euer it breake foorthe, men wil of them ſelues willingely, & gréedily flée vnto it.
                  Damaſus, the Biſhop of Rome, wrote vnto S. Hierome in doubteful Caſes,
to knowe his counſel.Damaſ. Hierony. Hieronymus ad Algaſiam. 
                     S. Hierome him ſelfe ſaith, Filius meus Apodemius de
Oceani littore, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vltimis Galliarum finibus, Roma praeterita, quaeſiuit Bethlehem:
My ſonne Apodemius, comminge from the ſhoare of the Ocean Sea, and from
the furtheſte Coaſte of France, leauinge Rome, ſought for Bethlehem, where I dwelle,
(to conferre with mee).
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe S. Ambroſe ſaith, Poſt Alexandrinae Eccleſiae, Epiſcopi quoque
Romanae Eccleſiae Definitionem,Ambroſ. Lib. 10. Epiſt. 83. per Literas plaeri
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      meam adhuc expectant
Sententiam: After y• Reſolution of the Churche of Alexandria, and alſo of the Biſhop
of the Churche of Rome, many menne yet write Letters vnto me, and woulde alſo vnderſtande
my iudgemente. Pope Liberius him ſelfe writeth thus vnto Athanaſius,
the Biſhop of Alexandria:Apud Athanaſi. Tomo primo. Si mecum ſentis, quoeſo ſubſcribas: quò certiores reddamur,
num eiuſdem nobiſcum ſuffragij ſis, eadem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſtatuas de Vera Fide: vt & ego ſecurior
efficiar, Tua
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      mandata indeſinenter obeam: If yee be of my Iudgemente, then I
beſeeche you, to ſubſcribe (your name vnto theſe Articles): that I maie be out of doubte,
whether you thinke, as I thinke, touchinge the
                      True Faithe: and, that I maie be the better
confirmed in mee ſelf, and maie euermore doo your Commaundementes without delaie.
Here you ſée your
                      Heade of the Churche offereth him ſelfe with al vis Vniuerſal
Povver, to be at the Commaundèmente of an other inferioure Biſhop. Bernarde,
beinge but an Abbate, writeth thus vnto Pope Eugenius: Aiunt, non vos eſſe
Papam,Bernar. Epiſ. 238. ſed me. Et vndi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad me confluunt, qui habent negotia: They ſaie, that I
am Pope, and not you. And on euery ſide, they, that haue ſuites, comme renninge vnto mee.
                  
                  Thus were menne woonte to ſéeke for Counſel,
                     Hierony. in Apologia aduerſ. Ruffin. not onely at Rome, but alſo,
where ſo euer it might be founde. And therefore was Origen called, Magiſter

Eccleſiarum,
                     The Paterne of the Faith. 
                     The Enformer, or Maiſter of the Churches:
                      S. Baſile, Canon Fidei,
The Rule of the Faithe: Euſebius Samoſatenſis, Regula Veritatis, The Standarde
of the Truthe:
                     
                     Nazian. ad Simpliciam. Nazian. ad Heronem. 
                     Athanaſius, Orbis oculus, The eie of the worlde:
                      And in doubteful
Caſes they were as diligently ſought vpon, as the Pope.
                  
                  Here, by the waie, it were a woorthy mater to conſider ſomme of the Profound,
and Learned Reſolutions, that wee haue receiued from the See of Rome. Auguſtine
the Italian Monke, whom ſomme haue called the Apoſtle of England, demaunded
of Pope Gregorie,
                     Gregor. Lib. 12. Indicti. 7. Ca. 9. by waie of greate Counſel, whether a Woman with
Childe might be Baptized, or no: and howe longe afterwarde it might be lawful
for her to comme to Churche.
                  
                  
                     Bonifacius, the Apoſtle of Germanie, demaunded the like queſtions of Pope
Zacharie,
                     Inter Decreta Zachariae. whether laies, Davves, Storkes, Beauers, Otters, Hares, and VVilde
Horſes be mannes meate, or no: what order were to be taken with Man, or Horſe,
hauinge the Fallinge ſickeneſſe: At what time of the yeere it maie be lawful, or
wholeſome for folkes, to eate Bacon: and, if a man liſte to eate it Ravve, howe
old it ought to be,Inter Decreta Alexandri 3. par. 30. Ca. 2. Si maculam in oculo. before he eate it: What maie be donne, if a Prieſte haue a blacke
in his eie: Who maie hallovve Oile: who maie weare the palle: At what time, in
what place, in what ſorte, ouer, or vnder, openly, or ſecretely, it maie be lawful to
weare it.
                  To theſe, and other like doubteful, and profounde queſtions, the Pope hath geuen
out his Anſweares,Inter Decreta Gregor. 2. Ad Bonifacium. and that in ſutch graue, and ſolemne ſorte, as if no other
Creature vnder Heauen, biſides his Holineſſe, were hable to vnderſtande ſutche
highe Myſteries.
                  There felle out ſommetime an Odious quarrel bitwéene the Thomiſt s,
                     Auguſti. De Ciuitate, Li. 20. Cap. 26. Viues. and
Scotiſtes, whether the Bleſſed Virgine were conceiued in ſinne, or no. The
one ſide ſaide, Yea: the other cried, Nay. There were Learned menne of bothe
ſides: Parties grewe: The Schooles were enflamed: the worlde was troubled:
No Conference, no Doctoure, no Councel was hable to quiet the mater, and to
make them frendes. The Scotiſtes alleged for them ſelues the Councel of Baſile:
The Thomiſtes cried out, the Councel of Baſile was diſorderly ſummoned,
and therefore vnlawful. In the middes of this heate, Pope Sixtus tooke vpon
him, to be Iudge bitwéene them, and to determine the bottome of y• Cauſe. In
concluſion, when al the worlde lookte to be reſolued, and ſatiſfied in the queſtion,
the Pope Commaunded bothe the Thomiſtes, and the Scotiſtes, to departe home,
and to diſpute no more of the mater, but to let al alone: & ſo leafte them as doubteful,
as he founde them.
                  A greate contention fel out bitwéene them, of Ratiſpone in Germanie, and
the Abbie of S. Deniſe in France,
                     Io. Caluinus de Reliquijs. whether of them had the whole Body of S. Deniſe:
for that either parte ſaide, & bare the worlde in hande, they had the whole. To
Rome they wente: The Pope ſate ſadly in Iudgemente: and examined theire Allegations,
and grewe to concluſion: and in the ende, gaue his aduiſed, & Definitiue
Sentence, that either parte, as wel thei of France, as alſo the others of Germanie,
had the vvhole Body of S Deniſe: and that who ſo euer woulde ſaie nay, ſhoulde
be an Heretique. Of ſutche ſubſtance, and certainetie are the Oracles of your
See of Rome.
                  
                  Somme of your frendes haue ſaide,Cardi. Cuſanus, De Authoritat, Eccleſi. & Con. ſupra, & contra Scripturam. 
                     Veritas per Chriſtum Cathedrae alligata
eſt, non perſonis: Chriſte hath faſtened his Truthe, not to the Popes perſonne, but to
his Chaire: Meaninge thereby, that the Pope, what ſo euer he decree, or ſaie, ſittinge
in S. Peters Chaire, can neuer erre. And thus, by this Doctours Iudgemente,
wee are taught, to géeue credite rather to the Popes Chaire, then to the
Pope.
                  
                  
                     
                     Yet neuertheleſſe,
                     The Paterne of the Faith. 
                     the ſame Irenaeus, whom yée haue here alleged, openly reproued
Pope Victor: and S. Cyprian like wiſe reproued Pope Steuin: for that thei
thought,Euſeb. Li. 5. ca. 26. Cyprian. ad Pompeium. 
                     notwithſtandinge their Chaire, they were in erroure. Braſmus, ſpeaking
of the Anſweare of Pope Innocentius vnto the Councel of
                      Carthage, ſaith thus,
In hac Epiſtola & Dictionem, & Ingenium, & Eruditionem tali Praeſule dignam
cogimur deſiderare:Inter Epiſto. Augu. Ep. 91. Eraſm. Ambroſ. De Sacram. Li. 3. Ca. 1. 
                     In this Epiſtle wee miſſe bothe Eloquence, and Witte, and
Learninge meete for ſutche a Prelate. S.
                      Ambroſe ſaithe, In omnibus cupio ſequi
Eccleſiam Romanam. Sed tamen & nos Homines ſenſum habemus. Ideo quod
alibi rectiùs ſeruatur, & nos rectè cuſtodimus: I deſire in al thinges to folowe the
Churche of Rome. Howe be it, wee our ſelues, for that wee be menne, haue vnderſtandinge,
and Iudgemente too. Therefore, what ſo euer is better keapte in other places, wee doo
wel to keepe the ſame.
                  
                  
                     But, touchinge the ſtate of Rome, that nowe is, Arnulphus ſaide openly in y•
                     
Councel of Remes,Arnulphus in Concil. Remenſi. Cùm hoc tempore Romae nullus ſit, vt fama eſt, qui Sacras
Literas didicerit, qua fronte aliquis illorum docere audebit, quod non didicerit?
For as mutche as, nowe a daies, as it is reported, there is none in Rome, that hath Learned
the Scriptures, with what face dareth any of them to teache vs that thinge, that he
him ſelfe neuer learned?
                  
                  
                     It is not ſufficiente to ſaie, The Pope ſitteth in Peters Chaire. As Antichriſte
maie ſitte in place of Chriſte, ſo maie Iudas ſitte in place of Peter. S.
Hierome ſaithe,
                     Hierony. in Oſee Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Bethel, quae priùs vocabatur Domus Dei, poſtquam Vituli in ea poſiti
ſunt, appellata eſt Bethauen, id eſt, Domus inutilis, & Domus idoli: Bethel,
that before was called the Houſe of God, after yt
                      Hieroboams Goldē Calues were ſette
vp in it, was called Bethauen, that is to ſaie, a Houſe vnprofitable, and the Houſe of
an Idole.
                  Therefore wée thinke it better, to examine, & trie the groundes of your Religion
by the VVoorde of God, that is one, and Vniforme, and enduereth for euer, then
by your touche of Rome, that is ſo vncertaine, and ſo mutable, and ſo often hathe
deceiued vs.Cyprian. ad Pompeium. S. Cyprian ſaithe, Si ad Diuinae Traditionis Caput, & Originem
reuertamur, ceſſat error humanus: If wee returne to the Heade, and Original of
the heauenly Tradition (which is the VVoord of God) al humaine errour geueth place.
                     
                  
                  Touching the reſte of your néedeleſſe talke, our Brethren in France, whom in
your pleaſante manner yée cal Huguenotes, burnte not the Body of Irenaeus.
They knewe, he was a Bleſſed Martyr of God: and his Body ſommetime the
Temple of the Holy Ghoſte. Without any reproche, or villanie, either donne, or
meante to that Holy Father, if they burnte any thinge, whiche alſo maie wel be
doubted, they burnte onely an Idole, that you had ſo vnreuerently ſette vp
againſte the Glorie of God.
                     Chryſoſto. in Geneſim. Homil. 67. 
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Ioſeph moriens air, Oſſa
mea efferetis hinc vobiſcum: Ne Aegyptij memores beneficiorum eius, Corpus
Iuſti haberent in occaſionem Impietatis: Ioſeph lieinge in his death bedde, ſaide vnto
his Children, and Neuewes, yee ſhal carrie my bones with you foorthe out of Egypte: Leſte
the Egyptians remembringe the good thinges, he had donne, ſhould vſe that good mannes
Body to an occaſion of VVickedneſſe, or Idolatrie.
                  
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Auguſtine,
                     
                     Auguſti. De mirabilib. Sacrae Scripturae, Lib. 1. Cap. vltimo. 
                     Nemo conſcius erat Sepulchri Moſis, ne populus, ſi cognouiſſet,
vbi eſſet, adoraret: Noman was made priuie to Moſes Graue: leſte, if the people
had knowen, where his Body had benne, they ſhoulde adoure it.
                  
                     Your obiection of the Sacrifice is otherwhere anſweared more at large. S. Auguſtine
ſaithe,
                     In the Former Replie. Artic. 17 Auguſti. contra Iudaeos, Cap. 1. Augu. in Pſal. 41. 
                     Nunc manibus non offerimus Carnem: Sed Corde, & ore offerimus
Laudem: Nowe wee offer not vp fleaſhe with our handes: but with Harte, and mouth wee
offer praiſe. Againe he ſaithe, Intùs habeo Sacrificium, quo flectam Deum meum:
                     
Within mee ſelfe I haue a Sacrifice, where with I maie pacifie my God.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Apologie, Cap. 17. Diuiſion. 1. & 2.
               When Eldras went about to repaire the ruines of the Temple of
God, he ſente not to Epheſus, although the moſte beautiful and gorgeous
Temple of Diana were there: and whē he purpoſed to reſtore
the Sacrifices and ceremonies of God, he ſente not to Rome, although
peraduenture he had heard, that there were the ſolemne Sacrifices
called Hecatombae, and other called Solitaurilia, Lectiſternia,
and Supplicationes, and Numa Pompilius Ceremonial Bookes, or
Manuals, or Portueſes. He thought it yenough for him, to let before
his eies, and folowe the Paterne of the Olde Temple, whiche
Salomon at the beginninge builded, according as God had appointed
him, and alſo thoſe olde cuſtomes and ceremonies, whiche God
him ſelfe had written out by ſpecial woordes for Moſes.
               
               The Prophete Aggaeus, after the Temple was repaired againe
by Eſdras, and the people mighte thinke, they had a very iuſte cauſe
to reioice on theire owne behalfe, for ſo greate a benefite receiued of
Almighty God, yet made he thē al burſt out into teares, bicauſe that
they whiche were yet aliue, and had ſeene the former buildinge of the
Temple, before the Babylonians deſtroied it, called to minde, howe
far of it was yet, from that beautie, and excellencie, whiche it had in
the olde times paſt before. For then in deede would thei haue thought
the Temple woorthily repaired, if it had anſweared to the Anciente
Paterne, and to the Maieſtie of the firſte Temple. S. Paule, bicauſe
he woulde amende the abuſe of the Lordes Supper, whiche the corinthians
euen then begonne to corrupt, he ſet before them chriſtes
Inſtitution, to folowe, ſaieinge: I haue deliuered vnto you, that
thinge, that I firſte receiued of the Lorde. And, when Chriſte confuted
the Errour of the Phariſeis, Ye muſte, ſaithe he, retourne to
the firſte beginninge: for from the beginninge it vvas not thus.
And, when he found great fault with the Prieſtes for their vncleaneneſſe
of life, & couetouſneſſe, & would cleanſe the Temple from al euil
Abuſes, This houſe, ſaith he, at the firſt beginning vvas a Houſe of
Praier, wherein al the people might deuoutely, and ſincerely praie togeather.
And ſo it were your parte to vſe it now alſo at this daie. For
it was not builded to the ende it ſhould be a denne of theues. Likewiſe
al the good and commendable Princes mentioned of in the Scriptures,
were praiſed ſpecially by theſe woordes, that they had walked
in the waies of theire Father Dauid: That is, bicauſe they had
retourned to the Firſte and Original Fundation, and had reſtoared
the Religion euen to the perfection wherein Dauid leaft it. And therfore,
when we likewiſe ſaw, that al thinges were quite troddē vnder
foote by theſe men, & that nothing remained in the Temple of God,
                  
but pitieful ſpoiles, and decaies, wee reckened it the wiſeſt, and the ſafeſte
waie, to ſette before our eies thoſe Churches, whiche we knewe
for a ſuertie, that they neuer had erred, and yet neuer had, neither
Priuate Maſſe, nor Praiers in a ſtrange, and Barbarous Language,
nor this Corruption of Sacramentes, and other toies.
               And, for ſo mutche as our deſire was, to haue the Temple of the
Lorde reſtored anew, we would ſeeke none other Fundation, thē the
ſame, which, we knewe, was longe agone laide by the Apoſtles, that
is to wite, Our Saueour Ieſus Chriſt. And, for ſo mutche as wee
hearde God him ſelfe ſpeakinge vnto vs in his VVoorde, and ſawe
alſo the notable Examples of the Olde, and Primitiue Churche:
againe, how vncertaine a mater it was, to waite for a General Councel,
and, that the ſucceſſe thereof woulde be mutche more vncertaine:
but ſpecially, for ſo mutche as we were moſte aſcertained of Goddes
VVil, and therefore counted it a wickedneſſe to be too careful, and ouercumbred
about the Iudgementes of Mortal Menne, wee coulde
no longer ſtande takinge aduiſe with fleaſhe, and bloude, but rather
thought good, to doo the ſame thinge, that bothe might rightly be
donne, and hath many a time benne donne, aſwel of other good men,
as alſo of many Catholique Biſhoppes: that is, to remedie our own
Churches by a Prouincial Synode. For thus wee knowe, the Olde
Fathers vſed to put maters in experience, before thei came to the Publique
Vniuerſal Councel. There remaine yet at this daie Canons,
written in Councelles of Free Citties, as of Carthage vnder Cyprian,
as of Ancyra, Neoceſarea, and Gangra, whiche is in
Paphlagonia, as ſomme thinke, before that the name of the General
Councel at Nice was euer hearde of. After this faſhion in Olde
time did they ſpedily meete with, and cutte ſhorte thoſe Heretiques,
the Pelagians, and the Donatiſtes at home, by Priuate Diſputation,
without any General Councel. Thus alſo, when the Emperour
Conſtantius euidently, and earneſtly tooke parte with Auxentius,
the Biſhop of the Arians faction, Ambroſe, the Biſhop of the
Chriſtians, appealed, not vnto a General Councel, where he
ſawe no good coulde be donne, by reaſon of the Emperours might, &
greate laboure: but onely to his owne Cleregie, and People, that
is to ſaie, to a Prouincial Synode. And thus it was decreed in the
councel at Nice, that the Biſhoppes ſhoulde aſſemble twiſe euery
yeere. And in the councel at carthage it was decreed, that the Biſhoppes
ſhoulde meete togeather in eche of their Prouinces, at leaſte
once in the yeere: whiche was donne, as ſaithe the councel at chalcedon,
of pourpoſe, that if any Errours, or Abuſes had happened to
ſpringe vp any where, they might immediately at the firſte entrie be

deſtroied, euen where they firſte began. So likewiſe when Secundus
and Palladius reiected the councel at Aquileia, bicauſe it was not a
General and common councel, S. Ambroſe Biſhop of Millaine
made anſweare, that no man ought to take it for a newe, or ſtraunge
mater, that the Biſhoppes of the VVeaſt Parte of the world did calle
togeather Synodes, & make Priuate Aſſemblies in their Prouinces,
for that it was a thing before then vſed by the Weaſte Biſhoppes not
ſeldome, and by the Biſhoppes of Graecia vſed oftentimes and commonly
to be donne. And ſo Charles the Greate beinge Emperoure,
helde a Prouincial coūcel in Germanie, for puttinge awaie Images,
contrarie to the Seconde councel at Nice. Neither pardy euen amongeſt
vs is this ſo very a ſtrange, and new a trade. For wee haue
had ere nowe in Englande Prouincial Synodes, and haue gouerned
our churches by home made Lavves. What ſhoulde one ſaie more?
Of a truthe, euen thoſe greateſt councelles, and where moſte Aſſemblie
of people euer was (whereof theſe menne vſe to make ſutche an
exceedinge rekeninge) compare them with al the churches, whiche
thoughout the worlde acknowledge, & profeſſe the Name of chriſte,
and what els, I praie you, can they ſeeme to bee, but certaine
Priuate councelles of Biſhoppes, and Prouincial Synodes? For
admitte peraduenture, Italie, Fraunce, Spaine, Englande, Germanie,
Denmarke, and Scotlande meete togeather: if there wante Aſia,
Graecia, Armenia, Perſia, Media, Meſopotamia, Egypte, Ethiopia,
India, and Mauritania, in al whiche places there bee bothe many
chriſtian menne and alſo Biſhoppes: howe can any man, beinge in
his right minde, thinke ſutche a councel to be a General councel?
And, where ſo many partes of the worlde doo lacke, howe can they
truely ſaie, they haue the conſente of the whole worlde? Or what
manner of councel, weene you, was the ſame laſte at Tridente? Or
howe might it bee termed a General Councel, whereas out of al
Chriſtians Kingedomes and Nations, there came vnto it but onely
fourtie Biſhoppes, and of the ſame, ſomme ſo conninge, that they
might be thought meete, to bee ſente home againe, to learne theire
Grammare, and ſo wel learned, that they had neuer ſtudied Diuinitie?
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Your waitinge for a general Councel was not vncertaine. For at the ſettinge foorthe of your
Apologie, it was farre and wel entred, and almoſt ended. VVhat ſo euer ſucceſſe thereof ſhould folow,
ye ought not to haue refuſed itVntruthe. For in many reſpectes it vvas vnlavvful. beinge in al reſpectes lawful.
                  Your aſſurance of Gods wil is none. That is but your common biewoorde, as it hath alwaies
benne of Heretikes. Ye ought to haue ſhewed good euidence for your beinge ſure of Gods wil, before
ye attempted theſe greate and dangerous changes in Religion. Neither becommeth it you to
cal the determinations of a General Councel the iudgementes of mortal men, ſo mutche as concerneth

declaration of neceſſarie pointes of faithe, but the promptinge and teachinge of the Holy
Ghoſte.
                  As for your prouincial Synode, it was none. Synodes cannot be keapte without Biſhops. Before
ye claime the name of a Synode for your packinge and hudlinge togeather, ye muſte proue your
ſelues Biſhops, whiche ye are not able to doo. VVhat ſo euer ye ſaie,Vntruthe, by many examples ſoone reproued. there were neuer
good men, nor Catholike Biſhops, that kepte prouincial Synodes, contrarie to approued and lawful
General Councels,Vntruthe. For our Synode is moſte agreeable to the Olde Councelles. as your Synode is moſte contrary. Neither can ye pretend, that ye
folowed any olde fathers, puttinge thinges in experience before the comminge to an Vniuerſall
Councel.
                  Your Councel prouincial holden in Germanie by Charles the greate, againſte the ſeconde Nicene
Councel general,A greate Vntruthe, As it maie ſoone appeare. is a falſe forged matter, as the Booke againſte Images is, whiche one Eli Phili the
man in the Moones ſonne, Caluine, Illyricus, and other Heretikes haue fathered vpon that moſte godly,
and Catholike Emperoure.
                  The Councel, whiche you meane, was a Godly, and a Catholike Councel, holden at Franck forde
by Pope Adrian, and Charles the greate,Vntruthe. For the vvoordes be plaine, Pſeudoſynodus pro Adorādis Imaginibus, abdicata eſt. Ado.
                      againſte the wicked Councel of the Heretikes named
* Imagebreakers, whiche they helde a litle before that at Conſtantinople, whiche of thoſe Heretikes
was called the ſeuenth, and general, of the Catholikes Pſeudoſynodus, that is to ſaie,
the falſe or forged Councel. Of bothe theſe Councels, thus writeth Abbas Vrſpergenſis, ſo
mutche commended of Melanchthon:In praefat. ad Ducem Bauariae. The Councel whiche a fewe yeeres before was aſſembled
at Conſtantinople, in the time of Irene and Conſtantine her ſonne, of them called the ſeuenth and
Generall (in this Councel holden at Frankforde) was repealed and put awaie by conſente
of al, as voide and ſuperfluous, ſo as from thence foorthe it ſhoulde be named neither the ſeuenth; nor
ought els.
                  If you beleue not this, as the witnes of a Catholike writer, then beleue Anſelmus Rid an erneſte
profeſſour of your owne the neweſt Goſpell.In Catalogo annorum & principum, &c. Bernae impreſſo, anno. 1550. In additionib. ad Carion. Pantaleo. VVho writeth that Adrian the Biſhop of Rome, and
Kinge Charles, at the Councel holden at Frankforde, execrated, and accurſed as Heretical, the
Councel of the Empiere of Conſtantinople and of the Greekes, whiche they helde for thaboliſhinge
of Sainctes Images. Thoſe be his very woordes. Beleue Peucerus Philip Melancthons ſonne in
lawe writinge, that the Councel of Nice, was kepte by common conſente of the Greeke Emperoure
and of Charles. If the ſeconde Councel of Nice, whiche was altogeather for Images, was holden
by conſente of Charles, howe helde he a Councel in Germanie, for puttinge awaie Images, againſte
the Councel of Nice? Beleue Carion, and ſpecially Pantaleo of Zurich, a man of your
owne the moſte Euangelical Religion, who vpon warrante of thauthoritie of Regino writeth,
that the Councel of Frank forde abrogated, and diſanulled the Greekes Councel, that was againſte
the woorſhip of Images. Briefely, howe falſely you and ſundrie other of your ſecte haue herein
belied that woorthy Prince Charles the greate, it maie eaſely appeare by that Paulus Aemylius
writeth of him: That he ſente twelue Biſhops out of Fraunce to the Councel then holden
at Laterane in Rome, in whiche the Imagebreakers falſe named and forged Councel was abrogated.
                  VVhere of General Councels ye make priuate and prouincial Synodes, ye doo biſides learninge,
reaſon, and cuſtome of the Churche. A Councel is not accompted general bicauſe Biſhops of al
Countries vnder Heauen be aſſembled,by this Rule, the Councel of Tridente vvas not General. but bicauſe many be aſſembled, and al be lawfully called.
Els in times, when Hereſies raigne, the Churche ſhould neuer haue the neceſſarie remedie of a general
Councel: for alwaies Heretikes woulde refuſe to come to it, as ye haue, to come to the late Councel at
Trente.
                  In Perſia, Media, Egypte, Mauritania, I wene, ye finde fewe Biſhops at this daie, nor many in the
other Countries, whiche ye recken, and thoſe in manner altogeather ignorant, and ſchiſmatikes. Yet
the Patriarkes of Aſſyria, or Syria Orientalis, and of Armenia, who of late yeres were at Rome, haue
for theire Prouinces bothe ſubſcribed to the Councel of Trente,Vntruthe, vvithoutſhame, or meaſure. and receiued the whole Decrees of
the ſame for theire peoples.
                  
                     
Your reporte of fourty Biſhops onely preſent at the Councel of Trent, and of their ſlender lerning,
is as true, as your Doctrine contrary to that Councel is,Vntruthe manifeſte. Reade the Recordes. & Subſcriptions of the ſame Councel. that is to ſaie, in plaine termes, ſtarke falſe.
It is wel knowen there were at this late Councel of Trent in this Popes time, wel neare two hundred
Biſhops.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  What hope wee might conceiue of your Late Chapter of Tridente, wée were
ſufficiently warned by the former, holden vnder Pope Paulus. 3. and Pope Iulius.
3. wherein, notwithſtandinge your many yéeres ſtudie, and greate conference
of ſo many, and ſo Learned, and ſo excellente, and ſo mutche a doo, yet in the end,
yée were neuer hable, neither to ſuppreſſe your open ſtewes, nor to auoide your
Prieſtes Concubines, nor to cauſe your Biſhoppes to be reſidente vpon theire
Charge, and to doo theire deuties, nor to reſolue vs, whether the Pope be aboue the
Councel,
                     Omnipotentis Dei benignitaie, & Apoſtolorum Petri, & Pauli Authoritate freti. Ambroſ. Catharinus. or the Councel aboue the Pope. In the Summone, and firſte Entrie of
your Aſſemblie there, Pope Paule had forgotten Chriſte, and leafte him quite out
of Companie, and ſupplied the wante of him, with the Authoritie of Peter, and
Paule. An other of your Reuerende Fathers there, maketh Marie the Bleſſed
Virgine, Equal vvith Chriſte, and calleth her, his moſt Faithful Felovve: Fideliſsimam
Chriſti Sociam. An other of the ſame Companie telleth vs, that the
Pope is the Light, that is comme into the vvorlde: Papa Lux venit in Mundum.
To be ſhorte, the whole Iſſue, and Concluſion of al your dooinges there,
by the ful agréemente of al your Fathers,Cornel. Epiſcop. Bitontinus. Seſsione. 6. Salua ſemper in omnibus Sedis Apoſtolicae Authoritate. hangeth vpon the Popes onely pleaſure.
And, by your Doctrine, the Pope maie not be controlled, what ſo euer he
doo, neither by the Cleregie, nor by al the whole Worlde. And, what ſo euer the
Pope ſhal wil, to ſtaie, or paſſe, your Doctoures telle vs, His onely Wil muſte
ſtande for Lavve.
                  
                  For theſe, and other like cauſes, bothe the Emperoure Charles. 5. & alſo Franciſe
the Frenche King,
                     9. Qu. 3. Nemo. 10. Sleidan. Anno. 1551. Illyric. in proteſta. aduerſ. Conc. Trident. Pag. 24 Auguſt de Vnitate Eccleſ. ca. 10 Eodem Lib. ca. 7. biſide ſundrie other Chriſtian Princes, made open Proteſtatiō
againſt your ſaid Tridentine Conuenticle, being then remoued to Bononia,
and ſaid, it was no lawful General Councel, but onely an Aſſemblie of a fewe
certaine perſonnes, to ſerue one mans affection, and to ſeeke for gaine. Sutche is
the opinion, that your owne Princes haue of your Aſſemblies.
                  It becommeth vs not, yée ſaie, to calle the determinations of your General Councelles,
the Iudgementes of Mortal menne. Yet it became S. Auguſtine to calle the ſame,
Concilia Contendentium Epiſcoporū:
                      The Councelles of quarrelling Biſhoppes.
                  
                  
                     And againe, Humanarum contentionum animoſa, & pernicioſa certamina:
                      The bolde,
and hurteful Contentions of worldly quarrelles. But what néede wée many woordes?
Your owne Panormitane ſaith,
                     Extra. de Conſangui. & Affin. Non debet. 
                     Leges Summorum Pontificum, & Conciliorū
appellantur Statuta Humana: & fic ſtrictè non poſſunt dici Ius Diuinum: The
Lawes, and Determinations of Popes, and Councelles, are called the Determinations, and
Lavves of menne: and ſo in ſtreite manner of ſpeache, they cannot be called the Lavves
of God.
                  
                  Yee ſaie, wée are no Biſhoppes, and therefore haue no Authoritie, to holde a
Synode.
                     1. Cor. 9. Euen ſo your Fathers in olde time ſaide, that S. Paule was no Apoſtle,
and that S. Baſile, and S. Hilarie were no Biſhoppes. Of S. Paule, it is plaine.
S.Hilar. Contra Arianos, & Auxentium. 
                     Hilarie ſaithe of him ſelfe, Auxentius de Perſona mea calumniatus eſt, damnatum
me à Saturnino, audiri, vt Epiſcopum, non oportere: The Heretique Auxētius laith
a quarrel to my perſonne: and, for as mutche as Saturninus, the Heretique, hath condemned
me, he ſaithe, I maie not be hearde, as a Biſhop.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe the Arian Heretiques vſed to ſaie, that S. Baſile, and other like Learned,
and Catholique Fathers of that time, were no Biſhoppes. S. Baſile thereof

writeth thus:
                     Coūcelles General repealed by Prouincial. They calle the Councel of Catholique Biſhoppes a Councel of vvicked
menne: neither wil they once voucheſaue to name them Biſhoppes, leſte they ſhould ſeeme
to allowe the Decrees, that they haue made againſte them. And they challenge them to be no
Biſhoppes, for that, as they ſaie, they are the Captaines of a wicked hereſie. In like ſorte
he writeth vnto Patrophilus,
                     
                     Baſil. Epiſt. 72. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Baſil. Epiſt. 82. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     of the Heretique Euſtathius:
                      He taketh greate heede,
leſte he ſhoulde happily be forced to calle vs Biſhoppes.
                     Marc. 1. 
                     Thus, M. Hardinge, in denieing
vs to be Biſhoppes,
                        1. Cor. 15. yée doo none otherwiſe, but as other your Predeceſſours
haue donne before you.
                  
                  Of the Biſhoppes, and Prelates of your ſide, I wil ſaie nothinge. What your
owne frendes haue thought of them, I haue ſaide before.
                  As for vs, it ſhalbe ſufficient, if wée be onely the voice of a Crier in the Wilderneſſe.
S. Paule, to auouthe his Apoſtleſhip, ſaide openly thus, Gratia Dei ſum id
quod ſum: By the Grace of God, I am, that I am.
                     
                  
                  
                     Yée ſaie, a Prouincial Councel maie not repeale a Councel General: as if
the Authoritie of your Councelles ſtoode onely in number, and not in Truthe.
Howe be it, the Simple Truthe of God ſhal ouerweigh Falſehedde, be it neuer ſo
General. But euen thus ſaide Auxentius, the Arian Heretique, againſte S.
Hilarie. Theſe be his woordes, Ego quidem, pijſsimi Imperatores, exiſtimo, non oportere
ſexcentorum Epiſcoporum Vnitatem, poſt rantos labores, ex contentione
Paucorum hominum refricari: My moſte Graceous Lordes, in my Iudgemente,
it is not meete, after ſo greate paines taken, for the contentions ſtriuinge of a fewe, to hazarde
the conſente, and Vnitie of Six hundred Biſhoppes. Thus the Heretique Auxentius
alleged greate multitudes of his Companions, againſte S. Hilarie, and
the Catholiques: whiche, he ſaide, were but a fewe.
                  
                  
                     Notwithſtandinge, it were no harde mater, to ſhewe euidente Examples of
General Councelles, that haue benne ouerruled by Particulares. The General
Councel of Nice determined, as you ſaie, that al appeales, out of al partes of the
worlde, ſhoulde lie to Rome. Yet the Particulare, or Prouincial Councel of
Aphrica ſaithe, Si prouocandum putauerint, non prouocent, niſi ad Aphricana
Concilia.Epiſt. Auxentij apud Hilarium. Concil. Aphrican. Ca. 92. Sozom. li. 1. ca. 23 Concil. Carthaginenſe. 2. ca. 2. Socra. li. 5. ca 17. Ad tranſmarina autem qui putauerit appellandum, à nullo intra Aphricam
in Communionem recipiatur: If they ſhal thinke it good to appeale, let
them not appeale, but onely to Coūcelles that ſhal be holden within Aphrica. But who ſo
euer ſhal appeale beyonde the Seas (that is to ſaie, to Rome) let noman within Aphrica
receiue him to his Communion.
                  The General Councel of Nice durſte not to diſſolue Prieſtes Marriage: The
Particulare Councel of Carthage diſſolued it vtterly. The order of Priuate, or
Auriculare Confeſsion, whiche, in your fantaſie, was receiued generally throughout
the whole Churche of God, was notwithſtandinge quite aboliſhed in the
Churche of Conſtantinople, onely by the Particulare aduiſe of Nectarius.
                  
                  Your Blacke Freers in theire Particulare Chapters,
                     Augu. De Ciuita. li. 20. Cap. 26. Viues. haue controlled, and cut
of the General Determination of the Councel of Baſile, touchinge the conceiuing
of our Lady in Original Sinne. And Albertus Pigghius, by his like Particulare
Authoritie,
                     Alber. Pigghius in Hierarchi. telleth you, that as wel this Councel of Baſile, as alſo the
Councel of Conſtance, beinge bothe General (in that they ſaide, The Councel
is aboue the Pope) Decreed plainely againſte
                         Nature, againſte the manifeſte Scriptures,
againſte al Antiquitie, and againſte the Catholique Faithe of Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     Certainely, the Truthe of God is not bounde, neither to Perſonne, nor to
Place. Where ſo euer it be, either in fewe, or in many, it is euermore Catholique,
euen bicauſe it is the Truthe of God. In the Councel of Conſtantinople it is
written thus, Definierunt pariter, vt, ſi quid in Prouincia qualiber emergeret,Historia Triparti. Li. 9. ca. 13 Prouinciae

Concilio finiretur:The coū
                        cel of Frankforde. 
                     The Fathers agreed al togeather, that, if any mater ſhould happen
to growe in the Prouince, by a Councel of the Prouince it ſhoulde be ended. Likewiſe
ſaith
                      Iſidorus: Manifeſtum eſt, quo'd illa, quae ſunt per vnamquan
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Prouinciam,
ipſius Prouinciae Synodus diſpenſet: ſicut Niceno conſtat decretum eſſe Concilio:Iſidorus in Praefatione in Concilia. 
                     It
is cleare, that maters happeninge in euery Prouince, by a Prouincial Synode maie be ordered:
as it is concluded in the Councel of Nice. Likewiſe S. Ambroſe ſaithe,
Sciebant eſſe conſuerudinem,In Concilio Aquileien. vt in Oriente. Orientalium eſſet Concilium: Intra occidentem,
Occidentalium: They knewe, it was a Cuſtome, that a Councel of the Eaſt
Biſhoppes ſhoulde be holden in the Eaſte: and a Councel of the VVeaſte Biſhoppes
aparte in the Weaſte.
                  
                  
                     S.
                     Auguſti. De Baptiſmo. contra Donatiſt. Lib. 2. Cap. 3. Auguſtine ſaithe, Literas Epiſcoporum, & per Sermonem fortè ſapientiorem
cuiuſlibet in ea re peritioris, licet reprehendi, ſi quid in eis fortè à Veritate
deuiatum eſt: Biſhoppes Letters, if they ſwarue any thinge from the Truthe, maie be
controlled by the diſcretion of any other man, that hath more ſkil in the mater.
                  
                  
                     In like ſorte Abbate Panormitane your own Doctoure ſaith, as it hath benne
alleged before:
                     Extra, de Electi. & Electi poteſt. ſignificaſti. Abb. In concernentibus Fidem, etiam dictum Vnius Priuati eſſet praeferendum
dicto Papae, fi ille moueretur mehoribus rationibus Noui, & Veteris Teſtamenti:
In maters concerning the Faithe, the ſaieinge of any one Priuate Man were to be taken
before the ſaieinge of the Pope: if he were moued with better reaſons of the Olde, and
Nevve Teſtamente, then the Pope.
                  Howe be it, wée haue not by our Prouincial Councel remoued, or ſhaken the
Authoritie of any one Anciente General Councel, M. Harding. For of al the Anciente
Councelles, that haue benne, touchinge the caſes, that lie bitwéene vs in
controuerſie, yee are not yet hable to allege one. Wée haue vpon good cauſes remoued
your Vanities, & vnſéemely Folies: & haue reſtoared againe, ſo mutch, as in vs
late, the Decrees, & Canons of the Anciente Councelles. Hincmarus, the Biſhop
of Remes,
                     Hinemarus Remenſis, Cap. 20. ſaith thus: Cùm duarum, aut trium Prouinciarum Praeſules in vnum conueniunt,
ſi Antiquorum Canonum iuſtitutione muniti, aliquid praedicationis, aut dogmatis
inſtituunt, quod tamen ab Antiquorum Patrum dogmaribus non diſcrepet, Catholicum
eſt, quod faciunt: & fortaſſe dici poteſt, Vniuerſale: When the Biſhoppes
of twoo, or three Prouinces meete togeather, if they by the warrante of the Olde Councelles,
appointe any mater of preachinge, or Doctrine, ſo that it diſagree not from y• Doctrine
of the Ancient Fathers, it is Catholique, yt thei doo, and perhaps maie be called Vniuerſal.
                  
                  The credite of the Emperoure Charles Booke, reportinge the Decrees of the
Councel of Frankfoorde, touchinge the Adoration of Images, I leaue wholy
to the indifferente diſcretion of the Reader.
                  It was Printed, not at Geneua, as you ſurmiſe, but in Pariſe: The ſetter out
proueth it, not to be forged, by many good, and likely Reaſons. An Anciente Copie
of the ſame is yet ſtil to be ſéene in Rome in Laterane, euē in the Popes owne Librarie.
Auguſtinus Steuchus,
                     Augu. Steuchus, De Donatione Conſtan. li. 1. ca. 6 Eckius, de Imaginibus. the Maiſter of the ſame Librarie, reporteth y• ſame.
The Emperour Ludouicus, Sonne vnto Charles, wrote a Booke, yet extante, and
remaininge in France, to like purpoſe. Freere Eckius alſo beareth witneſſe vnto y•
ſame Booke of the Emperoure Charles, although vntruely, and guilefully, as his
manner is. For he ſaith, that Charles wrote four Bookes in Defence of Images:
whereas in deede the Bookes are directely written againſte Images.
                  
                  Although yée thinke Eli Phili, or, I knowe not, who, maie eaſily be charged
with corruption, & forgerie, yet why the Pope him ſelfe ſhoulde corrupte, & forge
his owne Booke, in his owne Librarie, againſt him ſelfe, it were harde for you to
ſhewe good Reaſon.
                  
                     The Councel of Frankforde, yée ſaie, was
                      Godly, and Catholique, and made Decrees
againſte Imagebreakers, in the behalfe of Images. Yet notwithſtandinge Auentinus

                     ſaith,
                     A councel General. In Frankfordienſi Concilio Scita Graecorum, de Adorandis Imaginibus,
reſciſſa ſunt:Auen
                           ••
                        n. Fol. 3, 7. 
                     In the Councel of Frankford the Grecians Decrees, for the Adoration
of Images,Regino. 
                     were quite aboliſhed. Regino ſaithe, Pſeudoſynodus Graecorum,
quam pro adorandis Imaginibus fecerunt, reiecta eſt: The Falſe Councel of the
Greekes, whiche they made for Adoration of Images, was repealed in the Councel of
Frankforde.Ado. 
                     Likewiſe Ado ſaithe, Pſeudoſynodus, quam Graeci Septimam vocant,
pro Adorandis Imaginibus, abdicata eſt penitùs: The Falſe Councel, whiche
the Greekes calle the Seuenthe, wherein Decrees were made for the Adoration of Images,
was there vtterly put awaie.
                  
                  Hincmarus, the Archebiſhop of Remes, ſpeakinge of the ſame Councel of
Frankforde,Hincmar. ca. 20. 
                     ſaith thus: Pſeudolynodus Graecorum deſtructa eſt, & penitùs abdicata.
De cuius deſtructione, non Modicum Volumen, quod in Palatio adoleſcentulus
legi, ab eodem Imperatore Romam eſt per quoſdam Epiſcopos miſſum:
The Falſe Councel of the Greekes was repealed, and vtterly ouerthro wen in the
Councel of Frankforde. Whereof, when I was a yong man, I readde a prety bigge Booke
in the Popes Palaice in Rome: whiche Booke was ſente thither by certaine Biſhoppes
from the ſaide Emperoure Charles.
                  
                     Certaine woordes of the ſaide Levvde, or Falſe Councel of the Greekes, emongeſt
others,
                     Citantur in Libro Caroli Magni. 
                     are theſe: Qui timet Deum, Adorat Imagines, vt Filium Dei: Qui Adorat
Imaginem, & dicit. hoc eſt Chriſtus, non peccat: peccat, qui nō Adorat Imaginem.
Qui non Adorat imaginem, eſt Haereticus. Imago Adoranda eſt eodom
cultu, quo Sancta Trinitas: He, that feareth God, Adoureth an Image, as he would
Adoure the Sonne of God: He that Adoureth an Image, and ſaith, This is Chriſte,
offendeth not: He offendeth, that Adoureth not an Image: He that Adoureth not an
Image, is an Heretique: wee muſte Adoure an Image with the ſame Reuerence. wherewith
wee Adoure the Holy Trinitie.
                  Nowe, whether theſe, and other like woorthy ſaieinges, and ſentences were
to be reproued, or no, it maie pleaſe you, M. Hardinge, to conſider.
                  That Councel, yée ſaie, is called General, not, whereun to al Chriſtian Nations
doo reſorte in déede: but whereunto al Chriſtian Nations are lawfully ſummoned.
As this anſweare is true, & not denied, ſo by the ſame, your late Councel of Tridente,
maie in no wiſe be called General. For, what lawful Sommones ſente your
Pope Pius, either to Preter Gian into Ethiopia: or to other Biſhoppes, and Chriſtians
in India, or (Europa onely, and that not whole, excepted) into any other
Kingedome, or Countrie of the worlde?
                  
                     But yée ſaie, In Perſia, Media, Egypte, Mauritania, and in other Countries
adioininge, there are fewe Chriſtians at this daie to be founde. Yet the Authours
of Nouus Orbis,Nouus Orbis. 
                     diſcribing the ſtate of the world, ſaie thus, In al Countries vvhither
ſo euer yee comme. there be ſomme Chriſtians. Againe, In India many
Kinges, & princes profeſſe Chriſte. And againe, In Armenia, & cilicia, in a manner,
the vvhole people is Chriſtened. Onely they are ſubiecte to the Cham of
Tartarie.Eol. 324. Their Prieſtes be maried: And, vvho ſo is vnmaried, maie be no Prieſt.
                  Yée ſaie, The Patriarkes of Aſſyria, and Armenia
                      (that neuer ſawe, neither the
one Countrie, nor the other) were at Rome (yée knowe not, when) and ſubſcribed to al the
Articles of your Councel of Tridente.
                      O M. Hardinge, yee can grate no greate credite
by open mockerie. It is no harde mater for your Pope, out of his owne garde
to make ſutche Patriarkes yenough, one for Hieruſalem, an other for Conſtantinople,
an other for Alexandria, an other for Antioche, an other for Sidon, an other
for Tyrus: and I marueile, if there be not ſomme Patriarke, one, or other, for
Sodome, and Gomorre. Theſe poore Holy, and Hongry Fathers are contented
at al times, to yelde theire ſubmiſſions, and to ſette theire handes to what ſo euer

they ſhalbe required,The number of the Biſhoppes at Tridēte and in the names of thoſe Countries, that they ſcareely ouer
hearde of, to confeſſe, the Pope their maiſter, to be al, & more then al. With ſutche
daine ſhewes, and viſa
                        •
                     des, it pleaſeth you to ſmoothe the worlde.
                  
                     It yee doubte hereof, yée maie eaſily finde, that one Auguſtinus de Roma, in
your late Councel of Baūle,
                     
                     Concil. Baſilien. Petrus Paluden. Patriar. Hieroſolymitanus. Ceremontar. li. 1 Section. 3. 
                     hare the name of the Archebiſhop of Nazareth in
lurie: Likewiſe, that one Petrus Paludenſis,
                      a poore Fréere Obſernante, not long
ſithence, bare the name of the Patriarke of Hieruſalem. But what néede moe Examples?
Your own Ceremoniarie of Rome telleth you thus, Conſucueruni Autiqui
ponere Patriarchas quatuor Eccleſiarum Principalium, inter Epiſcopos Cardinales
mixtim. Noſtro tempore ponuntur immediatè poſt Cardinales. Sunt enim
quodammodo' Titulares: They were woonte in olde times, to place the Patriarkes of
the foure Principal Churches togeather with the Cardinal Biſhoppes, one with an other. But
nowe adaies they are placed nexte beneathe al the Cardinalles. For in a manner they haue
nowe nothinge els, but the names of Patriarkes.
                  
                  It is moſte certaine, that the Chriſtian Patriarkes, and Biſhoppes of thoſe
Countries, wil neither Communicate with the Pope, either in Sacramentes, or
in Praiers: nor any wiſe yéeld to his Authoritie nor geue any manner of honoure,
or reuerence to his perſonne: nomore then to Machomete, or Antichriſt: as I
haue ſufficiently ſhewed before.
                  Touchinge the Number of Biſhoppes, preſente at your Former Aſſemblie at
Tridente, I referre mee ſelfe to the Recordes of the ſame. If yée finde there more
then Fourtie Biſhoppes, I am cōtent to loſe my credite. And yet of the ſame number,
Blinde ſir Roberte of Scotland, as I haue ſaid before, & M. Pates of England
were ſeely poore Biſhoppes, God knoweth, endewed onely with bare names, without
Biſhoprikes.
                     Flacius Illyricus In proteſtatione aduerſus Conci. Trident. In your later Aſſemblie, twoo of your Holy Fathers were ſtaine
there preſently in Aduouterie. By meane of whiche miſfortune, your number by ſo
mutche was abated.
                  Theſe be the greate woorthies of the worlde: Theſe Cornelius Bitontinus, one
of the ſame Companie, calleth the Starres of the Churches, and the Mighty Armie
of Goddes Angelles. Theſe haue power to determine maters, that thei neuer
vnderſtoode, by Authoritie onely, but not by knowledge.
                  
                     Alphonſus de Caſtro,
                     Alphanſus aduerſus Haereſes, Lib. 1. Ca 4. Eraſmus, In Epiſtolam Hieronymi ad Euſtochium. 
                     as I haue ſhewed you before, ſaithe thus, It is certaine,
that ſomme Popes be ſo voide of Learninge, that they vnderſtande not the Grammare
Rules. Eraſmus, ſpeakinge of ſundrie the greate Learned of your ſide, ſaithe thus,
Sibi videntur Semidei, miro ſupercilio prae ſe deſpicientes Grammaticos: Qui ſi Grammaticae
litaſſent, non ad hunc modum ſe pueris deridendos propinarent:
                      They
thinke them ſelues halfe Goddes, and with high lookes thei deſpiſe poore Grammariens.
But if they had wel Learned their Grammare, thei woulde not offer ſutche occaſions, that
children, and babes ſhould ſcorne at theire folie.
                  
                     Concerninge the whole mater, your Doctours of Sorbona in Pariſe haue concluded
thus, Vt Concilium legitimè congregetur, ſufficit, quo'd ſolennitas, & forma
luris ſolenniter ſit ſeruata.Articul. 22. Quia, ſi quis trahere velit hoc in diſputationem, vtrùm Praelati,
qui ibi ſedent, habeant Rectam Intentionem, & vtrùm ſint Docti, & vtrùm habeant
Scientiam Sacrarum Literarum, & animum obediendi Sanae Doctrinae, eſſet proceſſus
in infinitum: That the Councel be lawfully aſſembled, it is ſufficient, that y• Solemnitie, and
fourme of Lawe be ſolemnely obſerued. For if a man would caſte doubtes, whether the Biſhoppes,
that ſitte in Councel, haue a good Meaninge, and whether they be Learned, and
whether they be ſkilful in the Scriptures, and whether they haue a minde to obeie ſounde
Doctrine, or no, then wee ſhould neuer make an ende.
                  
                  Theſe be they, M. Hardinge, to whom yée woulde haue vs to géeue care, what
ſo euer thei ſaie, euen as to the Secretaries of the Holy Ghoſte.
                  
                  
                     
                     But S.
                     Auguſtin contrae Creſconi. Lib. 3. Cap. 79. Auguſtine ſaithe, Eccleſiae inter nos agitur cauſa, non mea. Eccleſia in
nullo homine ſpem ponere, à ſuo didicit Redemptore: It is the Churches cauſe, that wee
talke of, it is not mine. The Churche hath learned of her Redeemer, to put no truſte
in any man.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 18. Diuiſion. 1.
               How ſo euer it bee, the truthe of the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſte dependeth
not vpon Councelles, nor, as S. Paule ſaithe, vpon
the Iudgementes of Mortal Creatures. And if they, whiche ought
to be careful for Goddes Churche, wil not be wife, but ſlacke their
duetie, and harden their hartes againſte God, and his Chriſte,
goeinge on ſtil to peruerte the right waies of the Lorde, God wil
ſtirre vp the very ſtones, & make children, and babes cunninge, that
there maie euer be ſomme, to confute theſe mennes lies.
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Hereto M. Hardinge anſweareth nothinge els, but thus, The Councel is the Schoole
of Truthe: The Biſhoppes cannot foreſlowe their dueties: The Churche of Rome cannot erre.
Whiche tales wee haue ſo often, and not without wearineſſe hearde already.
Petrus de Palude,Petrus De Palude, De Poteſta. Papae. Arti. 4. 
                     emongeſt other your Doctours ſaithe, Non eſt credendum, Eccleſiam
Romanam erraſſe à Fide. Ipſa enim poteſt è contrario cum Chriſto dicere,
Ego Teſtimonium perhibeo de meipſa. Teſtimonium meum verum eſt: No
man maie beleue, that the Churche of Rome maie erre from the Faithe: Contrarywiſe
that Churche maie ſaie with Chriſte, I beare vvitneſſe of mee ſelfe. And my vvitneſſe
is iuſte, and true. Therefore ſo longe, as the Churche of Rome can ſpeake
for her ſelfe, there is no doubte, but al is wel.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 18. Diuiſion. 2.
               
                  For God is able (not onely without Councelles, but alſo, wil
the Councelles, nil the Councelles) to maintaine, and anaunce his
owne Kingedome. Ful many be the thoughtes of mans harr (ſaith
Salomon) but the Counſel of the Lorde abideth ſtedfaſt: There
is no vviſedome, there is no knovvledge, there is no counſel againſt
the Lorde.Hilarius in pſal. mum 126. Thinges endure not, ſaithe Hilarius, that be ſet
vp vvith mannes vvorkemanſhip: By an other manner of meanes
muſte the Churche of God be buiided and preſerued: For that
Churche is grounded vpon the Fundation of the Apoſtles and
Prophetes, and is holden faſte togeather by one corner ſtone,
vvhiche is Chriſte Ieſus.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhere ye ſaie, that by an other manner of meanes the Churche of God muſt be builded and preſerued,
ſhewe vs what other meanes they are, and we muſt ſaie, ye are very cunninge men, who correct,
I will not ſaie, Magnificat, but Chriſtes owne ordinaunce for gouernemente of his Churche,
By this reckeninge, it appeareth not, that God euer orderned Popes, or Car
                           ••
                        alles, to builde his Churche. who hath ordeined Apoſtles, Prophetes, Euangeliſtes, Shepeherdes, and Teachers (as is before mentioned)
In aedificationem Corporis Chriſti, To the buildinge vp of the Bodie of Chriſte, which
is his Churche. Ye ſhall pardon vs if we beleue S. Paule before you. VVe ſee what is the marke ye

ſhoote at,The buildinge of Goddes Churche. that the lawfull ſucceſſours of the Apoſtles, Prophetes, and Euangeliſtes, and the lawfull
Shepeherdes, and Doctours being put from the buildinge of Chriſtes Body the Churche, your ſelues maie
take the woorke in hande, and gouerne all, set your hartes as reaſte, it ſhal not be ſo.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  In déede Chriſte hath ordeined Apoſtles, Prophetes, Euangeliſtes, Paſtours, &
Teachers, for the gouernmente of his Churche: notwithſtandinge y• ſame be not
alwaies allowed to ſitte in Councelles, nor be alwaies knowen by Rochetes, or
Miters. If God had not prouided other Paſtours, & Feeders, biſides your Prelates,
the whole Churche might ſterue for hunger. S. Paules Woordes be true: but your
idle Conſtructions are vntrue. Wée finde not faulte with Goddes Ordinance: but
wée reioice in Goddes Mercie, for that it hath pleaſed him, to viſite his people,
and to diſcouer the multitude of theſe Vanities, wherewith you haue ſo longe, and
ſo vncourteouſly beguiled the worlde. Therefore wée correcte not Magnificat, M.
Hardinge, as you ſaie: but rather wee humbly ſinge, Te Deum laudamus, and
reioice in God our Saueoure. The right, & onely waie of buildinge Goddes
Houſe, is, to laie the Fundation thereof vpon y• 
                     Euerlaſtinge vvoorde, and vvil
of God.
                     1. Corin. 3. Eſai. 8. S. Paule ſaithe, Other Fundation noman can laie, but the ſame, that is ſaide already:
whiche is Chriſte Ieſus,
                      The Prophete Eſaie ſaithe, To the Lavve (of God)
and to the Teſtimonie. If they ſpeake not accordinge to this Woorde, they ſhal haue no
morninge Lighte.
                      Therefore S. Hilarie ſaithe, as it is alleged in the Apologie,
Aliter extruenda,
                     Hilarius in Pſalmum. 126. 
                     aliter cuſtodienda Eccleſia eſt: Fundamentum eius ſuper Prophetas,
& Apoſtolos collocandum eſt. Eccleſia ita à Deo, id eſt, Doctrinis Dei aedificata,
non concidet: Otherwiſe muſte the Churche be builte, and otherwiſe muſte it be keapte.
The Fundation of it muſt be ſaide vpon the Apoſtles, and Prophetes. The Churche
beinge thus builte by God, that is to ſaie, by the Doctrine of God, ſhal neuer falſe.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 19. Diuiſion. 1.
               
                  But marueilous notable, & to very good pourpoſe, for theſe daies,
bee S.
                  Hieronym. in Naum. Cap. 3. Hieromes woordes: VVhom ſo euer (ſaithe he) the Deuil
hathe deceiued, and entiſed to fal aſleepe, as it vvere vvith the
ſvveere, and deadely enchauntementes of the Maremaides the Sirenes,
thoſe perſones doothe Goddes VVoorde avvake vp, ſaieing
vnto them:Epheſ. 5. Ariſe thou that ſleapeſt, lifte vp thee ſelfe: and Chriſte
ſhal geeue thee light. Therefore at the comminge of Chriſte, of
Goddes VVoorde, of the Eccleſiaſtical Doctrine, and of the ful
deſtruction of Niniue, and of that moſt bevvtiful Harlot, then ſhal
the people, vvhiche heretofore hadde benne caſt in a traūce vnder
their Maiſters, be raiſed vp, and ſhal make haſte to goe to the Mountaines
of the Scriptures: and there ſhal thei find hilles, Imeanemoſes,
and loſua the Sonne of Nun: other Hilles alſo, vvhiche are the
Prophetes: and Hilles of the Nevve Teſtament, vvhiche are the Apoſtles,
& the euangeliſtes. And vvhen the people ſhal flee for ſuccoure
to ſutche Hilles, and ſhal be exerciſed in the readinge of this
kinde of moūtaines, though thei finde not one to teache them (for
the harueſt ſhal be greate, but the labourers fevv) yet ſhal the good
deſire of the people be vvel accepted, in that thei haue gotten them
to ſutche Hilles: and the Negligence of theire Maiſters ſhal bee

openly reproued. Theſe be S. Hieromes woordes, & that ſo plaine,
as there needeth no Interpretour. For they agree ſo iuſte with the
thinges, we now ſee with our eies, haue already comme to paſſe, that
wee maie verily thinke, he meante to foretel, as it were, by the Spirite
of Propheſie, and to painte before oure face, the Vniuerſal ſtate
of oure time: the fal of the moſte gorgeous Harlot Babylon: the repairinge
againe of Goddes Churche: the blindeneſſe, and ſlouthe
of the Biſhoppes, and the good wil, & forewardeneſſe of the people.
For, who is ſo blinde, but he ſeethe, theſe menne be the Maiſters, by
whome the people, as ſaithe S. Hierome, hath benne leadde into erroure,
& lulled a ſleepe? Or, who ſeeth not, that Rome, that is their
Niniue, whiche ſometime was painted with faireſt colours, nowe,
her vizarde beeinge pulled of, is bothe better ſeene, and leſſe ſette by?
Or, who ſeeth not, that good menne, beinge awaked, as it were, out
of their deade ſleepe, at the lighte of the Goſpel, and at the voice of
God, haue reſorted to the Hilles of the Scriptures, waitinge not at
al for the Councelles of ſutche Maiſters?
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye wreſte the ſaieinge of S. Hierome to your purpoſe, that is to ſaie, ſo as it may ſeeme to be ſpoken
againſt the Churche, that now is, wherein ye make him a Prophete. And that this place mighte
ſounde the more againſt the Clergy, to the commendation of the people, and to ſtirre them to reade the
Scriptures: after your accuſtomed maner ye ſticke not to adde ſome what of your owne in one place:
to take awaie a litle of the Doctour in an other place: to alter the woordes in an other place. VVho
looketh ſo narrowly for trial of this, as your ſecretarie thought maliciouſly, when he wrote it: by diligent
conference of this Apologie with S. Herome he ſhall finde it.
                  Now, concerninge the right ſenſe of the place, S. Hieromes intent was not, to foretell and paint
before our face (as you ſaie) the vniuerſall ſtate of our time, but to tell, and declare the meaninge of
the Prophete Nalium.Vntruthe. For S. Hierome in the ſame place ſaithe, Haec in Conſummatione Mundi magis complentur &c. Hucuſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            de Mundi ruina.
                      ſignifiynge the ſtate of the time now paſte, to witte, the time of Chriſtes firſte
comminge into the world: for the woordes do expreſſely ſpeake thereof. After S. Hieromes expoſition,
by Niniue, that Prophete meaneth the worlde: by the Aſſyrian Kinge, the Deuill. And there he prophecieth
the ruine of the worlde. and of the Deuill at the comminge of Chriſte. S. HieromeVntruthe. For he ſpeaketh oftentimes of her: and ſaithe plainly, that Rome is Babylon. ſpeaketh
neuer a woorde of your harlotte Babylon, whereof ye and your vnlearned miniſters haue neuer donne
bablinge, meaning thereby the Holy Romaine Churche.
                  Firſt you Sir defender, that penned this geare, haue plaide a falſe parte by diuidinge the one member
of the ſentence into twoo: Or rather by puttinge in one woorde, and leauing out an other. For,
where S.In Comment. in Nahum. Cap. 3. Hierome hath thus, Et conſummationis Niniue ſpecioſiſsimae quondam Meretricis
(whereby he meante the vndoinge of the Deuils power in the worlde once, that is to ſaieAs though ſithence the Birthe of Chriſte, there neuer had bēne, neither Niniue, nor Babylon, nor Ignorance, nor Negligence in the Cleregie. before
the comminge of Chriſte, a moſt beautiful harlotte) that you might geue occaſion of reproch to the Romaine
Church, which falſefiynge the doctours ſenſe you vnderſtand by Niniue, you haue ſet it forthe
thus, Et conſummationis Niniue, & ſpecioſiſsimae meretricis. Then you deſcant vpon it, as
though S. Hierome had ſo written, and ſaie that he ſetteth before our face the falle of the moſt gorgeous
harlot Babylon, whiche you interpret to be Rome. And then further corrupting S. Hieromes ſenſe,
you make him to ſpeake of the repairinge againe of Goddes Churche, as though at this daie it were
by defaulte of the catholike Clergie fallen downe, and ſhould be ſet vp againe by you and your Miniſters:
alſo of the blindeneſſe of the Biſhops of our time, that they be the maiſters by whome the people
hath benne lead into errour, and lulled aſleepe. And hereto ye adde, as ſaithe Hierome, where S.
Hierome ſaithe not ſo neither of the maiſters at Chriſtes firſt comminge, but of the Deuil, who brought

the people aſleepe, by whome he vnderſtandethNo doubte: if there be credite ſufficiente in this Commentarie. not the people that liueth now, but them that were
deceiued by the Deuill vnder euill maiſters, before the comminge of Chriſte.
                  But becauſe this defender thinketh be hath acquited him ſelfe like a Clercke by alleaginge this
place out of S. Hierome againſt the Catholike Churche, I require al the learned to reade ouer what S.
Hierome writeth vpon the ende of the Prophet Nahum, from theſe woordes of the texte,In Nahum. Cap. 3. 
                     Brucus irruit
& euolauit &c. foorth to the ende of the Chapter, and moſt diligently to marke that goeth immediatly
before the place by this defender alleaged. As for thee, good reader, that vnderſtandeſt not
the Latine tonge, I aſſure thee, S. Hierome ſpeaketh thoſe woordesAs though the Popes Clerkes vvere not Heretiques, and Teachers of Falſe Doctrine. of Heretikes, * of teachers of euil
doctrine, of ſuche as will not beare the voice of the Churche, of whiche ſorte this new engliſh Clergie
is. And in that diſcourſe he commendeth to true beleuers, not onely the Hilles, that is, the written
Scriptures, but alſo the doctrine of the Churche (as thou ſeeſt in the allegation put in the Apologie) and
before that be commendeth likewiſe Latibula Doctorum, the Caues of the Doctours, in which the
faithfull people alſo as by flyinge to the Hilles, couche them ſelues ſafe from danger of the Deuill ſtirrer
of Hereſies. So that if the place be well ſcanned, by that allegation they ſhall ſeeme to haue made
a rodde to whippe them ſelues. The whole place beinge ouer longe to recire here, a ſentence or two.
that are ſpecially meante of ſuche as they be, maie ſuffiſe.
                  
                     Vae ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         his &c. wo then to thoſe, whiche are teachers of peruerſe doctrines in Niniue, by
which is ſignified the worlde.Pſalm. 151. And aptly to them it is ſaide, thy Shepeherdes haue ſtepte, for they haue
geuen ſleepe to their eies, and ſlomberinge to their eieleddes. And therefore haue they not founde a
place for our Lorde, nor atabernacle for the God of Iacob. Neither haue they hearde out of Ephrata,
that is to ſaie, Frugifera Eccleſia, the fruitefull Churche. Nor haue they founde the Churche in the
thickettes of the woddes. Neither onely the Shepeherdes of this rifferaffe (mixticij huius, be meaneth
by 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , whiche is the woorde of the ſeuenty tranſlatours, all ſortes of people deceiued
by falſe teachers) and of the locuſte (they are the capitaine Heretikes) whiche in time of froſte ſitteth
in the hedges, haue ſlepte: but by the Kinge of Aſsyrians (who is the Deuill) they haue ben lulled aſlepe.
For alwaies it is the ſtudie of the Deuil, how he may bringe aſleepe waking ſoules. Thus S. Hierome.
                  Now I reporte me to thoſe that haue eies to ſee, whether out newe Cleregy may not ſerme thoſe,
whome the Deuill hath lulled aſleepe (gladly I vſe their owne terme) in their newe deuiſes, in their
owne liked conceites, in their Schiſmes, and Hereſies, in their vniuſte poſſeſsion of Benefices, and Biſhoprikes,
thoſe yet liuinge, to whome the right belongeth, in their preſumption of that office they
are not duely called vnto, in their malice towarde the Churche, in the continuall ſatisfiynge of their
fleaſhly luſtes, and in their vnlawfull and lecherous embracinges.
                  Let them feare the dreadfull ſayinge of S. Hierome folowinge ſtraight after their allegation:
Non eſt ſanitas contritioni tuae, &c. There is no health for thy bruze, thy woonde ſwelleth.
Therefore the rifferaffe of Niniue can not be healed, becauſe he laieth not downe his pride, and the
woonde is alwaies freſhe, and daily he is woonded whiles the Deuill ſtriketh at him. And when all
commeth to all, there is no health for his bruze. For although he ſeeme to him ſelfe hole, yet is his ſoule
broken, and cruſshed with the bytle of the whole earth, that fownceth downe vpon it. And it is not
healed, becauſe continually it is lifted vp (with pride). But if it become humble, and ſubmit it ſelfe to
Chriſte,Pſalm. 50. a contrite and an humble harte God deſpiſeth not. Thus deſcribeth S. Hierome theſe menne.
Neither let them ſaie, they ſubmitte them ſelues to Chriſte, whome and whoſe Goſpell they haue ſo
muche in their mouthes, vntill they folowe his doctrine, ſayinge of the gouernours of his Churche,
He that heareth you,Luc. 10. heareth me: and he that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me. And this muche for anſweare
to the place of S. Hierome.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     Here is a marueilous woorke. Sir Defender ſingeth diſcante, and quiteth him ſelfe like
a Clerke: He altereth S. Hieromes minde: He ſaithe, S. Hierome ſaithe ſo, where as S. Hierome ſaith not
ſo: He of Prowde Niniue, hath made the Churche of Rome: He of the Diuel, hath made Antichriſte:
He bableth aboute Babylon: He diuideth one ſentence into twoo: He putteth in one woorde, and leaueth
out an other: He is bulled a ſleepe: He ſcattereth his rifferaffe: He doothe, and ſaithe,

                     I knowe not,
                     Rome. Niuiue. Babylon. 
                     what, what ſo euer it ſhal pleaſe M. Hardinge of his courteſie to
reporte.
                  
                  
                     Touchinge this heinous imagined corruption, and alteringe of S. Hieromes
minde,
                     Chryſoſt. in Matthae. Homil. 19. 
                     S. Chryſoſtome ſaith. Qui mendax eſt, neminē putat verum dicere, ne ipſum
quidem Deum:
                      He that him ſelfe is a lier, imagineth, that noman ſaithe y• truthe, no not God
him ſelfe. With ſutche corruption, & change of woordes, Palladius, a lewde felowe,
thought him ſelfe ſommetime hable to charge S. Hierome. S. Hieromes woordes
thereof are theſe:
                     Hieronym. Ad Pammach. De optimo genere Interpretandi. 
                     Concionatur, me eſſe Falſarium: me Verbum non expreſsiſſe de Verbo:
pro Honorabili, dixiſſe Chariſsimum.
                     Tom. 2. 
                     Haec, & huiuſmodi nugae, mea crimina ſunt:
He preacheth, and publiſheth abroade,In eadem Epiſt. that I am a Falſarie: that I haue not preciſely tranſlated
woorde for woorde: That I, in ſleede of this woorke, Honorable, haue written, deerely
Beloued. Theſe thinges, and ſutche trifles are laide to my charge.
                  
                     To theſe folies S. Hierome anſweareth thus, Cùm ipſa Epiſtola doceat, nihil
mutatum eſſe de ſenſu, nec res additas, nec aliquod dogma confictum, faciunt nae iſti intelligendo,
vt nihil intelligant: & dum alienam imperitiam volunt coarguere, produnt
ſuam:
                      Whereas the Epiſtle it ſelfe declareth, that there is no alteration made in the ſenſe,
and that there is neither mater of ſubſtance added, nor any Doctrine imagined, verily by their
greate cunninge, they proue them ſelues fooles: and ſeekinge to reproue other mennes vnſkilfulneſſe,
they betraie theire owne.
                  Yée ſaie, S. Hierome in theſe woordes ſpake nothinge, neither of the Churche
of Chriſte, nor of your Cleregie of Rome. For trial whereof, let S. Hierome him
ſelfe be hearde to ſpeake, as a witneſſe indifferēt of him ſelfe. Firſt in other places
he ſaith thus (To this place we ſhal reſorte afterward) Dicimus,
                     Hieronym. in Michaeam, Ca. 3. 
                     Nō venient ſuper
nos mala. Audiamus ſententiam Domini. Sion, & Hieruſalē, & Mons Tēpli ſpeculatotium,
& viſio pacis, & Templus Chriſti in conſummatione, & in fine: We ſaie,
There ſhal no hurte comme vpon vs. Let vs heare the ſaieinge of our Lorde. Sion, and Hieruſalem,
and the Mounte, that is the Watche Tower of the Temple, and the ſighte of
peace, and the Temple, or Churche of Chriſte, ſhalbe conſumed, and brought to
an ende. Theſe woordes be plaine: not onely that haute Lady Niniue, but alſo the
Churche, or Temple, that beareth the Name of Chriſte, ſhalbe conſumed, and
broughte to an ende.
                  
                     Likewiſe he ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. in Sophoniam. Ca. 2. 
                     Quos Deus inſeruit ex Oleaſtro in radicem Bonae Oliuae, ſi illi
immemores receſſerint à Conditore ſuo, & Adorauerint Aſſyrium, cur illos Deus non
euertat, & ad eandem ſitim reducat, in qua priùs fuerunt? Euen they, whome God hath
graffed frō out of the Wilde Oliue tree, into the roote of the Good oliuie, (that is to ſaie,
the children of the Churche
                     ) if they forgeate them ſelues, and flee from theire Maker,
and woorſhip the Kinge of Aſſyria (that is to ſaie, Antichriſte, or any other Creature,
that is not God) why maie not God ouerthrowe them, and bringe them to the ſame
thirſte, and drouth, they were in before?
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Hierony. in Matthae. Ca. 24. Li. 4. Abominatio Deſolationis, intelligi poteſt omne dogma peruerſum:
quod cum viderimus ſtare in Loco Sancto, id eſt, in Eccleſia, debemus fugere
de Iudaea ad Montes: The Abomination of Deſolation, maie be taken for any
VVicked Doctrine: whiche when wee ſhal ſee ſtandinge in the Holy Place, that is to
ſaie, in the Churche of Chriſte, then wee muſte flee from Iurie to the Mountaines (of
the Scriptures).
                  
                     And againe likewiſe he ſaithe, Paxillus auferetur de Loco Fideli, hoc eſt, de
Eccleſia, per impietatem quotidiè ſuccreſcentem: &, qui ſuper eum antè pependerant Fide,
poſteà infidelitate frangentur, & cadent, & peribunt:
                      The Pinne, or barre (whereby
he meaneth Chriſte, for that the Faitheful hange vpon him, as in a houſe thinges
are hanged vp ſafely vpon a Pinne,
                     ) ſhalbe taken awaie from the place, that was
Faitheful, that is to ſaie, from the Churche, bicauſe of the wickedneſſe, that daiely groweth:
And they, that before honge vpon him by Faithe, afterwarde, by infidelitie, ſhalbe broken

downe,Rome, Babylon, and falle, and periſhe.
                  What ſo euer Gloſe yée ſhal geue to the other woordes of S. Hierome, certainely
theſe woordes are plaine, and euidente, & wil not eaſily receiue your Gloſe.
Likewiſe S. Gregorie, ſpeakinge, not of the Firſte comminge of Chriſte, but of
the time,Gregor. in Iob. Ca. 9. Li. 19. Ca. 29. that is diſcribed, to be before the ende of the worlde, ſaithe thus: In diebus
illis Eccleſia, quaſi quodam ſenio debilitata, per Praedicationem parere Filio
                           •
                         non valebit:
In thoſe daies the Churche, as beinge ouermutche weakened with age, ſhal not be
hable by Preachinge to beare Children.
                     
                  
                  
                     Now,
                     Hieronym. In Hieremi. Lib. 1. Ca. 4. 
                     touchinge your Cleregie, S. Hierome him ſelfe ſaithe, Ipſi quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Sacerdotes,
qui Legem Domini docere deberent, & ſubiectos ſibi populos à Leonis furore
defendere, quodam ſtupore infatuati, vertentur in amentiam: The Prieſtes them ſelues,
that ought to teache the Lavve of our Lorde, and to defende the people, committed to
their charge, from the furie of the Lion (that is the Diuel) beinge amazed, and berefte of
their wittes, ſhalbe turned into madneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. in Naum. Ca. 3. Scit Rex Aſſyrius, non poſſe ſe Oues decipere, niſi Paſtores
ante conſopierit. Semper Diaboli ſtudium eſt, vigilantes animas conſopire: The Kinge
of Aſſyria (that is the Diuel) knoweth, that he can neuer deceiue the Sheepe, onleſſe firſte
he caſte the Sheepeheardes into a traūce. It is euermore the Diuels policie, to laie watcheful
Soules aſleepe.
                  
                  
                     And therefore againe he ſaithe,
                     Hieronym. In Sopboniam, Ca. 1. Auferet Dominus nomina Vanae Gloriae, &
Admirationis falſae, quae verſantur in Eccleſia. Sed & nomina Sacerdotum cum
Sacerdotibus, qui fruſtrà ſibi applaudunt in Epiſcopali nomine, & in Preſbyterij
Dignitate, & non in opere: God wil take awaie the names of Vaine Glorie, and
Falſe Credite, that are in the Churche: and the Names of Prieſtes, togeather with the
Prieſtes them ſelues, that vainely boaſte them ſelues of the Name of Biſhoppes, and of
the Dignitie of Prieſtehoode, but doo nothinge.
                  
                  
                     But aboute Babylon, yée ſaie, yee neuer make an ende of Bablinge. What Bablinge
then,
                     Hieronym. In Catalogo Scriptor. Eccle. in Marco. 
                     I praie you, made S. Hierome, when he ſaide, Petrus in Prima Epiſtola,
ſub Nomine Babylonis, Romam ſignificat? S. Peter in his Firſte Epiſtle meante
Rome vnder the name of Babylon.
                  
                     S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Roma eſt quaſi Secunda Babylon: Rome
                      is as the Seconde
Babylon.
                     Auguſt. De Geneſi contra Manichae. Li. 2. Ca. 1. Auguſtin. in Pſalm. 44. Primaſius in Apocalyp. Ca. 16. 
                     Againe he ſaithe, Ciues Babyloniae nos fecerunt: dimiſimus
Creatorem: Adorauimus Creaturam: dimiſimus eum, à quo facti ſumus: Adorauimus
illud, quod fecimus:
                      They haue made vs the Citizens of Babylon: (for
                     )
wee haue leafte oure Creatoure, and haue woorſhipped a Creature: wee haue leafte him, that
made vs: and haue Adoured that thinge, that wee made oure ſelues.
                  
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Primaſius, Tunc Babylon cadet, quando nouiſsimè poteſtatem
perſequendi Sanctos acceperit:
                      Then ſhal Babylon comme to grounde,
when ſhe ſhal laſte of al take power to perſequute the Sainctes of God.
                  
                  
                     And againe,
                     In idem Caput. Vidi Mulierem ſedentem ſuper Veſtem Coccineam, plenam Nominibus
Blaſphemiae, habentem Capita Septem. Septem Capita dicit Septem
Montes: Romam, quae ſuper Septem Montes praeſidet, ſignificans: I ſawe a
VVooman ſittinge vpon a ſcarlet roabe, fulle of Names of Blaſphemie, hauinge Seuen
Heades. Seuen Heades he calleth the Seuen Mountes, vpon vvhiche
Rome vvas builte: meaninge thereby Rome, that ſitteth vpon Seuen Hilles.
                  
                  Ludouicus Vi
                        •
                     es,Auguſt. De Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 18. Ca. 22. Viues. Ambroſius Anſbertus in Apacalyp. Li. 6. 
                     your owne very frende, ſaith thus: Hieronymus, ad Marcellam
ſcribens, non aliam exiſtimat diſcribi &c. S. Hierome, writinge vnto Marcella,
thinketh, there is none other Babylon diſcribed by S. Iohn in his Reuelations, but the
Cittie of Rome. Ambroſius Anſbertus ſaithe, Vbi eſt illa dudum ſuper omnia
Regna exaltata Inclyta Roma, Babylon Secunda? VVhere is that Noble Rome,
euanced of late aboue al Kingedomes, the Seconde Babylon?
                  
                     
I paſſe ouer Beatus Rhenanus,
                     The people ſhal flee to the scriptures. 
                     Auentinus, Petrarcha, Dantes, and a greate
number of other youre owne Doctours, mentioned before in place more conueniente:
Al whome ye maie not of youre courteſie charge with bablinge.
                  
                     Yee ſaie, S. Hierome meante not the ſtate of our time: but onely the ſtate of the
time nowe paſte: that is to ſaie, as it is ſaide before,
                      The time of Chriſtes firſte
Comminge into the VVorlde. And this, in your margine, yee cal the right ſenſe
of S. Hierome truely reported. Howe be it, youre Reader, that hath eyes to ſee,
maie eaſily finde, that this is youre owne onely ſenſe, M. Hardinge, and not S.
Hieromes. For, I beſeeche you, howe was Niniue fully deſtroied, or what Goſpelles
were there written,
                     Hieronym. In Naum. Ca. 3. The true ſenſe of S. Hieroms woordes. 
                     at the Firſte Comming of Chriſte into the vvorlde?
S. Hieromes meaninge, and ſpeache is plaine, The people, before the seconde
Comminge of Chriſte, vvhiche ſhalbe in Glorie, ſhal leaue theire negligente,
and idle Scholemaiſters, vvhiche haue of longe time deceiued them: and ſhal
flee to the Mountaines of the Scriptures. And, al be it they finde not one to
teache them, yet ſhal theire deſire, and endeuoure be accepted before God,
for that thei haue ſought vnto theſe Mountaines: and the negligence, and
ſlouthefulneſſe of theire Maiſters ſhalbe reproued.
                  
                     To like pourpoſe S.
                     Chryſoſtom. In Gene. Homi. 36. 
                     Chryſoſtome ſaithe, Fieri non poteſt, vt is, qui Diuinis
Scripturis magno ſtudio, feruenti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         deſiderio vacat, ſemper negligatur. Licet enim deſit
nobis hominis Magiſterium, tamen ipſe Dominus, ſupernè intrans in corda
noſtra, illuſtrat mentem: rationi iubar ſuum infundit: detegit occulta: doctor
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
fit eorum, quae ignoramus: tantùm ſi nos ea, quae à nobis ſunt, afferre velimus:
It cannot poſſibly be, that he, that with earneſte ſtudie, and feruente deſire readeth the
Scriptures, ſhoulde euermore be foreſaken. For although wee wante the inſtruction of
man, yet God him ſelfe from aboue entringe into our hartes, lighteneth our minde: poureth his
beames into our wittes: openeth thinges, that were hidden: and becommeth vnto vs a Scholemaiſter
of that, wee knowe not: onely if wee wil doo ſo mutche, as in vs lieth.
                  
                     So ſaithe S. Hierome, Poſtquàm conuerſi fuerint, & Clarum Chriſti Lumen
aſpexerint,Hierony. In Eſai. lib. 12. ca 49. Pſalm. 23. paſcent in vijs, & in ſemitis sanctarum Scripturarum: & dicent,
Dominus paſcit me, & nihil mihi deerit: When they ſhalbe turned, and ſhal beholde
the cleare light of Chriſte, they ſhal feede in the pathes, and waies of the Holy Scriptures,
and ſhal ſaie, The Lorde feedeth me: and I ſhal vvante nothinge.
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe, Circundabit ſibi, quaſi murum firmiſsimum, Scripturarum doctrinam:
ne ad interiora eius poſsit hoſtis irrumpere:Hieronym. In Naum. Cap. 3. 
                     He wil encloſe him ſelfe with the Doctrine
of the Scriptures, as with a ſtronge walle: that the Enimie maie not enter into his harte.
Againe he ſaithe,
                      Haec eſt via: Ambulate in ca. Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad Dextram, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad Siniſtram.
Tunc omnes Errores,Hierony. In Eſai. lib. 9. Cap. 30. & Idola, & Similitudines Veritatis comminnes, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      diſperges, & ita
iudicabis immunda, vt 
                        •
                     a menſtruatae mulieris ſordidiſsimo Sanguini compares: This is
the waie: walke in it. Goe neither to the Right hande, nor to the Leafte. Then ſhalt then
breake, and ſcatter al Errours, and Idoles, and Countrefeite likeneſſe of the Truthe:
and ſhalt iudge them to be ſo filthy, that thou ſhalt liken them to moſte vile, and lotheſome
bloude.
                  
                  
                     But, for as mutche as yee ſaie, Al theſe woordes of S. Hierome perteiue vnto
ſomme other mater, I know not what, and not vnto the ouerthrowe of Babylon, or fal of
Antichriſte, that ſhalbe before the ende of the worlde, notwithſtandinge S. Hieromes
woordes of them ſelfe be plaine yenough, yet maie it pleaſe you, to conſider theſe
woordes of S. Chryſoſtome,
                     
                     Chryſoſtom. In Matt. Homi 49. 
                     touchinge the ſame. Thus he ſaithe: Tunc, qui in Iudaea
ſunt, fugiant ad Montes, id eſt, qui ſunt in Chriſtianitate, conferant ſe ad
Scripturas. Montes ſunt Scripturae Apoſtolorum, & Prophetarum, &c. Sciens
Dominus tantam confuſionem rerum in nouiſsimis diebus eſſe futuram, ideò mandat, vt
Chriſtiani, qui ſunt in Chriſtianitate, volentes firmitatem accipere Fidei verae, ad

nullam rem fugiant, niſi ad Scripturas. Alioqui, ſi ad alias res reſpexerint, ſcandalizabuntur,
& peribunt, non intelligentes, quae ſit Vera Eccleſia. Et per hoc incident in
abominationem deſolationis: Then let them, that be in Ievvrie, flee vnto the Mountaines:
that is to ſaie, let them, that be in Chriſtes profeſſion, flee to the Scriptures.
The Scriptures of the Apoſtles, and Prophetes, be the Mountaines, &c. Our
Lorde knowinge, that there ſhoulde be ſutche confuſion in the laſte daies, therefore commaundeth,
that Chriſtian menne, that beleue in Chriſte, willinge to haue an aſſurance of
the True Faith, ſhoulde haue recourſe to nothinge els, but vnto the Scriptures. Otherwiſe,
if they haue regarde to any other thinge, they ſhalbe offended, and periſhe, not vnderſtandinge,
what is the true Churche. And by meane hereof they ſhal falle into the Abomination of
deſolation.
                  
                  Here, M. Hardinge, no Gloſe wil ſerue. Certainely, theſe woordes were ſpoken,
not of the Firſte comminge of Chriſte into the worlde, as you imagine: but
of the Kingedome of Antichriſte, and of the Ende, & conſummation of the worlde.
                  
                     Hereof S. Gregorie ſaithe thus:
                     Gregori. In Iob. ca. 29. li. 19. ca▪ 9. Eccleſia poſt eoſdem dies, quibus deprimitur, tamen
circa finem temporum grandi praedicationis Virtute roborabitur: The
Churche after theſe daies of her affliction, ſhal afterwarde notwithſtandinge be ſtrengthened
with greate Power, and mighte of preachinge.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 20. Diuiſion. 1.
               But, by youre fauoure, ſomme wil ſaie, theſe thinges ought not
to haue benne attempted without the Biſhop of Romes commaundemente,
forſomutche as he onely is the knotte and bande of Chriſtian
Societie: He onely is that Prieſte of Leuies order, whom
God ſignified in the Deuteronomie, from whome counſel in maters
of weight, and true iudgemente ought to be ſette: and, who ſo
obeieth not his iudgemente, the ſame man ought to bee killed in the
ſight of his brethren: and, that no Mortal Creature hathe Authoritie
to be Iudge ouer the Pope, whatſoeuer he doo: that Chriſte reigneth
in Heauen, and the Pope, in Earthe: that the Pope alone can doo
as mutche, as Chriſte, or God him ſelfe can doo: bicauſe Chriſte, and
the Pope haue but one Conſiſtorie: That without him is no
Faithe, no Hope, no Churche: and, who ſo goeth from him, quite
caſteth awaie, and renounceth his owne Saluation. Sutche talke
haue the Canoniſtes, the Popes Paraſites, but with ſmal diſcretion,
or ſobreneſſe. For they coulde ſcantly ſaie more, at leaſte, they coulde
not ſpeake more highly of Chriſt him ſelfe.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  VVhat ſomme wil ſaie, wee knowe not. VVee tel you, that your change of Religion, and manifolde
Hereſies ought not to haue benne attempted at al, neither without the Biſhop of Romes commaundemente,
nor with his commaundemente. Touching the Biſhop of Rome him ſelfe, you haue neuer
donne with him. He is a great blocke in youre waie. And ſo hath he euer bene in the waie of al Heretikes.
Yet could he neuer by you, or them be remoued. To your ſcoffes againſte him, and belieinge of the
Canoniſtes before by you vttered, and here idly repeted, my former anſweare maie ſuffiſe.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 20. Diuiſion. 2.
               As for vs truely, we haue fallen from the Biſhop of Rome, vpon

no manner of worldly reſpect, or commoditie. And would to Chriſte
he ſo behaued him ſelfe, that this falling away needed not: But ſo the
caſe ſtoode, that onleſſe we leafte him, wee coulde not come to Chriſte.
Neither wil he nowe make any other league with vs, then ſutche a
one,1. Reg. 11. as Nahas the Kinge of the Ammonites woulde haue made in
times paſte with them of the Cittie of Iabes, whiche was, to put out
the Right Eie of eche one of the Inhabitantes. Euen ſo wil the Pope
plucke from vs the Holy Scripture, the Goſpel of our Saluation,
and al the Confidence, whiche wee haue in Chriſte Ieſu. And vpon
other condition can he not agree vpon peace with vs.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Ye are not fallen from the Biſhop of Rome onely, whiche were a damnable ſchiſme, but ye are
fallen from Chriſtes Churche. Your compariſon of the Pope with kinge Nahas is not very agreable.
But ſirs, ye ſpeake more maliciouſly, then credibly. Be ye good Chriſten men, and conforme your ſelues
to the Catholique Faithe, (and denie Chriſte, and his Goſpel: For, this alſo yee ſhoulde
haue added) and I warrant you, the Pope wil not plucke from you, neither the Scriptures, nor your
confidence in Chriſte Ieſu, no more then he dooth from vs.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 20. Diuiſion. 3.
               For whereas ſomme vſe to make ſo greate a vaunte, that the Pope
is onely Peters Succeſſour, as though thereby he carried the Holy
Ghoſte in his boſome, & cannot erre, this is but a mater of nothing, &
a very trifelinge tale. Gods Grace is promiſed to a good minde, and
to any one that feareth him, not vnto Sees & Succeſſiōs. Richeſſe,
ſaithe S. Hierome, maie make a Biſhop to be of more might, then
the reſte: but al the Biſhoppes, whoſoeuer they be, are the Succeſſours
of the Apoſtles. If ſo be the Place, and Conſecration onely be
ſufficient, why then, Manaſſes Succeded Dauid, and Caiphas Succeded
Aaron. And it hath benne often ſeene, that an Idol hath benne
placed in the Temple of God. In olde time, Archidamus the Lacedemonian
boaſted mutche of him ſelfe, howe he came of the bloud of
Hercules. But one Nicoſtratus, in this wiſe abated his pride: Nay,
quod he, thou ſeemeſt not to deſcende from Hercules. For Hercules
deſtroied euil menne: and thou makeſt good menne euil. And when
the Phariſeis bragged of their linage, howe they were of the kinred
and bloude of Abraham,
                  Iohan. 8. 
                  Ye, ſaithe Chriſte, ſeeke to kil me, a manne
vvhiche haue tolde you the truthe, as I hearde it from God. Thus
Abraham neuer did. Yee are of youre Father the Diuel, and vvil
needes obeie his vvil.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Pope ſuccedeth Peter in auctoritie and power. For whereas the Shepe of Chriſte continewe
to the worldes ende, he is not wiſe, that thinketh Chriſte to haue made a ſhepeherde temporarie or for
a time, ouer his perpetual flocke. Then what ſhepeherdly endoument our Lorde gaue to the firſte ſhepeherde,

at the inſtitution of the ſhepeherdely office of the Churche: that is he vnderſtanded to haue
geeuen ordinarely to euery ſucceſſour.Luke. 22. To Peter he gaue that he obteined by his praier made to the
Father, that his Faithe ſhould not faile. Againe, to him he gaue grace that to performe, the performance
whereof at him he required, to witte, that he confirmed and ſtrengthened his brethren: wherefore
the grace of ſtedfaſtneſſe of Faithe, and of confirminge the waueringe and doubtful in Faithe,
euery Pope obteineth of the holy Ghoſte for the benefite of the Churche. And ſo the Pope, although he
maie erre by perſonal erroure, in his owne priuate iudgemente, as a man, and as a particular Doctour
in his owne opinion:Vntruthe, ioined vvith impudent flatterie, & extreme folie. yet as he is Pope, the ſucceſſour of Peter, the Vicar of Chriſte in earthe, the
ſhepeherde of the vniuerſal Churche, in publique iudgemente, in deliberation and definitiue ſentence
Vntruthe, ioined vvith impudent flatterie, & extreme folie. he neuer erreth.Vntruthe, ioined vvith impudent flatterie, & extreme folie. nor neuer erred. For when ſo euer he ordeineth or determineth any thinge by his
highe Biſhoply Auctoritie, intendinge to binde Chriſten menne to performe or beleue the ſame, he is
alwaies gouerned and holpen with the grace and fauour of the holy Ghoſte. This is to Catholique
Doctours a very certaintie, though to ſutche doughty Clerkes as ye are, it is but a mater of nothinge,
and a very triflinge tale.
                  Gods grace in one reſpecte, is promiſed bothe to a good minde, and to one that feareth God, and
alſo in an other reſpect, to the ſucceſſours of Peter. S. Hieromes ſaieinge to Euagrius, whiche nowe
you haue alleaged three or foure times, wil not handſomly ſerue you for ſo diuerſe pointes, as a ſhipmans
hoſe for diuerſe legges.This place of S. Hierome is anſvveared before, Par. 2. ca. 3. Diui. 5. Once againe I tel you, thereby he meaneth nothinge els, but that, the
greatnes of Rome ought not to geue Auctoritie to a wronge priuat cuſtome, (by whiche Deacons, in
certaine caſes were preferred before Prieſtes) againſt the right generall cuſtome of the worlde. And
biſhoppes be the ſucceſſours of the Apoſtles, we graunte, yet is the Pope the ſucceſſour of Peter,Peter vvas the Shepeheard, and the Apoſtles the Sheepe. A vaine vntruthe vvithout 
                           •
                        auoure. Cyprian ſ
                           •
                        the, Chriſtus parem dedit Apoſtolis omnibus poteſtatem. who
was ſhepeherde of al Chriſtes Lambes and ſhepe, and therefore alſoPeter vvas the Shepeheard, and the Apoſtles the Sheepe. A vaine vntruthe vvithout 
                           •
                        auoure. Cyprian ſ
                           •
                        the, Chriſtus parem dedit Apoſtolis omnibus poteſtatem. of the Apoſtles them ſelues, and
ſo hath a higher auctoritie.
                  As for your example of Archidamus, who boaſtingly fetched his petigree from Hercules,
you muſte conſider, ſucceſsion of vertue alwaies foloweth not ſucceſsion of bloude. Nowe wee do
                        •
                     
acknowledge in the Pope a ſucceſsion of ſhepeherdly power, euen ſutche as was in Peter.The Pope ſuccedeth in povver but notin Holineſſe. VVhiche
power is not taken awaie by lacke of Peters holines. Chriſte likewiſe by his anſweare
to the Phariſeis, though he affirmed, they ſucceded not Abraham in loue of truthe, and that for their
malice, they were of their Father the Deuil: yet 
                        •
                     e denied not, but that they came lineally of Abraham,
and were of his bloud, though not of his godlines. Sutche ſucceſsion meane not we, ſpeakinge of
the Pope, whoſe ſucceſsion is deriued of Peter: but the ſucceſsion of power and auctoritie, andAl this maie be called the Succeſsiō of folie. of
infallibilitie of Faithe in iudgemente and ſentence definitiue.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Here wee haue founde one Pope with twoo Capacities. In one reſpecte he is
a Man: in an other reſpecte he is aboue a Man: but whether, in that reſpecte, he be
Angel, or Archangel, it is paſte in ſilence. One waie he Succedeth Peter: an other
waie he Succedeth, I knowe not, whom. One waie he maie Erre: an other waie,
though he woulde neuer ſo faine, he cannot erre. In his Bed, at his Table, on
Horſebacke, or els where, wee maie wel miſtruſte him: for in theſe places he maie
be deceiued, as wel, as others. But, in Councel, in Conſiſtorie, and in place of
Iudgemente, it is moſte certaine, yee ſaie, he cannot erre. For in theſe places he
hathe the Holy Ghoſte, I trowe, at his Commaundemente. His Povver Paſtoral,
his Succeſsion in Authoritie, and Infallibilitie of Faithe, his Place, his Chaire, &
his Conſecration,
                     Salluſtius in Ciceronem. are ſufficiente for euer to preſerue him from Erroure. To like
pourpoſe Salluſte ſommetime ſaide of Cicero, Aliud Stans, aliud Sedens, de Republica
ſentit: While he Standeth vp, he hath one minde, touching the common State: When he
ſitteth downe,
                     
                     Nicola. Cuſanus de Authoritate Eccleſi. &c. Diſ. 19. Sic omnes. in Gloſsa. 
                     he hath an other. Apolloes Nonne,
                      while ſhe ſate mewed in her Caue,
was inſpired, and Propheſied, and gaue Oracles: but after that ſhee came abroade,
ſhee was no wiſer, then other wemen. Thus your Doctours ſaie, as it is before reported,
Veritas adhaeret Cathedrae: Papa ſanctitatem recipit à Cathedra: The
                        
Popes Truthe is faſtened vnto his Chaire:
                     The Pope cannot Erre. The Pope from his Chaire receiueth
his Holineſſe.
                  It ſhameth mee, M. Hardinge, to ſee you ſo vainely occupied about theſe vanities.
Yee maie wel be liberal in dealinge hereof. They coſte you but litle: they are
onely your owne. Scriptures, Doctoures, or Councels, to witneſſe your ſaieinges,
yee allege none. For further declaration of this whole mater, I beſeche thee, good
Chriſtian Reader,Par. 6. ca. 5. Di. 2. to conſider the ſhorte treatie that I haue written before, touchinge
the ſundrie Erroures, and euidente Hereſies, that haue benne notably
founde in Popes. Alphonſus de Caſtro, one of M. Hardinges owne ſpecial Doctours,
ſaithe:Alphonſus, De Haereſib. li. 1. ca. 4. 
                     Non dubitamus, an Haereticum eſſe, & Papam eſſe, coire in vnum
poſsint, &c. Non enim credo, aliquem eſſe adeò Impudentem Papae Aſſentatorem,
vt ei tribuere hoc velit, vt nec Errare, nec in Interpretatione Sacrarum Literarum
hallucinari poſsit: Wee doubte not, whether one man maie be a Pope, and an Heretique
bothe togeather. For, I beleue, there is none ſo ſhameleſſe a flatterer of the Pope, that
wil ſaie,
                      (as you ſaie, M. Hardinge) The Pope can neuer Erre, nor be deceiued in the
Expoſition of the Scriptures.
                     
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe Eraſmus ſaithe: Si verum eſt, quod quidam aſſeuerant, Romanum
Pontificem Errore Iudiciali Errare non poſſe,Eraſm in Annotationibus, In 1. Corin. 7. quid opus eſt Generalibus Concilijs?
quid opus eſt, in Concilium accerſere Iuriſconſultos, ac Theologos eruditos?
Si Papa pronuntians labi non poteſt, cur datus eſt Appellationi locus,
vel ad Synodum, vel ad eundem rectiùs edoctum? Quorſum attinet, tot Academias
in tractandis Fidei quaeſtonibus diſtorqueri, cùm ex Vno Pontifice, quod verum
eſt, audire liceat? Imò qui fit, vt huius Pontificis decreta cum illius Pontificis decretis
pugnent? If it be true, that ſomme menne ſaie, that the Biſhop of Rome can neuer
Errre in Erroure of Iudgemente, what neede wee then ſo many General Councelles?
And in the ſame, what neede wee ſo many Lavviers, and learned Diuines? If
the Pope cannot Erre in geeuinge ſentence, wherefore lieth there any Appeale from the
Pope, either to a Councel, or els to the Pope him ſelfe beinge better enfourmed? What
neede wee to trouble ſo many Vniuerſities, in diſcuſſinge of Maters of Faithe, whereas
wee maie learne the Truthe of the Pope alone? Naie, howe commeth it aboute, that one
Popes Decrees are founde contrarie to an others: if it bee ſo certaine, that the
Pope, who ſo euer he be and what ſo euer he ſaie, can neuer Erre?
                  
                  
                     That yee ſpeake of Peters Succeſsion, is vaine, and childiſhe. Of ſuche folie
Athanaſius ſaithe:
                     Athana. In Apologia Secunda. Hieronymus ad Euagrium. Perſuaſus eſt, in Magnitudine Vrbium Religionem eſſe ſitam: This
wiſe man imagineth, that Religion ſtandeth in the Greateneſſe of Citties. S. Hierome
ſaithe: Potentia Diuitiarum, & Paupertatis Humilitas vel Sublimiorem, vel Inferiorem
Epiſcopum non facit. Caeterùm omnes Apoſtolorum succeſſores ſunt:
The Wealthe of Richeſſe, and the Baſeneſſe of Pouertie maketh a Biſhop neither Higher,
nor Lower. But al Biſhoppes be the Apoſtles Succeſſours.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 21. Diuiſion. 1.
               Yet notwithſtandinge, bicauſe wee wil graunte ſomme what to
Succeſſion, tel vs, hath the Pope alone Succeded Peter? And wherein,
I praie you, in what Religion, in what Office, in what peece
of his life hathe he Succeded him? What one thing (tel me) had Peter
euer like vnto the Pope, or the Pope like vnto Peter? Except peraduenture
thei wil ſaie thus, That Peter, when he was at Rome, neuer
taught the Goſpel, neuer Fedde the Flocke, toke away the Keies
of the Kingdome of Heauen, hid the Treaſures of his Lorde, ſat him

downe onely in his Caſtle of S. Iohn Laterane, & pointed out with
his finger al the places of Purgatorie, and kindes of pouniſhementes,
committinge ſomme poore Soules to be tormented, and
other ſomme againe ſuddainely releaſing thence at his own pleaſure,
takinge monie for ſo doinge: or, that he gaue order to ſaie priuate
Maſſes in euery corner: or that he mumbled vp the Holy Seruice
with a lowe voice, and in an vnknowen language: or, that he
hanged vp the Sacrament in euery Temple, and on euery Aultar,
and caried the ſame about before him, whither ſoeuer he wente, vpon
an amblinge Iannet, with lightes, and belles: or, that he Conſecrated
with his Holy Breath, Oile, VVaxe, VVulle, Belles, Chalices,
Churches, and Aultars: or that he ſolde Iubilees, Graces, Liberties,
Aduouſons, Preuentions, Firſte fruites, Palles, the vvearinge
of Palles, Bulles, Indulgences, and Pardons: or that he called him
ſelfe by the name of the Head of the Churche, the Higheſt Biſhop,
Biſhop of Biſhoppes, alone moſte Holy: or, that by vſurpation he
tooke vpon him ſelfe the Right & Authoritie ouer other Biſhoppes
Churches: or that he Exempted him ſelfe from the Power of any
Ciuil gouernemente: or that he mainteined Warres, and ſet Princes
togeather at variance: or that he ſittinge in his Chaire, with his
triple Crovvne ful of labelles, with ſumptuous and Perſianlike
gorgiouſneſſe, with his Roial Scepter, with his Diademe of gould,
and glitteringe with ſtones, was caried about, not vpon palfraie,
but vpon the ſhoulders of Noble Menne. Theſe thinges, no doubt,
did Peter at Rome in times paſte, and leafte them in charge to his
Succeſſours, as you would ſaie, from hand to hande: for theſe things
be nowe a daies donne at Rome by the Popes, and be ſo donne, as
though nothing els ought to be donne.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Pope alone hath ſucceded S. Peter. Aſke you wherein? in what Religion? in what office?
VVee tel you, he ſucceded in Peters Chaire, in whiche he ſate at Rome, and ruled the Churche, in
Chriſtian Religion,Vntruthe. For the Pope feedeth not. in that office whiche Chriſte committed to Peter, when he ſaide, Paſce oues
meas, Fede my Sheepe. Then whiche office he neuer gaue greater, nor with like circumſtance of
charge, nor to any other gaue he it, then to Peter. For to him alone, he ſaide, Fede my Sheepe. VVhat
aſke ye vs of this officers life?
                  You aſke what thinge had Peter euer like vnto the Pope, or the Pope like vnto Peter. VVe tel you.
Peter had authoritie to fide Chriſtes ſhepe, like vnto the Pope. And the Pope hath authoritie to fede
Chriſtes Shepe, like vnto Peter,And vvel proued. Like power, like commiſsion. He that gaue them authoritie to fede,
gaue them alſo authoritie to doo what ſo euer maie perteine to feding.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  For that yee telle vs ſo many faire tales of Peters Succeſsion, wee demaunde
of you, wherein the Pope ſuccedeth Peter? You anſweare, He ſuccedeth him in his
Chaire:
                      as if Peter had benne ſommetime enſtalled in Rome, and had ſate ſolemnely
al daie with his Triple Crovvne, in his Pontificalibus, and in a Chaire of
goulde. And thus, hauing loſte bothe Religion, and Doctrine, yee thinke it ſufficient,

at leaſte to holde by the Chaire:
                     Peters ſucceſſoure. as if a Souldier, that had loſt his ſwerde,
would plaie the man with 
                        •
                     he ſcaberde. But ſo Caiphàs ſucceded Aaron: So wicked
Manaſſes ſucceded Dauid: So maie Antichriſte eaſily ſitte in Peters Chaire.
                  
                  Chryſoſtome ſaithe: Non Cathedra facit Sacerdotem: ſed Sacerdos Cathedram.
Nec Locus Sanctificat Hominem:Diſ. 40. Multi. ſed Homo Locum: It is not the Chaire,
that maketh the Biſhop: But it is the Biſhop, that maketh the Chaire. Neither is it the
Place, that halloweth the Man: But it is the Man, that halloweth the Place. Likewiſe
S. Hierome ſaith:
                     Diſ. 40. Non eſt facile. Non Sanctorum Filij ſunt, qui tenet loca Sanctorum: Theiare
not alwaies the Children of Holy menne, that ſitte in the roum
                           ••••
                        
                      Holy menne.
                  He doothe greate wronge vnto S. Peter, that placeth ſutche a one in ſutche a
Chaire. For neither is the Pope in any thinge like S. Peter: nor was S. Peter
in any thinge like the Pope. When Simeones ſawe that Arſacius, an vnlearned,
and an vnvvorthy Olde Doatinge man,
                     Nicepho. li. 13. cap. 28. was placed in Chryſoſtomes roume,
he cried oute, prò pudor: Quis, cui? Out for ſhame: what a ſoary hinde is this? and in
whoſe place haue wee ſette him?
                      Euen ſo maie wee iuſtely ſaie of the Popes ſittinge
in Peters Chaire, prò pudor, Quis, Cui?
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 21. Diuiſion. 2.
               Or contrariwiſe, peraduenture they had rather ſaie thus, that the
Pope doothe nowe al the ſame thinges, whiche wee knowe, Peter
did many a daie agoe: that is, that he renneth vp and downe into euery
Countrie, to Preache the Goſpel, not onely openly abroade, but
alſo priuately from houſe to houſe: that he is diligente, and applieth
that buſineſſe, in ſeaſon, and out of ſeaſon, in due time, and out of due
time: that he doothe the part of an Euangeliſte, that he fulfilleth the
woorke, and Miniſterie of Chriſte, that he is the watcheman of the
Houſe of Iſrael, receiueth anſweares, and wordes at Gods mouthe:
and, euen as he receiueth them, ſo he deliuereth them ouer to the people:
That he is the Salte of the Earthe: That he is the Light of the
worlde: that he doothe not Feede him ſelfe, but his Flocke: that hee
doothe not entangle him ſelfe with the worldly cares of this life: that
he dooth not vſe a Sou
                        •
                     raintie ouer the Lordes people: that he ſeeketh
not to haue other menne Miniſter vnto him, but him ſelfe rather
Miniſtreth vnto others: that he taketh al Biſhoppes as his
Felowes, and Equalles: that he is Subiecte to Princes, as to perſonnes
ſent from God: that he geeueth to ceſar that, whiche is
ceſars: and that he, as the Olde Biſhoppes of Rome did without
contradiction, calleth the Emperoure his Lorde. Onleſſe therefore
the Popes doo the like nowe a daies, as Peter did the thinges aforeſaide,
there is no cauſe at al, why they ſhoulde glorie ſo mutche of
Peters name, and of his Succeſsion.
               
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  The Pope nowe runneth not vp and downe into euery countrie, he goeth not openly and priuatly,
from houſe to houſe, and to euery alehouſe, as ye would him to doo, like one of your miniſters: Neither,
I trowe, ye maiſters, that be Superintendentes your ſelues, thinke it conuenient, that ye goe from houſe
to houſe, to preache your Goſpel at theſe dates. And would ye the Pope to abaſe him ſelfe to that yee
thinke becommeth not your ſelues? He hath (as meete it is) other fitte menne to helpe to beare his
burthea with him. And whereas one body ſuffiſeth not for ſo great and ſo many affaires: for Coūcel, he

hath many heads: for ouerſight, many eies: for eare, many hartes: for preachinge, many tounges: for
woorke, many handes: for knowledge, many eares: for expedition of matters, many feete: for the great
weight of his charge, many ſhoulders: briefly, for al neceſſary and behoofeful caſes, conuenient helpes.
The like helpes would S. Peter vſe, were he nowe liuinge.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  To ſpeake of the Popes renninge vp, and downe, from alehouſe to alehouſe,
it is greate folie. It ſhould be ſufficiēt, if he would goe from Churche to Churche,
and remember his Charge, and Feede the Flocke, & Preache the Goſpel. Yee ſaie,
The Pope hath many heades, many eies, many hartes, many tongues, many handes, many eares.
many ſhoulders: And thus, of your Pope ye make a Monſter, with many eies, eares,
tongues, and hartes of others, & none of his owne. A wiſe man ſommetime ſaide:
Improbè facit,
                     Titus Liuius. 
                     qui, cùm alienis oculis omnia ei agenda ſint, poſtulet aliorum
vitas committi ſibi: It is but lewdely donne, if a man, that muſt ouerſee al thinges with
other mennes eies, deſiere to haue the liues of others committed ouer to his charge.
                     
                  
                  God geeue him eies to ſee, and eares to heare, and harte to vnderſtande: that
he maie knowe the time of Goddes Viſitation.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 22. Diuiſion. 1.
               Mutche leſſe cauſe haue thei, to complaine of our departinge, and
to calle vs againe to be felowes & frendes with them, and to beleue
as thei beleue. Menne ſaie, that one Cobilon a Lacedemonian, whē
he was ſent Embaſſadoure to the Kinge of the Perſians, to treate of
a league, and ſounde by chaunce them of the Courte plaieing at dice,
he returned ſtreight way home againe, leauinge his meſſage vndonne.
And when he was aſked, why he hadde ſlackte to doo the
thinges, whiche he had receiued by publique Commiſſion to doo, he
made anſwere, he thought it ſhould be a great reproche to his Common
Wealthe, to make a league with Dicers. But, if we ſhould contente
our ſelues to returne to the Pope, and to his Errours, and to
make a couenaunt, not onely with Dicers, but alſo with menne farre
more vngraceous, and wicked, then any Dicers be: biſides that, this
ſhould be a great blotte to our good name, it ſhoulde alſo be a very
dangerous mater, bothe to kendle Goddes wrath againſt vs, and
to clogge and condemne our owne Soules for euer.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Yee doo wel to compare your ſelues with this Cobilon. For in deedeVVee flee vvicked Companie, as he did. ye doo as he did. Yee were
ſentVntruthe. For vvhere did Chriſte euer ſende vs to the B. of Rome? by Chriſte to his Vicare, Peters Succeſſour, to be fedde and gouerned like ſhepe vnder the ſhepeherde
Chriſte and his Churche be a perfite body, he the head, the true beleuers knitte togeather in
charitie the members▪ eche one in his order and degree. He is the vine, wee the boughes and branches.
By this Rule the Pope is leaft voide of life: for that he is diuided frō Chriſte, that is the head. VVhat member cutte of from the bodie, liueth? what boughe broken from the tree, groweth? As euery
ſuche member dieth, and bough withereth: So if ye remaine not in the Catholike Churche, which
is the body of Chriſte, yee drawe no life from the heade, yee haue no parte of the Spirite, that from
thence redoundeth to euery member, yee haue no portion of the vitall iouyſſe that iſſueth from the
roote. Then what remaineth, but that ye be caſte into the fire? For this cauſe S. Cyprian and other
Fathers, often times haue ſaide, that out and beſides the Churche, there is no ſaluation.
               
               
                  
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Chriſte neuer tolde vs, neither of any his Vicare General: nor of Rome: nor of
Laterane: nor of Peters Chaire: nor willed vs to haue recourſe to the Biſhop of
Rome, more then to any other ſeueral Biſhop. Therefore, M. Harding, we muſte
recken this emongeſt the reſte of your Vntruthes.
                  
                  It is true, that you ſaie, A member diuided from the Body cannot liue. But youre
Concluſion is Vntrue, like the reſt. For, Rome is not the Body, but onely a Member
of the Body: Rome is not the Tree, but onely a Boughe: Rome is not the
Heade, but onely a Springe. And therefore, ſeeinge, it is nowe diuided from that
Body: ſeeinge, it is broken from that Tree: ſeeing, it is cut of from that Heade, it
is no maruaile, thoughe it be ſterued, thoughe it be wethered, thoughe it be leafte
drie, without either Sprite, or life: As this daie it appeareth to the eies of al them,
that wil beholde it.
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 22. Diuiſion. 2.
               For of very truthe, we haue departed from him, whom we ſawe,
had blinded the whole worlde this many a hundred yeere: From
him, who too farre preſumpteouſly was woonte to ſaie, he could not
erre, and, what ſo euer he did, no mortal man had power to condemne
him, neither Kinges, nor Emperoures, nor the whole Clergie, nor yet
al the people in the worlde togeather, no, thoughe he ſhoulde carrie
away with him a thouſande Soules into Hel: From him, who tooke
vpon him power to commaunde, not onely menne, but euen the Angelles
of God, to goe, to returne, to leade Soules into Purgatorie, &
to bringe them backe againe, when he liſte him ſelfe: who, Gregorie
ſaithe, without al doubte, is the very forerenner, and ſtanderd bearer
of Antichriſte, and hath vtterly forſaken the Catholique Faith:
From whom alſo theſe ringleaders of ours, who now with might,
and maine reſiſte the Goſpel, and the truthe, whiche thei knowe to be
the truthe, haue ere this departed euery one of their owne accorde, &
good wil: and would euen now alſo gladly departe from him againe,
if the note of inconſtancie, and ſhame, & their owne eſtimation among
the people, were not a let vnto them. In concluſion, wee haue departed
from him, to whom we were not bounde, and who had nothinge
to laie for him ſelfe, but onely, I knowe not what, vertue, or power of
the place, where he dwelleth, and a continuance of Succeſſion.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As yee confeſſe youre departinge, ſo woulde God yee vnderſtoode youre gylte.
                  Thoſe reuerent Fathers, and Godly learned menne, whoſe romes ye holde wrongfully, whom it liked
your interpreter to cal Ringleaders, reſiſte not the Goſpel, but ſuffer perſecution for the Goſpel.
Your Goſpel, that is to ſaie, your vile hereſies and blaſpemies, worthely thei deteſ
                        •
                     e. Your newe trouth,
that is to ſaie, your falſe and wicked lies, thei abhorre. Neither euer departed they from any parte
of the dutie of Catholique menne,M. Hardinges Reuerende Fathers continued tvventie yeeres together in Hypocrifie. by their owne accorde and good wil, as ye ſaie.M. Hardinges Reuerende Fathers continued tvventie yeeres together in Hypocrifie. But wherein
they ſlepte aſide, they were compelled by ſutche feare, as might happen to a right conſtant man, I
meane the terrour of death, whiche, as Ariſtotle ſaithe, of al terrible thinges is moſt terrible. Nowe
bicauſe yet they finde the terroure of a gilty conſcience, more terrible then death of their perſons, thei
entende by Gods grace aſsiſting them, neuer ſo to ſteppe aſide againe, but rather to ſuffer what ſo euer
extremities. VVhoſe bloude, or the bloude of any of them, if God to his honour ſhal at any time permitt

mitte you to drawe,Perſequution. whiche ſo mutche ye thirſt, ſone after looke ye for the retourninge of the Iſraelites
againe, that texte beinge then fulfilled, Complerae ſunt iniquitates Amorrhaeorum.
                  
                  VVere not thei wel aſſured of the trouthe, moſte certaine it is, what ſo euer ye ſaie, thei would
not make ſo fooliſhe a bargaine as your ſelues doo, as to buye vaine eſtimation among the people, with
the certaine loſſe of their ſoules.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Certaine of youre frendes, whom yee cal Reuerende Fathers,
                      ſuffer impriſonement,
yee ſaie, and perſequution for the Goſpel. Notwithſtandinge, it is not ſo longe ſithence
the ſaide Reuerende Fathers, were them ſelues the Burners, and Perſequutours
of the Goſpel.
                     Epiphanius. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     Sutche complainte ſommetime made Arius the wicked
Heretique. For thus he writeth, I Arius,
                      that ſuffer perſequution for the Truthe,
that euer preuaileth. Ruffinus, notwithſtandinge he were a greate fauourer of the
Origenian Heretiques, yet he ſaide, euen as you ſaie, Noſtra Fides, perſequutionis
Haereticorum tempore, cùm in Sancta Alexandrina Eccleſia degeremus, in carceribus,
& Exilijs,
                     Hieronym. Aduerſus Ruffinum lib. 2. Hiero. eodē loco. 
                     quae pro fide inferebantur, probata eſt: While wee liued in the Holy Churche
of Alexandria, in the time of the perſequution of Heretiques, Our Faithe was proued in
priſones, and Baniſhementes, whiche were laide vpon vs for the Faithes ſake. Vnto
whom S. Hierome in his pleaſante manner anſweareth thus: Miror qu'd non
adiecerit, Vinctus Ieſu Chriſti: Liberatus ſum de ore Leonis: Alexandriae ad
beſtias depugnaui: Curſum Conſummaui: Fidem ſeruaui: Supereſt mihi corona
Iuſtitiae:
                      I maruaile mutche, that he ſaide not further. Ruffinus the Priſoner of Ieſus
Chriſte: I was deliuered out of the Lions mouthe: I was throwen amongeſte wilde beaſtes
at Alexandria: I haue paſte my Courſe: I haue keapte the Faithe: Nowe there remainethe
for mee the Crovvne of Righteouſneſſe.
                  
                  Thus the Woulfe, when he is reſtreined from ſpoile and rauen, maie likewiſe
complaine of Perſequution.
                  
                     S.
                     Hieronym. Ad Apronium. 
                     Hierome, writinge vnto Apronius of the ſtate of the Eaſte Churches,
where he then liued, ſaithe thus: Hîc quieta ſunt omnia. Etſi enim venena pectoris
non amiſerint, tamen os impietatis non audent aperire. Sed ſunt ſicut aſpides
ſurdae, obturantes aures ſuas: Al thinges here are quiete. For, al be it they haue
not leafte the poiſon of theire bartes, yet they dare not open theire wicked mouthes. But
they are as the deafe Serpentes, ſhuttinge vp theire eares, and wil heare nothinge.
                  The ſaide Reuerende Fathers, that, as nowe, ſitte ſo firmely of your ſide, not
longe agoe, were wel contented, bothe to mainetaine, and to publiſſhe the contrarie,
as wel, as you. Howe be it, al this, you ſaie, they did not of good wil, but onely
of feare, and of ſutche feare, as maie happen vpon a conſtant man: that is to ſaie, of mere
Hypocriſie, and Diſſimulation, and by open flatteringe of theire Prince.
                  
                  And thus, to ſaue your Fathers from beinge Schiſmatiques, yee are wel contente
to make them Hypocrites.Stephan Gardi. De vera Obediē. Thus ſaie you. But youre ſaide Reuerendes
them ſelues woulde haue tolde you farre otherwiſe.
                  Doctour Gardiner of him ſelfe ſaith thus:
                     He examineth the mater vvith al his ſenſes. In the diſcuſſing, and trial of the
truthe, I did not ſo eaſely contente me ſelfe. But I ſo framed me ſelfe, that, as it
had benne in aſkinge the iudgemente of al my ſenſes, onleſſe I perceiued, that
I firſte of al hearde them vvith mine eares, ſmelled them vvith my noſe, ſavve
them vvith mine eies,He is perſvvaded by the vvoorkinge of Gods grace. and felte them vvith my handes, I thought, I had not
ſeene yenough. Againe he ſaithe: This aduiſed conſideration hathe pulled
avvaie al ſcrupulous doubtes: And by the vvoorkinge of Goddes Grace,He is compelled by the povver of the Truthe. hathe
conueighed and brought them into the lighte of the veritie.
                  
                     And againe, In deede to tel you at a vvorde, that compelled me, that compelleth
al menne, euen the mighty povver of the Truthe.
                  
                     
                     Likewiſe ſaithe Doctour Bonner,Truthe preuaileth. 
                     touchinge the ſame:
                     Doctor Bonner, In praefatione in Veram Obedientiam. The mater vvas
not raſhely taken in hande: but vvith Iudgemente, and vviſedome examined,
and diſcuſſed. Againe he ſaithe, The Biſhop of VVincheſter had longe
agoe thorovvely bulted this mater, euen vnto the branne.
                  If theſe tales be true,He examineth the mater to the vttermoſte. M. Hardinge, then is youre tale moſte vntrue. Certainely,
beinge directly contrarie, to make them bothe true, it is not poſſible.
                  
                     But here yee beginne to fraie vs with youre Prophetical threates.
                      If wee
once beginne to touche youre Bloude, then, yee ſaie, your Louanian Iſrael immediately afterwarde
ſhalbe reſtoared: I thinke, you meane, Domus Iacob de populo Barbaro.
                     
                  
                  In ſutche blinde Prognoſtications, I haue no ſkil. God oftentimes ſuffereth
iniquitie, and falſhedde to preuaile for a ſeaſon, to chaſten the vnkindeneſſe of his
people. Let his wil be donne with mercie, as it ſhal ſeeme good in his eies. But if
yee preuaile againe, yee ſhal preuaile to your owne confuſion. Wel yee maie repreſſe
the Truthe of God, as youre Fathers haue often donne before: But vtterly
to aboliſhe it, yee ſhal neuer be hable.
                  Sutche vaine hope had the Ievves in olde times, to recouer theire Religion,
and Ceremonies, and vtterly to ouerthrowe the Ghoſpel of Chriſte. They conſpired
togeather, gotte Maſons, and Carpenters, and beganne to caſte the fundatiō,
to repaire their Tēple.
                     Chryſoſtom. In Oratio. contra Iudaeos. Immediately the Emperoure Cōſtantine raiſed a power,
and ſette vpon them, and put them to the ſwerde, as Rebelles, and Traitours.
Others, that he ſpared aliue, he made ſlaues, and cutte of ſomme theire tongues,
ſomme theire handes, ſomme theire cares, ſomme theire noſes: ſomme he burnte
in the face: and ſo ſente them abroade, for an example, from Towne to Towne
throughout the Worlde.
                  Afterwarde,Ambroſius, li. 5. Epiſt. 29. when the wicked Emperoure Iulian, in deſpite of Chriſte, had
geuen the Iewes leaue to builde, and repaire, as is ſaide before, and, the Princes
power aſſiſtinge them, no power ſeemed hable to withſtande theire pourpoſe, then
God him ſelf from Heauen aboue encoūtred with them. Earthequakes brake out,
and ouerthrewe theire buildinges. Lightninges fel downe, and burnte bothe the
tooles in theire handes, and the coates on theire backes. Then was the Goſpel of
Chriſte more bewtieful, and more glorious, then euer it had benne before.
                  
                     S. Gregorie ſaithe,
                     Gregor. In primum Regum. cap. 4. li 3. ca. 5. 
                     Tulerunt Dagon, & reſtituerunt eum in locum ſuum.
Hoc eſt, in Templo, vbi Arca Dei poſita fuerat. Quid eſt ergo Dagon in locum
ſuum reſtituere, niſi Idololatriae ſtatū ſubtili cōſideratione perquirere? Et quia,
quò ſubtiliùs Idololatriae error aſpicitur, eò veriùs condemnatur, ſubiunctū eſt,
Rurſus diluculo ſurgentes inuenerunt Dagon iacentem ſuper faciem coram
Arca Domini: They took the Idole Dagon, and reſtoared him againe into his place: that
is to ſaie, in the Temple of God, where the Arke of God was placed before. And what is
it, to reſtoare againe Dagon into his place, but diſcretely, and aduiſedly to examine the ſtate
of Idolatrie? And, for as mutche as, the better the Erroure of Idolatrie is ſeene, the better
it is condemned, therefore it foloweth further, They riſinge in the morninge, founde Dagon
lieinge flat vpon his face, before the Arke of the Lorde.
                  Euen ſo, M. Hardinge, if yee rayſe vp youre Dagon once againe, once againe
he ſhal comme to grounde, and ſhal ſquatte his handes, and feete, and be vtterly
diſmembred by the falle, and ſhal lie grouelinge, as a blocke, before the preſence of
the Arke of God.
                     Prouer. 21. 
                     There is no Counſel againſte the Lorde.
                  
                  
                     The Noble Prince Ioſua, after that he had once, by Goddes commaundement,
deſtroied the Cittie of Iericho,Ioſua. 6. 
                     adiured al his poſteritie in this ſorte: Accurſed be
he before Iehoua the Lorde, that ſhal ſtande vp, and reſtoare this Cittie of Hiericho.
In the deathe of his eldeſt ſonne he ſhal laie the fundation: and in the
deathe of his yongeſte childe he ſhal cloſe the gates.
                  
                     
                     Theodoretus ſaithe,
                     Perſequution. The wicked ſhal not be hable to preuaile againſte God.Theodoret. Eccle. hiſtor. fol. 285. in Graeco. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      But if
they once geate the ouer hand, yet ſhal they comme downe againe: as it is written by the
Prophete Eſai.
                  As for draweing of youre bloude, yee neede not ſo greatly to complaine. The
Goſpel of Chriſte is not bloudy. It hath hitherto preuailed withoute any one drop
of al your bloude. God geue you grace, to repente, lefte your owne bloude be vpon
your owne heade in the daie of the Lorde. Fire, and ſwerde, and mercileſſe Crueltie
are the onely inſtrumentes of youre Doctrine. And therefore yee ſeeme nowe
to ſaie,Geneſis 27. in youre blinde hope, as curſed Eſau ſommetime ſaide of his Brother Jacob.
Venient dies luctus patris mei, & occidam Iacobum Fratrem meum: The daies
ſhal comme, that my Father ſhal die. Then wil I kille my Brother Iacob.
                     
                  
                  Athanaſius ſaithe,
                     Athanaſius, Ad Solitariam vitā agentes. Caedi Chriſtianorum proprium eſt: Caedere autem Chriſtianos,
Pilati, & Caiphae, officia ſunt: It is the parte of Chriſtians, to ſuffer perſecution: But to
perſecute the Chriſtians, it is the very office of Pilate, and Caiphas.
                  
                     Wee wil ſaie vnto you with S. Auguſtine:Auguſtin. Cōtra Epiſtolā Fundamenti. cap. 1. Illi in vos ſaeuiant, qui neſciunt, quo
cum labore verum inueniatur, & quàm difficilè caueantur errores: Let them perſecute you,
and vſe crueltie ouer you, that knowe not, what a laboure it is, to finde the truthe: and howe
harde it is, to beware of erroure.
                  
                  
                     Againe he ſaithe: Nemo de praeteritis inſultat Erroribus, niſi qui Diuinam Miſericordiam
expertus non eſt, vt careret erroribus. Tantum id agamus, vt errores aliquando
finiantur:
                      No man vpbraideth others with erroures paſte, but he, that hathe not felte
Goddes Diuine Mercie, to be voide of erroures. Let this be oure onely laboure, that erroures
at laſte maie haue an ende.
                  Wee wil ſaie of you, as S. Peter ſommetime ſaide of Simon the Sorcerer,
when the people for anger, ſeeinge his falſehedde, woulde haue ſtoned him to
deathe,Abdias in Tetro 
                     Imò viuat, & Regnum Chriſti creſcere videat, vel inuitus: Naie, naie, let
him liue: and let him ſee the kingdome of Chriſte to growe, and proſper, euen againſt his wil.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 23. Diuiſion. 1.
               And as for vs, we of al others moſte iuſtely haue leafte him. For
our Kinges, yea euen thei, whiche with greateſt Reuerence did folowe,
and obeie the Authoritie, & Faithe of the Biſhoppes of Rome,
haue longe ſince founde, and felte wel yenough the yoke, and Tyrannie
of the Popes kingdom. For the Biſhops of Rome ſomtime tooke
the Crowne from the Heade of our Kinge, Henry the Seconde, and
compelled him to put aſide al his Princely ſtate, and Maieſtie, and,
like a meere Priuate man, to come vnto theire Legate with greate
ſummiſſion, and humilitie, ſo as al his Subiectes might laugh him
to ſcorne. More then this, thei cauſed Biſhoppes, and Monkes, and
ſomme parte of the Nobilitie, to be in the fielde againſte our Kinge
Iohn, and ſet al the people at libertie from their othes, whereby thei
ought allegeance to their Kinge: and at laſte, wickedly, and moſte
abominably they bereeued the ſame Kinge, not onely of his Kingedome,
but alſo of his life. Biſides this, thei Excōmunicated, and curſed
Kinge Henry the Eighte, that moſte famous Prince, and ſtirred
vp againſt him, ſommetime the Emperour, ſommetime the Frenche
Kinge: and as mutche as in them was, put our Realme in hazarde
to haue benne a very praie, and ſpoile vnto the Enimie. Yet were

they but fooles, and madde menne, to thinke, that either ſo mighty a
Prince could be feared with bugges, & rattles: or els, that ſo Noble,
and greate a Kingdome might ſo eaſily, euen at one morſel, be deuoured,
and ſwalowed vp.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  Concerninge the caſe betweene theſe three Kinges of Englande, and the Biſhops of Rome for the
time beinge, I ſaie litle. If they did wel, and the Biſhops euil, they haue their rewarde: the other, their
puniſhemente. 
                        •
                     f otherwiſe, or howe ſo euer eche one at Gods iudgemente ſhal haue his deſerued meaſure.
But be it graunted, al were true, ye ſaie, though we know the more part to be falſe. VVhat though
Kinge Henry the ſeconde were euil treated of Pope Alexander, about the murthering of S. Thomas the
Archebiſhop of Cantorbury, and Kinge Iohn likewiſe of that zelous and learned Pope Innocentius
the thirde? &c.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  Notwithſtandinge the Pope, as his manner hath benne, raiſe Commotion
within the Realme, and arme the ſubiectes againſte theire Soueraine, and pulle
the Crovvne Emperial from his heade, yet, by your Doctrine, who ſo euer dare
ſpeake in his Princes right, is a foole, and killeth him ſelfe: as if there were no life,
or ſaluation, but onely vnder the frantike gouernement of the Pope. Sutche obedience,
and loialtie the Pope hathe taught you towardes your Prince.
                  
               
            
            
               The Apologie, Cap. 23. Diuiſion. 2.
               And yet, as though al this were too litle, thei would needes haue
made al the Realme Tributarie to them, & exacted thēce yeerely moſt
vniuſte and wrongeful taxes. So deere coſte vs the frendeſhip of the
Cittie of Rome. Wherefore, if they haue gotten theſe thinges of vs
by extortion, through theire fraude, and ſuttle ſleightes, we ſee no
reaſon, why we maie not plucke awaie the ſame from them againe,
by lawful waies, and iuſte meanes. And, if our Kinges in that darkeneſſe,
and blindeneſſe of the former times, gaue them theſe thinges of
theire owne accorde, and liberalitie, for Religions ſake, beinge moued
with a certaine opinion of their fained holineſſe: now, when the ignorance
and erroure is ſpied out, maie the Kinges theire Succeſſours
take them awaie againe, ſeinge they haue the ſame Authoritie, the
Kinges theire Aunceſtours had before. For the gifte is voide, excepte
it be allowed by the wil of the geeuer: and that cannot ſeme a perfit
wil, whiche is dimmed, and hindered by erroure.
               
                  M. Hardinge.
                  As for Peterpens, and what other ſo euer ſummes of monie were yeerely paide to the Churche
of Rome, whiche were not by extorcion ſuttil ſleightes by the Popes gotten, as ye ſlaunder, but
freely and diſcretely by the prince and the realmeNo doubt. For the very cauſe hereof vvas Auarice, and treacherie. for a greate cauſe graunted, it is not a thing that
ſo mutche grieueth the Pope, as your departure from the true faith and Churche dothe, as it maie wel
appere by that whiche happened in Queene Maries raigne. In whiche time although the Pope were
acknowledged▪ yet him ſelfe neuer was knowen to haue demaunded his Peterpens, or any other yeerely
paimentes againe. But what is this to your ſchiſmes and Hereſies? This healpethe you nothinge for anſweare
to the hainous crime of your Apoſtaſie. The liberalitie of our countrie to the ſee of Rome,

whiche is the mother of al the VVeaſte Churches,The Popes Exactions. hath ben ſo ſmal in compariſon of certaine other
Realmes, as with the honoure of the Realme it might not ſeme to finde it ſelfe greued therewith.
Yet here ye ſette a gnatte to an Elephante, and make greate adoo about a litle. The Realme is not ſo
mutche enriched by retaininge that ſmal ſumme from the Pope, as it is diſhonored by your vndiſcrete
talke, ſaueringe altogeather of miſerie and niggardnes. Ye ſhoulde haue ſhewed better ſtuffe at
leaſte in thende of your booke. The laſte acte of a fable, by rules of Poeterie ſhoulde be beſte. Ye haue
done like a fooliſhe Poete, making your ende ſo badde. The Pope ſeeketh not your monie, he ſeketh you
He ſeeketh the ſafetie of your ſoules.But remember the Olde Verſe, Curia Romana non captat Ouē ſine lana. He ſeeketh, like a good ſhepherde, howe to reduce the ſtreied
ſhepe of Englande vnto the folde of Chriſtes Churche, God graunte we maie ſee his good intente happely
acheued.
               
               
                  The B. of Sarisburie.
                  
                     The Pope hathe enriched him ſelfe, and gotten the treaſures of the world into
his owne handes, not by fraude, or guile, as you ſaie, but onely by the frée liberalitie
of Kinges,
                     
                     Auguſt. De Verbis Domini Secundum Matth. Sermo. 19. 
                     and Princes. Yet S. Auguſtine ſaithe, Non poſſumus dicere, Nemo
nos inuaſores arguit: violētiae nullus accuſat: Quaſi non maiorem interdum praedam à viduabus
blandimenta cliciant, quàm tormenta. Nec intereſt apud Deum, vtrùm vi, an
circumuentione quis res alienas occupet: dummodò quoquo pacto teneat alienum:
                     
Wee cannot ſaie, No man chargeth vs with extorſion: noman accuſeth vs of violence. For
oftentimes of poore widowes a man maie geate more by flatterie, then by rackinge. And there
is no difference before God, whether a man holde an other mannes goodes by open violence, or
by guile: if the thinge, that he holdeth, be not his owne.
                  But how maie this by your learninge, M. Hardinge, be called the liberalitie of
the Prince? He is liberal, that is frée in beſtowing of his own. But you tel vs, that
al the Temporal goodes of the vvorlde are the Popes, and not the Princes: and
that the Prince hath nothinge, but by fauoure & ſufferance of the Pope. Your Doctours
wordes be theſe,Archidiacon De Haereſi. Ver. Et quia tanta Fo. 15 Matthae. 4. Citatur à Felino▪ de Offic. & poteſt. iudicis delega. Ex parte. 1. Iohan▪ De Pariſijs, de poteſtat. Regia, & Papali. 
                     Papa eſt Dominus omnium temporalium: ſecundum illud
dictum Petri, Dabo tibi omnia regna mundi: The Pope is the Lorde of al temporal
goodes: accordinge to that ſaieinge of S. Peter (that S. Peter neuer ſpake: for they
are the woordes of the Diuel) I wil geue thee al the Kingdomes of the world.
                  
                  
                     An other of your Doctours ſaithe thus, Dicunt, quòd ſolus Papa eſt verus Dominus
temporalium, ita quòd poteſt auferre ab alio, quòd aliâs ſuum eſt. Sed praelati caeteri,
& Principes, non ſunt Domini, ſed Tutores, Procuratores & Diſpenſatores: Thei ſaie, that
the Pope onely is the very Lorde of Temporal thinges ſo that he maie take from any man,
that is his own. As for other Prelates, and Princes, thei be the ouerſeers, and fermours, and ſtewardes
of wordly thinges, but not the Lordes. And
                      Matthias Pariſienſis ſaithe, that
Pope Innocentius 3 called Kinge Iohn the Kinge of England, Vaſallum ſuum,
That is to ſaie, his féede man, or his Tenante: meaning thereby, that the Realme
of England vvas the Popes, and not the Kinges. If al this be true, how can the
Kings of England, in graunting any thing to the Pope, be counted liberal?Matthias Pariſien. in Iohanne. 
                     Verily
it is an eaſy kind of liberalitie for a man to geue that thing, that is not his owne.
                  
                  
                     But the Pope,
                      yée ſaie, ſetteth no more by al his reuenewes out of Englande, then an Elephante
by a gnat: and that therefore, during the whole time of Queene Marie, he neuer demaunded
of vs any manner of yeerely paimente. Wée muſt beare with your erroure herein, M. Hardinge,
for that yee neuer were the Popes Collectoure, and therefore not mutche
acquainted with his Bookes. Otherwiſe yée might haue remēbred, that Cardinal
Poole, being not the Pope, but onely a Legate, or meſſenger from the Pope, had
a thouſande poundes paide him yéerely of one Biſhoprike in Englande, towardes
the prouiſion of his kitchin. Yee might haue remembred, that al the Biſhoppes of
Englande, paide the Pope the vvhole firſte fruites of al theire liuinges: whiche
by any common eſtimation, amounted to more ſommewhat, then a Gnatte. And
although I were neuer, neither ſkilful, nor curious in the Popes Collections, yet,

as wel for the diſcouerie of ſo greate vntruthe, as alſo for the better ſatiſfaction
of the Reader, I haue thought it good, briefely, & by the waie to touche, what maie
be founde in olde Recordes of good credite, touchinge the ſame.
                  Firſte therefore the Archebiſhop of Canturburie paide vnto the Pope for his
Annates, or Firſte fruites, at euery vacation, tenne thouſande Florenes: biſides other
fiue thouſande Florenes for the vſe, and right of his Palle.
                  
                  The Archebiſhop of Yorke paide likewiſe for his Firſte fruites tenne thouſande
Florenes, and, as it is thought, other fiue thouſand Florenes for his Palle.
                  
                  
                     The Biſhop of Elie paide for his Firſte Fruites ſeuen thouſand Florenes.
                  
                  
                     The Biſhop of London paide for his Firſt Fruites thrée thouſande Florenes.
                  
                  
                     The Biſhop of Winceſter paide for his Firſt Fruites xij. thouſande Florenes.
                  
                  
                     The Biſhop of Exceter paide for his Firſte Fruites ſix thouſande Florenes.
                  
                  
                     The Biſhop of Lincolne paide for his Firſte Fruites fiue thouſande Florenes.
                  
                  
                     The Biſhop of Lichefielde, and Couentrie paide for his Firſte Fruites thrée
thouſande Florenes.
                  
                  
                     The Biſhop of Herforde paide for his Firſt Fruites one thouſande, and eight
hundred Florenes.
                  
                  The Biſhop of Sariſburie paide for his Firſt Fruites foure thouſande, and fiue
hundred Florenes. And ſo the reaſte, eche man accordingly after his rate.
                  Here is to be noted, that a Florene is an Italian Crowne, of the valewe of
four ſhillinges and ſix penſe ſterlinge.
                  Thus mutche I haue noted onely for example. By theſe few the diſcréete Reader
maie eaſily gheaſſe the Exactions, and paimentes of the other Biſhoppes.
                  The whole value of the Popes Firſte Fruites throughout Europe,Legatio Adriant Papae. 6. Excuſae VVittenbergae, An. 1538. as I finde
in one Recorde (although very vnperfite, for that it lacketh ſundrie great, knowē,
& notable Biſhoprikes, as Durham, Carlile, Worceſter, Norvviche, Bathe, Chicheſter,
whiche, with many other moe Archebiſhoprikes, & Biſhoprikes, as wel
within the Dominions of our Kinges of Englande, as alſo in ſundrie other Chriſtian
Kingedomes, and Countries, are leafte vnreckened) ariſeth to the Summe of
twoo thouſande thouſande, foure hundred thrée ſcoare thouſande, eight hundred
fouretie and thrée Florenes.
                  Notwithſtandinge yée make your Pope as bigge, as an Elephante, yet, M. H.
theſe reckeninges are ouer huge, in any reaſonable proportion, to be reſembled to
a gnatte. Here I leaue out the yéerely perquiſites, that ye Pope made of his Elections,
Preuentions, Diſpenſations, Pluralities, Trialities, Torquottes, Tolerations:
for his Bulles, his S
                           •
                        ales, his Signatures: for Eatinge Fleaſh, for Egges,
for White Meate, for Prieſtes Concubines, & for other like marchandiſe. I knowe
not what. The ſumme whereof not withſtandinge amounteth to more then niene
hundred thouſand Florenes. As for your Smoke farthinges, & Peter penſe, I make
no reckeninge: by the vile, and contemptuous reporte whereof, ye ſhewe your ſelf,
not onely ignorante, & vnſkilful, in that yée write, which argueth ſomme folie, but
alſo iniurious vnto your Countrie. Reade Matthias Pariſienſis, & yée ſhal find,
bothe by what tyrannie, and treacherie, and alſo what maſſes, and intolerable
ſummes of monie the Popes Miniſters haue caried out of this Realme.
                  The Pope,Anno. 1215. 
                     ſaith he, beinge diſeaſed vvith a Spiritual dropſie, that is to ſaie,
with an vnquencheable thirſt of monie, ſhooke out al the Prieſtes purſes, & ſpoiled
the Abbies of al theire Treaſures.
                  
                     Againe,
                     Anno. 1246. The Pope made a Decree in Rome, that the goodes, and monies of al Biſhoppes,
and Prieſtes deceſſed within Englande, ſhoulde be taken to his vſe.
                  The Pope gaue ſtraite commaundemente to the Biſhoppes of England,
                     Eodem Anno. that al Perſonnes,
and Vicares beinge reſident vpon theire Benefices, ſhoulde paie yeerely vnto him the
thirde parte of al the valewes of theire ſaide benefices: And, that al Parſonnes, and Vicares,

beinge not reſidente, ſhoulde paie vnto him yeerely the one fuſſe halfe parte of theire benefices.
Al theſe paiementes to continewe, duringe the ſpace of three whole yeeres. Whiche amounteth
at the leaſt to the ſumme of a hundred and thrée ſcoare & x. thouſand poundes.
                  
                  The Biſhoppes of England,
                     Anno. 1247. after great, and forceable intreatie, agreed togeather
to geue the Pope a Contribution of eleuen thouſande Markes.
                  
                  At that time the poore Prior of Winceſter was forced to paie yéerely three hundred,
                     Anno eodem.
                     threeſcoare and fiue Markes towardes the furniture of the Popes Table.
                  The Pope made a ſtraite Decrée,Eodem anno. that al Biſhoppes Electe ſhould immediately
trauaile out of Englande to Rome, to attende vpon his Holineſſe, as Matthias
ſaith, Vt Romanorum loculos impregnaret, in ruinam Regni Angliae: To ſtuffe
the Romaines purſes, and to decaie the Kingedome of Englande.
                  
                  
                     The Pope had the Tenthes of al the Spiritual Liuinges in Englande,Matthaeꝰ VVeſtmonaſterienſis: Anno 1301. Anno. 1255. 
                     duringe
the ſpace of tenne whole yéeres.
                  
                  
                     Ruſtandus the Popes Legate exacted intolerable great paimentes of the Cleregie
of Englande in a Synode holden in London, as Matthias ſaith, Per ſcripta
Papae plena iniurijs, & iniquitate, quae poſſent patientiſsimum cor virulenter
ſauciare: Al this he did by the Authorite of the Popes Letters, ful of iniurie, and iniquitie:
Whiche were hable moſte cruellie to wounde any harte, were it neuer ſo patiente.
                      The Biſhoppes
of London, & VVorceſter anſweared the Popes Legate, that thei would
rather leſe theire liues, then they woulde geeue theire conſente to ſo open iniurie,
and ſeruitude, & intolerable oppreſſion of the Churche.
                  The Kinge had entred into an Obligation to paie vnto the Pope tvvoo
hundred thouſande Markes, biſides other fiftie thouſande pounde ſterlinge,
For paiement whereof, the Biſhop of Herforde, beinge then the Popes Agente,
had bounde the Biſhoppes of Englande, before thei were ware. Sutche like
pretie gnattes your Pope can ſtraine, if Kinges and Princes wil geue him leaue.
                  Ioh innes Sariſburienſis,Iohan. Sariſburien. Li. 6. Ca. 24. 
                     otherwiſe called Rupertus Carnotenſis, in the familiare
talke, that he had with Pope Adriane. 4. ſaide thus vnto him: Ipſe Romanus
Pontifex omnibus ferè eſt intolerabils: Lae
                        •
                     atur ſpolijs Eccleſiarum: quaeſtum omnem reputat
pietatem: Prouinciarum diripit ſpolia, acſi Theſauros Croeſi ſtudeat reparare:
The Pope is nowe becomme vntolerable almoſte to al the worlde: He reioiſeth in ye ſpoile of
Churches: Al manner of gaine he counteth Holineſſe: He maketh ſutche hauocke of Kingedomes,
and Prouinces,Lib. 5. Cap. 16. Acſi mittaturab Inferis Teſiphone, vel Megèra. Anno. 1247. Anno. 1257. 
                     as if he had intended to repaire againe croeſus Treaſurie. Againe,
His Legates ſo rage, and rampe for monie, as if ye Infernal Furies were ſent frō Helle to
goe at libertie. What ſhal wée néede many wordes? Ambition, and Auarice haue no
bottome. Matthias Pariſienſis ſaith, In Romana Curia omnia poſſunt pecuniae:
Monie maie doo al thinges in y•
                      Courte of Rome. And he calleth theſe vnſatiable prollinges
of the Pope, Quotidianas Extorſiones, Daily Extorſions. Againe he ſaith,
that the
                      King of Englande, vpon a very friuolous, & fonde mater, made true paiemente
vnto Pope Alexander the fourth,
                     Quod eſt horribile cogitatu. D. Bonner. in praefatione in Libe
                           •
                        l Stephani Gardineri de Vera Obedien. Anno. 1240. 
                     of niene hundred, and fiftie thouſande
Markes. VVhiche thing, he ſaith, is horrible, and abominable to be thought of.
To be ſhorte, that yée maie the better viewe y• bigneſſe, & quantitie of your Gnatte,
Doctoure Boner hereof writeth thus: The
                      Popes praie in Englande was ſo greate,
that it came to as mutche almoſte, as the Reuenewes of the Crowne.
                  
                  
                     Therefore Matthias ſaithe, Imperator reprehendit Regem Angliae, quòd permitteret
terram ſuam tam impudenter per Papam depauperari: The Emperour
frendely reproued Henry the 3.
Kinge of Englande, for that he ſuffered the Kingdome ſo
impudently to be compoueriſſhed by the Pope.
                  
                     Againe he ſaith, King Henrie the third made open cōplainte by this Embaſſadour
in the Councel of Lions in Fraunce, of the Popes innumerable Exactions.
                  
                     Likewiſe he ſaith before,
                     Anno. 1215. 
                     Rex Henricus 3. repreſsit impetum Legati. propter
violentiam Denariorum: The Kinge ſtaied the attemptes of the Popes Legate

touchinge his intolerable greedineſſe in prollinge for monie.
                  
                     Yée ſée therefore, M. Harding, neither is this gnatte ſo litle, as by your ſcorneful
compariſon, to the greate diſhonoure of this Noble Realme, yée woulde
ſéeme to make it: nor is the griefe, and complainte thereof ſo newe, as yée beare vs
in hande.
                     VVilihelmus Malmeſburien Anno. 1031. Kinge Canutus, the Kinge of Englande almoſte ſix hundred yéeres agoe,
beinge at Rome, wrote home to the Archebiſhoppes, and Biſhoppes, and
States of the Realme, on this wiſe: Conqueſtus ſum item coram Domino Papa,
& mihi valdè diſplicere dixi, quòd mei Archiepiſcopi in tantum angariabatur
immenſitate pecuniarum, quae ab eis expetebatur, &c. Alſo I haue made my complaint
vnto the Pope, and told him, that it match 
                           ••
                        ſliketh mee, that my Archebiſhoppes
ſhoulde be vexed with ſutche vnreaſonable ſummes of monie required of them.
                  
                  
                     Likewiſe Matthias Pariſienſis writeth of King VVilliam the Conquerour,Anno. 1094.
Concipiens indignationem contra Papam, allegauit quòd nullus Archiepiſcopus
vel Epiſcopus de Regno ſuo, ad Curiam Romanam, vel ad Papam haberet
reſpectum: Kinge VVilliam, vpon diſpleaſure conceiued againſte the Pope, ſaid, that no
Archebiſhop, or Biſhop of his Realme, ſhoulde from thencefoorth haue regarde
either to the Courte of Rome, or to the Pope.
                  Al this notwithſtāding, yée ſaie, the Pope is an Elephant: & al theſe Summes,
in Compariſon of his treaſures, are but a gnatte.
                  
                  Verily, al theſe, and other far greater reckeninges the Realme of England is
wel hable to defraie. Neither make wée any accoumpte of the monie, but of the deceitful
extorting of ye monie: neither is it diſhonorable to ye 
                     Realme, to repreſſe theſe
lewde, & iniurious mockeries, and to preſerue the ſubiecte from open ſpoile. Other
Kinges, & Countries haue oftentimes donne the ſame. Ievves the Frenche King.
whom,Ludouicus. 9. for his Holineſſe, they haue made a Saincte, hereof complaineth thus,
Exactiones impoſitas per Romanam Curiam, quibus Regnum noſtrū miſerabiliter depauperatum
eſt, leuari, aut colligi nullatenus volumus: Theſe Exactions, or paimentes of
monie laide vpon vs by the Courte of Rome, by meane whereof our Realme is miſerably empoueriſhed,
we wil not in any wiſe to be leuied, or geathered.
                      The gaines, & pelferies, that
the Phariſeis made of the people, were not ſo greate. Neuertheleſſe Chriſte ſaide
vnto them,Matth. 23. 
                     VVoe be vnto you, yee Scribes and Phariſeis, that rauen vp poore
vvidovves houſes, vnder pretenſe of longe praieinge.
                  
                  
                     Rome, yée ſaie, is the Mother Churche of al the VVeaſt: & therefore, I trow,
wée are bounde to paie, what ſo euer paimentes ſhée ſhal require. If wée allowe
ſutche ſimple reaſons, then is the Pope likewiſe bounde to paie to the Churche of
Hieruſalem, what ſo euer paiementes ſhe ſhal require. For Hieruſalē
                      is in déede ye
                     Mother Churche, not onely of the Weaſte, but alſo of al the whole worlde. Howe
be it, it is a cruel Mother, that deuoureth vp her owne Children. S. Paule ſaithe,
Non debent filij parentibus theſaurizare,
                     2. Corin. 12. Lib. 6. Cap. 24. 
                     ſed parentes filijs: The Children ought not to laie
vp treaſure for theire parentes, but the Parentes for theire Children.
                      But Iohannes Sariſburienſis
in his Polycraticon ſaithe, Roma nunc non tam matrem exhibet, quàm
nouercam: Rome nowe ſheweth her ſelfe not ſo mutche a natural Mother, as a Stepmother:
For ſhee ſpoileth, and deuoureth her Children.
                  
                     This Defender, yée ſaie, in makinge his ende ſo badde, hath plained the parte of a fooliſhe Poete.
Here, M. Hardinge, wée haue good cauſe to thinke, your
                      Diuinitie is waxen colde,
ſéeinge you are thus driuen to pleade in Poetrie. But maie wée beleue, the
Churche of Rome is growen ſo Holy, that monie is nowe becomme the vileſte
parte of al her Plaie? Certainely, if your Pope once loſe his monie, al his Plaiers
wil ſoone ſit a colde.
                     Felin. De Offic. et Poteſt. Iudicis delegati. Ex parte. 1. 
                     One of your owne Doctours ſaithe thus, Ceſſante tali
redditu, qui maximus eſt, attenta hodierna Tyrannide, Sedes Apoſtolica contemneretur:
If this rente (of Simonie) whiche is very greate, were once ſtaide, conſideringe
the Tyrannie of Princes, that novve is, the Apoſtolike See of Rome vvoulde

be deſpiſed. In whiche woordes thus mutche is alſo to be noted by the waie, that
what ſo euer Prince wil not ſuffer the Pope to take what him liſteth, muſte be
taken, and iudged, as a Tyranne. Therefore Ioannes Andreae, one of youre
greatteſt Canoniſtes,In ſexto. De Elect. & Electi poteſt. Fundamenta. In Gloſſ. 
                     ſaithe thus, Roma fundata fuit à Praedonibus: & adhuc de
primordijs retinet: dicta Roma, quaſi rodens manus. Vnde verſus, Roma manus
rodit: quos rodere non valet, odit: The firſte fundation of Rome was laide by
Theeues: and hitherto ſhee ſauoureth of her beginninge: and is called Roma, quia rodit
manus. Thereof commeth the common verſe, Rome bireth you by the handes. And
vvhom ſhee cannot bite, them ſhee hateth.
                  The ſtate of the Romaine Popedome ſpronge firſte of monie, and encreaſed
by monie, and ſtandeth nowe, neither by Truthe of Doctrine, nor by ſeueritie of
Diſcipline, nor by Praier, nor by Holineſſe, nor by ought els, but onely by monie.
Set monie aparte, and the Pope is equal with other Biſhoppes. Codrus Vrceus
ſaithe,Codrus Vrceus. Sermon. 1. 
                     Pontifex Maximus, ſi non Virtute, tamen Pecunia: The Pope is the greatteſte
Biſhop, although not in Vertue, yet at leaſte in monie. Therefore wée maie
ſaie of the Pope,
                     Cicero ad Attic. Lib. 2. as Diphilus ſommetime ſaide of Pompeius, Noſtra miſeria
Magnus es. Baptiſta Mantuanus, ſpeakinge of the ſtate of Rome, ſaith thus,

                        
                           Ʋenalia nobis
                        Templa, Secerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
                        Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum eſt venale, Deus
                              •
                           ue:
                     
                     Bmongeſte vs, in Rome, Churches, Prieſtes, Altars, Maſſes, Crovvnes, Fire, Incenſe,
Praiers, and Heauen are ſet to ſale. Yee God him ſelfe emongeſte vs maie
be had for monie.
                  Budaeus ſaithe,
                     Eudaeus in Pandectis. Sanctiones Pontificiae non moribus regendis vſui ſunt: ſed,
propemodum dixerim, Argentariae faciendae Authoritatem videntur accommodare:
The Popes Canons ſerue not nowe, to guide mennes liues, but, if I maie ſo ſaie,
they ſerue rather to make a banke, and to geate monie.
                  
                  Bernarde of Clunice ſaithe thus,
                     Roma dat omnibus omnia dantibus:Bernardus Clun
                              •
                           acen. in Satyra Omnia Romae
Cum Pretio.
Rome geueth al thinges to them, that geue al thinges: Al thinges at Rome wil paſſe for
monie.In Sexto. De Elect. & Electi Poteſtat. Fundamenta. In Margine. 
                     Euen in the Popes own Decretales yée ſhal finde it noted thus, Roma eſt
Caput Auaritiae. Ideò omnia ibi venduntur: Rome is the Heade of al Couetous
treacherie. And therefore al thinges there are ſet to ſale.
                  
                  Yea Thomas Becket him ſelf, whom a litle before, yée called a Saincte, when,
for his wilful diſobedience, and Treaſon committed againſte his Prince, he had
for aide, and ſuccoure, fledde to Rome, and ſawe, that nothinge would be wrought
there without monie,
                     In Epiſt. ad Archi
                           •
                        piſ. Moguntinum. thus he wrote he wrote thereof to the Biſhop of Menze: Mater
Roma facta eſt Meretrix, & proſtituta eſt pro mercede: Rome our Mother is
becomme an Harlot, and for monie, and meede laiethe her ſelfe to ſale.
                      To be ſhorte,
yée knowe, that our Fathers, longe ſithence, were woonte to ſaie,
Curia Romana non captat Ouem ſine lana:
The Courte of Rome wil not take the Sheepe without the flieſe.
                  Therefore, M. Hardinge, your Poete concluded in good order, and went not ſo
farre biſides his Rules. For, monie is bothe the Firſt, and the Middle, and the laſte
Acte of al your Fable.
                  
                  
                     Chriſte ſommetime thruſte ſutche Buiers,Matth. 21. Sellers, Brokers, & Scorſers out of

the Temple: But contrariwiſe, yée haue receiued in Buiers, and Sellers, & thruſte
out Chriſte: and ſo haue turned the Houſe of God into a Caue of Theeues. S.
Paule ſaith thus vnto the people of Epheſus,
                     Actor. 20. 
                     Argentum, & Aurum nullius concupiui:
I haue deſired nomans Gould, or Syluer. Vpon whiche woordes, in the Gloſe
it is noted thus, Per hoc Lupi cognoſcuntur, qui talia concupiſcunt: Hereby,
they,
                     
                     1. qu. 1. Nunquam Diuinatio. 
                     that deſire ſutche thinges, are knowen for woulues. S. Hierome ſaithe, Quia
Prophetae pecuniam accipiebant, Prophetiae corum facta eſt Diuinatio: For that
the Prophetes felle to taking of monie, therefore their Propheſte was becomme a Soothe ſaieinge:
                     
that is to ſame, it was of the Diuel, and not of God.
                  
                  Thus, M. Hardinge, to conclude, what ſo euer faulte yee can finde with the
Defenders Poetrie, Verily, by the iudgement of your neareſt frendes, Monie was
the beſte paare of al your Fable.
               
            
            
               The Recapitulation of the Apologie.
               THus thou ſeeſt, good Chriſtian Reader, It is no newe thinge,
though at this daie the Religion of Chriſte be enterteined with
deſpites, and checkes, being but lately reſtoared, and, as it were,
comminge vp againe anewe: for ſo mutche as the like hath chaunced
bothe to Chriſte him ſelfe, and to his Apoſtles: yet neuertheleſſe, for
feare thou maiſte ſuffer thee ſelf to be leadde amiſſe, and to be ſeduced
with thoſe exclamations of our Aduerſaries, wee haue declared at
large vnto thee the very whole manner of our Religion, what our
Faith is of God the Father, of his onely Sonne Ieſus Chriſte, of the
Holy Ghoſte, of the Churche, of the Sacramentes, of the Miniſterie,
of the Scriptures, of Ceremonies, and of euery parte of Chriſtian
Beliefe. Wee haue ſaide, that wee abandon, and deteſte, as plagues,
and poiſons, al thoſe olde Hereſies, whiche either the ſacred Scriptures,
or the Anciente Councelles haue vtterly condemned: that wee
cal home againe, aſmutche as in vs liethe, the right Diſcipline of the
Churche, whiche our Aduerſaries haue quite brought into a poore
and weake caſe: That we pouniſhe al licenceouſneſſe of life, and vnrulineſſe
of manners, by the olde, and longe continued Lawes, and with
as mutche ſharpeneſſe as is conueniente, and liethe in our power:
That we mainteine ſtil the ſtate of Kingedomes, in the ſame condition,
and ſtate of honoure wherein we found them, without any diminiſhinge,
or alteration, reſeruinge vnto our Princes their Maieſtie,
and worldly preeminence ſafe, and without empairinge, to our poſſible
power: That we haue ſo gotten our ſelues awaie from that
Churche, whiche they had made a denne of Theeues, and wherein
nothinge was in good frame, or once like to the Churche of God, and
which by their owne confeſſions had erred many waies, euen as Lot
in times paſt gate him out of Sodome, or Abraham out of Chaidee,
not vpon a deſire of contention, but by the warninge of God him ſelfe:
And that we haue ſearched out of the Holy Bible, which we are ſure,
cannot deceiue, one ſure fourme of Religion, & haue returned againe
vnto the Primitiue Churche of the Anciente Fathers, and Apoſtles,
that is to ſaie, to the grounde, and beginninge of thinges, vnto the
very 
                     •
                  undations, and headſpringes of Chriſtes Churche.
               
                  
And in very truthe we haue not tarried in this mater for the
Authoritie, or conſente of the Tridentine Councel, wherein we ſawe
nothinge donne vprightly, nor by good order: where alſo euery body
was ſworne to the maintenaunce of one man: where Princes Embaſſadours
were contemned: where not one of our Diuines coulde be
hearde, and where partes takinge, and Ambition was openly and
earneſtly procured and wrought: but as the Holy Fathers in former
time, and as our Predeceſſours haue commonly donne, wee haue reſtored
our Churches by a Prouincial Conuocation, and haue cleane
ſhaken of, as our duetie was, the yoke, and tyrannie of the Biſhop of
Rome, to whom wee were not bounde: who alſo had no manner of
thing lyke, neither to Chriſte, nor to Peter, nor to an Apoſtle, nor yet
like to any Biſhop at al. Finally, we ſaie, that we agree amōgeſt our
ſelues, touchinge the whole Iudgement, and chiefe ſubſtance of Chriſtian
Religion, and with one mouthe, and with one ſpirite doo woorſhip
God, and the Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte.
               Wherefore, O Chriſtian and Godly Reader, for ſo mutche, as
thou ſeeſte the Reaſons, and Cauſes, bothe why wee haue reſto
                     •
                  red
Religion, and why we haue foreſaken theſe menne, thou oughteſt not
to marueile, though we haue choſen to obeie our Maiſter Chriſte, rather
then menne. S. Paule hath geuen vs warning, that wee ſhould
not ſuffer our ſelues to be carried awaie with ſutche ſundrie learninges,
and to flee theire companies, ſpecially ſutche as woulde ſowe
debate and varience, cleane contrarie to the Doctrine, whiche they
had receiued of Chriſte, and the Apoſtles.
               Longe ſithence haue theſe mennes craftes, and treacheries decaied,
and vaniſhed, and fledde awaie at the ſight, and light of the Goſpel,
euen as the owle doothe at the ſonne riſinge. And albeit their trumperie
be builte vp, and reared as highe as the Skie, yet euen in a
momente, and as it were of it ſelfe, falleth it downe againe to the
grounde, and commeth to naught.
               For you muſte not thinke, that al theſe thinges haue comme to
paſſe by chaūce, or at aduenture: It hath benne Gods pleaſure, that,
againſte al mennes willes wel nigh, the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſte
ſhould be ſpread abroade throughout y• whole worlde at theſe daies.
And therefore menne folowinge Goddes commaundemente, haue of
theire owne free wil reſorted vnto the Doctrine of Ieſus Chriſte.
               And, for our partes, truely wee haue ſought hereby, neither glorie,
nor wealthe, nor pleaſure, nor eaſe. For there is plentie of al theſe
thinges with our Aduerſaries.
               And, when wee were of theire ſide, we enioied ſutche worldly commodities
mutche more liberally, and bountifully, then wee doo now.
               Neither doo wee eſche we Concorde, and Peace. But, to haue peace
with man, wee wil not be at warre with God. The name of Peace is
a ſweete, and pleaſante thinge, ſaith Hilarius: But yet beware, ſaithe
he, Peace is one thinge, and bondage is an other. For, if it ſhoulde
ſo be, as they ſeeke to haue it, that Chriſte ſhoulde be commaunded

to keepe ſilence, that the Truthe of the Goſpel ſhoulde be betraied,
that horrible errours ſhoulde be cloked, that Chriſtian mennes eies
ſhoulde be bleared, and that they might be ſuffred to conſpire openly
againſte God: this were not a Peace, but a moſt vngodly couenaunt
of ſeruitude. There is a Peace, ſaithe Nazianzene, that is vnprofitable:
againe, there is a Diſcorde, ſaithe he, that is profitable.
For we muſte conditionally deſire Peace, ſo far, as is lawful before
God,Matth. 10. and ſo far, as we maie conueniently. For otherwiſe, Chriſte
him ſelfe brought not Peace into the worlde, but a ſwerde. Wherefore
if the Pope wil haue vs reconciled to him, his duetie is firſt to be
reconciled to God: For from thence, ſaithe Cyprian, ſpringe Schiſmes
and Sectes, bicauſe menne ſeeke not the Heade, and haue not
their recourſe to the Fountaine (of the Scriptures) and keepe not
the Rules geuen by the Heauenly Teacher: For, ſaithe he, that is
not Peace, but vvarre: neither is he ioined vnto the Churche,
vvhiche is ſeuered from the Goſpel. As for theſe menne, thei vſe to
make a marchendiſe of the name of Peace. For that Peace, whiche
they ſo 
                     •
                  aine would haue, is onely a reaſt of idle bellies. They, & wee
might eaſily be brought to atonemente, touchinge al theſe maters,
were it not that Ambition. Gluttonie, and exceſſe doothe let it. Hence
commeth theire whyninge: theire harte is on their Halfepennie. Out
of doubte, theire clamours, and ſtirres be to none other ende, but to
mainteine more ſhamefully, and naughtily il gotten goodes.
               Nowe a daies the Pardoners complaine of vs, the Dataries, the
Popes Collectours,1. Tim. 6. the Bawdes, & others whiche thinke gaine to
be godlineſſe, and ſerue not Ieſus Chriſte, but theire owne bellies.
Many a daie agoe, and in the olde worlde, a woonderful greate aduantage
grewe hereby to theſe kinde of people. But now they recken
al is loſte vnto thē, that Chriſte gaineth. The Pope him ſelfe maketh
a greate complaint at this preſent, that Charitie in people is waxen
colde. And why ſo, trow yee. Forſoothe bicauſe his profites decaie
more, and more. And for this cauſe dooth he hale vs into hatred, al
that euer he maie, laieinge lode vpon vs with deſpiteful railinges, &
condemning vs for Heretiques, to the ende, they, that vnderſtand not
the meter, maie thinke there be no woorſe menne vpon earthe, then
wee be. Notwithſtanding, we in the meane ſeaſon are neuer the more
aſhamed for al this: neither ought we to be aſhamed of the Goſpel:
For we ſette more by the Glorie of God, then wee doo by the eſtimation
of menne. Wee are ſure, al is true, that wee teache, and wee maie
not either goe againſte our owne conſcience, or beare any witneſſe againſte
God For if we denie any parte of the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſte
before menne, he on the other ſide wil denie vs before his Father. And
if there be any, that wil ſtil be offended, and cannot endure Chriſtes
Doctrine, ſutche, ſaie wee, be blinde, and Leaders of the blinde: the
Truthe neuertheleſſe muſte be preached, and preferred aboue al: and
wee muſte with patience waite for Goddes Iudgemente.
               
                  
Let theſe folke in the meane time take good heede, what thei doo,
and let them be wel aduiſed of theire owne Saluation, and ceaſe to
hate, and perſecute the Goſpel of the Sonne of God, for feare leſt they
feele him once a redreſſer, and reuenger of his owne cauſe. God wil
not ſuffer him ſelfe to be made a mockinge ſtocke. The world eſpieth
a good while agoe, what there is adooinge abroade. This flame, the
more it is keapte downe, ſo mutche the more with greater force, and
ſtrengthe doothe it breake out, and flie abroade. The vnfaithfulneſſe
ſhal not diſapointe Goddes faithful promiſſe. And, if they ſhal refuſe,
to laie awaie this theire hardeneſſe of hart, and to receiue the Goſpel
of Chriſte, then ſhal Publicanes, and ſinners goe before them into
the Kingedome of Heauen.
               God, and the Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, open the eies of
them al, that they maie be hable to ſee that bleſſed hope, whereunto
thei haue benne called: ſo as we maie altogeather in one, glorifie him
alone, who is the true God, and alſo that ſame Ieſus Chriſte, whom
he ſente downe to vs from Heauen: vnto whom with the Father, and
the Holy Ghoſte, be geeuen al Honoure, and Glorie Euerlaſtingly.
So be it.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To Maiſter Hardinge.
            
               IT appeareth, M. Hardinge, by that yee
haue lately ſente vs ouer, and ſpecially by the vnpleaſante
verdure of your ſpeache, that my late Replie hath ſommewhat
diſordered your quiete minde. VVhiche thinge
notwithſtandinge I mighte eaſily haue gheaſſed, was not
vnlikely to comme to paſſe, ſpecially beinge before not vtterly vnſkilful of
your affections, Yet, as I neuer ſought to write any thinge, that of pourpoſe,
and iuſtely mighte offende you (the righte of the cauſe, and the Defence of
the Truthe euermore forepriſed) euen ſo am I nowe righte ſoary, to ſee you
ſo vnhable to maiſter your paſsions, and ſo vnaduiſedly to make them open
vnto ſo many. If it greeue you in reſpecte of your credite, for that I haue
thus diſcouered your errours, that was your faulte: it was not mine. If yee
had not made your errours knowen, they ſhoulde neuer, of my parte, haue
benne diſcouered. If you knewe, how ſoary I am in your behalfe, yee would
not ſo impatientely be offended.
            It miſliketh you, that I haue alleged ſo many Doctours, and Councelles,
and, as you ſaie, haue ſo ambitiouſly painted my Margine with ſo many
Authorities, bothe Greeke, and Latine. Yet you, for your parte, haue not
ſpared, ouer and biſides theſe twoo tongues, to painte your Margine, for a
ſurcharge, with woordes in Hebrewe: biſides other ſutche rankes of your
Engliſhe Scholies, ſo many, ſo thicke, and ſo cloſe togeather, that it were a
harde mater, to force in one woorde of Truthe to ſtande emongeſt them. It
is no courteous dealinge, M. Hardinge, to reproue that in others, that you ſo
commonly doo your ſelfe.
            If the Number of Doctours haue offended you, I doo not marueile: A
cowardely Chalenger woulde alwaies wiſſhe the Defendente to comme vnarmed
vnto the fighte. If I had alleged, either no Doctours at al, or nothinge
to pourpoſe, as your woonte commonly is to doo, yee would haue borne it a
greate deale better. How be it, my Authorities of Doctours, and Councelles,
be they neuer ſo many, yet, as you haue vſed them, are fewe yenough. For of
the whole number, by your good ſkil, more then three partes are leafte vntouched.
And in deede this was the wiſeſte waie. Children, where they
cannot reade, thinke it beſte, to ſkippe ouer.
            VVhereas I examine, and laie abroade al the partes, and branches of
your Argumentes, and ſhewe, how directly yee growe to your Concluſions,
that your Reader maie ſee, by what weapons yee ſeeke to maiſter him, this
you ſaie is a kinde of ſcoffinge. Yee telle me, I racke, and alter, and abuſe your

Argumentes, and plaie with ſhadowes of mine owne. But, M. Hardinge, if
yee wil haue your Argumentes to paſſe ſmoothely without controlment, then
learne hencefoorthe to make them better. Yee are ouer tender, if yee looke to
ſpeake, what yee liſte, and yet to heare nothinge, but to your likinge: and, to
ſende abroade ſutche ſimple wares, to ſerue the people, and yet maie ſuffer
noman to telle you of it. Verily, where yee ſaie, I haue of pourpoſe Changed
your Argumentes, if yee make them otherwiſe, then I haue made them, hauinge
alwaies an eie vnto your Concluſion, yee ſhalbe forced to make them
woorſe. Touchinge the Scoffes, wherewith yee finde your ſelfe ſo mutche
agreeued, doubteleſſe, who ſo had that grace, that is in you, as maie wel appeare
throughout al your Bookes, might ſoone deſerue to be called a ſcoffer.
            VVhere yee ſaie, you, and your Felowes haue eſpied a thouſande fowle
greate Lies in my writinges: had not one of you benne a greate Father of
Lies, ye coulde neuer haue hitte ſo readily vpon the number. Sutche an Auditoure,
I trowe,Laurent. Surius Carthuſian. In praefatione in Nauclerum. was he, that founde vs oute eleuen thouſande Lies in Sleidans
ſtorie. The very multitude hereof, and the hugeneſſe of the heape, as
it be wraieth wel your ſtomake, ſo in any indifferent iudgemente, it decaieth
the credite of your reckeninge. A man maie reaſonably thinke, it is as poſſible,
to finde twoo hundred, and fiftie Vntruthes in your Booke, as in mine
to finde a thouſande. Verily, as I neuer minded to defende any thinge, what
ſo euer, that in any my writinges, ſhalbe founde amiſſe, ſo I ſee, by the viewe
of your accomptes, it were no harde mater, with your eies, to finde Vntruthes
in the Goſpel. For what ſo euer I ſaie, be it neuer ſo true, yet, if it like not
your taſte, it is a Lie: VVhatſoeuer I allege, or tranſlate, it is corrupted. So
euil is my lucke: I can touche nothinge, but it is either too mutche, or too litle:
or too ſhorte, or too longe: or too blacke, or too white: or one waie, or other it
ſtandeth awry.
                  M. Hardinge, Reioinder: Fol. 203. b. If I tranſlate, Nonnulli Sacerdotes, Sundrie Prieſtes,
yee crie oute, A corrupter, a falſarie. I ſhoulde haue ſaide, Certaine
Prieſtes, or, Somme Prieſtes: but I ſhoulde not in any wiſe haue ſaide,
Sundrie.
            
            If I tranſlate, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Vnà nutritos, Fedde togeather, yee telle
the worlde, It is Falſehedde, it is fowle corruption. Thus, yee ſaie, I ſhoulde
haue tranſlated it,
                  M. Hardinge, Reioinder: Fol. 115. b. 
               Eodem cibo alitos, Fedde vvith one kinde of
meate: as if 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Greeke, were not Vnà in Latine, or had not Relation to
the Place. Deale herein with your frendes, M. Hardinge, as you maie: The
Greeke Reader wil allow you no ſutch Tranſlations. If I happen to ſaie, M.
Hard, ſaithe, The thing, that vvee receiue in the Sacramente, is no
Breade,
               
                  M. Hard. Reioind. fol. 163. b. Yee crie, Alarma: Looke, yee ſaie, in my Booke, Reader: M.

Ievvel is an vntrue man: Here he is taken vvith a lie: Marke vvel:
I ſaie, It is not Breade: I ſaie not, It is No Breade. Not Breade,
yee ſaie. No Breade, yee ſaie not: As if there were ſo many miles diſtance
bitweene No and Nor.
            
            Theſe, and ſutche like, be the ſhameful Vntruthes, and horrible Lies,
that you, and your Felowes with greate ſeekinge, and diligence haue eſpied.
And thus, if a man happen to vſe Enſis, for Gladius, or Nam, for Enim,
or Que, for Et, yee thinke it cauſe ſufficiente to make a Tragedie. How
be it I doubte not, but in my Replie, beinge ſo longe, and ſo ful of neceſſarie
allegations, yee maie happen to finde ſomme ouer ſightes of greatter importance.
And in acknowledginge, and refourminge of the ſame, yee ſhal finde
me as ſharpe, and eger, as your ſelfe. But theſe fewe examples I haue touched
by the waie, that it mighte appeare, howe inquiſitiue, and fierce yee are, to
ſeeke occaſions: and that your Reader maie ſee, yee hunte wantonly, and
renne riote, and open oftetimes without a cauſe. Yet notwithſtandinge,
if yee can telle vs ſadly, as your manner is; that M. Iewel bringeth triflinge
obiections, and traſſhe, and pelfe, and nothinge to pourpoſe, without learninge,
without reaſon, without witte: that he racketh, that he ſtretcheth,
that he wringeth, that he wreaſteth, that he nippeth, and clippeth the Doctours,
and Councelles: (for theſe be the woordes, whereby yee thought, yee
mighte beſte vtter your preaty fanſies): If yee can crie oute, Falſe partes,
Falſe reportes, Falſe dealinges, Falſe Marchantes, Falſe Ballance,
Falſe Diſe, and al is Falſe: If yee can ſaie, Loe, Sir Defender, yee
vvrangle, yee trifle, yee are taken tardee, yee haue proued nothinge,
yee haue nothinge to anſvveare: If yee can thus ſaie, and ſaie
it boldely, it ſhalbe ſufficiente: al is ſafe: your frendes wil thinke, yee haue
ſaide ſommewhat, and that yee woulde neuer haue framed ſutche a countenance,
to ſaie nothinge.
            Yee telle vs ful often, wee are no Biſhoppes: I trowe, for that wee haue not
ſworne our obedience to the Pope. And therefore yee geeue the worlde to
vnderſtande, wee can conſecrate no Miniſters, wee can holde no Synodes, we
canne doo nothinge. Euen ſo certaine your Forefathers in Olde times tolde
S. Paule,
               2. Corinth. 9. He was no Apoſtle: and others afterwarde by like authoritie
tolde S. Baſile, and S. Hilarie, they were no Biſhoppes. But, M. Hardinge,
they were Falſe Apoſtles, they were Arian Heretiques, that ſo
tolde them. It booteth not, to trie our titles before you. VVee wil onely ſaie
with S. Paule:
               1. Corinth 15. 
               By the Grace of God vvee are, that vvee are. And,
wee truſte, wee haue not his Grace in vaine.
            
               
But ſpecially, and aboue al other thinges, and that throughout al your
three Bookes, yee ſaie, that Sir Defender is vnlearned: that his beſte ſkil
is in a fewe Figures of Rhetorique: that he hath neither Greeke, nor Logique,
nor Philoſophie, nor Diuinitie: that he hath readde no kinde of Doctours,
nor Newe, nor Olde, nor of his owne, nor of others: that al the furniture
of his Booke was broughte to his hande, ſomme by Greeke Readers,
ſomme by Scholemaiſters,
                  M. Hard. Confuta. 21
                     •
                  . a Et 259. a. and commonly in other places. ſomme by Ciuilians, ſomme by Canoniſtes, ſomme
by Summiſtes, ſomme by Gloſers, ſomme by others: that he hath nothinge
els but patched Notebookes, huddled togeather by ſnappes, and peeces. Some
parte hereof, or rather the whole al togeather, without exception, to doo you
pleaſure, I would eaſily haue graunted you, M. Hardinge, vpon ſmal ſuite,
with more fauoure, and leſſe adoo. Take from mee, what learninge yee liſte:
diſtreine it, and pounde it at your pleaſure: I wil neuer trouble you with Repleuin.
How be it, if yee vtter al this of your indifferente iudgemente, and
certaine knowledge, yet is it impertinente: for wee pleaded of Faithe, and
not of Learninge: if otherwiſe yee ſpeake it of heate of minde, and abundance
of Cholere, and therevpon thus proclaime it vnto the world, it is great
folie. Truely yee neuer ſawe Sir Defenders Bookes, nor neuer ſette your
foote within his ſtudie. A wiſe Iudge wil ſeldome pronounce, before he
knowe. If it ſhal pleaſe you, for trial hereof, to ſende your frende, he maie
happily ſee, that Sir Defender hath al theſe Summiſtes, and Canoniſtes,
and Greekereaders, and Scholemaiſters, of his owne.
            Notwithſtanding, it maie becomme vs bothe to ſaie, as a Heathen wiſeman
ſommetime ſaide,Socrates. 
               This onely thinge vvee knovve, that vvee
knovve nothinge. Goddes Truthe dependeth not of our knowledge. Our
Tongues ſhal ceaſe, and our knowledge ſhal faile: But the Glorie of
God ſhal ſtande for euer. For my parte, I wil ſaie to you with S. Auguſtine,
Quaere doctiores: ſed caue praeſumptores: Seeke others of
more Learninge: but bevvare of them, that praeſume of Learning.
If any praiſe falle out in this reſpecte, beſtowe it freely vpon your Greeke-readers,
and Scholemaiſters, who, in your iudgemente, haue beſte deſerued
it. It ſhalbe ſufficiente for mee, to haue ſaide the Truthe: whiche,
though it appeare neuer ſo ſimple, is hable to remoue a Mountaine of Learninge.
But happy are your Brethren of Louaine, that are ſo ſpeedily
growen Learned vpon the ſuddaine, not by greate ſtudie, I trowe, but rather
by deſtinee. As ſoone as they had once ſauoured the ſoile of that countrie,
they lookte onely vpon twoo poore Titles of the Lavve,
               Extra. Li. 5. 
               De Maledicis,
and De Clerico promoto per ſaltum: and ſuddainely they were

tranſfourmed, and nowe goe for Doctours.
            
            As for your Learninge, M. Hardinge, wee neuer reproued it. How be
it, greately to feare it, wee haue no cauſe. God geeue you Grace, yee maie
wholy turne it to his glorie: leſte in the daie of the Lorde it be laide againſte
you. He is ouer wel learned, that bendeth his Learninge againſte God.
            
            But, if wee be ſo vtterly voide of al manner of Learninge, paintinge, as
you ſaie, our Bookes, and Margines with the Names, and Authorities of ſo
many Doctours, what maie your frendes then thinke of you, that ſtanding
ſo longe in the Defence of your Priuate Maſſe, are not yet hable to allege
one Doctoure, nor Greeke, nor Latine, nor one, nor other? It ſeemeth
greate marueile, yee ſhoulde haue ſutche abundance of Doctours,
and ſhewe ſo fewe, ſpecially where it ſtandeth you ſo mutche vpon, to open
your ſtoare. Conſider, I beſeeche you, your late Reioinder: wherein, as
it is thought, nothinge of your parte is leafte vntouched. Of the Seuen and
twentie Articles conteined in my Replie, yee haue taken vpon you onely
to anſweare One. And yet of the ſame One, yee haue ſcarcely touched the
tenthe parte. Your pourpoſe ſhould haue benne therein, by euidente Examples,
and good Authorities, ſubſtantially to haue proued your Priuate
Maſſe.
            
            Now conſider the order, and plaineneſſe of your dealinge. Yee beſtowe
welneare the thirde parte of your Booke aboute the Sacrifice: as though
there were no Sacrifice without Priuate Maſſe. Al the reſte yee conſume
in idle diſcourſes, and needeleſſe talkes, of Conſecration, of the Intention
of the Prieſte, of Minglinge the vvater vvith the vvine,
of the Name of the Maſſe, of Tranſubſtantiation, of Real Preſence,
of Churche Feaſtes, (whiche in olde time were called Agapae), of Singulare
Communion, of Communion of Faithe, of our Vnion with
Chriſte, of ſendinge abroade the Sacramente, of Prieſtes vviues, of
Vovves, of Bigamie, of Good vvoorkes, of Onely Faithe, of Publique
Praier in a tongue vnknowen, of Ceremonies, of Fourmes, of
Accidentes, of the Epiſtles Decretal, of Clemens, Cletus, Anacletus,
Abdias, Leontius, &c. Hereof yee haue tolde vs ſutche thinges, as
perhaps wee knewe before, and were not harde to be knowen, and perteined
ful litle to the pourpoſe. Yee ſhould rather haue proued, that within the firſte
ſixe hundred yeeres after Chriſte, ſomme one, or other of the Holy Learned
Catholique Fathers Miniſtred the Holy Communion openly
in the Churche, and receiued the Sacramente Alone not diuidinge
the ſame to any other, the vvhole multitude of the people

ſittinge, or ſtandinge by, and lookinge on him. This was the mater,
that laie bitweene vs: Hereunto yee ſhould haue laide your force: This was
it, yee ſhould haue proued. For proufe of ſutche thinges, as needed no proufe,
yee haue brought foorthe greate ſhewes of Learninge. But as touchinge
your Priuate Maſſe, whiche onely yee had taken in hande to proue, yee
haue hitherto proued nothinge. Your Reader, M. Hardinge, can neuer
be, neither ſo ſimple, nor ſo partial, but he muſte needes haue an eie vnto
your iſſue, and remember, what yee had in hande. If emongeſt ſo many,
and ſo Learned woordes, he finde not one woorde of that he ſought for, maie
he not thinke, he hath loſte his laboure, and that there is ſomme folie in your
fardle? Maie he not ſaie within him ſelfe, Quò nunc ſe proripit iſte?
VVhat ſhal I make of theſe vagaries? what meaneth this man, to ſhoote ſo
faire biſide the marke? He muſte needes perceiue by your ſilence, that, notwithſtandinge
your ſo many faire, and liberal promiſſes, yet the thinge, he
ſought for, cannot be founde. Naie, you your ſelfe, for excuſe hereof, by expreſſe
woordes haue tolde vs plainely,
                  M. Hard. Reioind. fol. 281. a. Et fol. 88. a. 
               It mighte be, that none receiued
the Sacramente vvith the Prieſte: And againe, VVhether the
Prieſte had alvvaies a companie,
               
                  M. Hard. in his Reioinder, in the Preface to the Reader. &. In the ſame Preface. & ij. M. Hardinge, Reioinder: Fol. 210. a. 
               to receiue vvith him, or ſommetimes
receiued alone, that is a circumſtance of a facte: the proufe
vvhereof by manifeſte Teſtimonies, cannot vvith reaſon be demaunded.
Againe, It is contentious, to put vs to proufe of the
Circumſtance. Againe, It forceth not, vvhether vvee bringe
foorthe Teſtimonies of the ſixe hundred yeeres, or no. Againe,
VVhether I can ſhevve, that a Maſſe vvas ſaide vvithout companie
preſente to receiue vvith the Prieſte, that ſaide it, or no,
vvhat ſkilleth it? Againe, I muſt telle you, that I ſeeke not for
Priuate Maſſe,
               Reioinder. 219. a. 
               vvhiche to finde, your ſcoffinge pretendeth me to
be deſirous. I ſeeke not for that, vvhiche I acknovvledge not.
And againe, It forceth not greately, vvhether it maie be proued,
or no: VVhiche is as mutche, as if yee had tolde vs in plainer wiſe, that
for the ſpace of ſixe hundred yeeres after Chriſte, yee can heare no tidinges
in any Doctoure, or Councel, of your Priuate Maſſe. VVhiche thinge,
thus of your parte confeſſed, to our pourpoſe is ſufficiente.
            Now, touchinge the Authoritie of your Amphilochius, not long ſithence,
yee thought his force had benne inuincible. And therefore yee ſtoode vp alofte,
                  M. Hardinge in his Anſweare, Fol. 29. a.
and braied alowde, Novve M Ievvel, and his Conſacramentaries
doo ſtagger, I doubte not. And for that cauſe, as if it had benne
ſomme greate woorthy Authoure, yee alleged him ſeuen times, with ſpecial

reuerence, in one Booke.Roioinder. fol. 267. b. And yet nowe at the laſte, yee are contente, for
ſhame, to turne him ouer, and to let him goe. Perhaps yee thought, for the
while, a weake threede was ſufficient to leade the people: and that, as folkes
vſe ſommetimes to pleaſe children, yee might quenche their thirſte with an
emptie cuppe. Thus mutche hitherto, touchinge ſomme partes of your Reioinder.
            
            Concerninge your Former Booke, whiche yee haue intitled, a Confutation,
I neede to ſaie nothinge. By the iudgemente of the wiſe, it ſaithe ſufficiently
of it ſelfe. But what meante you, M. Hardinge, therein to make ſo
large diſcourſe, I wil not ſaie, in the Defence, (for that woorde your frendes
maie not beare) but at the leaſte in the fauoure of Open Stevves: and to
calle the ſame,
                  M. Hard. Confu. fol. 162. b. 
               Malum neceſſarium, that is to ſaie, although an il thinge,
yet ſutche a thinge, as no good Common weale maie be without it? VVhat
meante you, to that purpoſe, to ſhewe vs the name, and Authoritie of S. Auguſtine:
and thus to vpbraide vs in the ende,Confu. fol. 162. a 
               In good ſoothe, Maiſters,
ye are too yonge, to cōtrolle the Cittie of Rome in her doinges?
VVhat needed you to beſtowe ſo fine eloquence in ſo fowle a cauſe?
                  M. Hard. Confu. fol. 163. a. Is vice
growen ſo colde in Louaine, that it muſte be enflamed, and authorized by
open VVritinge? VVhat meante you to allege the Prophete Dauid,
the Euangeliſte S. Mathevve,
               Confut. 251. a. & deinceps. and S. Paule the Apoſtle for proufe of
your Pardonnes? VVil yee telle vs, that Dauid, Matthevve, and Paule
were Pardoners? Or, if yee dare to telle vs ſo, muſt wee beleeue it? If yee ſo
manifeſtly mocke vs with open folies, howe maie wee truſte you in higher
Myſteries?2. Corin. 4. S. Paule ſaithe, Though our outwarde man be corrupted,
yet our inwarde man is renewed daie by daie. Here yee telle vs, in greate
ſoothe,
                  M. Hard. Confut. fol. 117. a. Luke. 22. M. Hard Confut. fol. 192. b. that theſe woordes vndoubtedly ſerue to proue Purgatorie.
            
            Chriſte ſaithe vnto Peter, I haue praied for thee &c. Therefore,
yee ſaie, Chriſte novve requireth vs, not to be obediente to Peter,
or Paule, but to the Pope, that ſitteth in theire Chaire. Chriſte
ſaithe,
               
                  M. Hard. Confu. Fol. 99. a. The Sonne of Man came, not to deſtroie, but to ſaue:
Ergo, ſaie you, The Breade, and VVine in the Sacramente loſe no
parte of their former vertues: but remaine in Fourmes, and Accidentes,
euen as they vvere before: as if the Sonne of God had come
downe from Heauen to ſaue Accidentes.
            Thus yee nippe of the ſenſe, and meaninge of the Holy Scriptures,
and feede vs onely with emptie woordes: as if yee woulde pike awaie the
corne, and geeue vs the chaffe: or conueigh awaie the iewels, and throwe vs
the bagge. O M. Hardinge, be not wilful: let your owne conſcience leade

you. VVas this the meaninge of S. Paule? was this the comminge of
Chriſte into the worlde? was this the ſenſe of the Holy Ghoſte? I wil not
ſaie, what Olde Doctour, or Anciente Father, but, what Summiſte,
what Canoniſte, what Childe, what Heretique, euer either ſo vndiſcretely,
or ſo vnreuerently vſed the VVoorde of God?
            
            I leaue the miſconſtrueinge, and falſifieinge of ſo many Fathers: the
allowinge, and ſoothinge of manifeſt Forgeries: the vpholdinge of Abuſes,
and open Erroures: your weake Proufes: your ſeely Coniectures: your ſimple
Gheaſſes: your greate Ouerſightes: your bolde Affirmations: your heapes
of Vntruthes: your diſdeigneful Scornes: your immoderate Scoffes: your
vngentile, and vnciuile woordes, as for example, Villanes, Theeues,
Fooles, Diſardes, Lourdaines &c. I leaue other your vnmannerly,
and vncleanely ſpeaches:Confuta. 318. b. 
               Hungry Dogges eate dirty puddinges:
As common as life vvith beggers:
               Confuta. 250. b. 
               They ſerue the belly, and the
thinges beneath the belly.
            
            VVas this a preſente, M. Hardinge, meete either for the Modeſtie of a
Virgine, or for the Maieſtie of a Prince: ſpecially ſutche a Virgine, and
ſutche a Prince, ſo Chaſte, ſo Graue, ſo Learned, ſo VViſe, ſo Vertuous, ſo
Godly, as Chriſtendome ſeldome hath ſeene the like? VVhat? thought you,
that either her wiſedome coulde not eſpie your fraudes, and mockeries: or,
that her chaſte eares coulde quietly beare your lotheſome talke? Or, thought
you by the weight of ſutche reaſons, to mooue Mountaines, and to woorke
woonders, and to force her Maieſtie to leaue chriſte and his Goſpel, and
comme to Louaine to folowe you?
            Yee threape her Maieſtie fondely with kindeneſſe, and, as yee woulde
haue the worlde imagine, with good likinge, and fauouringe of your ſide: as
if her Maieſtie, hauing benne brought vp from her cradle in the knowledge
and feare of God, and through Goddes greate Mercie, and accordinge to
his knowen VVil, by the good aduiſe, and counſel of the ſtates of her
Realme, hauinge refourmed the Houſe of God from the filthe, and ſoile
of your diuiſes, ſhee ſtoode nowe in a mammeringe, and were not hable to
diſcerne, either Falſehedde from Truthe, or Darkeneſse from Light:
or, as if your Errours were not ſo groſſe, that a blinde man maie groape them
with his Fingers.
            Yee telle her Maieſtie, ſhee hath neither Parlamente, nor Lavve, nor
Churche,
               Confut. fol. 42. a. and ſo throughout the whole Booke. nor Cleregie: The Churche of Englande yee commonly calle
the Tovver of Babylon, the Synagog of Antichriſte, and the
Schoole of Sathan: ye charge her Maieſtie with diſordered proceedinges,

with mainteinance of Infidelitie,Confut. fol. 5. a. 15. a. 38. a. 49. a. and ſo through the whole. of Sacrilege, of Schiſme, of Hereſie: For
your poſsible power, ye diſhonour her Maieſtie, bothe abroade, and at home:
where yee maie geate credite to your folies, yee ſclaunder the gouernmente:
yee diſquiete her Maieſties louinge Subiectes: yee breede Seditions:
yee procure Rebellions: yee hazarde her eſtate. And yet dare yee to pouder
al this poiſon with a fewe diſſembled, and ſugred woordes, and to offer the
ſame vnto her Maieſtie for a preſente? VVel, M. Hardinge, if yee had
foreſeene the thankes, that her Maieſtie moſte iuſtely yeelded you for your
trauailes, yee woulde not haue benne ſo bolde, ſo rudely to preſſe into her
preſence. It behooued you, to be aduiſed, not onely, what yee wrote, but
alſo what Perſonage ſhoulde viewe your writinges.
            If yee ſhal happen to write hereafter, ſende vs fewer woordes, and more
Learninge. If yee ſhal diuiſe to talke any more of your Priuate Maſse,
leaue your vagaries, and goe directly to the pourpoſe. Telle vs no moe ſutche
longe tales, either of the Sacrifice, or of other maters ſo farre from the queſtion.
It is no good Logique, to ſhifte of the thinge, yee haue in hande, and
to mocke your poore Reader with an other. Treade not ſo nicely, and ſo
gingerly, M. Hardinge. Saie not, your Maſſe is a Circumſtance, and a
mater of Facte,Reioinder. 232. b 233. a. and ſtandeth onely vpon ſuppoſalles, and gheaſſes, and therefore
needeth no further proufe. VVhy ſoulde yee ſo trifle with the ſimple?
This is the Iſſue, that falleth out bitweene vs: VVhether any one of
al the Anciente Learned Fathers &c. euer ſaide your Priuate
Maſſe &c. This is it, that is denied. If yee proue not this, what ſo euer ye
proue, yee proue nothinge. Bringe out ſomme Learned Father: ſhewe
ſomme Catholique Doctoure: keepe them no lenger foorthe comminge.
The worlde looketh yee ſhoulde deale plainely.
            Denie nomore the manifeſte Truthe: auouche nomore the open Falſehedde:
Let there be ſomme probabilitie, and likelihoode in your ſaieinges.
Leaue your immoderate, and vncourteous talkes. They are tokens of ſtomake,
and not of Learninge. Therein yee haue deſerued the honoure aboue
al others. In ſutche kinde of Eloquence noman can matche you, but your
ſelfe. A good cauſe mighte haue benne pleaded with better woordes. The
more vntemperate, and firy yee ſhewe your ſelfe without cauſe, the more
in the ende wil appeare your folie. If yee haue hitherto taken any pleaſure
in ſpeakinge il, at my hande, by hearinge il, yee ſhal not loſe it. If yee bringe
vs moe Fables of your Pardonnes, and Purgatories: If yee feede vs, as
yee haue donne, with Vntruthes: If yee depraue the Scriptures: If yee
falſifie the Doctoures: If yee Conclude without Premiſſes: If yee place

your Antecedente at Rome, and your Conſequente at Louaine: If
yee ſtuffe ſo mutche paper, and blotte ſo many leaues, and ſhewe vs nothinge:
briefely, if yee write none otherwiſe, then yee haue donne hitherto,
no wiſe man wilgreately feare your force.
            Deceiue not the ſimple. They are bought with price: They are the people
of God, for whome Chriſte hath ſheadde his Bloude. Your ſhiftes
be miſerable. Yee trouble your ſelfe, as a birde the lime. The more yee ſturre,
the faſter yee cleaue: the longer yee ſtriue, the weaker yee are. Yee cannot
bridle the flowinge Seas: yee cannot blinde the Sonnebeames Kicke not
ſtil againſte the ſpurre: Geeue place vnto the Glorie of God. VVil yee,
nil yee, the Truthe wil conquere. God geeue vs bothe humble hartes,
and the people eies to ſee: that al fleaſhe maie be obediente to his wil. Amen.
            
               From London. 27. Octobris. 1567.
               
               Iohn Sariſburie.
            
         
         
            
            ¶A Table of the principal maters
Conteined in this Booke.
            
               A
               ABſolutiō of madde men.
139.
               Abſolution ſtandeth not
in the vvil of the Prieſte. 139.
               The Abomination of deſolation.
446.
               Abuſes in the maſſe, confeſſed by
Pigghius. 456.
               Refourminge of Abuſes. 133.
               Accidentes vvithout ſubiecte. 253.
               Adoration of the Sacramēt. 269.
               VVee neede no Aduocates vnto
God. 316.
               Agreement in Religion. 194.
               Altars, or Communion Tables.
333.
               S. Ambroſe refuſed the Emperours
iudgement in Eccleſiaſtical
cauſes. 689.
               Ambition in the Cleargie, the
cauſe of greate euil. 409.
               Anacletus fondely miſconſtrued
by M. Hardinge. 226. 227.
               Antichriſte. 446.
               Antichriſte in the Churche of
God. 447. 448.
               Antichriſte ſhal coūterfaite Chaſtitie. 482.
               Antichriſte in the Temple of
God, and vvhat Antichriſte
ſhalbe. 434.
               Antonius learned in the Scriptures.
195.
               VVeemen diſſemblinge themſelues
in mens Apparrel. 376.
               Choiſe of Apparrel for Religions
ſake 346. 347.
               No difference in Apparrel. 346.
347 348.
               Superſtitious holineſſe in Apparrel.
344 345.
               Eccleſiaſtical brauerie in Apparrel.
641.
               The Apoſtles equal vvith Peter.
106, 107, 108.
               The Apoſtles aboue Kinges and
Princes. 397.
               The Apologie authorized. 17.
               Athenes ſtandinge. 376▪ 377.
               S. Auguſtines iudgement refuſed. 
                     •
                  98.
               Auguſtine the Italian Monke. 11.
               Auguſtine the Italiā Mōke, aliue
at the time of the vvarre. 493.
               Auguſtine the Italian Monke inflamer
of the vvarre. ibidem.
               Auguſtine the Italian monke, Biſhop
in Englande. 492.
               The authoritie of the Doctours,
and Fathers. 18. 19.
               Pretence of Antiquitie. 495. 496.
            
            
               B.
               Bacon. 454.
               Baptiſme. 203.
               Baptiſme of Infantes. 150.
               By Biptiſme vvee are vnited vnto
Chriſte. 241.
               VVee are partakers of Chriſtes
Body and Bloude in the Sacramente
of Baptiſme. 271.
               Chriſte is he that Baptiſeth. 215.
               The Povver of Baptiſme. 217.
               Baptiſme is the Povver of Reſurrection.
221.
               Baptiſme receiued vvithout Faith.
216.
               Beleeue them not, ſpoken of Antichriſt
and his follovvers. 208.
               To Beleeue in God. 84.
               The recantation of Berengarius. 348.
               The Bernates lavvful vvarre againſt
the Duke of Sauoye. 389.
               Binding ſtandeth in vvilful refuſing
of the VVoord of God. 142.
               Biſhoppes called and conuented
before the Prince. 637. 638. 639.
               A Biſhop maie not put avvaie his
vviſe vnder pretence of holineſſe. 185.
               Biſhoppes ſvvorne vnto the Pope:
and the fourme of the Othe
expreſſed. 43.
               Difference bitvveene Biſhop and
Prieſte. 198.
               Biſhoppes vvithin the Princes
checke. 398.
               A Biſhop bearing ciuile office. 512.
               Biſhoppes proude, and diſdeigneful
in olde times. 409.
               Biſhoppes, no Biſhoppes. 117.
               The ſubſtance of Breade remaineth
in the Sacramente. 231.
               The Bread is the body of Chriſt,
in vvhat ſenſe. 246. 255. 257. 479.
480.
               The Bread of the Sacrament paſſeth
by natural digeſtiō, by the
Iudgement of Origen. 258. 261.
               The Bread remaineth in ſubſtance
as it vvas before. 247. 248. 249.
251. 252. 257.
               The Bread chāged, in vvhat ſenſe.
247 248. 249.
               The Breade not annihilate. 248.
               The Breade hath a certaine likeneſſe
of Chriſtes Body. 254.
               The Buildinge and repairinge of
Goddes Churche. 716.
               Burninge of the Scriptures. 477.
            
            
               C.
               Calixtus, for Anacletus. 226.
               The Calendar of Biſhops names.
374. 375.
               Carnal libertie. 335. 336.
               Cathechumeni, or Beginners in
the Fa
                     •
                  the. 139.
               Catholike, in many, or in fevv. 93
               Catholike Churche, and vvhat is
meant thereby. 49.
               Ceremonies. 308.
               S. Auguſtine founde faulte vvith
the multitude of Ceremonies.
308. 309.
               Ceremonies more eſtemed then
the commaundementes of
God. 308. 310.
               Vaine Ceremonies ought to be
remoued vvith al ſpeed conuenient.
309.
               Ceremonies haue povver to quiet
the conſcience, and to remitte
ſinne 554.
               Diuerſitie of Ceremonies. 309.
               Vovve of Chaſtitie, and lavvful to
breake the ſame. 168. 169. 170.
               Counterfaite Chaſtitie a marke
of Antichriſte. 183.
               Chaſtitie the gifte of God, & may
not be commaunded by any
man. 167.
               No one Chiefe but Chriſte. 340.
               Chriſtes humanitie in one place.
85 87 88. 89.
               Chriſte and the Pope haue one
place of Iudgemente. 95.
               Chriſtes Body neuer promiſed to
our bodily mouth. 274.
               To touche or to holde Chriſt. 288
               Chriſte the onely Pope. 106.
               Chriſtes Bloude not in the holy
Cuppes. 265.
               Chriſtes Body in one place. 276.
277.
               Chriſtians hated, & ſclaundered.
49.
               To approche vnto Chriſte. 288.
               To receiue or beare Chriſte. 285.
286.
               The ſpiritual receiuing of Chriſts
Body. 348.
               Chriſtes Body cruſſhed & torne
vvith teeth. 349.
               Chriſtes Body geeueth life. 241.
               Chriſtes Body in Heauen. 233.
               Chriſtes Body verily preſente in
the holy ſupper, in vvhat ſenſe.
271. 273. 276.
               The Chriſtians in Graeciae and Aſia

abhorre the Pope and his
Cleregie. 457.
               The Churche of Rome is departed
frō the primitiue Churche
of God. 566.
               The deformities of the Churche
of Rome. 568.
               The Churche in fevve. 571.
               The Churche knovven by Gods
vvoorde. 3.
               The Churche of Rome can neuer
erre, true or falſe. 430. 436.
437. 439. 440. 444. 445.
               Readinge of Chapters in the
Churche. 552. 553.
               The Churche is aboue the vvorde
of God. 557. 558. 559. 560.
               The Churche of Rome can not
faile. 565.
               The miſerable ſtate of the
Churche of Rome. 462. 463.
               The Pope is the vvhole Churche.
558.
               The Churche knovven by the
vvoorde of God. 463. 464. 465.
               The ſtate of the Churche decaied
in the time of the olde Fathers.
442.
               The Authoritie of the Churches
in Africa, as good as the authoritie
of the Churche of
Rome. 440.
               The Churche maie erre. 445.
               The Churche, if it depend of one
man, ſhal ſone decay. 448. 450.
               The Churche in fevve or many.
441. 442. 443.
               No Idolatrie in the Churche of
Rome. 628. 629.
               The Churche maie be in a fevve.
93. 94.
               To beleue in the Churche: to beleue
in Sainctes. 85.
               The Pope not the head of the
Churche. 95.
               The Romaine Churche compared
vvith the Churches of the
Goſpel. 585.
               The State and Vnitie of the
Churche, dependeth of the
Pope. 53.
               The Doctrine of the Churche of
Rome, is the expreſſe vvoorde
of God. 200.
               The Romaine Churche receiued
the faith from the Greekes. 577.
               Euery Biſhop, the head of his
ſeueral Churche. 95.
               Vaine Titles of the Churche of
Rome. 40.
               The authoritie of the Church. 55.
               Heare the Churche. ibidem.
               No Saluation vvithout the
Churche of Rome. 36.
               The Churche knovven by Gods
vvoorde. 55.
               The Romaine Church vnlike the
Church of the anciēt Fathers. 21.
               The Churche of Rome fallen
from God. 36.
               The Churche of Rome is the Catholique
Churche. 36.
               The Churche builte vpon Iohn,
aſvvel as vpon Peter. 107.
               The Churche inuiſible. 391.
               The Greekes abhorre the Church
of Rome. 36.
               The Ciuile Magiſtrate to be obeied.
394.
               The erroures and abuſes of the
Cleregie. 96. 104.
               The Communion in one Kinde,
vſed firſte by Heretiques. 230.
               Cauſes of the Communion vnder
one kinde. 328. 329.
               Prieſtes Concubines. 511.
               A Prieſte keepinge a Concubine,
maie not therefore be refuſed
in his miniſtration. 511.
               Concupiſcence is verily ſinne. 217.
218.
               Confeſsion not commaunded.
155. 156.
               Confeſsiō auricular neuer named
of the Ancient Fathers. 257.
               Confeſsion of ſinnes venial. 151.
               Confeſsion of ſinnes appointed,
not by Goddes VVoorde, but
by Tradition. 133.
               Sinnes forgeeuen vvithout Confeſsion. 143.
               Confeſsion of ſinnes, not neceſſarie.
133. 143 151.
               Confeſsion made by hādvvriting
or by a broker. 137.
               Confeſsion to be made onely vnto
God. 140.
               Confirmation of Biſhoppes. 129.
               Confeſsion made vnto a laie man
137.
               Conſecration, and diuers iudgementes
of the ſame. 208. 209.
               Conſecration of Biſhoppes. 130.
               The donation of Conſtantine.
401. 537. 538.
               Conſtantine vvas Chriſtened by
Sylueſter: A fable. 670.
               Conſtantine the Emperoure in
the Councel of Nice. 677. 678.
679. 680.
               The Emperoure Conſtantine
ſtoode vpright at the Sermon,
and vvould not ſitte. 678.
               Courteghians remaininge ſtil in
Rome. 382.
               Councelles lavvfully called vvithout
the Popes conſent. 529.
               Decrees of Councelles ratified,
vvhether the Pope vvoulde or
no. 53.
               The Authoritie of Councelles. 50
               Prieſtes, Miniſters, and Deacons in
Councelles. 603.
               The credit of Councelles. 593.
               The Holy Ghoſt in Coūcels. 606
               No good end of any Coūcels. 599
               The Pope not alvvaie preſident in
Councelles. 57.
               The Authoritie of Councelles &
Fathers. 57.
               Libertie of voice, and diſputation
denied in the Councel of
Trente. 43. 44.
               The Truthe of Iudgemente vvas
in that Councel that pronoū
                  ced
ſentence againſt Chriſt. 622
               The Authoritie of Councelles. 19
               Authoritie to cal Councelles. 529
               Confirmation of Councelles. 607
               Councelles maie bee ſummoned
vvhether the Pope vvil or no.
665.
               Councel of Tridente. 597.
               The Pope not Preſident in Councelles.
669.
               Councelles of Biſhoppes. 674.
               The Emperoure ſummoned general
Councels. 663. 664. 667. 670. 672.
               The Pope vvas ſummoned to
come to Councels. 663. 666.
               The Pope Confirmeth Councelles.
665.
               The Popes Legates had not the
firſt place in Councelles. 666.
               The freedome of the Councel of
Trent. 627. 632. 633.
               Godly men haue refuſed to come
to Councels. 629. 630.
               Councels called the determinations
of men. 710.
               Councelles general, repealed by
Councelles prouincial. 711.
               Diſſenſions in the Tridentine
Councel. 634.
               Emperours and Kinges Embaſſadours
in Councel vvithout
voice. 634.
               The Councel of Tridente of ſmal
credite. 710.
               The Councel of Frankeſorde. 712
               A Councel general, vvhat it is. 713
               In the Summon of the Councel
of Trente, the Pope had, forgottē
the name of Chriſte. 710
               The credite of Councelles, 488.
               
                  
The Emperours authoritie ouer
Councelles. 674.
               Councel general, not general. 708
               The Authoritie of Councels, certaine
or vncertaine. 486.
               The number of Biſhoppes in the
Councel of Trident. 714.
               The Ciuile Prince or Magiſtrate
ſubſcribeth in Councel. 686.
               Diuerſe formes of Creedes. 83.
            
            
               D.
               The office of Deacons. 98.
               Departinge from the Churche of
Rome. 568. 569. 570. 574. 582.
               Departinge from the Pope. 104.
               Vaine Deuotion. 293.
               Diſputation. 41.
               Diſſenſions in Religion. 337. 338.
               Diſſentions in Religion amonge
the olde Fathers. 340.
               Diſſentions amonge the ſchoole
Doctours. 341. 349. 350.
               The Diuiſion of the Empiere. 403
               A Diuine povver in the Pope. 403
               The Duke of Sauoi
                     •
                   ſpoiled, 389.
            
            
               E.
               To Eate God. 278. 279. 239. 240.
               It is one thing to Eate Chriſte in
Sacrament, & an other to Eate
Chriſte in deede. 283.
               Groſſe imagination of the Eating
of Chriſtes Body. 279. 280.
               The Emperoure a childe of the
Churche. 155.
               The Emperour bound to ſvveare
obedience to the Pope. 399.
               The Emperour ſo farre beneath
the Pope, as the Moone is beneath
the Sonne. 400.
               The Emperoure Stevvarde of the
Churche of Rome. 119.
               The Emperour maie trāſlate the
Supremacie from the Pope, to
an other. 119.
               The Emperoure Prince of the
vvhole vvorlde. 675.
               The Emperoure poiſoned in the
Sacramente. 408.
               The Emperoure maie lavvfully
make Eccleſiaſtical lavves. 692.
693.
               The Emperoure inferiour onely
vnto God. 424.
               The Emperoure maie depoſe the
Pope. 405.
               The Emperour vvaited vpon the
Pope vvith bare heade and bare
foote. 417.
               The Emperour is the Popes man
413.
               The Emperoure limiteth the Catholike
Faithe. 668.
               The Enimies of God are cruel. 554
               The Entention of the Prieſt. 209
               Epiphanius rent an Image. 504.
               Equalitie of Biſhoppes. 109. 111. 112.
               The other Apoſtles Equal vvith
Peter. 105.
               The Pope Equal vvith other Biſhoppes. 109.
               Erroures & abuſes of the Church
of Rome cōfeſſed by her ovvne
children. 627.
               Errours in the olde Fathers. 337. 338.
               Errours among the Fathers touchinge
the Body of Chriſt. 353.
               The Popes immoderate and Vnreaſonable
Exactions of monie.
734. 735. 736. 737. 738.
               To follovv the Example of Chriſt
575.
               Exorciſtes. 98.
               Vniuſte Excommunication. 41.
               Excommunicatiō vvithout cauſe.
583.
            
            
               F.
               One learned Father receiued before
a Councel. 52.
               Fables and tales readde in Churches.
520.
               The firſte Faithe. 170.
               Perfitte Faithe in Heathens. 320.
               The Faithe planted in Englande
before Auguſtine. 11.
               Chriſtes body preſente onely by
Faithe. 235.
               VVee aſeende by Faith into Heauen,
and ſo eate the fleaſhe of
Chriſte. 269. 270. 287.
               The holy Fathers ouerſightes in
the allegation of ſtories. 416.
               The Body of Chriſte eaten by
Faithe. 221. 224.
               By Faithe vvee ſee, and touche
Chriſte. 271. 272. 273. 289.
               Faith is the kaie of the kingdom
of Heauen. 138.
               The Authoritie of the Fathers.
52. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. 69.
               Faithe of Infantes. 216.
               Faithe eateth. 
                     〈◊〉
                   234. 235. 239.
               The Faithe of the parentes helpeth
the Infantes. 216.
               The paterne of the Faithe. 702.
703. 706. 707.
               Faithe eateth Chriſte beinge abſente. 220. 221.
               Chriſte preſent by Faithe. 289.
               Faſtinge vpon any certaine daies,
not apointed. 197. 198.
               Faſting vvith fleaſhe. 197.
               Faithe vvithout vvoorkes, is no
Faithe. 321.
               Fond Faithe is no Faithe. 293.
               By Faithe vvee eate Chriſte. 289.
               Chriſtes death applied by Faithe.
298.
               By Faithe vvee are incorporate
vnto Chriſte. 241. 243.
               Church in fevve, or many. 327. 328
               Shifte of Figures vſed by. M. Hardinge.
269.
               A Figure is not the thing it ſelfe.
205.
               Flamines, and Archiflamines. 121.
               The floriſhing ſtate of Kinge Pipinus
life. 406.
               Fornication in a Prieſt more tolerable
then mariage. 366. 367.
               Simple Fornication, vvhether it
be ſinne, or no ſinne. 360.
               Fornication vvinked at by the
Popes Canons. 362.
               The fourme of Baptiſme. 203.
               Fourme, and Subſtance. 98. 89.
               Formes, and accidētes. 205. 231. 232.
               A prieſte maie not be depoſed for
Fornication. 189.
               Franciſcus Dandal
                     •
                  s. 414.
               Free vvil, hovv free, hovv bonde. 13
                     •
                  
               
               Perfit fulfilling of the lavv. 316. 317
               The fulfilling of the Lavve, poſsible,
or impoſsible. 317.
            
            
               G.
               Gerſon. 454.
               Goddes Truthe mutable. 438.
               The credite of Goddes VVoorde
hangeth on the Pope. 438.
               The Goſpel encreaſed of ſmal
beginninges. 34.
               The Goſpel of Chriſte reproued
for noueltie. 490. 491. 496.
               The fruites of the Goſpel. 51.
               The Goſpel of Chriſte ſhal not
ſtande. 22.
               The Goſpel of Chriſte ſclaundē
                  rouſly
called groſſe and fleaſhely. 32.
               The encreaſe of the Goſpel. 38.
               The Goſpel in Princes Courtes.
34. 35.
               The Authoritie of Gratian. 28.
               Gratian often deceiued. 226.
               The Greekes haue neither priuate
Maſſe nor half cōmunion
nor Purgatorie. 578. 579. 580.
               Guilty of the Body, & Bloud, &c.
587. 588.
            
            
               H.
               The Halfe communion vveakely
proued. 480. 481.
               M. Harding abateth fiue hundred
yeeres of his reckeninge. 32.
               M. Harding miſallegeth S. Auguſtine. 141.
               
                  
M. Harding fondly applieth theſe
vvoordes of Chriſte, The ſonne
of man came not to deſtroie,
but to ſaue. 254. 255.
               M. Harding miſconſtrueth S. Auguſtine. 61. 62.
               M. Hardinge miſtaketh Ioſua for
Oſee. 101.
               Heade of the Churche. 94.
               Henry 4. and his qualities. 419.
               A vvomā Head of the Church. 644
               Heretiques alleged Scriptures. 57.
58. 59. 60. 467.
               Heretiques ſuppreſſe the Scriptutes.
481.
               The Definition of Hereſie. 46.
               The note of Hererſie maie not be
diſſembled. 45.
               Heretiques diſcredite the Scriptures.
488.
               Heretiques allege the Doctoures
and Fathers. 495.
               Heretiques accuſe the Scriptures.
78. 474.
               Popes haue benne Heretiques.
612. 614. 615. 616. 617.
               Heretiques confound al thinges,
bicauſe they cannot diſcerne
the Creator from the Creature.
295.
               Ruffinus an Heretique. 672.
               Heretiques alleged Councelles,
and Fathers. 57.
               Hereſie in good parte. 48. 49.
               Heretiques vvoulde be called Catholiques.
433.
               Heretiques holde by Tradition.
199.
               Heretiques clothed vvith the
name of the Churche. 2.
               Condemned of Hereſi vpon light
occaſions. 46.
               Godly menne accuſed of Hereſi.
631.
               Hieremie ſette ouer Kingdomes
and nations, in vvhat ſenſe. 399
               The Higheſte Prieſte. 526. 527.
               Holy Orders. 96. 97.
               Holy Orders vvithout offices.
98.
               The Holy Ghoſt is God. 90.
               Holy VVater. 21.
               Hoſius Iudgemente of the Scriptures.
468.
               Hoſius miſtaken. 472.
               Huldericus the Biſhop of Auguſta.
186.
               Huſbande of one vvife, and the
meaninge thereof, 174.
               Hus, and Hierome of Prage. 48.
            
            
               I.
               S. Iames Epiſtle. 193.
               The ignorance of the Cleregie
in times paſte. 371.
               Images in Churches. 505.
               Adouring of Images. 503.
               Images painted in vvalles. 502.
               The blaſphemous Inuocation of
our Lady, called by M. Hard.
a ſpiritual daliance. 313.
               India conuerted. 37.
               Innocentius 3. ſaid, he vvould either
loſe his Triple miter, or
els he vvoulde pulle themperour
Philips Crovvn
                     •
                   Empeperial
from his heade. 398.
               Inuocation of Sainctes. 311.
               Dame Iohane the Pope. 374.
               Iohannes Caſa. 383.
               Iohannes Diazius ſlaine by the
procurement of his Brother. 383
               Iohannes Camo
                     •
                  enſis. 618.
               Goddes Iudgement folovveth the
Iudgement of the Prieſt, Reproued.
154.
               The Prieſte Iudge ouer ſinne. 152.
               The Iuſte man truſteth not in
his ovvne righteouſneſe. 323.
               The luſt man ſinneth, and deſerueth
euil. 321. 322.
               Iuſtification by Faith onely. 74.
               Iuſtinian the Emperour depoſed
ij. Popes. 690. 691.
            
            
               K.
               The vvoorde of God is the Keie.
144. 152.
               The Popes Keie ſhutteth, and openeth
not. 143.
               Many Prieſtes haue not the Keie
of Knovvledge. 136.
               Confuſion of Keies. 160.
               Peters Kaie greater then his fellovves.
161. 162. 163.
               The Keie of Inſtruction, and the
Keie of Correction. 149.
               Peters Keie equal vvith the reſte
162. 163.
               Somme Prieſtes haue no Keie at
al. 145.
               Knovvledge is not the principal
Keie. ibidem.
               Kinges, and Emperours hold the
Popes ſtirope, and leade his
horſe, beare his traine, and cari
                     •
                  
his diſhe. 412.
               Kinges maie lavvfully deale in Eccleſiaſtical
cauſes. 636. 645. 647.
648. 654. 655. 656. 657. 658. 659.
660. 682. 683. 684. 688.
               Kinges not alvvaies anointed by
Biſhoppes. 696.
               King Iohn of England poiſoned.
409.
               Kinges Foſterers, and Queenes
Nurſes of the Churche. 649.
            
            
               L.
               The Lamb laide vpon the Table,
in vvhat ſenſe. 282. 283.
               Laie men, after a certaine ſorte,
be Prieſtes. 131.
               They myſtical Latine tongue. 517
               The Lambe of God is ſlaine in
the Holy Supper, in vvhat ſenſe
286.
               A Laie man maie remitte Sinnes.
137.
               Lenten faſte. 198.
               Lenten faſt, & Lenten meates. 270
               God cauſeth his light to ſhine
out of barbarous and deſpiſed
places. 391.
               Liga Sotularia. 388.
               Laghtes. 13.
               Lightes, & tapers in Churches, 20
            
            
               M.
               Prieſtes haue Married. 514.
               Marriage letteth not Praier. 172.
               Good cauſes vvhy Prieſtes ſhoulde
bee ſet at libertie, touchinge
Marriage. 187. 188. 189. 190.
               Prieſtes Married vvithin holy orders.
175. 176.
               Marriage hindereth. 182.
               The reſtrainte of Marriage the
doctrine of Deu
                     •
                  lles. 182. 183.
               Biſhoppes and Prieſtes Mar
                     •
                  ied.
166. 167. 184.
               Marriage hindreth not the Biſhoppes
dutie. 177.
               The Apoſtles doctrine touchinge
Marriage. 184. 185. 186.
               Marriage Condemned. 165.
               Seconde Marriage is Fornication,
in vvhat ſenſe. 174. 175.
               Not lavveful to breake Prieſtes
marriage. 185.
               Marriage contracted after a vovve
is Lavveful. 459.
               Prieſtes Marriage allovved. 173.
               Seconde Marriage cōdemned. 166
               Marriage furthereth the Biſhops
dutie. 178. 179. 180.
               Marriage forbidden, not fornication.
182.
               Al the Apoſtles, Iohn excepted,
vvere Married. 166. 184.
               Better to Marrie, then to burne.
184.
               Biſhoppes tvviſe Married. 174.
               A Prieſte maie Marrie. 171.
               Monkes Married. 176
               Prieſtes Marriage not forbidden.
185. 186.
               Chriſtes deathe applied by the
Maſſe vvithout Faithe. 297.
               Matrimonie chaſte and pure. 513.
               
                  
Churche in many, or fevve. 38. 39.
               Matrimonie, neither good, nor
il. 178.
               The cares of Matrimonie, ibidē.
               The bleſſed Virgin Marie, Idolatrouſly
abuſed by Heretiques.
312.
               Martyrdome ſtandeth not in the
deathe, but in the cauſe. 30.
               The Bookes of the Machabees. 193
               The Maſſe ſeuen hundred yeeres
in furniſhinge. 194.
               Godly menne, coūted madde. 80.
               A Prieſte beinge Married ought
not therefore to be refuſed in
the miniſtration. 513.
               One Maſſe, or Communion, in
one daie. 524.
               The Emperoure appointed Metropolitanes.
122.
               Truſte in Merites. 77.
               Mediatoure of Saluation: Mediatour
of interceſsion. 311.
               Merite and Mercie. 319. 321.
               Miracles. 37. 294. 699.
               Miracles vvrought by fained Chriſtians.
700.
               The ſeruantes of Chriſte knovven
by that they vvoorke no Miracles.
699.
               Miracles vvrought by ſubtile
menne, or by the Diuel. 294.
               VVhether a Mouſe maie eate the
Bodie of Chriſte, M. Hardings
Doctours cannot tel. 236. 260.
               The order of Monkes in olde
times. 624.
               Superſtition and couetouſnes in
Monkes. 625.
               Monkes life, Gods ſeruice. 509.
               Lavveful ſuppreſsinge of Monaſteries.
600.
               Monaſteries ſuppreſſed by the
godly Fathers. 510.
               Monkes liuinge by their labour
of theire handes. 508. 509. 510.
               Monkes from Chriſte, and the
Prophetes. 66.
               To be the Mother of God, is leſſe
then to be the childe of God. 314
               Multiplication of keies. 145.
            
            
               N.
               Nevvenes in Religiō. 32. 490. 491.
               Nominales and Reales. 344.
               Nouatus. 134.
            
            
               O.
               Obedience. 16.
               Obedience vnto man. 345.
               Chriſtes Body offered, in vvhat
ſenſe. 277.
               Oile hallovved. 20.
               Oile in S. Iames. 73.
               One Head, one Iudge. 336.
               One onely Biſhop. 122. 451. 452.
               Peter the Onely Biſhop. 106.
               One Heade. 101.
               One Shepheard, & one Flocke. 102.
               One Biſhoprike, Expoūded. 112. 113
               Open confeſsion. 140.
               Origens Iudgement of the Sacrament.
501.
               Our God, our Lorde: My God,
my Lorde. 386.
            
            
               P.
               Paphnutius. 173.
               The ſtorie of Paphnutius reproued.
ibid.
               Parlaments holden vvithout cō
                  ſente
of Biſhoppes. 596.
               Pardons. 402.
               Maters of Religion determined
in Parlament. 596.
               Parlament, no Parlament. 595.
               Patriarkes vvithout office. 714.
               VVe maie not beleeue Paule, if
he ſpeake as of him ſelfe. 108.
               Paule had no neede of Poter. 106.
               S. Paule, and S. Iames accorded. 75
               Pauperes à Lugduno. 454.
               The People dothe communicate
by the mouth of the Prieſt. 297
               The People is in the cuppe. 283.
               Patience in Perſecution. 335.
               Perſecution a tokē of the truthe
10.
               Perſecution for Loue. 24. 25.
               The Godly vvoorke no Perſecution.
732.
               The vvicked complaine of Perſecution.
730.
               Truthe grovveth by Perſecution.
484.
               Perſecutiō, & deliting in Bloud. 30
               Perſecution for the Truthes ſake.
484.
               The Churche encreaſeth by Perſecution.
31.
               Peter ouer mutche auanced. 111.
               Peter the Shepheard, and the Apoſtles
the ſheepe. 106.
               Peter Martyr and others falſely
ſlaundered. 475.
               The Apoſtles receiued theire povver
of Peter. 106.
               Petrꝰ Aloiſius the Popes ſonne. 382
               Pius 4. endangered by his Cardidinalles.
41.
               The Popes Chaire of Porphyrie
ſtoane. 379.
               The Pope preuaileth by darknes
and Ignorance. 698.
               VVhether the Pope be Iudas, or
Peter, it ſkilleth not. 622.
               A certaine Diuine Povver in the
Pope. 541.
               The Pope is the Heade ſpringe of
al Lavves. 542. 543.
               The Pope Lorde and God. 540.
               The Pope hathe povver ouer the
Angels of God. 543.
               Popes and Cardinalles nothing
                     •
                  
differinge from ciuil Princes.
640. 641.
               The Pope Vicar to Iulius Caeſar.
674.
               The Popes Pardons. 547. 548.
               The Pope ſuccedeth Conſtantinus.
674.
               The Pope noted for Antichriſte.
457. 458. 459. 460.
               Al other Biſhoppes receiue of the
Popes fulneſſe. 531.
               The Pope maie not be iudged by
any Prince, or other povver. 532
533.
               The Pope vſeth bothe ſiverdes
522. 523. 528.
               Emperours & kinges receiue their
free libertie of the Pope 534. 535
               The Pope aboue the Emperoſi
                     •
                  e
as far as the ſonne is aboue the
Moone. 536.
               The Pope hathe al Lavves in his
breaſte. 482.
               Popes or Biſhoppes of Rome,
Prieſtes ſonnes. 166.
               VVherein the Pope is like to Peter.
726.
               The Pope can neuer erre. 725.
               The Pope is aboue Kinges and
Emperoures. 397.
               The Pope a Chriſtian man by the
vertue of his office. 674. 675.
               The Pope abſolueth by a deputie.
161.
               The Pope is a King. 650. 651. 652.
               The Pope is no Kinge. 653.
               The Popes povver ſupernatural.
695, 696.
               The Pope and his clergie vnlearned.
705.
               The Pope Peters Succeſſor. 675.
               The Pope choketh the povver of
al other Biſhoppes. 125.
               The Pope ridinge in his Pontificalibus.
293. 294.
               Pope Hildebrande. 420. 421.
               The Pope treadeth on the Emperoures
necke. 422.
               The Popes factes vvhatſoeuer thei
be, are excuſed. 423.
               The Pope inferior to the Prince.
425. 426.
               The Pope ſubmitteth him ſelfe
to the Emperoure. 425.
               The Pope no vniuerſal Biſhop,

but limited onely to a part. 427
               The Popes and Cardinalles by
their ovvne frendes compared
to the Scribes & Phariſeis. 430
               VVee are bound to obey, not Peter
and Paule, but the Pope. 431
               The Pope heir apparent vnto the
Empire. 417.
               The Pope ouerthrovveth the Emperours
crovvne vvith his foote.
418.
               The Pope may depoſe kinges and
Emperours. 404. 405.
               The Pope, vvhatſoeuer he be, is euer
holy. 423.
               The Pope armeth Hēry the ſonne
againſt his Father. 419.
               The Popes ſaueconducte. 633.
               The Popes Legates, firebrandes of
troubles. 402.
               The Pope vvoulde haue depoſed
Philippe the Frenche King. 407
               The Popes faith can not faile. 436
               The Pope claimed the Kingdom
of Fraunce to him ſelfe. 407.
               No Saluation vvithout the Pope.
104.
               The Pope Iudge in his ovvne
cauſe. 608.
               The Pope appointeth Kinges and
Emperours to kiſſe his feete. 410.
               The Pope keepeth not his ovvne
Councels. 525.
               Pope Iohns erroure, touching the
immortalitie of the ſoule. 617.
               The Pope diſcouered. 4.
               The Pope aboue the general
Councel. 609. 610. 611.
               Chriſte, and his Apoſtles coulde
not rule the Church better thē
it is novv ruled by the Pope. 551.
               Pet
                     ••
                  e Popes. 100.
               The Pope maie diſpenſe againſte
Gods vvoorde. 51. 330. 331.
               Al povver geuen to the Pope 532.
               Pope Zofimus corrupted the
Councel of Nice. 612.
               The Pope vncertaine of his ovvne
ſucceſsion. 129.
               The Pope admitted by the Emperours
letters parents. 130.
               The Pope teacheth Humilitie in
the Schole of pride. 410.
               The Popes vniuerſal povver. 104.
               The Popes povver not Vniuerſal.
115. 116. 123.
               The Prieſte hath the ſame povver
that Chriſte had. 138.
               The Pope receiueth his ciuile iuriſdictiō
frō 
                  
                     •
                  he Prince. 534. 535
               The Pope is Lorde of Lordes, and
King of Kinges. 544.
               It vvere beſte the vvhole vvorld in
al caſes vvere ruled by the Pope
alone. 400.
               The Pope ſo far aboue the King
as God is aboue a man. 397.
               The Pope, the Prince, bothe of
the heauenly, and alſo of the
vvorldly Kingdome. 95.
               The Pope hathe free libertie to
doo euil. 533.
               The Popes Authoritie vvas but
ſmal before the Councel of
Nice. 115.
               The Pope the Headſhepheard. 17.
               The Pope equal in credite vvith
other Biſhoppes. 52. 53.
               The Pope maie make a Biſhop
onely by his vvoorde. 129.
               The Pope ſummo
                     •••
                  d by the Emperour
to appeare at Coūcels. 57
               The Popes credite aboue the Goſpel.
51.
               One Pope contrarie in iudgemēt
to an other. 52. 100. 466.
               The Pope maie erre as a Priuate
man: but in publique iudgemēt
he cannot erre. 52.
               The Popes equal vvith the other
Patriarkes. 53
                     •
                  .
               Al povver geeuen to the Pope. 103
               The Popes povver ouer Purgatorie.
542.
               The Pope is no mere natural mā
541.
               The Pope the vniuerſal Biſhop of
al the vvorlde. 530.
               Pope Leo, touchīg his ovvn Sec. 111
               The Pope, Prince of Paſtours. 112.
               The Pope equal vvith the other
Petriarkes. 115.
               The Pope no vniuerſal Biſhop.
118. 121.
               The Pope hardly obteined to bee
called the head of the churche. 118
               The Pope aboue the vvhole
Churche. 65.
               A ſimple Prieſte aboue the pope.
397.
               To diſobeie the Pope. 40.
               The Pope encreaſed in povver, abated
in holineſſe. 16.
               The diſſolution of the Empiere
vvrought by the Pope. Ibidem.
               The Pope maie beſtovve the Empire
at his pleaſure. 400.
               Pope Zacharie depoſed Childericus
the Frenche King. 403.
               The Pope is al, and aboue al. 619.
               The Popes iudgemente aboue al
the iudgemēt of the vvorld▪ 482.
               The encreaſing of the Popes temporal
povver. 403.
               Pope Victor poiſoned in the
Chalice. 40
                     •
                  .
               The Pope is more then God. 397.
               The Popes ſtoole of Porphyris
ſtoane. 410.
               Kinges and Princes ſvveare obedience
to the Pope. 396.
               The Pope placeth him ſelf aboue
the Empier. 398.
               The Pope him ſelfe vvoulde not
be called the vniuerſal Biſhop. 45
                     •
                  
               
               The Pope can haue no Superioure.
424.
               The Pope is Chriſte. 461.
               The Pope and his Clergie fallen
from God. 453.
               Departing frō the Pope. 430. 431.
               The Pope had no authoritie to
ſummone Councels. 671.
               The Popes honor preiudicial to
to the honor of God. 398.
               The Pope is the onely Lorde of
temporal thinges. 426.
               Pope Sylueſter dead before the
Councel of Nice. 666.
               The Emperours place in Councel
at the Popes feete. 635.
               A priuate mā ſaieing the truthe,
is to be heard before the Pope.
431.
               Popes and Cardinalles entangled
vvith vvorldly affaires. 640.
               It is ſufficient for vs to do
                     ••
                  es the
Pope vvilleth vs. 431.
               The Ambition of the Pope. 426.
               The Pope is the light that came
in to the vvorlde. 619.
               The Pope is not the head of al
Churches. 451. 452.
               The Pope hath inuaded the right
of al inferiour Biſhoppes. 452.
               Pope Adrian confeſſ
                     •
                  th that al
euil grevve from the See of
Rome. 454 455.
               The Pope and his Clergie, Spoilers
and Trai
                     •••
                  rs. 462. 463.
               Praier in a ſtrange tonge. 516.
               The Pride of Rome. 110. 119.
               Moſes a Prieſte. 651.
               Prieſtes Concubines allowed. 363.
367 370.
               Prieſtes take vpō thē the proude
lookes of the Phariſeis. 153. 154.
               Laie men in a certaine ſenſe to be
called Prieſtes. 652.
               The Prieſtes povver in remittinge
ſinne. 158. 159.
               Prieſtes, or elders. 603.
               Prince of Prieſtes, or hieſt Biſhop▪
a title geuē to many Biſhops 121
               Godly Princes careful for Goddes
cauſes. 34. 35.
               
                  
The Prince the Supreme gouernoure
in Eccleſiaſtical cauſes. 643. 644. 645.
647.
               The Prince, touchinge his obedience
tovvardes God, is a priuate
man. 394.
               The Prince bounde to vvrite out the
booke of the Lavve. 648. 649.
               Flatteringe of Princes. 591.
               Priuate Maſſe coldely auouched by
M. Hardinge. 225. 226. 227.
               The Prophetes of God called Heretiques.
233.
               The Popes power ouer Purgatorie.
299.
               Old fantaſies of Purgatorie. 299. 300.
               Praier for the dead importeth not
Purgatorie. 300.
               Vaine proues for Purgatorie. 301.
               The Bloude of Chriſte is our true
Purgatorie. 301. 305. 306.
               There is no Purgatorie. 302.
               Scriptures diſprouing Purgatotie. 304
               Purgatorie Imagined by the Heathens
305.
               Contrarie opiniōs of Purgatorie. 306.
               Roffenſis confeſſeth that the olde Fathers
made little mention of Purgatorie.
307.
               The Greekes neuer beleeued Purgatorie.
302. 307.
               S. Auguſtine doubteth of Purgatorie
305.
               M. Hardinge imagineth double fire
in Purgatorie. 306.
               S. Auguſtine denieth Purgatorie. ibid.
               Paule and Peter muſte paſſe through
Purgatorie. 301.
            
            
               Q.
               Quodāmodo miſcetur mihi. 242. 243
            
            
               R.
               Readers. 98.
               Readinge of the Scriptures vvithout
praier. 195.
               Children of xiiij. yeres of age admitted
to be Readers in the Churche.
602.
               Rebellion. 16.
               The Boures Rebelliō in Germanie. 388
               Recourſe to Rome. 702. 703. 704.
               Reconciliation of diſſenſions. 354.
               Regimente of vveemenne. 389.
               Relikes, or dead mennes boanes. 705.
               The Kinge determineth caſes in Religion.
12.
               The cauſe of Reſurrection. 324. 325.
               The good man vvoorketh good
things, vvithout hope of Revvard. 320
               Our perfection of Righteouſneſſe is
vnperfit. 317. 318.
               The Romaine Religion in many
pointes agreable vvith the Manichees.
17.
               The Romaine cleregie deceiuers, falſe
teachers, and Pilates. 461.
               The Romaine Faith ſhal neuer faile. 22
               The Romaine Faithe ſpoken of thorough
the vvorlde. 436.
               The filthie life of the Romaine Clergie.
367. 368.
               Erroures and abuſes in the Romaine
Churche confeſſed. 24.
               Rome is Babylon. 719. 720.
               Fond queſtiōs reſolued at Rome. 704.
               The Tragedies of Rome. 79.
               Rome the roote of euil. 455.
               Departure from the Churche of
Rome. 17.
            
            
               S.
               Tvvo Sacramentes. 202. 214.
               Sacramentes miniſtred vvithout vnderſtandinge.
203.
               Sacramentes sanctifie, and conteine
grace. 203. 204.
               Sacramentes be ſignes. 205.
               Vehement phraſes of the Sacramētes,
246.
               The grace of the Sacramentes. 235.
               The number of Sacramentes. 212. 213.
               Sacramentes be vvoordes viſible. 145.
               Sacrament turned into a Diuine ſubſtance.
252.
               The Breade and VVine of the Sacrament
doo nouriſhe. 205.
               The Scaramentes of the olde Lavve, &
the nevve. 206.
               The viſible partes of Sacramentes are
thinges corruptible. 257. 260.
               Goddes ſpecial vvoorking in al Sacramentes.
254.
               The Sacrament is a figure. 244.
               Goddes omnipotente povver in the
Sacramentes. 245.
               In the Sacramente, or by the Sacramente.
232.
               Sacramentes are Seales of Gods promiſſes.
134.
               Sacramēts neceſſarie, & hovv. 149. 150
               The diuiding or breaking of the Sacrament.
521.
               Nature, Povver, Vertue in Sacramēts.
253. 254.
               M. Harding referreth the Iudgement
of Sacramentes to his ſenſes. 255.
               Diſdaineful ſpeaches of the Sacramēts
vſed by M. Hardinge. 268.
               Chriſte is crucified, and dieth in the
Sacramente. 269.
               The Sacramente changed into the
ſubſtance of our fleaſhe. 259.
               Sacramentes are ſignes. 73.
               Vehement ſpeeches of the Sacrament
239.
               The Bread changed into a Sacrament
244.
               The Sacramente vnder bothe kindes
of Chriſtes Inſtitution. 229. 230.
               The Sacramentes of the nevve Lavve
geue grace, in vvhat ſenſe. 062.
               The difference bitvveene the Sacrament,
and the ſubſtance of the Sacramente.
222. 224.
               The Sacramentes vvoorke in vs the
hope of Reſurrection. 221. 222.
               The carieing about of the Sacrament
293. 295.
               The Sacramente dependeth not on
the Miniſter. 215.
               The Sacramente is one thinge, and
Chriſtes Body is an other thing. 222
230. 232. 268.
               The Sacrifice of Melchiſedeth. 434.
               Sainctes offices diſtincted. 313.
               Sale of Maſſes, and of Merites. 292.
               Certaintie of Saluation. 75.
               The Schoole Doctours. 19.
               The Scripture a deade letter. 473. 474
               The Scriptures tranſlated into diuers
tonges. 588. 589.
               The Scriptures preſerued by Goddes
prouidence. 478.
               The people ought to reade the Scriptures.
506.
               The Scriptures preſerued by the Iues
478.
               The Scriptures inferioure to the
Churche. 474.
               The Scriptures take theire force of
the Churche of Rome. 456. 593.
               Ignorance of Scriptures is ſinne. 590.
               The Scripture ſtandeth in the ſenſe, &
not in the vvoordes. 54. 72. 194.
               Hovve knovve you that theſe be the
Scriptures? a fonde queſtion. 200.
               Scriptures at diuerſe times, diuerſely
expounded. 78.
               Scripture receaueth authoritie of the
Churche. 77.
               The old tranſlation of the Scriptures
corrupted. 598.
               The Scriptures fovvly abuſed. 53. 77.
467.
               Scriptures onely to be read in Churches.
519.
               Scriptures folovve the Churche, and
not the Churche the Scriptures. 78.
               VVee maie not heare an Angel of
God againſt the Scriptures. 485.
               The Heretiques alleged the Scriptures.
72.
               The ſimpleſt of the people in olde
times diſputed of the Scriptures. 507
               The Scriptures diſcloſe al errours. 481
               Grace to diſcerne Scriptures. 201.
               Boaſtinge of the Holy Ghoſte vvithout
the Scriptures. 65.
               Gods Scriptures levvdely ſcorned. 193.
               Scriptures forged. 201.
               The authoritie of the Scriptures. 69.
               
                  
The ſimple people maie reade the
Scrip 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 589. 590.
               The people cannot iudge of the
Scriptures, becauſe the Scholar is
not aboue his Maiſter. 487.
               Tovvardes the ende of the vvorld, the
people ſhal flee to the Scriptures.
716. 721.
               Scriptures ſufficiete to debate al
doubtes. 58. 59. 61. 62. 64. 69.
               The Scriptures of God muſte be expounded
by the Sprite of God. 65.
               Searche the Scriptures. 72.
               To ſelle Chriſte. 292.
               Simple erroure. 46. 50.
               A Prieſt maie not be depoſed for ſimple
fornication. 362. 363. 364. 365.
               Simple fornication, vvhether it bee
ſinne, or no. 361.
               The Iudge of Sinne. 140. 
                     •
                  53.
               The vvorde of God forgeueth Sinnes.
158.
               Sinne forgeuē vvithout Couſeſnō. 155.
               The Pope cannot cōmitte Simonie.
560. 561. 562. 563.
               Vnchaſte ſingle life, vvorſe then aduoutrie.
170.
               Filthines maintained vnder the color
of ſingle life. 167. 168.
               The Prieſte forgeueth not Sinne. 154.
               Sinnes forgeuen by hearinge the
vvoorde of God. 138.
               The frutes of ſingle life. 187. 188. 189.
               Singe
                     •
                  s. 98.
               Spiritual eating of Chriſtes Bodie. 271
272. 274. 280.
               Stevves in Rome. 369. 370. 371. 373.
               Stubberneneſſe. 46. 50. 590.
               Subſtance. 251.
               
                  
                     •
                  ubſtance, by M. Hardinges Iudgement,
ſignifieth Accidentes. 253.
               Succeſsion. 127.
               Succeſsion not ſufficient. 132.
               Succeſsion in Peters Chaire. 727.
               The Succeſsion of Popes. 131. 132.
               Chriſte vvas able to ſhevve no ſucceſſion.
128.
               The Pope hath his holineſſe by Succeſsion. 39.
               Certaintie of Succeſsion. Ibidem.
               Summus Sacerdos. 526. 527.
               Superſtitious choiſe of meates. 270.
               Superintendents. 597.
               Surſum corda, vſed in the time of
the holy myſteries. 275.
            
            
               T.
               Temple. 328.
               Theophylacte anſvvered. 239.
               He that entreth not by the vvoorde
of God, is a Theefe. 102.
               The Popes tyrannie ouer Princes. 732.
               Tyrannie and crueltie in the Popes. 79
               Freere Ticelles Proclamation. 34.
               Traditions. 195.
               Vaine Traditions fathered vpon the
Apoſtles. 66.
               Tradition is the ſenſe of the Scripture.
72.
               Traditions and Errours cutte of by
Goddes vvoorde. 67.
               Traditiōs equal vvith Gods vvord. 195.
               Traditions vſed for the vvoorde of
God. 196. 197.
               Traditions broken. 195.
               Tradition againſt the Scripture. 65. 66
               Traditions abuſed. 66.
               Tranſubſtantiation nevve and doubtful.
237 238.
               Tridentine Coūcel referred al to the
Pope. 634.
               Truthe deuoureth falſehed. 585.
               Truthe blinded vvith falſehed. 7.
               The Truthe ſtil a ſtranger. 9.
               Truth il entreated, & ſclaundered, 4. 5
               Truthe vvil conquere. 284.
               Truthe preuaileth. 731.
               The ſprite of Truthe in Annas and
Caiphas. 621.
            
            
               V.
               Valentinian the Emperoure refuſed
to heare Eccleſiaſtical cauſes. 667.
               Venial ſinnes remitted other vvaies,
then by the bloud of Chriſte. 151.
               The Pope changeth vice into vertue.
564.
               Vigilantius. 13.
               The Churche is the Popes Vineyard.
608.
               The perpetual virginitie of our
Lady. 200.
               The vitious life of the Romaine
Clergie. 358.
               I vvil no more drinke of this frute of
the Vine, expounded. 262.
               One vniuerſal Biſhop. 99. 122.
               Vniuerſal povver cōmitted no more
to Peter, then to Paule. 124.
               An Vniuerſitie in Rome. 377.
               The Popes vauntinge of his vniuerſal
povver. 125.
               Pope Gregorie refuſeth the name of
Vniuerſal Biſhop. 124.
               Reaſons for the Vniuerſalitie of the
Pope. 100. 101.
               Vnitie, a token of the Truthe. 352.
               The Vniuerſal Churche dependeth on
the Pope. 452.
               The Vniuerſal church maie faile. 450
               Vnitie amonge the vvicked. 352.
               The Vnitie of the Churche reaſteth
(not in one Chriſte, but) in one
Pope. 100. 466. 467.
               Pride it ſelfe deſireth Vnitie. 100.
               Miniſters Vnlearned. 602.
               The Romaine clergie Vnlearned. 601.
602.
               A Vovve ſimple, or ſolemne. 499.
               Vovve annexed vnto holy orders. 171.
               Voluſianꝰ the Biſhop of Carthage. 366
            
            
               VV.
               VVater vvas not water, but bloud. 246
               VVatches. 13.
               VVeemen changed into men. 380.
               VVicked men commended. 421.
               The VVicked eate not the Body of
Chriſte. 210. 241. 273. 349. 586.
               The VVicked receiue the Body of
Chriſte, in vvhat ſenſe. 210.
               VVilful ſtubberneneſſe. 435.
               VVitenberg. 391.
               A poore huſbandman bringinge the
VVoorde of God, ought to be beleeued
before Pope or Coūcel. 611.
               The Authoritie of Gods VVoord. 194
            
            
               Z.
               Zele, and griefe of minde againſt the
enimies of God. 3.
            
            FINIS.
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   