
      
         
            
            
            A proper dyaloge / betwene a Gentillman and a husbandmā / eche complaynynge to other their miserable calamite / through the ambicion of the clergye.
            
               ¶ An A. B. C. to the spiritualte.
               
                  ¶ Awake ye gostely persones / awake / awake
                  Bothe preste / pope / bisshoppe & Cardinall.
                  Considre wisely / what wayes that ye take
                  Daungerously beyngelyke to haue a fall.
                  Every where / the mischefe of you all.
                  Ferre and nere / breaketh oute very fast
                  Godde will nedes be revenged at the last.
               
               
                  ¶ Howe longe haue ye the worlde captyued
                  In sore bondage / of mennes tradiciones?
                  Kynges and Emperoures / ye haue depryned
                  Lewedly vsurpynge / their chefe possessiones.
                  Muche misery ye make / in all regiones.
                  Nowe youre fraudes / almoste at the latter cast
                  Of godde sore to be revenged at the last.
               
               
                  ¶ Poore people to oppresse / ye haue no shame
                  Qwakynge for feare / of your donbble tyranny.
                  Rightfull iustice ye haue put out of frame
                  Sekynge the lust of youre godde / the b
                        •…
                     y.
                  Therfore I dare you boldely certifye.
                  Very litle though ye be therof a gast
                  Yet god will be revenged 
                        •…
                     r the last.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
O Christen reder / from rashnes refrain
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Of hastye iudgemēt / & lyght sentence.
                  though sū reckē it frowardnes of bra
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Thus to detecte ye clergyes incōueniēce. (ne
                  Vnto christes wordes geue / thou aduertence
                  Which saieth nothinge to be done so secretly
                  But it shall'be knowen manifestly.
               
               
                  Where as men discerne no grefe of darcknes
                  F
                        •…
                     ll litle is desyred the confortable lyght
                  The daye is restrayned to sheme his clerenes
                  Tyll the clowdes be expelled of the night
                  As longe as we perceyue not wronge frō righ
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Nether holynes from false hypocrisye
                  The truthe can not be knowen manifestly.
               
               
                  ¶ Cursed they are / as Esaye dothe expresse
                  Which presume the euyll for good to commēde
                  Sayenge that swete is soure / & light darcknes
                  As nowe in the clergye / we may perpende.
                  Whos disguysed madnes in the later ende
                  As seynt Paule to Timothe did prophesye
                  Shall be knowen to all men manifestly.
               
               
                  ¶ Example of twayne he doth
                        •…
                      th
                        •…
                     e recyte
                  Whos names were called I
                        •…
                     nes & Iambres
                  Which by enchauntmēt / through deuels might
                  Strongely resisted the prophete Moyses.
                  Doynge lyke merueyles and wonderfulnes
                  So that none could the very trouth espye
                  Tyll their Iugglynge was knowen manifestly
               
               
                  
                     
Christe / likewise / with his predicacion
                  The phariseyes shewynge outwarde holynes
                  Was a counted of sma
                        •…
                      reputacion
                  Vyce cloked vnder shyne of vertuousnes.
                  Vntill at the last their furiousnes
                  Accusyng the woman taken in aduo
                        •…
                     ery
                  They sawe their fautes detecte manifestly.
               
               
                  Their vyces opened / they could not abyde
                  Shame drevynge them to confusyon
                  Which afore season through pope holy pryde
                  They bolstred out vnder abusyon
                  It is the practyse of their collusyon.
                  Zele of rightuousnes to fayne outwardly
                  Tyll their fautes be detecte manifestly / 
               
               
                  Which in oure clergye is evidently sene
                  Fayned godlynes falsly pretendynge
                  Wherby moste parte of people do wene
                  That they seke goddes honour in all thing
                        •…
                     
                  
                  How be it / men shuld se that their sekynge
                  Is to confounde christes gospell vtterly
                  Were their fautes 
                        〈◊〉
                      manifestly.
               
               
                  What greater despyte can they ymagine / 
                  Agaynst god his hye honour to deface
                  Than to vsurpe on them his power diuine
                  Abhominably sittinge in holy place▪
                  
                  Which hath continued longe tyme & space
                  And shall with outragious blasphe
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Till their fautes be 
                        〈◊〉
                      manifestly.
               
               
                  
                     
Scripture vnto them was first proferyd
                  Mekely without any prouocacion.
                  Which to receyne when it was offeryd
                  They refused with indignacion.
                  Wherfore touchinge their reformacion.
                  Litle trust is to be had certaynly
                  Ty
                        •…
                      their fautes be detecte manifestly.
               
               
                  ¶ Thus to conclude / 
                        〈◊〉
                      christen reder
                  Vnto pacience / I the exhorte.
                  Aduertesynge / howe & in what maner
                  Christe rebuked this pharisaycall sorte.
                  Whom as Mathew in the. xxiij. doth reporte.
                  With fearefull sentence he cursed ernestly
                  Their wicked fautes detectynge manifestly.
               
               ¶ Nihil est opertum q
                     •…
                   nō reueletur. Mtah. x.
            
            
               ¶ Here foloweth the Dialoge / the Gen tillmā beginige first his cōplaynte.
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  WIth soronfull harte / maye I cōplayne
                  Cōcerninge the chaunce / of my misery
                  Although parauēture it is but vayne
                  Trueth oporessyd / with open tyranny.
                  My enheritaunce and patrimony.
                  Agaynst right / from me they kepe awaye.
                  Which saye / for my frendes soules they praye.
                  
                     
¶ Myne aunceteres of worthy progeny
                  With rentes and lyuelood largely endued
                  Mayntayned their estates honorably
                  Aydynge the poore / indigence to exclude.
                  Tyll at the last / the clergy to them sued.
                  Pretendinge godlynes / vnder a fals waye
                  Sayenge they wold for their soules praye.
                  ¶ Stoutely they alleged before their syght
                  Howe after this lyfe is a purgatory.
                  Wherin their soules both daye & night
                  Shuld be tormented with out memory
                  Excepte of their substaunce transitory.
                  Vnto their seactes / they wold some what paye
                  Sayenge that they wold for their soules praye.
                  They bare them in hande that they had myght
                  Synners to bynde & loose at their owne plesure
                  Takynge vpon them to leade thyem a right
                  Vnto ioye / that euer shuld endure.
                  Of popes pardones they boosted the treasure.
                  Chalengynge of heuene & hell the faye
                  Sayenge / that they wold for their soules praye.
                  To trust wife or childern / they did disswade
                  Eyther any frendes or persones temporall.
                  Affermynge / that oure loue shuld a way vade
                  Without any memory of them at all
                  Onely to hope in their seactes spirituall.
                  They entyced / with persuasiones gaye
                  Sayenge that they wold for their soules praye.
                  
                     
Thus with wylines and argumentes vayne
                  Myne aunceters brought in to perplexite
                  Partely thorough feare of eternall payne
                  And partely for desyre of felicite.
                  They consented makynge no difficulte
                  To graunte their requestes without delaye
                  Sayenge that they wold for their soules praye
                  Their chefe lordshippes and londes principall
                  With cōmodytes of their possessyon
                  Vnto the clergye they gaue forthe with all
                  D
                        •…
                     sheretinge their right successyon.
                  Which to receiue without excepcion
                  The couetous clergy made no denay
                  Sayenge that they wold for their soules pray
                  By the meanes wherof / I and suche other
                  Suffrynge the extremyte of indigence
                  Are occasioned to theft or mourder
                  Fallynge in to moche inconuenience.
                  Because the clergye agaynst conscience
                  Deuoureth oure possessiones nighte and daye
                  Sayeng y• for oure frendes soules they praye.
                  I haue wife and childern vpon my hande
                  Wantinge substaunce / their lifes to sustayne
                  Wherfore to the clergy that haue my lande
                  Sometyme I come and pituously complayne
                  Whos statelines / to helpe me hauyng disdayne
                  With oure any comforte to me they saye
                  That for my frendes soules they dayly praye.
                  
                     
Shuld I and my houshold for houngre dy
                        •…
                     
                  
                  They wold not an halfe peny with vs parte
                  So that they lyue in welthe aboundantly
                  Full litle they regarde oure woofull smerte.
                  To waste oure goodes they nothinge aduert
                        •…
                     
                  
                  In vicious lustes and pompous araye
                  Sayenge yt for our frendes soules they praye.
                  They take vpon them apostles auctorite
                  But they folowe nothinge their profession
                  Often tymes they preache of christes pouerte
                  Howe be it towarde it they haue no affeccion.
                  Yf so be they pleate ones in possession
                  Harde it is to get ought fro them awaye
                  Sayenge / that for our frēdes soules they praye.
                  Thus must we beare their oppression
                  Whiles to complayne there is no remedye
                  The worlde they haue brought in subiection
                  Vnder their ambicious tyranny.
                  No respecte they haue to the mysery
                  Of vs poore gentillmen that be laye
                  Sayenge that for our frēdes soules they praye.
                  Alas / is it not a myserable case?
                  To se ydle persones voyde of py
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Occupyenge the landes before oure face
                  Which shuld pertayne vnto vs of ducte.
                  They haue richesse / and we calamyte
                  Their honour encreaced / oures must de
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Sayenge that for our frēdes soules they pray
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
¶ The husbandman.
                  Syr / god geue you good morowe
                  I perceiue the cause of youre sorowe
                  And most lamentable calamyte.
                  Is for the oppression intollerable
                  Of thes monstres so vncharitable
                  Whom men cast the spiritualte.
                  Trouthe it is / ye poore gentillmen are
                  By their craftynes made nedy and bare
                  Your landes with holdinge by violence
                  How be it we husbandmen euery where
                  Are nowe in worsse condicion ferre
                  As it may be marked by experience.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  In worse caas? nay / that can not be so
                  For loke ouer the hoole worlde to and fro
                  Namely here in oure owne region.
                  And thou shalt fynde that in their handes
                  Remayneth the chefe lordeshippes and landes
                  Of poore gentillmens possession.
                  They haue oure aunceters lyuelood and rentes
                  Their principall fearmes and tencamentes
                  With temporall fredomes and libertees.
                  They haue gotten vnto their kingdomes
                  Many noble baronries and 
                        •…
                     rldemes
                  With esquyres landes and knightes fees.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondeman.
                  Notwithstandinge yet they saye prceysely
                  That your Auncerers gaue to theym freely
                  Soche worldly dominion and lyulood.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Freely quod a
                        •…
                     nay / that is but fayned
                  
                     
For they ware certeynly therto constreyned
                  By their couetous disceite and falshod
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  Howe dyd they youre annceteres compell:
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Mary in threatnynge the paynes of hell
                  And sharpe punishment of purgatorye.
                  Wher to brenne / they made them beleue
                  Excepte they wolde vnto them geue
                  Parte of their substaunce & patrimony.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondeman.
                  But howe wold they delyuer them frothence:
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  As they saide by their prayers assistence
                  Which with boostynge wordes they dyd alowe
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  Prayer? god geue her a shamefull represe
                  For it is the mdost briberynge these.
                  That euer was / I make god a vowe.
                  For by her the clergy without dowte
                  Robbeth the hole countre rounde aboute
                  Bothe comones and estates none excepte.
                  I wote they haue prayed so longe allredy
                  That they haue brought the lande to begg
                        •…
                     
                  
                  And all th
                        •…
                     nes clene awaye 
                        〈◊〉
                      epte.
                  What soeuer we get with sweate and 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  That prolle they awaye with their prayour
                  Sayenge they praye for oure soules 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  But is their prayer nor 
                        〈◊〉
                      avaylynge
                  To the deade soules / than to the lynynge
                  So is it not worthe a ro
                        •…
                     en aye.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  
                     
To the soules departed it is not profitable
                  For whye / thos that are in case dampnable
                  No assistence of prayour can attayne.
                  And as for purgatory ther is none
                  Allthough there be clerkes many one
                  Which to seke it take moche payne.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  Than I wold their prayenge were at an ende
                  For yf they pray longe thus so god me mende
                  They shall make y• lande worsse than nought.
                  But nowe I will rehearce seriously
                  Howe we husbandemen full pituously
                  Vnto miserable wrechednes are brought.
                  Fyrst whan englonde was in his floures
                  Ordred by the temporall gouernoures
                  Knowenge no spirituall iurisdiccion.
                  Than was ther in eche state and degre
                  Haboundance and plentuous prosperite
                  Peaceable welthe without affliccion.
                  Noblenes of blood / was had in price
                  Vertuousnes avaunced / hated was vyce
                  Princes obeyd / with due reuerence.
                  Artificers and men of occupacion
                  Quietly wanne their sustentacion
                  Without any grefe of nedy indigence.
                  We husband men lyke wise prosperously
                  Occupyenge the feates of husbandry
                  Hyerd fearmes of pryce competent.
                  Wherby oure lyninge honestly we wanne
                  And had ynough to paye euery manne
                  Helpinge other that were indigent.
                  Tyll at the last the rauenous clergye
                  
                     
Through their craftynes and hypocrisye
                  Gate to theym worldly dominacion.
                  Than were we ouercharged very sore
                  Oure fearmes set vp dayly more and more
                  With shamefull pryce in soche a fasshyon.
                  That we paye more nowe by halfe the sume
                  Than a fore tymes we dyd of custome
                  Holdinge ought of their possession.
                  Besyde this / other contentes of brybery
                  As payenge of tythes / open and preuy
                  And for herynge of confession.
                  Also presies dueties and clerkes wages
                  Byenge of perdones and freres quarterages
                  With chirches and aultares reparacion.
                  All oure charges can not be nombred
                  Wherwith we are greatly acombred
                  Ouer whelmyd with desolacion.
                  We tourmoyle oure selfes nyght and daye
                  And are fayne to dryncke whygge and whaye
                  For to maynteyne the clargyes facciones
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  This were a great shame to be knowen
                  Seynge halfe the realme is their owne
                  That they charge you with soche exaccions.
                  Me thyncketh so to do is no small cryme
                  For they kepte as good houses a fore tyme
                  Whiles theyr feanne hyers was ferrelesse.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  Ye / more plentuous houses a great deale
                  How be yt in hyndrynge the comone 
                        〈◊〉
                      eale
                  They vse also this practyse doutles.
                  Where as poore husband men afore season
                  
                     
Accordinge vnto equite and reason
                  House or lande to fearme dyd desyre.
                  Without any difficulte they might it get
                  And yet no hygher price was ther vp set
                  Than good conscience did require.
                  But nowe their ambicious suttlete
                  Maketh one fearme of two or thre
                  Ye some tyme they bringe. vi. to one.
                  Which to gentillmen they let in farmage
                  Or elles to ryche marchauntes for avauntage
                  To the vndoynge of husbandeman 
                        •…
                     ch one.
                  Wherby the comones sufferinge damage
                  The holelande is brought into rerage
                  As by experience ye may well see.
                  Thus is the wealth of village and towne
                  With the fame of honorable renowne
                  Fallen into my scrable pouerte.
                  Plentnous housholdes hereby ar dekayde
                  Relefe of poore people is awaye strayde
                  Allmes exyled with hospitalyte.
                  By soche meanes / all thinge waxeth dere
                  Complaynte of subiecres cryenge ferre and ne
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Oppressed with grenous calamyte.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Truely thou shewest the very abuse
                  Neuerthelesse concernynge oure excuse
                  Why we gentillmen fearmes occupye.
                  The principall occasion is onely this
                  That oure patrimony geuen awaye is
                  Vnto thes wolffes of the clergye.
                  By whos oppression we are so beggeryd
                  That necessite hath vs compellyd
                  
                     
With fearmes soche shyft to make.
                  For asye husbandmen can well vnderstande
                  Touchinge expences and charges of the lande
                  They disdayne any parte with vs to take.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  Ye by seynte Marye / I you warrante
                  In soche cases / their ayde is very scant
                  Makinge curtesye to do any goode.
                  Let the realme go what way it wull
                  They hauynge ease / and their belyes full
                  Regardelitle the comone weale by the rode
                  Yf princes demaunde their succour or ayde
                  This answere of them is comonely saide
                  We are pore bedemen of youre grace.
                  We praye for your disceaced auncetryes
                  For whom we synge masses and dirigees
                  To succour their soules in nedefull case.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Oh / they afoorde prayers good cheape
                  Sayenge rather many masses by heape
                  Than to geue a poore man his dyner.
                  Wherfore as thou saydest / so god helpe me
                  I se of their prayenge no comodyte
                  Nether a
                        •…
                     untage in any maner.
                  For whye with in thes. iiij. hundred yere
                  Thorough oute christendome was not a free
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Of thes / whom we mendicantes call.
                  And syth that tyme dyuers facciones
                  Of collegianes / monkes and chanones
                  Haue spred this region ouer all.
                  Also of prestes / were not the tenthe parte
                  Which as they saye / haue none other ar
                        •…
                     
                  
                  
                     
But for vs worldly people to praye.
                  And yet the worlde is nowe farre worsse
                  As euery man felyth in his poorsse
                  Than it was at that tyme I dare saye.
                  Wherfore the trueth openly to betryde
                  I wolde they shuld laye their prayenge a syde
                  And geue theym selfes to labour bodely.
               
               
                  ¶ H
                        •…
                     sbandman.
                  It were harde to bringe theym therto
                  Vtterly refusynge any labour to do
                  Because they are people gostely.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Were not the apostles gostely also?
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  Yes syr / but it is solonge ago
                  That their lyuynge is oute of memorye.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  We fynde it well in the newe testament.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  The clargye saye / it is not conuenyent
                  For layemen therwith to be busye.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Wotest thou wherfore they do that?
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  In fayth syr I coniecture somewhat
                  And I suppose I do not m
                        •…
                     che erre.
                  Might men the scripture in Englishe rede
                  We secular people shuld than se in dede
                  What Christ and the apostles lyues were.
                  Which I dout nothinge are contrarye
                  Vnto the lyuynge of oure clargye
                  S
                        •…
                     uyn to pomp
                        •…
                     us ydlenes euery where.
                  
                     
Whos abhominacion ones knowen
                  Their pryde shuld besone ouer throwen
                  And fewe wold their statelynes for beare.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentyllman.
                  Thou hyttest the nayle vpon the heed
                  For that is the thinge that they dreed
                  Least scripture shuld come vnto light.
                  God commaundyd man in the begynnynge
                  With sweat of vysage to wynne his lyuynge
                  As Moses in his fyrst boke dothe wryte.
                  And as Marcke sayeth in the. vi. chapter
                  Christe here vpon erthe was a carpenter
                  Not dysdayninge an occupacion.
                  Also the disciples vniuersally
                  With their handes laboured busyly
                  Exchewynge ydle conuersacion.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  Oure clargye lyue nothynge after their rate
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  No / they seke ydelly to anaunce their estate
                  And to be had in reputacyon.
               
               
                  ¶ Husb
                        •…
                     ndman.
                  Are they worldly 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     ely to saye the tr
                        •…
                     the?
               
               
                  ¶ Gentyllman.
                  So god helpe me I
                        •…
                     e we none of bothe
                  As it apperyth by their fasshion.
                  For in matters of worldly busynes
                  The clergye haue moche more 
                        •…
                     tresse
                  Than temporall men I ensure the.
                  The landes of lordes and dukes to possesse
                  Thei abasshe not a whit the seculernes
                  Chalengynge tytles of worldly honour
                  
                     
But is the realme in any necessyte
                  Where as they shuld condescend of ducte
                  To stande by their prince with succour
                  Than to be of the world they denye
                  Sayenge that their helpe is spiritually
                  From the worlde makinge a separacion.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  Whiles they vse soche craftynes to contryue
                  The temporalte ought theym to depryue
                  Of their worldly dominacyon.
                  And euen as they saye that they are gostely
                  So without any assistence worldly
                  To lyue gostely they shuld haue no let.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  That were an expedyent medicyne
                  Accordinge vnto saynt Paules doctryne
                  Qui non laborat / non manducet.
                  Nowithstanding their power is so stronge
                  That whether they do ryght or wronge
                  They haue their owne will without fayle.
                  Their enormytees so ferre out breaketh
                  That all the worlde agaynst theym speaketh
                  But alas man what dothe it avayle:
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  The remedy that I can ymagyne
                  Were best that we together determyne
                  To get vs to london incontynent.
                  Where as it is here for a suretetolde
                  The kinge with his nobles dothe holde
                  A generall counsell or parlament
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  What woldest thou that we shuld do there?
               
               
                  
                     
¶ Husbondman.
                  The constraynte of oure myserye to declare
                  Under a meke forme of lamentacion.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  So shuld we be sure of soche answeres
                  As were made vnto the poore beggers
                  For their pituous supplicacyon.
                  Against whō ye clergyes resons nought worthe
                  The soules of purgatory they brought forthe
                  The beggers complaynte to discomfyte.
                  Wherfore against oure peticion I the tell
                  They wold bringe out all the deuells in hell
                  For to do vs some shamefull despyte.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  And was ther none other waye at all
                  But the sonles of purgatory to call
                  In ayde and assistence of the clergye.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  It was the suerest waye by seynt Ihone
                  For had they to playne scripture gone
                  I wousse they hadde be taken tardye.
                  The beggers complaynte was so grounded
                  That the clargye hadde be confounded
                  Had they not to purgatory hasted.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  Where sayd they purgatorye shuld be?
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  By scripture they shewed no certente
                  Albeit with stowte wordes they it faced.
                  Euen like vnto the man / which ment
                  A certeyne straunge ylonde to inuent
                  But whan he sawe
                        •…
                      could it not fynd
                        •…
                     .
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
Least his wit & travaile shuld seme in vayne
                  Reporte of other men he beganne to fayne
                  The symplicite of rude people to blynde.
                  But touchinge oure communicacion
                  Ther is another consideracion
                  Which somewhat more troubleth my mynde.
                  Thou knowest that in the parlament
                  The chefe of ye clergye are resident
                  In a maruelous great multitude.
                  Whos fearce displeasure is so terrible
                  That I iudge it were not possible
                  Any cause against them to conclude.
                  As for this ones we shall not be herde
                  And great men I tell the are a ferde
                  With them to haue any doynge.
                  Whosoeuer will agaynst them contende
                  Shall be sure of a mischefe in the ende
                  Is he genttllman lorde or kynge.
                  And that vnto kynge Ihon I me reporte
                  With other princes & lordes a great sorte
                  Whom the cronycles expresse by name.
                  Whiles they were a lyue they did them trouble
                  And after their deathe with cruelnes double
                  They ceased not their honour to diffame.
                  Dyd not they so longe striue a wrastle
                  Against the good knight syr Ihon oldecastle
                  Other wise called lorde of 
                        •…
                     obham.
                  That from hyghe heresye vnto treasone
                  They brought him to fynall destruction
                  With other many a noble man.
                  Moreouer at seynt Edmūdes bury some saye
                  That the famous prince duke Humfray
                  
                     
By them of his lyfe was abreuiate.
                  Sythe that tyme I coulde reckenmo
                  Whom they caused to be dispatched so
                  Parauenture some of no lowe estate.
               
               
                  ¶ The husbandman.
                  Their tyranny is great without fayle
                  Neuerthelesse yf we wold them assayle
                  With argumentes of the holy gospell.
                  They shuld n
                        •…
                      be ones able to resiste
                  For the wordes of oure sauiour christe
                  Shuld stoppe them were they neuer so fell.
                  Who in the. xxiij. chapter of seynt Luke
                  To their great confusyon and rebuke
                  Forbydeth secular ambicion.
                  Wherin he himselfe example gaue
                  Contempnynge worldly honour to haue
                  Of this world claymynge no kingdome.
                  Also when his disciples forthe he sent
                  He commaunded them to be content
                  With foode and apparayle necessary.
                  Wherto saint Paules doctrine accordinge
                  Saieth: hauynge mea
                        •…
                      d
                        •…
                     inke and clothinge
                  We shuld no thinge couer super
                        •…
                     uosly.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Yf the holy gospell allege we shuld
                  As stronge heretike sta
                        •…
                     e vs they would
                  Vnto their churche disobedient.
                  For why they haue commaunded straytely
                  That none vnder great payne be so hardye
                  To haue in englishe the testament.
                  Which as thou knowest at London
                  The bisshop makinge ther
                        •…
                      sermon
                  
                     
With shamefull blasphemy was bre
                        •…
                     .
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondeman.
                  Alas that cruelte goeth to my hert
                  Wherfor I feare me we shall all sm
                        •…
                     rt
                  At lengthe with bitter punisshment.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Undouted it is greatly to be fearyd
                  Least the hole region shalbe plagyd
                  For their outragious blasphemy.
                  In kynge Henryes dayes of that name ye fyft
                  The clergye their pride aboue to lyft
                  Persecured christen brothers haynously.
                  The gospell of Christ a syde to cast
                  Which at that tyme prospered fast.
                  With all their puysaūce they dyd conspyre.
                  Euery where they threwe theym in presones
                  In sharpe gayles / and horrible doungeones
                  Causynge many to be brent in fyre.
                  Their furious malice neuer stentyd
                  Tyll they had the light oute quenchyd
                  Of the gospell and holy scripture.
                  Wherof all bokes that they could get
                  They caused on a fayre fyre to be set
                  To expell goddes worde doynge their cure.
                  But consyder what ther of did chaunce
                  Moste terrible plages of fearfull vengeaunce
                  And endles sorowe to oure nacion.
                  For within shorte season after they lost
                  Which many a mans lyfe dyd cost
                  In fraunce their dominacion.
                  Amonge them selfes moste hatefull mourdre
                  Many stronge batayles / one after another
                  
                     
With great effusyon of englisshe bloode.
                  Frende against frede / brother against brother.
                  Euery man at variaunce with other
                  The realme longe season in myschefe stood
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  This is nowe a dayes clene oute of mynde
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  I praye god / hereafter we do not fynde
                  The same vengeaunce for like offence
                  For as it is in the byble playnely red
                  God left neuer lande yet vnpunished
                  Which agaynst his worde made resistence.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  Well syr / yf scripture ye forthe bringe
                  I beseche you / what is their answeringe
                  Are they so bolde goddes worde to denye:
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  
                     
                        •…
                     aye but after their ymaginacion
                  They make there of an interpretacion
                  Vnto the texte clene contrary
                  They allege the popes auctorite
                  Customes of auncyent antiquite
                  With diuers counseiles approbacion.
                  Also the holynes of religious fathers
                  With the bloode sheadinge of marters
                  For their chirches preservacion.
                  Besyde that contynuaunce of yeres
                  Myracles of bishoppes / monkes and freres
                  Whom for speciall patrones they holde.
                  And fynally to make a conclusion
                  In fortefyenge their abusion
                  Other practyses they vse many folde.
                  
                     
They resorte to lordes and great estates
                  With whom they are dayly checke mates
                  Ye to saye therrouthe their soucraynes.
                  Where amonge other communicacion
                  They admonishe them with protestacion
                  To beware of thes heretikes Lutheranes.
                  Whom they saye is a secte newe fangled
                  With execrable heresyes entangled
                  
                     
                        •…
                     inge the chirches perdicion.
                  Which oure fore fathers as wise as we
                  Were contente with humble simplicite
                  To honour / obeynge their tuycion.
                  Also none presumed till nowe a late
                  Against the clergye to beare any hate
                  Or grudged at their possession.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  By seynt mary syr / that is a starcke lye
                  I can shewe you a worcke by and by
                  Against that poynte makinge obiection.
                  Which of warantyse I dare be bolde
                  That it is aboue an hundred yere olde
                  As the englishe selfe dothe testifye.
                  Whe
                        •…
                      the auctour with argumentes
                  S
                        •…
                     th against the lordshippes & rentes
                  Of the clergye possessed wrongfully.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Is itso olde as thou doest here expresse
                  Reprouynge their pompous lordlynes
                  So is it than no newe found heresy.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  No! but alas / halfe the boke we want
                  Hauynge no more left than a remenant
                  
                     
From the begynnynge of the. vi. chapter verely.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  As for that it maketh no matter
                  Begynne hardely at the sixte chapter
                  Redynge for the to the ende seriously.
                  For though old writinges apere to be rude
                  Yet notwithstandinge they do include
                  The pithe of a matter most fructuously.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbondman.
                  To rede it I shall be diligent
                  Though the style be nothinge eloquent
                  With ornate speache set out curiously.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ¶ Here foloweth an olde trearyse made aboute the tyme of kynge Rycharde the seconde.
                           
                              WHere as the clergy perceyueth that lordlynes & worldly dominiō can not be borne out biscripture / thē flie they to argumentes of mēnes persuasyon sayenge after thys maner Seynt Huge & seynt Swithune were thus lor des / & in this they ensued Christes lyuyng & his doctrine / therfore we may be laufully thus lordes. But I wote well that Gabriel shall blowe his horne or they haue proued the minor. That is / that thes sayntes or patrones in this sued the doctrine or the lyfe of Iesu Christe. And of this thou mayst se that soch argumentes that ar not clothed with Christes lynynge or his teachinge / beright nought worthe all though the clerkes blynde with thē moch folke in yt world. But here haue Inoleyser to tell though I coulde / 



what chefesaunce and costes the churche maketh and what werres they hold to cōtynue this fymony and heresy so vnavisely brought in to ye chirche. And yet they seke all the wayes therto that they can. Ye in so moch that they go opēly armyd in to the felde to kyll christen men / for to get and holde soche lordshippe. And notwithstondynge seynt Peter was so pore that he had nether golde nor syluer as he saieth in the Actes of the apostles. And his other worldly good Act. iij. he left / whan he beganne to sue Christe. And as tow chynge the tytle of worldly lawe that he had to soch worldly goodes / he made neuer cley me ne neuer resceyued after any worldly lordshippe. And yet they call all their hole kingdom seynt Peters grounde or lordshippe. And therfor seynt Bernarde writeth to Engenie ye pope sayenge. Yf thou wilt be a lorde / seke by a nother Lib
                                    •…
                                 . ij waye to attayne it / but not by thys apostles ryght For he may not geue the that he had not / that he had he gaue / the whiche was busynes vpon chirches. Whether he gaue lordshippe or no / here what he saieth. Be ye not lordes in the clergy / but be ye made forme and example off i. Petri. Christes flocke. And least ye trowe thys be not sayde of trothe take kepe what Christe saieth in ye gospell. The kinges of hethen haue lordshippe vpon theym / forsot he ye not so. Se howe playn ly lordshippe is forboden to all apostles / for yf thou be a lorde howe darest thou take vpon the apostleshyp / or yf thou be a bysshoppe / howe da rest thou take vpon the lordship? Pleynly thou



art forboden bothe. And yf thou wylt haue bothe to get her thou shalt lese bothe / and be of the n
                                 •…
                              mber / of whych god ple
                                 •…
                              h by the prophete 
                                 〈◊〉
                               sayenge. They reygnyd but not by me sayeth god. And yf we holde that / that is forbo den / here we that is boden of Chryste. He that is greatest of you se yt he be made as younger in symplenes / and he that is a fore goere loke he be as a seruaunt. Thys is ye forme of apostles lyfe / lordshyppes forboden ād seruys is boden thys sayeth saynt Bernerdethere. And therfor no man may put a nother grounde besydes yt that is put whych is Christe Iesu.
                           But yet I wote well that clarkes and relygyous fol
                                 •…
                              ke that loue 
                                 •…
                              nkyndly these lordlynes wyll glose here & saye / yt they occupre not soche lordshyppes in proper as secular lordes doo / but in comone / lyke as the apostles & perfyte people dyde in the beginnynge of Christes chirche as w
                                 •…
                              yteth Saynot Luke in the fourthe chaptre of the Actes of the apostles / the whyche had all thynges in comone / lyke as soche clarkes and re ligyous saye they haue nowe. In tokeninge wherof no mā sayde of any thinge at that tyme / thys ys myne / so oure clarkes and namely rely gyous people whon they wyll speake in termes of their religyō. A pryuate person wyll not saye this or thys is myne / but in parsone of all his bretheren he wyll saye / this is oures. And ouer thys they saye more s
                                 •…
                              elly that they occupye not this by tytle of secular lordshyppe / but by tytle of perpetuall allmes. But what euer thy



people saye here / we mo
                                 •…
                              e take hede to the rule of prefe that fayleth not. The whiche rule Christe teacheth vs in the gospell in dyuers places / where he sayeth / beleue ye the workes. For why by their workes ye shall knowe thei. And thys rule is wonder nedefull to a mā that hath a do with any man of the Pharyseys condycyones. For as Christe sayeth Math. xxiij. They saye but they do not. And so as Christes workes be re witnesse of hym as he hym selfe sayeth / and sheweth what he was and howe he lyued / so the dedes and maner of lyuinge / or the thynge in it selfe bearyth wytnesse wyth out fayle howe it stondyth amonge theym in thys poynte. And yf we take hede thus by thys rule we shall se at oure eye howe the clargye sayeth other wyse than it is in dede. For in some place in pryuate parsone / ād in some place in comone or parsone aggregate / whiche is all one as saynct Austyne sayeth vppon the psalter / y• clargy occupyeth the secular lord shyppe secularly / & so in propere. For in the same maner wyse as yt Barone / or the knyghte occupyeth and gouuer nyth hys baronrye or hys knyghtes fe / so after the amortesyenge occupyeth y• clarcke / ye Mon ke / or Chanon / the College or Conuente / the sa me lordshippe & gouerneth it by ye same lawes in iudgement & punishinge as presonnynge ād hangynge with soche other worldly turmētyng the which some tyme belongyd to the secular arme of the chirche. Ye oft tymes we may se ho we they busye theym selfes to be kinges in their



owne / and reioyce them full moche in that ciuilyte or secularite yf they may get it. And this is an euidence that they wold gladly be kynges of all the realme or the world. For where their londes & secular mēnes fraunchyse ar to gether they striue who shall haue the galowes / or other maner tourmētes for fela
                                 •…
                              nes. They kepe also vnder bondage their tenauntes and their yssue with their londes. And this is the moste ciuilite or secular lordshyppinge that any kynge or lorde hath on his renaūtes And therfore we maye se howe they cleyme in their goodes a maner of proper possessyon cōtrarye to the c
                                 •…
                              monnynge of the comone goodes in tyme of the perfyte mē in the begynnynge of Christes chirche. And so what so euer the clergy sayeth the dede sheweth well that they haue not their goodes in comone lyke as Christe with his apostles and perfyte men had in the begynnynge of christes chirche. For in holdynge or hauynge of their goodes / is properte of possessyon and secular lordshippin ge. The which stondith not with ye plente of chri stes perfeccyon in prestes as it sueth of this pro cesse and of that / that is declared before. And as for that o
                                 •…
                              her glose that clerkes haue here / where they saye that they holde thes lordshyppes by tytle of perpetuall almes. But here ye shall vnderstandeth at mercy or almes is a will Almes. of releuinge of some wretche oute of his my sese as Lyncolniensis sayeth in the begynnynge of his dicris. So that yf a man shuld effectually Dicto. 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 
                               do almesse he must loke to whom he shulde do



almesse to / were in my sease and had nede to be releuyd. In tokeninge wherof / christ onely assigneth almesse to thos / in whom he marketh my sease. And so here of this it will sue / that yf a man will releue one wretche and make a nother or 
                                 •…
                              o / he dothe none almesse / but rather maketh mysease. And moche more he dothe none al messe yf he make riche thos persones that haue no nede. For as moche as they be sufficient to theym selfes / this hath no coloure of almesse. For this may be better called a woodnes or a wastynge of goddes goodes. And ouer this yf a man take thos goodes / the which god in the best wyse euen and with oute erroures hath assygned to the state of secular lordes / and geue thos goodes to another people that hath no nede of theym / ye to ye which people soche goodes are forfendid. This shuld be called no almesse / but peruertinge of goddes ordinaunce / and the destruction of the state of secular lordes ye which god hath approued in his chirche. For as saynt Paule sayeth. Almesse dede shuld be ruled so ye 
                              ij. Cori. viij. it were releuīge to thos ye receiue it. And moch rather it shuld not be vndoynge of thos that do it. And therfore Christ teachith in the gospell to do almes of the thinges that be nedeles or super fluite. And in this dede a man shuld haue regarde Qd superest da te 
                                    •…
                                 lemo sinā. Lu ce. xiiij. to the nede of him that he dothe almes to and to the charge of his owne house. What almes was it then I praye you / to vndo the state of the Emperoure / ād to make the clarkes riche with his lordshippes / namely syth Christ confirmyd



to ye Emperour his state / with tho thinges that longe therto / notwithstonding at that tyme the emperoure was hethen. And he hath forfendyd expresly hys clergy in worde & in exā ple soche lordshyppe. And as thys was no allmes / so we mote saye of other kynges / dukes ād erles / barones and knyghtes that are vndone hereby / & the clerkes made ryche and worldly lor des with theyr goodes. And though it had be so yt the clergy myght haue occupyed thus wor ldly lordshyppe / & also though it hadde be no de struccion nor appeyrynge of any other state / yet it hadde be no allmes for to geue to theym soche goodes / wherfor it may be ryghtfully sayde. No man may put a nother grounde besydes that is put / which is Christe Iesu.
                           Here we may se by the grounde of y• gospel and by the ordynaunce of christe / that the clergye was sufficiently purueyd for lyuelood. For god is so perfyte in all his werckynge / yt he may ordeyne no state in hys chirche but yf he ordeyne sufficient lyuelood to the same state. And this is opē in goddes lawe who so takyth hede / and that vnder euery lawe of god / as vnder ye lawe of innocencye and of kynde / vnder ye lawe geuē by Moyses and also vnder ye lawe geuē by chri ste. In ye tyme of the state of innocencye we knowe well by beleue ye god hadde so ordeyned for man kynde that it shuld haue hadde lyuelood ynough withoute any tedious laboure And of ye lawe of kynde / christ speakyth in ye gospell sayen Mat. v
                                    •…
                                 
                               ge thus All thynges ye ye wyll y• other men do



to you / do ye to theym. And yf thys lawe hadde be kepte ther shuld no man haue bene myscheuously nedy. And in the tyme of ye lawe geuē by Moyses / god made a full ād a sufficient ordynaunce for all hys people howe & wher by they shuld lyue. For he dealyd ye londe amonge the laye people and he assygned y• fyrst frutes & tythes to ye prestes & deakenes. And all though yt he wold yt ther shuld be all waye pooremen in ye lande of ysraell / yet he made an ordinaunce Seu
                                    •…
                                 e. 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 . agaynst myscheuous nede. And comandyd all the people that ther shuld be in no wyse a nedye man and a begger amonge them as it is wrytten. And so in thys lawe he ordeyned sufficiētly ynough for hys people. And in ye tyme of the newe lawe christe assigned ye seculer lordshyppes to temporall lordes as it is taught before / And alowed ye comonte her lyuelood gotten by true marchaundyse & husboundrye & other craf tys. And in worde & ensaumple he taught hys prestes to be proctoures for nedye people & poore at y• ryche men / & specifyed thes poore / & taught howe they that were myghty / shuld make a purueaūce for soche poore folke yt they were not cōstrayned by nede for to begge / as great clerkes marcke vpon thes wordes of ye gospell whe re chryste sayeth thus. Whan thou makest thy feast / yt is of allmes / call poore people / feble / lame & blynde▪ He sayeth not lett soche pooremen Luc
                                    •…
                                 . xiiij. call vpon ye / but call thou vpon theym meanyn ge in yt / that thou shuldest make a purueaunce for soche people / yt they be not myscheuously fa
                                 •…
                              


                              
tye. And for ye clergy he ordeined sufficiētly / reching theym in worde and ensample howe they shuld holde theym appayde with lyuelood and hylynge mynistred to theym / for theyr true laboure in the gospell as it is written before. Of thys than thou mayst se howe god in all hys la wes hath sufficiently ordeyned for all y• stares that be founded and approuyd And howe it is agaynst ye goodnes and wysdom of god / to ordeyne any state / but yf he ordeyned sufficient lyuelood therto. Syth than thys ordenaunce of god was sufficient as well for the clergye as for other men it semeth a foule presumpcion to brynge in a newe & a contrarye ordinaūce of lyuelood for clerckes vpon the ordinaūce yt Criste hath made for theym before. Of ye whiche ordynaunce / the clergye full many yeres after the begynnynge of Chrystes chyrche / whan it was best gouuernyd / held theym well a payde. For thys meaneth that Christes ordynaūce was insufficient / and worthy to be vndone And yf we take good hede / they hadde no more nede to pl
                                 •…
                              y ne theym of thys ordynaunce / than hadde the other two states of hys chyrche / which vnto this daye holde theym a payde with thys ordynaū
                              ce of chryst / were it fully kepte. And more sekirnes & ensuraūce maye no man make of any thin ge than chryst hath of hys lyuelood to the clergye For chryst not onely affermyth to ye people yt he wyll not fayle theym in lyuelood ād hylinge / but also prouyth thys by argumētes yt may not be assoyled / So yt they be true seruauntes



to him. For Chryste meanyth thus in his argu ynge there. Syth god fayleth nor bryddes and lyles and grasse that groweth in ye felde / nether herhen men. Howe moche rather shall he not fayle his true seruauntes? And so this purneaunce of perpetuall almes yt oure clerkes spea ke of / meanyth faute of beleue & despeyre of the gracious gouernaūce of god. Syth than as it is sayde before / it is no allmes to releue one wretche & to make another or moo / & to make thei ryche wyth temporall lordshippe / the whiche be ne forfendyd to soche people & namely yf soche al mes geuynge be destroyenge or appeyringe of any state approuyd by God in his chirche / it willsue that the endowynge of ye clargye with worldly lordshippe / ought not to be called allmesse / but rather all a mysse / or wastynge of goddes goodes or destroyenge of his ordinaū
                              ce / for as moche as the clergye was sufficiently ordeyned be Christe. For why / this almes that clerckes speake of here / made many wretches & it was geuen to theym that had no nede. And 
                                 •…
                              s it is em
                                 •…
                              y 
                                 〈◊〉
                               not only of one estate of ye chyrche / but of all 
                                 〈◊〉
                               of the which I spake in ye begynynge. And so this almes geuynge hath made all oure realme nedy / ye ād as I suppose fullnygh all christendom full poore & nedy and mischeuous ouer that it shulde haue bene yf the clargye had held theym a payde with christes ordinaūce. But nowe thou rough this perpetuall all a mysse / that the clarkes call almes / christes ordinaūce ys vndō in some landes holly ād



in Englonde for yt more party & it is lykely to be all vndone in processe of tyme. For by a mortesy enge of lordshippes / ye lordes be yndone in great party. And many noble mē because they lacke their owne parte through folishe gifte of their aunceters be full nedy. Forthermore it may be vnderstōde of this processe / yt withdrawyng of this lordshippes frō ye clergy & restoringe againe of thē to the states yt god hathe assigned thē to / shuld not be called robbery of holy chirche as oure clerkes faye / but rather rightwise restituciō of good wrongfully & theefly with old. And therfore ther maye none othe or vowe binde any mā to maytayne this theft & destrucciō of goddes ordinaunce / & this great harmynge of Christes chirche. As y• vowe of Iepte shuld not haue bounde him to kill & sacrifice his owne doughter. Ne the othe of herode shuld not haue bounde him to kill innocent Ihon. But as Iepte shuld a broken his othe or vowe & haue offered a nother thinge that had bene pleasynge to god & accordinge with his lawe: As saynt Austyne sayeth vpō the same storye. So Herode shuld haue broken his othe & a saued innocēt blood & sore a repented him for his vnavysed swerynge. And so shuld lordes nowe a dayes breake they: othes that they haue vnavysely & without counseyle of holy scripture sworne to maynteine this theefte / ye heresy & symony as it is proued before / the which oure clerkes call perpetuall almes And not sue theire folishe dedes & othes yt they haue made to maynteyne this mischeuous peruertinge



of chhristes ordinaunce. For as the sta te of the clergye hath no power or leaue / to make the people or lordes to synne deadly or to destroye gods ordinaunce in his chirche. So they haue no leaue or power of god to counceile or to 
                                 
                                    •…
                                 oke well 
                                    •…
                                 ponthis 
                                    •…
                                 ason constrayne in any case the lordes or y• people to swere for to maynteyne this endowēge of ye cler kes & religious folke / which is full great thefte heresy & symony / & wounder harmefull to chri stes chirche as it is shewed in this processe & in other writen before. But the lordes specially shuld se here / what were pleasynge not to these clerkes / but to god / & that shuld they do. For her to they be bounde by vertue of their office vppe peyne of dampnaciō. And there may no no mā dispence with thē of yt bound stondinge her sta te. For no mā shuld put another grounde besydes that / yt is put which is christ Iesu.
                           And therfore mē deme it a great synne to ge ue londe entayled by mennes lawe from ye par sone or kynred that it is entayled to / ye although it be so that the parsone or kynred that soche lan de is geuen to be nedye & haue leaue by goddes lawe to occupye soche maner londe or lordshippe. And this is demyd full great synne among the people not onely to the geuer but also to the taker. For both they do dampnable wronge to him that it is entayled to / as the people demyth ye although it be geuen for good and true seruyce that the receyuer hath done to the geuer before / or elles by waye of almes of releuynge of the perone or kinred that it is geuen to. How



moche rather than I praye you without compa rison is it a greater synne / as well to the reacey ners as to the geuers / to take the lordeshippes / the whiche god that hath full lordshippe vpon all the world hathe geuen by perpetuall lawe or right to the state of secular lordes / and geue this from the state to the whiche god entayled this lordshippe to another straunge people off another lyne / the which hadde neuer neade / ne leaue of god to occupye it. And yf priestes cleymetythes because god graunted them to y• kynred of leuy / yet ther argument is voide. For chri ste came of the lynage of Iuda / to whiche lyne was no tythes graunted and so as men suppo se this entayle was not confermyd by christe & his apostles to the priestes in the newe lawe. Polic
                                    •…
                                  Lib. vii.
                           
                           For Gregory the tenthe ordeyned first tythes to be payed to curates only. And yet they clcyme so forforthe tythes that no man maye lawefully with holde theym or ministre than saue they. Ne they maye be turned or geuen to any other state or kynred saue onely to theym. All though men wolde do that vnder coloure or by tytle off perpetuall allmes. For this shulde be demyd of the clergye a dampnable synne and destroyenge of holy chirche and sacrilege. How moche rather is it then an hydeous & dampnable synne / to geue or to take awaye the secular lordship pes from the state of secular lordes / the whiche god had geuen and entayled to them by the same lawe and right / by the whiche he hadde geuen the tithes to the priestes in the olde lawe.



And this entayle was neuer interrupt nor broken vnto christes tyme & his holy apostles. And than they cōfermed this entayle by lawe so strō
                              ge to the seculer parte yt no mā (saue Antichriste & his disciples) may opēly impūgne this entayle as it is shewed before. And so as no mā shulde presume to withdrawe with holde or turne the tithes from the state of presthod / as they saye / so moche rather shuld no mā presume by genynge or takinge to aliene ye temperall lordshippes frō the state of seculer lordes. And thus clerkes ha ue nor so moche coloure to saye yt the lordes and the laye people robbe thē for as moch as they ta ke their temperalties in to y• handes of ye clergy hath neuer the lesse malice in it selfe. For as mo che as it is done by simulaciō of holynes / ye whi che is double wickednes. For thus Lucifer robbed Adā both of goodes of fortune / of kinde ād Gene. iij yet dothe the chirche of thes thre maner goodes. For right as lucifer dyd this harme to Adam & Eue vnder coloure of loue & frendshippe & helpinge of thē: so do nowe his angell's / those ypocrites that tranfigure thē selfes into angells of light / & deceyue ye people by false beheste of heuēly helpe yt they will procure to theym for their goodes as they saye / & yf a bishope & his college oe an abbate & his conuent maye not aliene fro thē any of ye temporalties yt thei haue / nor ge ue to their founder any of thos possessiōs that he hath geuē thē / what nede that euer he haue / bo unde 
                                 〈◊〉
                               by a posityfe lawe or a tradiciō that they thē selfe saue made. And yf any foche lord



shippes be withdrawen / aliened / or taken fro th
                                 •…
                               by rechelesnes of their predecessoures / they ought on all wise / ye to the deathe laboure to get ye possessiones in to their hondes agayne as they saye: Howe muche more than shuld not a secular lorde or a laye al
                                 •…
                              ne fro him ād his yssue or fro the state of secular lordes / ye secular lordship pes the whiche god hath lymyted to that state / syth he is bounde by the lawe of kynde to ordeyne for his childern. And ou
                                 •…
                               this he is bounde by godes lawe to susteyne the state of secular lor des / the whiche is auctory sed in the chirche and his aposiles. Of this processe than yf a man take hede he shall perceyue the fals
                                 •…
                              s of this glo se / whan oure clerckes and religions folke saye that they hold these lordshippes onely by title of perpetuall allmes. For certis syth these tythes and offerynges the which as I suppose counteruayle the secular lordes re
                                 •…
                              s of the realme or elles passe as it is full lyely / for though they belesse in one chirde they passe in a nother and be sufficient for all the poi
                                 •…
                               in 
                                 •…
                              istendome yf they were 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . Than it were no nede to 
                                 〈◊〉
                               se secular lordshippes to the sta te of the clergye. The which amortesyenge is vndoynge of lordes / apost
                                 •…
                               of the 
                                 〈◊〉
                              . And yf this amor
                                 •…
                              enge were not nedefull / then were it no allmes as it is declared. And ouer the tythes and offerynges that be nowe off certeyn
                                 •…
                              e / the clerckee haue many great & small perquysytis / the whiche sma
                                 •…
                               of symonye and 
                                 •…
                              cion. As the fyrst frutes of 
                                 〈◊〉
                               benefyces / 



prouynge of testamentes and money for halowenge of chapelles / chirches / chauncelles / and other ornamentes of the chirche / and for sa cryng of ordres / ād full many mo that for mul titude may not well be numbred. For wellnigh all theire blessynges be set to sale and to prijs / in to chrystenynge and confumacion. Wherfore I may nowe saye as I sayde at the begynnige. No man may put a nother grounde besydes that / that is put / the whiche is Christe Iesu The which grounde of lyuynge christe graunte vs to kepe that we maye escape the euerlastin ge peynes of hell. AMEN.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The husbandman.
                  Loo / nowe by this treatyse may ye well se
                  That af
                        •…
                     etymes against the spiritualte
                  Men dyd invey / shewinge their vyces.
                  Also here after this auctour dorhe test.
                  What great Ieoparde it is and perell
                  For priestes to be in secular offices.
                  Ye / and rolordes which against right
                  Suffre them therein or therto excyte
                  Prouynge it by their owne doctours & lawes
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  I besechethe rede forthe the processe
                  That the people may se their unhappenesse
                  Which make all the world foles & dawes.
                  ¶ Seynt Eipriane sayeth yt by the counceile of bisshops ther is made a statute / that all y• bene 
                        
                           •…
                        ist. xxi. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . iij. ca. 
                           •…
                        ipriane charged with priesihede & ordeyned in ye seruys of clerfes / shuld not serue but to the aulter and to ministre y• sacramentes / to prcache gods wor



de / & to tale hede to prayers and orysones. It is for sorhe writen. No man bering his knighthosde to god: entryketh him with secular nedes. The which oure bisshops & oure predecessours beholdinge religiously & purueynge holsomly / deme that whosoeuer taketh ministres of ye chirche / from spirituall office to secular / that ther be none offrynge done for him / ne any sacrifice ho lowed for his sepulture. For they deserue not to be named before ye aulter of god in ye prayer off priestes / the whiche will clep
                        •…
                      awaye priestes & ministres of y• chirche frō ye aulter. Thus sayeth seynt Cipaiane. Here mē maye se how perelous it is to ye kyng & secular lordes to with holde any prieste of christ in secular busynes. This is pro ued thus. For euery secular lorde by the lawe of the gospell is gods bayly. But yf any bayly hy red a worclman with his lordes good and put him to his owne seruys / he must be vntrewe to his owne lorde. Right so is any secular lorde to oure lorde Christ Iesu / but yf he amende hym / that taketh a prieste and putteth him in his secular office breafinge the heest of his lorde god that cōmaundeth / thou shalr coueyet none other mannes servaunte. And he with draweth hym fro the seruys of god and fro the kepinge of chri sten mennes soules / yt which he hath taken char ge of / for which soules oure lorde Iesu Christe toke flesche and bloude & suffered harde dethe / & shedde his owne harte bloode. This pardous deynge of secular lordes is bothe against goddes lawe and mannes. It is ageinst gods lawe



for as seynt Paule saieth. No mā yt is a perfyte ij. Chi. ij knight of god / as euery priest shuld be by his or dre / ētromedleth him with worldly deades & busynes. And for this ende that he may so please ye lorde to whose seruyce he hathe put him selfe / & that is good. For soche worldly busynes in clerkes is against their ordre. And therfore y• apost les said as it is writē in ye dedes of y• apostles / it Acto. vi is nor euē / vs to leue ye worde of god & ministre to boordes of poore folke. And yf it was vnequi te as the apostles saide in their comone decree / them for to leaue ye preachinge of goddes worde / and ministre to the boordes of poore folke: Howe moche more vnequite ād wronge to god and man is it / preastes to leaue contemplacion / studye / prayer and preachinge of goddes worand ministrynge to poore folke for the servyce of a secular lorde? It is also agaynst the Popes lawe / for he speaketh to a bisshoppe and byddeth hym that he warne preastes and clerckes / Lin̄. iij. de 
                           •…
                        e. in fine that they be not occupyed in secular offices ne procurators of secular lordes deades & her goo des. And yf presies and clerckes be so bolde to occupye theym in soche busynes and if they fall after by losse of lordes goodes / then sayeth the lawe it is not worthy yt they be holpē & socoured of holy chirche / sythe through ther holy chirche is sclaundred. And saynte Gregorye wrote to the defensoure of Rome in this maner. It is tolde to vs that oure moste reuerēte brother Sasyle ye bysshoppe is occupyed in secular causes and kepith vnproffitable moote halles. Which



thinge makyth him foule & destroyeth y• reuerē
                     ce of presthood / therfore anone as thou hast rea ceiued this mādemēt / cōpell him with sharppe execucion to turne a gayne. So yt it be not lefull to y• by no excusacion totarye fyue dayes / lest in any maner thou suffre hym any lōger to tarye there in / thou be culpable with hym agaynst vs And so bysshoppes & other prestes be bounde to teache & ēforme lordes / to withdrawe theym fro this synne & sharpely to reproue prestes & cura tes vnder thē yt they occupye no secular office. This is proued thus by ye holy prophet Ezechiell sayēge. Yf ye wayte or y• watchemā se enemies Ezechie. xxxiij. come / & yf ye people be not warned & kepe not thē selues but enemies come & 
                        •…
                     sle ye people / thē sayeth god that ye people is take in their wicked nes. And of ye wayte yt shulde haue blowen his horne god will are acountes & rekeninge of the bloode & of the deathe of yt people. But nowe to gostely vnderstandinge / euery bisshoppe shuld be a wayte or a warche mā / totell & warne before to all ye people by his good lyuinge & reachin ge ye perell of synne / & this is ye reason why bisshopes & other prelates ād presies shuld not be occupyed with worldly deades & causes. For so che occupaciōs & charges make prestes slepinge ād slomobringe in synne. And therfore it is great perell to make ouer thē gostly waytes and watchemē / as bisshopes / parsones / vicarres / y• bē slepers in lustes of ye flesshe & in slomebernes ād blinded with pouder of couctyse of worldly deades yt they nether cā ne maye kepe thē selfes



ne no nother man. For of this perell and soche other / a prelate that hath witte and cunninge shuld sharpely reproue and warne all maner men to the shedinge of his oune bloode as christ did And yf he so leaue & blame not thē he assen tyth to their trespases and synneth deadly. For as sayeth Malach. Prestes lippes kepe cunnin ge & the people shall aske the lawe of god of his Mala. ij mouth / for he is the Angell of god / yf he kepe well the ordre & degre of presthood. And therfor it is not lefull to any mā to drawe to seculer offices & busynes ye messangeres of christe / that hath so vtterly for fendyd theym bothe in worde & deade secular offices in presthood. &c.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  Syr howe lyke ye nowe this oldetreatyse
                  Yf so be noble men wold it aduertyse
                  Puttynge a parte pryuate affeccion.
                  Shuld they not perceyue here euydently
                  That the clergye dothe theym great iniury
                  Retaynynge thus temporall possessyon?
               
               
                  ¶ Gentyllman.
                  Nowe I promyse the after my iudgement
                  I haue not hard of soche an olde fragment
                  Better groundyd on reason with scripture.
                  Yf soche 
                        〈◊〉
                      thynges myght come to ly ght
                  That noble men hadde ones of theym a s
                        •…
                     ght
                  The world yet wolde chaunge perauenture
                  For here agaynst the clergye can not bercke
                  Sayenge as they do / thys is a newe wercke
                  Of heretykes contryued lately.
                  And by thys treatyse it apperyth playne
                  
                     
That before oure dayes men dyd compleyn
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Agaynst clerkes ambycyon so stately
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  Concernynge thys treatyse and lyke matters
                  I haue hard saye of my fore fathers
                  Bowe in kynge henry the. v. raygne.
                  What tyme as ye dyd specyfye
                  The clergye persecutyd the gospell fercely
                  Causynge moche chrystē people to be slayne
                  The kynge at the last hauynge informacyon
                  Thourough seryous consyderacyon
                  Of soche proper matters as thys is.
                  Beganne to note the clergyes tyranny
                  And what temporaltees / they dyd occupye
                  Their spirituall state ferre a mysse.
                  Wherfore he determyned certeynly
                  To depryue theym temporally
                  Of all theyr worldly gouuernaunce.
                  Whos pretence / as sone as they perceyued
                  Amonge theym selfes they Imagyned
                  To get the kynge ouer in to fraunce.
                  That whyles he conqueryd ther his ryght
                  In england do what they lyst they myght
                  Theyr froward 
                        •…
                     yranny to fulfyll.
                  Which counseil / thus brought to passe
                  The kynge euer after so busyed wasse
                  That he could not performe hys sayde wyll.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentyllman.
                  So moore I the / it was happye for the kynge
                  That by soche a colour they could hym brynge
                  From medlynge with that case any more.
                  For hadde he it ones ernestly begonne
                  
                     
They had put hym to a confusyon
                  Euene as they dyd other kynges before.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  What suppose ye they wold haue done?
               
               
                  ¶ Gentyllman.
                  Mary / fyrst with a fayre interdyccion
                  To coursse the lande as blacke as pytche.
                  Than to inhybyt sayenge and syngynge
                  Of mattyns / masse / and belles ryngynge
                  With christen bury all of poore and ryche.
                  Besyde that precheres euery where
                  Shuld haue brought men in soche fere
                  By theyr threatnynge exclamacyon.
                  That their malycyous partye to take
                  Subgettes shuld theyr prynce for sake
                  Contrary to goddes ordynacyon.
                  Euene as they dyd in hygh Germany
                  To the Emperour lewes of Bauerye
                  Whom Pope Ihone sought to confounde
                  And so dyd the clergy as Ivnderstande
                  Unto kynge Ihon here in Englande
                  To kynge Sreuen / & henry the secounde.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  They saye kynge Ihone was poysoned
                  Because an halfe peny lofe of brced
                  Besayde / he wold make worthe. xij. pence.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  Tushe that is a cast of theyr comon gyse
                  Soche infamy of prynces to deuy
                        •…
                     e
                  To cloke theyr oune tyrannous vyolence.
                  For hadde not kynge Ihon gene aboute
                  From their temporaltees to put theym ow
                        •…
                     
                  
                  
                     
Be hadde bene longe after a lyues man.
                  But murder they neuer so shamefully
                  They can geue it a cloke full craftely
                  Sayenge / nobis non licer occidere quenq
                        •…
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  Whan they brennyd the newe testament
                  They pretendyd a zele very feruent
                  To maynteyne onely goddes honour.
                  Which they sayde with protestacyon
                  Was obscured by translacyon
                  In englysshe / causynge moche errour.
                  But the trueth playnly to be sayde
                  Thys was the cause why they were a frayde
                  Least laye men shuld knowe theyr iniquite.
                  Which through goddes worde is so vttred
                  That it were not possyble to be suffred
                  Yf to rede scripture men had lyberte.
                  Also after the same maner a fasshyon
                  Subtelly to colour theyr abhomynacyon
                  They destroyed cronicles not longe a gone.
                  Which for certeyne poyntes vnreuerently
                  Soundynge agaynst the kynges aunce
                        •…
                     rye
                  As they saye / were brent euery chone.
                  But for all that / they shulde haue been spared
                  From burnynge: had they not so declared
                  The clergyes abhomynable excesse.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  I suppose then / that they vse the same wayes
                  In burnynge of heretykes nowe a dayes
                  Whom they pursue with great furyousne
                        •…
                     .
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman.
                  No fayle / they perswade temporall menne
                  Thes heretykes (as they saye) to brenne
                  
                     
Least other good christians they shuld ifecte
                  But ye cause why they wolde haue theim rydde
                  Is onely that theyr vnhappynes nowe hydde
                  They dreede least they shuld openly detecte
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  By my trouth it is nothinge vnlickly.
                  For let one lyue neuer so wyckedly
                  In abhominable scandalisacion.
                  As longe as he will their church obaye
                  Not refusynge his tithes duely to paye
                  They shall make of him no accusacion.
                  Howbeyt let him ones begynne to pynche
                  Or withdrawe their tithinge anynche
                  For an heretike they will him ascite.
                  Wherfore I wonder moche of the temporalte
                  That in performyngethe clargyes cruelte
                  To burne soche parsones they haue delyte.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentillman
                  It is no merueil yf th
                        •…
                     n marcke well
                  The clargye sayenge yt it is goddes quarrell
                  Their mischeuous murdre to execute.
               
               
                  ¶ Husbandman.
                  So they are not a knowen by their wyll
                  That it is their cause christen men to kyll
                  But the faute vnto other they impute.
               
               
                  ¶ Gentyllman.
                  Touchinge that / another tyme atleyser
                  I shall shewe the more of their maner
                  But nowe I can not 
                        •…
                     ary verely.
               
               
                  ¶ H
                        •…
                     sbandman.
                  Well syr / yf ye may no longer abyde
                  Oure lorde be your continnall gyde
                  Grauntiuge y• trouth to be knowen openly.
               
            
         
         
            
            A compēdious oldetreatyse / shewynge / howe that we ought to haue the scripture in Englysshe.
            
               ¶ Thexcusacyon of ye treatyse
               
                  Though I am olde / clothed i barbarous wede
                  Nothynge garnysshed with gaye eloquency
                  Yet I tell the trouth / yf ye lyst to take hede
                  Agaynst theyr frowarde / furious frenesy
                  Which recken it for a great heresy
                  And vnto laye people greuous outrage
                  To haue goddes worde in their natyfe langage
               
               
                  Enemyes I shall haue / many a shoren crowne
                  With forked cappes and gaye croosys of golde
                  Which to maynteynether ambicious renowne
                  Are glad laye people in ignorance to holde
                  Yet to shewe the verite / one maye be bolde
                  All though it be a prouerbe daylye spoken
                  Who that tellyth trouth / his head shalbe brok
                        •…
                     .
               
            
            
               ¶ Vnto the Reader.
               GRace ād peace: not that ye worlde geuyth / but from god the father & oure sauioure Iesu Christ with increace of the holy spryt be with the and all that thurste ye truthe. Amē. ¶ Cōsyderynge ye mal
                     •…
                  ciousnes



of oure prelatz & theyr adherentes whiche so fu riously barke ageynst ye worde of God / ād specially the new testamēt translatyd & set forthe by Master Williā Tyndale / which they falsely pre tende to be sore corrupte. That ye may knowe yt yt is only the inwarde malyce whiche they haue euer had ageynst the worde of God. I haue here put in prynte a tretyse wrytten aboute ye yere of oure lorde a thousande foure hundryd. By which thou shalte playnly perceyue / yt they wol de yet neuer from the begynnynge admytte any trāslaciō to ye laye people / so yt it is not ye corrupte trāslacion yt they withstōde. For yf that were true the ydle bellyes wolde haue had leyser Inough to put forth a nother well trāslatyd. But yt is theyr owne myscheuous lynyn ge y• monith thē accordyng as Christe sayd Ihon̄. iij. Euery man that workyth euyll hatyth ye lyght / ner comyth to ye lyght lest hys workes shulde be repro ued. &c. Thus mayst thou se that bycause their workes are nought and not bycause yt is euill translatyd / they so furiously resyste the worde of god whiche is the trew lyght. For yet was ther neuer none translatyd but other with falshed or tyranny they put yt downe. Wherfore I exhorte the reder not to cōsydre & note ye wordes but the matter. And praye to god to sende y• rulers har tes to vnderstonde ye trewth & further ye same ād the god of all cōforte be with the AMEN
            
            
               
                  ¶ Thys treatyse more than an. C. yere olde
                  Declareth howe owre prelatis do ferre a mysse
                  
                     
Which of frowarde presumpcion are so bolde
                  To forbede the worde of god in englishe
                  For as the prophete saieth blessed he is
                  That exercyseth him selfe diligently Psal. 1.
                  
                  In scripture night and daye continually.
               
               
                  FOr to make vpon antichrist I ta ke figure of king Antioche of who in
                     •…
                   gods lawe speaketh in ye bo
                  
                     •…
                   of Machabeijs / for righte as 
                     •…
                  ge Antioche came in the ende wellnygh of ye olde lawe / & brēt the bokes of gods lawe / & compelled ye people to do maumentry. So now Antichrist ye kinge off clergy that lyuen worse then hethen presies / brē neth nowe nygh thēde of ye new lawe thenāgely of Christe that is nygh
                     •…
                   ye ende of ye world / to deceyue well hygh all the worlde / ād to proue ye seruauntes of god. For nowe god shall knowe who will stande by his lawe / for Sathanas as prophetes saye is nowe vnbounde & hathe ben. CCCC. yeres and more for to inhabit oure clergye / as he did the clergye of the olde lawe / but now with moche more malyce. For as they d
                     •…
                   
                  Ye may se it is no no uelte
                        •…
                     s yt the bishop pes burne ye gospell. ned Christ so now oure bisshopes dampne and bren goddes lawe / for bycause it is drawen into our mother tounge. But it ought to 
                     〈◊〉
                   (and we saued shuld be) as we shall proue by open euidē ce thorowe goddes helpe. First we take witnesse of Bo
                     •…
                  tius de disciplina scolari
                     •…
                  n / that say the that childerne shulde be taught in the bokes off Seneke. And Bede expoundeth this sayen
                     •…
                  


                  
and saythe that childerne in vertues shulde be taught. For the bokes of Seneke ben moralles and for they be not taught thus in there youthe they cōtynue still euyll maneryd & be vnable to conceyue the subtyle science of trouthe sayng / ye wise man is as a cleane myrror new pullished Wisdome shall not enter into a wicked soule. Reade ro bynhode / saye oure masters▪
                   And moche is herof the sentence of Bede. And Algasell in his logyke saieth / the soule of mā is a cleane myrror newe pulished in which is seyn lightly the ymage of vertue. And for the people haue not cunnynge in youthe they haue darke soules and blinde with ignorance / so that they profyt not in vertue but in falsnes & malice and other vices / & moche is therof ye matter. Sythē hethen philosophers wolden the people to profyt in naturall science / howe moche more shuld christē clerckes will ye people to profyt in science of vertues / for so wold god. For when the lawe was genē to Moses in ye mount of Sinai / god gaue it to his people in ther mother tonge of Ebrue / that all the people shuld vnderstande it / & cōmaunded Moses to reade it to them vntyll they vnderstode it / and so he did / as it is playne Dente. xxxi. And E
                     •…
                  dras also redde it in their
                     •…
                   mother tonge / fro morowe vntyll none as it is playne in the first boke of E
                     •…
                  dras Ca. viij. And he redde it apertly in the streate & the eares of ye people were intently geuē therto / in so moche yt the people fell into greate weping for y• mis
                     •…
                  es ping of ye lawe. Also gods lawe saith Deutero. xxij. that fathers shuld make the lawe knowē to



their sonnes / & the sonnes yt shulde be borne of thē shuld ryse & teache these thinges to ther son nes. And yt holy apostle seynt Peter in y• fourth chapter of his first boke speaketh after this maner / sayenge. Whosoeuer speake / speake he as ye worde of god: & euery man as he hath takē gra ce of knowinge / so ministre he forth to other m
                     •…
                   It is wrytten playnly in the boke of noumbres Chapter. xi. When the prophet Moses hadde chosen seuenty eldermen / and the sprite of god rested on them and they prophesyed. Two men besydes them / Eldad and Medad / prophesyed in ye tentes / & Iosue the ministre of Moses said to Mos
                     •…
                  s / forbyd thou them. And Moses say moses letted no mā to prophe sye. de / what enviest thou for me? Who shall let yt all the people prophesye / yf god gyue them his spirite? Also it is redde in ye gospell yt sayn ct Ihon 
                     •…
                  uāgelist said vnto Christ / lorde we shall forbid one that casteth out spirites in thy name / which Luce. ix. foloweth not vs. And Christ said do not forbid for who so is not against vs is with vs. And vnto the same agreyth well the prophesy of Iohell whiche seynct Petre preachinge to the Iewes strongly alleged as Luke recyteth in the secōde chapter of the acres of the apostles sayenge after this maner. That god nowe in the laste dayes shall shede out his spirite vp
                     •…
                   euery flesch. But they saye only master do ctor cā vn derstāde y• scripture. For god sayeth your sonnes & doughters shuld prophesy / and your yong men shall se visyons. And vpon whit sond
                     •…
                  y god gaue knowlege of his lawe to diuerse naciōs without any excepci ons in ther mother tonge / by the vnderstanding



of one tounge. And of this it is notabyll sithen the laye people in the olde lawe had their lawe in ther mother tounge / that the lay englishe people in the newe lawe haue it as all other naciōs haue / syns Christ bought vs as he did other & hath geuen to vs the same grace as to other. For saynt Peter. Actu. xi. was reproued for he had baptysed Cornelij and his felows that we re hethen men. And Peter answered and sayde Yf god haue gevyn the same grace to them that he hath to vs / who am Ithat may forbyd god? As who saythe it lyeth not in the power of men. Than who art thou yt forbiddest ye people to haue gods lawe in ther mother tounge? we saye yt thou art Antichrist himself. For Paule saieth. i. Corin. x. I will euery man to speake with tounges / more forsothe to prophesy / also he saith ho we shall he saye Amen vpon thy blessynge that woteth not what thou sayst. Vpō this saith doctor Lyre. Yf the people vnderstōde ye prayer of ye 
                  Here you re owne master Li 
                        •…
                     e yf ye wil not here Paul. priest it shall the better be ledde vnto god / & the more deuoutly answere Am
                     •…
                  . Al
                     •…
                  o▪ Paule saith in the same chapter. I will rather fyue wordes to be spoken to the vnderstāding of m
                     •…
                   / then ten thousand yt they vnderstand not. And. lxx. doctours with other m
                     •…
                   before the incarnacion of christe translated ye bible out of Ebrue into Greke. And after ye ascension many translated all ye bible in diuerselangages / as into spanysh tonge / frenshetunge / almanye / & italy / ād by many yeres haue had it. It was hard of a worthy mā of Almaynye that ye same tyme was a flēmyng



wh
                     •…
                  se name was Iames Merland which tra
                     •…
                  
                  flated all the bible into flemysh. For whiche dede he was semonned before the Pope of great malyce. And the boke was taken to examinacion. And truely he approued it. And then it was delyuerd to him agayn vnto confusion of all his enemyes. Worshupfull Bede in his first boofe called de ges
                     •…
                  s Anglo
                     •…
                  m. chapter. iij. telleth that saynt Oswolde the Kyng of Northumber lande asked of the skottes an holy bisshoppe Ai dan to preache to his people / and the kyng him selfe interpreted it in englishe to the people. Sythen this blessed deade of this Kynge is alowed of all holy churche / whye not nowe ought it as well to be alowed / a man to reade ye gospell in Englishe to the people / sythen that seynt Paule saith yf oure gospell be hidde / it is hidde A fearefull sayē ge. in thē that shall be dampned. And he saith also he that knoweth not shall not be knowen of god And therfore venerabilis Bede ledde by the spi rite of god translated a greate parte of the bible into Englishe / whose originalles ben in many Abbeyes in England. And Cisterciensis. libro v. chaptre. xxiiij. saythe that the Euangely off Ihon was drawen into Englishe by the forsayde Bede whiche Euangelye off Ihon and other Gospels ben yet in many places of so olde englishe that skant can anye englishe man reade them. For this Bede reygned in the yere off oure lorde god. vij. hundred and. xxxij. Also Cistercien. libro. vi. chaptre. i. saythe that kyng Al red ordyned open scoles of diuerse artes in Orforde



and he turned the bestlawes into hie me ther tounge and the Psalter also / he reygned in the yere of oure lorde god. viij. hundred. lxxi
                     •…
                  . And saynt thomas sayth super librū politic
                     •…
                   expounding this worde / barbarus / that barba rus is he that vnderstondyth not y• he readeth in his mother tonge. Wherforethe apostle saith If I knowe not the vertue of the voice to whome I speake I shalbe to him barbarus / that is to saye / he vnderstandeth not what I saye / nor I what he saith. And so all tho prestes that vn derstonde not what they readyn by ther mother tonge be called barbarus / and therfore Bede did drawe into englishe liberall artes leste englishe men shuld be come barbarus / hee Thomas. Also Lincoln sayeth in a sermon that begynnith / Scriptum est de leuitis. Yf any prieste saye he can not preache / one remedye is / resigne he vppe his benefyce. Another remedy yf Resygne in no wise but apon a good pē syon. he will not thus / recorde he in the meke the naked texte of the sondaye gospell that he haue the grosse storye and tell it to the people / that is yf he vnderstonde latyn / and do he this euery weke in the yere he shall profyt moch. For thus pre ched oure lorde sayenge. Ihon̄. vi. The wordes that I speake to you be spirit and lyfe. Yf he do not vnderstonde latyn go he to one of his neigh boures yt vnderstondeth / which will charitably expoune it to him / & thus 
                     •…
                  difye he his flocke. Vpō this argueth a great clerke & faithe / yf it be laufull to preache y• naked texte to ye people / it is also lefull to write & read it to thē. Also sir Williā


                  
Thoris by archebishop of Yorke did do draw The same treatise is in ye chirch over agaī ste Lōdon stone at th
                        •…
                      is houre. a treatyse in englishe by a worshipfull clercke / whose name was Gatryke / in the whiche were conteyned the articles of belene / the seuen dedly synnes / the seuen workes of mercy / the. x. commaundmētes. And sent them in small pagines to the cōmyn people to learne it and to knowe it / of which yet many a copye be in england. Also Richard the heremyte of Hampole drewe into englishe the Psalter with a glose ād the lessons of dirige and many other treatices / by the whi che many engleshemen haue ben greatly edifyed. And they bē cursed of god yt woldēlet ye people to be lewder thē they ber. But many mē nowe be lyke vnto ye frēdes of Hiob / yt whiles they enforced to defende god they offended in hi gre uously. And though suche as be slayne do myracles / neuertheles they bē stynkynge marters. This saieth Richerd y• heremyt expouning this verse / Ne auferas de ore meo verbū veritatis vs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  qua
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  .This prophesye of christ must be fulfilled take hede And Christ saieth ye mē shuld deame thē self to do great plesaunt seruice to god in kil ling of his people. Arbitretur se obsequiū pres
                     •…
                  a redeo. &c. Also a mā of londō whose name was Wyrynge had a bible in english of northē spea che whiche was seyne of many mē & it 
                     •…
                  yd to be. CC. yeres old. Also it is knowē to many mē in ye tyme of king Richerd ye. ij. yt into a parlemēt was put a bible by thassent of. ii. archbisshops and of the clergy to adnusse the bible that tyme translated into Englishe with other Englishe bookes of thex posicion off the gospells whiche



whē it was harde and seyn of lordes and of the comones. The duke of Lancaster Thou answered thereto ryght sharpely sayenge this sentence / we will not be refuse of all other nacions.
               For sythen they haue goddes lawe whiche is the lawe of oure belefe in there owne langage / we will haue oures in Englishe whosoeuer say naye. And this he affermyd with a greate othe Also Thomas Arundell Archebisshoppe off Canterbury sayde in a sermon at wes
                     •…
                  mester / Ypocrisy is y• nature of all bi shoppes. at the buryenge of Quiene Anne / that it was more ioye of here than of any woman that euer he knewe. For she an alien borne hadde in enhlishe all the. iiij. gospels with the doctours vpō them And he said that she had sent them to him to examen / and he saide that they were good & trewe. And he blamyd in that sermon sharpely the negligence of the prelates and other men.
               In so moche that he saide that he wold leaue vp the office of Chaunceler and forsake worldly bu synes / and gyue him to fulfyll his pastorall of fyce / for that he had seyn / and redde in tho bokes. And after this promyse he became ye moste cruell enemye that mighte be againste englishe Neuer trust bishop as longe as he ke
                     
                        •…
                     eth hys possessiōs bokes. And therfore as many men sayne God smo
                     •…
                  e him with a cruell dethe as he didde also Richard flemyng bisshoppe of Lincolne. And yet oure bisshops ben so indurate & so ferre strayed frō god that they haue no grace one to beware of another / but proudely against all reasons & euidence of gods lawes / & doctours sentences / they brenne gods worde the whiche hathe



brought thy 
                     〈◊〉
                   realme to vndoynge for euer Wher is y• aūciēt blode yt was in englād in these dayes. but if godes grace be the more / for thys cruell deade is cause of pestilēce / hungers / warres / ād that also this realme shalbe conqueryd in short tyme / as saynct Edward ye kyng & cōfessor prophesyethe in his booke y• beginnith thus / Sāctus Edwardus rex vidit spiritualibus oculis. And therfore it were good to the Kyng and to other lordes to make some remedy agaynst this cōstitucion of Antechrist that saythe it is vnlawfull to vs englyshemen to haue in englyshe god Et nūc reges intelligite erudimini qui iudicatis terram. des lawe / & therfore he brennythe & sleythe thē yt maynteyne this good deade / & that is for default that the kyng & lordes knowē not ne wyll not know ether owne office in maitenāce of god and his lawe. For as sainct Austen saithe the Ryng with his knyghtes representyn the godhede of Christe / & prestes the manhode of Christe / Rex est vicarius diuinitatis / et sacerdos est vicarius Christi humanitatis / hec Augustinus in de questionibus veteris et noue legis. ca. xci. And if the kyng desyer to knowe perfytly his of fyce / he maye fynde mē to shewe to hym bookes that truely & perfytly shall enforme hym to doo his office to the plesaunce of god. But this can not he lerne of Byshoppys for they enforme hym after Antichristes lawe and ordenaunce for his lawes nowe reignen. Yet agaynst them Bisshops will not teache against their god their bely. that sayn ye gospell in englyshe wold make mē to erre / wote they well yt we fynde in latyn langage more heretykes then of all other langages for the decre. saythe. xxiiij. xciij. Quidam autem



heretici / that there be founden syxty laten heretykes. And yf mē shuld hate any lāgage for here sy thē must they hate latē. But god forbede that any lāgage shuld be hated for heresy sythē manye heretykes wer of ye disciples of ye apos
                     •…
                  les. For sainct Ihon̄ saithe they haue gon̄ owt of vs but they were not of vs. And Paule saithe it behouyth heresys to be / & ātichrist maky the ma How Antich
                        •…
                      is can se of al heresyes. ny mo herctykes then there shuld be for he stoppythe so the knowyng of gods lawe / & punysheth so them that he knowyth y• haue it / yt they dare not comē therof opēly to haue trewe informaciō / & thys makyth laye men y• desyrē & lou
                     •…
                   to knowe gods law to goo to gyther in pry
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   cōceyuen by theyr owne wyttes many tymes heresys ye whiche heresies in shorttyme shuld be destroyed / yf men myght haue free comenyng opēly / & but if this maye be had moche of ye peo ple shall dye in heresy / for it lyethe neuer in An tichristes power to destroye all englyshe bookes for as fast as he brennethe / other mē shale drawe / & thus ye cause of heresy ād of ye people that dyeth in heresy is ye frowardnes of byshoppes that wyll not suffer mē to haue opyn comoning and fre in the lawe of god and therfore they be cowntable of as many sowlys as dyen in thys default / ād are traytors to god in stoppynge of Is r
                        •…
                      this tur nin
                        •…
                      y• rotys of y• tres vpw
                        •…
                     d his lawe ye whiche was made in saluacion of ye people. And nowe they turne his lawe by ther cruell cōstitucyōs into dāpnaciō of ye people as it shalbe prouyd apon thē at the dayte of dome for gods lawe saithe / Stabunt iusti in magna const
                        •…
                     
                  


                  
                  tia aduersus eos qui se angustiauerunt, & qui abstulerunt labores eorum. &c. For that the other Reade Sapi
                        •…
                     n vi. &. vii. men laborē they brennē / & yf owre clergy wold 
                     •…
                  dy well this lessen of sapi
                     •…
                  ce to ye ende / they shuld mowe rede therin theyr oune dāpnacion / bu
                     •…
                   yf they amend this defaulte with other defaultes. Saithe not the holy mā Ardemakan in the booke of questiōs that ye wurshupfull sacramēt of ye alter maye be made in eche comē lāga ge. For he saithe so diden y• apostles. But we co uer not thys / but y• Antechrist geue vs leaue to haue the lawe of ower beleue in englishe. Also they y• haue comonyd moche with ye Iewes / saye yt they haue in euery lāde yt they be borne in / ye byblein ther mothertoūge / yt is Ebrewe And they be more practysetherin thā annye men / ye aswell ye lewde m
                     •…
                   as ye prestes. But it is redde in her synagoges amōgest y• people ofther prestes to fulfyll ther prestes office & to y• edificacion of ye p
                     •…
                  raile / that for worldly busynes & slewthe maye not studye it. Also the. iiij. enāgelistes wrote ye gospell in diuerse langages / as Mathewe in Iurye / Marke in Italy / Luke in Achaie / and Ihon̄ in Asie. And all these wrotte in y• lāgages of the same contreys / also T
                     •…
                   bye saithe Chap. xiij. that god disperged / sprede / or scaterid yt Iewes abrode among the hethen pe ople yt they tellynge vnto theym ye merueylles of godde: they shuld knowe that there were none other god / but god of Israell. And god or dyned his people to beleue his lawe wrytten among them in ther mother tounge / vt patet



Ge. x. vij. and Exo. xiij. In so moche the 
                     •…
                  e of Iudithe is wryttē in Calde speche / vt patet per Hieronimū in prologo eiusdē. Also the bookes of Daniel / and of Esdre ben written in Calde / vt patet per Hierom. in prologis eorundem / al so the booke of Iohel is in Arabyke and Syre speche / vt patet per Hieroni. in prologo ciusdē. Also Ezechiell the prophet prophesyed in Babylon / and lefte his prophesye vnder the mother tounge of Babylon / vt patet per Hieronimū in prologo ciusdē Also the prophesye of Isaie is translated in to the tounge of Ethiope / as Hie. concludyth in primo prologo Gene. Then sythen the darke prophesyes were translated amō ges the hethen people yt they myght haue know lege of god and of the incarnaciō of Christ / mo che more it ought to be translatyd to englyshe people that haue receiuyd the faythe and bounden them selfe to kepe it vpon payne of dampna cion / sythen Christ commaunded his apostles Mathei. xxviij. to preache his gospell vnto all the worlde and exceptyd no people nor langage. Also Origen translated the byble owt of Ebrewe into Greke with helpe of other in the yere of ow
                     •…
                   lorde god CCxxxiiij. Also Aquila translated it in thery me of Adriā the emperoure in the yere of oure lorde. C. xxiiij. also Theodosion trāslaid it in ye tyme of thē perowre Comede. luij. yere after Aqui la / also Simacus trāslated it in the tyme of thē perowre Serene. xxx. yere after Theodosiō. viij yere after Simacus it was translated the auctor vnknowen yn the tyme of Alexāder the emperowre / And



Ierome translated it into latyn / vt in cronicis Cistercien. li. ij. ca. xxxij. And after that Ierom had translated it into laten / he translated to women moche of the bible. And to the maydens Eustochia and Paula / hetranslated the bookes of Iosue of Iudicum and Ruth and Hester / and Ecclesiastes / Ieremy / Isai
                     •…
                   and Daniell / and the. xij. prophetes / and y•. vij. canonyke epystylles / vt patet in prologo eorundem. And so all men maye se here by Ierom / yt it was neuer his entent to bynde ye lawe of god vnder his translacion of laten but by his owne dede geuythe leaue to translate it into euery spe che / for Ierom wrytythe in his. lxxviij. epystle to this man A
                     •…
                  leta / that he shuld enforme his daughter in the bookes of the olde lawe and the newe / Also in his. lxxv. epistle he wrytythe to ye virgin D
                     •…
                  metriadis / that she shuld for to encre ase her selfe in vertue rede nowe vpon one booke / and nowe vpon another. And he specifiethe vnto her that she also reade the gospell / and the epistylles of the apostles And thus Thenglyshemen But my lordes say yt it maketh men heretikes and peruerteth soules. desyre to haue the lawe of god in englyshe / sythen it is called the lawe vndefyled cō uertyng sowlys into clennes / lex dn̄i immacula ta conuertens aīas / but Antechrist saithe that it is corrupte with ye litterall lettre y• sleyth sowlys takyng his auctorite of Paule / that saithe / litera occidit spiritus autem viuificat. That is the le
                     •…
                  tre of the ceremonies of y• olde lawesleyth the Iewes / and them that nowe
                     •…
                  sen them / but the spirite of the newe lawe quykenethe trewe



Christen men / sythen Christ saythe my wordes ben spri
                     •…
                  te and lyffe. Also we take ensample of holy virgyns to loue to reade the gospell as they d
                     •…
                  den / as 
                     •…
                  atheryn / Cecyle / Luc
                     •…
                   / Agnes / Margaret / whiche alegyd the holy gospell to the infidels / that slewe them for the keping therof. Of these foresaid aucto rites it is prouyd laufu
                     •…
                  l / that both men and women laufully may reade and wryte gods lawe in their mother tonge / and they that forfenden this they shewe them selfes heyers and sonnes of the first tormentors / and werse / for they shewen them selfes the veraye dis
                     •…
                  les of Antichrist / whiche hathe and shall passe all the malyce of tyrauntes that haue ben before in stoppyng and peruertynge of gods lawe whiche deade engendrythe greate vengeaunce to fall in this realme / but yf it be amendid For Paule saithe Roma. i. The wrathe of god is shewyd from heuyn vpon cruelnes & vnryght fulnes of these men that with holden the trowthe of god in vnryght wysnes / Reuelatur enim ira dei super omnem impie
                     •…
                   et iniusticiam hominum eorum qui veritatem dei in iniustitia detinent. Now god of hys mercy geue vnto ower kyng / and to ower lordes grace of trewe vnderstandyng to amende this default principally and all other / then shall we mowe easely to be amendid. For vntyll it be amendid there shall neuer be rest and peace in thys realme. Who that fyndythe or redythe this. lettre put it furthe in examinacyon and suffer it not to be



hydde or destroyed / but multyplyed for no man knoweth what proffyt maye come therof. For hethat compiled it / purposyth with goddes helpe to mayntayne it vnto the deathe / yf neade be. And therfore all christen men and women / praye that ye worde of god maye be vnbounde / and de liuered from the power of An tichrist / and renne amonge his people. Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Emprented at Marborow in the lande of Hessen / by me
                  •…
                Hans Luft / in the yere of owre lorde. M. CCCCC. and. XXX.
         
      
   