
      
         
            
            
            A VIEWE
OF A SEDITIOVS
Bul sent into Englande, from Pius
Quintus Bishop of Rome, ANNO. 1569.
Taken by the reuerende Father in
God, IOHN IEWEL, late
Bishop of SALISBVRIE. Wherevnto is added
A short Treatise of the holy Scriptures. Both which
he deliuered in diuers Sermons in his Cathedral
Church of Salisburie, Anno. 1570.
            
            AT LONDON:
Printed by R. Newberie, & H. Bynneman,
ANNO. 1582.
         
         
            
            
            To the godlie Reader.
            
               THE present state of
these our dayes, and
the honourable, and
reuerent loue, that
euery one of vs subiectes
oweth to so
gratious a Prince, as
GOD in mercy hath
set ouer vs: hath caused
this small worke
to be persented vnto
thee (gentle Reader.) For, it carrieth in it selfe,
and bringeth vnto thee a ripping vp, and an vnfoulding
of that seditious BVL of Pius Quinius,
that was set vp and published by FELTON, a
rebellious traitour, in the twelfth yeare of hir Maiesties
raigne, to withdraw thee from the obedience
and loue that thou owest to hir Maiestie, to
hir Lawes and godlie proceedinges, and to this
Realme thy deare Countrie.
            To whiche is also adioined an other Treatise of
the Holy Scriptures. Wherein is shewed thee the
authoritie, and the profit, and the pleasure, and the
necessitie of the word of God.
            
            Both these, the reuerend Father in GOD, D. IEWEL,
late Bishop of SARVM, deliuered to that

Church and people: in the great care he had to do
his Maisters seruice, & to keepe the people committed
to his charge, from incurring such offence
to GOD, or vndutifulnes to hir Maiestie, or their
own euerlasting damnation. His meaning herein
was good toward thē: &, not doubt but they reapt
the comfortable fruit of his godlie trauailes. The
like mayest thou gather to thy selfe, by direction
of the same his speeches thus drawn into short and
compendious forme: if thou wilt reade them with
diligence and iudgement.
            If thou learne to humble thy selfe before GOD,
and to seeke wisdome of hym: if thou searche the
scriptures and make them thy guides to leade thee
through the desert and wide sea of this life, as thou
arte aduertised by the later: thou shalt soone espie
the daunger of all such practises towardes disloialtie,
aud rebellion, whereto the BVL driueth thee,
which is disclosed in the former. For, it is not only
sayde by the wise man,Prou. 1. 
               The feare of the Lorde is the
beginning of wisedome:
               Ierem. 8. but also set down by the Prophet;
They haue reiected the word of the Lord, and what
wisedome is in them? that is, therefore men become
foolish, and do such things as are vnmeete, because
they care not for the word of God: and therefore
Dauid in his experience so confesseth,Psa. 119. that by the
commaundemēts of God he was made wiser than his enimies,
and had more vnderstanding than al his teachers:
because the testimonies of the Lord were euer with him,
and he did meditate them. If thou settle thy heart to
like and do those things which please God, if thou
haue the loue of his word, hee wil teache thee the
way wherein thou shouldst walke in obedience to

him, and in dutie to hir Maiestie our dread Soueraigne
his seruant.
            I trust thou wilte take good instructions out of
these twoo Treatises to thy duty and zeale to them
both: and be thankful to God for that learned Father,
who hath lefte a light vnto thee, both in ex-example,
and by these and other his workes. whose
steppes if thou shalt follow, thou shalt liue godly,
and die with comforte, as a good seruaunt of thy
mercifull GOD and Father. The benefites of his
great trauailes taken in time of his life, are thine.
And vnto the ende, he ceassed not to continue in
the faith whiche he before professed. For (as I, one
of many yet liuing, can testifie) in the daye and
night before his departure out of this worlde, hee
expounded the Lordes prayer, and gaue short notes
vpon the 71. Psalme, to such as were by him. He
thought good to say somwhat at that time, of his
Bookes written by him, and set forth in Print; and
also of his Preaching. In both which seruices done
by him to the glory of God, and thy comfort: he
made protestation of his good conscience, whiche
euen then, as he declared, witnessed and shoulde
witnesse with him before God, that he dealt simply,
and plainely: hauing God only before his eies,
and seeking the defence of the Ghospel of Christ,
and that the truth thereof might bee opened and
maintayned. And farther gaue thankes to God
that made him his seruaunt in so greate a worke;
and then visited him by this messenger of death,
whiles he was doing the message of God, in visiting
his Dioecese: that then hee called him to reste
from his labours, when his weake body was spent

and worne out in setting forth the glory of God,
for which he many times prayed, it woulde pleas
                  •
               
God to let him be offred in sacrifice.
            Hee was at that time verye feruent in Prayer:
which he poured out before the Lord aboundantly,
and in great faith: crying often, Lorde let thy seruant
now depart in peace. Lord let thy seruant now come
to thee. I haue not so liued, that I am ashamed to liue:
neither am I afrayd to die, for we haue a gratious Lord.
There is laide vppe for mee a crowne of righteousnesse.
Christ is my righteousnesse. Thy will be done ô Lorde,
for mine is frayle. With many other suche godlye
speehes. In the extremitie of his disease he shewed
great pacience, and when his voice fayled that hee
lay speechelesse, hee lifted vp his handes and eyes,
in witnesse of his consent to those prayers whiche
were made. Thus, being vertuously occupied, and
wholly resting himselfe vpon the mercies of God
through Ies
                  •
               s Christ our sauior, he rendred vp his
soule to God, the 23. of September. 1571.
            Be thou thankful to God for giuing his Church
so worthy an instrument of his glorie: and bee
carefull to follow the good doctrine, which he left
behinde him, not only in this that commeth forth
at this present, but in all other his Bookes, whiche
haue beene set forth before, or shall be put foorth
hereafter to thy benefit, and increase of godlinesse.
            
               
                  27. Ian. 1582. North Crowlie. 
               Thine in the Lord,
IO: GARBRAND.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A VIEVV OF A
SEDITIOVS BVL
SENT INTO ENGLANDE.
            
               
                  WHiles I opened
vnto you ye words
of ye Apostle,
               2. Thes. 2. 
               That
daye shall not
come, except ther
come a departing
firste, & that man
of sinne bee disclosed,
euen the sonne of perdition:
which is an aduersarie, and is exalted aboue
all that is called God, or that is
worshipped: so that he shall sit as God
in the Temple of God, & beare in hand
that he is God: there came to my hands
a copie of a Bull latelye sente into this
Realme by the Bishop of Rome: I read
it, and weighed it throughly, and founde
it to be a matter of greate blasphemie against

God, and a practise to work much
vnquietnesse, sedition, and treason againste
our blessed and prosperous gouernment:
For, it deposeth the Queens
Maiestie (whome GOD long preserue)
from hir royall seate, and teareth
the Crowne from hir head: it dischargeth
all vs hir naturall Subiectes
from all due obedience: it armeth one
side of vs against an other: it emboldeneth
vs to burne, to spoile, to robbe,
to kill, and to cutte one an others
throate: it is much like that boxe which
Pandora sente to Epimetheus full of
hurtefull and vnholesome euilles. Are
you desirous to heare it? it gréeueth
me to disclose, and your godlye eares
will hardely abide his vnséemely spéeches.
Yet séeing hée hathe written
them, and hathe conueyed hys Copies
thereof to worke the mischiefe hée
hath entēded: I may the better rehearse
them vnto you, if withall your discreation
prouide to season them with the
feare of God, and with due obedience
vnto our dread Soueraigne, vsing these

two as the holesome meale of Elizeus to
preserue from infection in the tasting of
these wilde gourdes: then shall you by
this Bul espie out Antichrist, euen that
man of sinne, the sonne of perdition,
who is exalted aboue all that is called
God, or that is worshipped. The matter
is long: Pope Pius hathe bestowed
some paines in writiting of falshod, let
vs take some paines to heare the truth.
            But before I lay abroad to your sight
the packet of his grosse vntruths, and in
the dutie of a good Subiect make a true
report of that estate wherin we liue, as
well of religion, as of ciuill policie, against
the slanderous Libel of this man
of sinne: if otherwise than my wonted
manner hathe béene, anye harde or
sharpe spéeche passe from me: or, if I
speake more particularly of persons liuing,
and matters well knowen vnto
you, than may séeme fit for this place: I
muste desire your pardon, séeing the occasion
is suche, that it driueth me to bée
plaine & earnest. For she is the seruaunt
of GOD: she is my gratious Lady,

and dread Soueraigne. I haue sworne
trueth to hir Maiestie. If I knewe there
were in mine hart, one drop of disloyal
bloude towards hir, I woulde take my
knife and let it out.
            The Title is, Sententia declaratoria
contra Elizabeth, &c. A Sentence denoū
                     ced
against Elizabeth
                our noble and renowmed
Queene, whom God hath mercifully
apointed to rule ouer vs in place
of hir noble Progenitours. A Sentence
is the conclusion of Iudgement, and the
ende of controuersies, wherein manye
thinges are to bée considered: that the
Iudge bée competent, also graue and sober,
and wise, and vpright: that he call
the partie, and examine the cause, and
weigh the circumstances, and haue conference
with the learned: that then vpō
great aduise and du
                  •
                proofes (setting all
affection aside, and hauing God onelye
before his eyes) he open his mouth, and
pronounce sentence. Nowe if the Iudge
be a partie, or haue no iurisdiction ouer
them whome he iudgeth, and therefore
bée not a competent Iudge: if he sende

forth no processe, kéep no order nor form
of iudgement: if the party be not called:
if the matter be not duely examined: if
the presumption be false: if there be no
proofes: if he beginne where he shoulde
end, and declare a sentence of his owne
affection, without the feare of God, againste
God and against his anointed:
thē he is no Iudge, & his sentence is no
sentence, but rather a wicked Iudge, &
a corrupt sentence. These circumstances
are substantiall, and being wel considered,
will make you the better able
to iudge of these rash procéedings.
            After this his angry Title, his Holinesse
hath thought good to shew vs some
little of his pretie imagery, and maketh
Peter stand on the one side with Keyes,
and a poesie: Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum,
I wil giue the Keyes of the kingdome
of Heauen to thee.
                And leaste you
shoulde not yet finde whiche is he, he is
marked, Petrus clauiger, Peter the Keybearer.
Paule
                is placed on the lefte side,
with his Sworde: his marke is Paulus

                     •
                  nsifer, Paule the Sword bearer,
                and hys

circumscription, Paulus doctor gentium &
vas electionis, Paule the Doctor of Gentiles,
and elect vessel:
                and betwéen them
both the Popes Armes, the triple Myter,
the Crosse Keyes, and sixe Gunne
stones: so he maketh the two Apostles
supporters of his Armes, & setteth forth
himselfe vnder their name, and credite.
As if he should say, I sit here in the seate
of Peter and Paule, euen as did the Pharisees
sometimes, We are the seede of
Abraham, Wee are the children of the
Prophets, We sit in the chaire of Moses.
But the Apostle warneth vs,2 Cor. 11. 
               Such false
Apostles are deceitfull workemen, and
transform themselues into the Apostles
of Christ: and no maruell, for Satan him
selfe is transfourmed into an Angell of
Light. What right hath he to cary Peters
Keyes?
               Hom. 44. in opere imperf. 
               Chrysostome saith, Clauisest
scientia Scripturarum, the Key is the
knowledge of the Scriptures:
                and Tertullian
an other auntient Writer saith, Clauis est expositio legis,
               Lib. 4. cont. Marc.
               the Key is the exposition
of the Lawe. Againe, what
hathe he to doe wyth Paules Sworde?
               
that Sworde wherewith Paule foughte,
is the word of God,
               Hebr. 4. 
               which is liuely and
mightie in operation, and sharper than
any two edged Sword, and entreth thorough,
euen to the diuiding asunder of
the soule and the spirit, and of the ioints
and the marowe, and is a discerner of
the thoughtes and intentes of the heart.
Why bringeth he forth Paule wyth his
naked Sworde, and why maketh hée
shewe of Peters Keyes? In what Pulpit
didde he euer sette foote? where hath
he opened the Scripturs of God? where
hath he taught the expositiō of the law?
where did he euer fight with the Sword
of the spirite? the Sworde whiche hée
vseth, is the Sworde of ambition, and
of couetousnesse, the Sworde of extortion,
the Sworde of crueltie and tyrannie,
wherewith he fighteth againste al
truth, & al equitie, & al honestie. It is the
Sword of which the Prophet speaketh:
their tong is a sharp Sword:
               Psal. 56. yt Key whiche
he beareth,Reuel. 20. is the Key of Error, it is
the Key of the bottomlesse pit. Certainly
Christ will say vnto this Keykeeper,

wo be to thee Scribe and Pharisee, hypocrite,
because thou shuttest vp the kingdome
of Heauen before men: for thou
hast taken away the Key of Knowledge,
thou hast not entred in thy self, & them
that came in, thou forbaddest. Let hym
therefore leaue to deceiue the worlde any
longer vnder the names, and by the
countenaunce of the Apostles of Christ.
S. Hierome sayth,Ad Heliodorum. 
               it is no easie matter to
stand in the place of Peter and Paule, &
to holde the Chaire of them nowe raigning
with Christ. And againe he saith:
Non sunt filij sanctorum,
               Dist. 40. ex Hier. 
               qui tenent loca sanctorum,
they bee not euermore the childrē
of holy mē, which sit in the roomes
of holy men. Peter
                was a principall Apostle:
Paule was a vessel chosen of God
to beare his name before the Gentiles,
and Kinges, and the children of Israel.
Did they send such Buls into the world?
were they such workers of Treason? did
they disquiet the Lande by stirring vp
ciuill warres? verily these holy Apostles
will reason this case with Pope Pius.
What warrant haddest thou to vse our

names? why doest thou make our Images,
and sette them before thy Bulles?
what doest thou like vnto vs? or, what
did we like vnto that thou doest? is this
our Gospell? did we preache thus? is
this that for which we loste our liues?
thou art not our successour: thou doest
vs wrong: we knowe thée not. We neuer
discharged subiectes from their oath
of obedience: we did neuer stir vp one
Prince againste an other: thou haste no
déed of ours for thine example, thou hast
no worde of ours for thy doings: thou
doest vs wrong, wée disclaime thée, wée
know thée not. Thus much of his Title
and Armes.
            
               Pius Episcopus, seruus seruorum Dei, ad
futuram rei memortam: Pius Bishop, the
seruant of Gods seruants, to be kepte in
remembrance for euer.
                O how lowly &
humble this man semeth: méeke words,
when he is contented to be a seruaunt,
yea a seruaunt vnto seruantes. He hathe
made his Stile so low, that you woulde
thinke he were putte to the worste and
vilest seruice among his fellow
                  ••
               , that

he were the common drudge, mainteined
with cast apparell, little accompted
of, and readie to runne and goe at euery
bodies commandement. But what seruice
doth he, either worldly, or heauenly,
or bodily, or ghostly?
            Let Pope Pius tell his owne tale: he
saith, hunc vnum super omnes gentes, & super
omnia regna principem constituit: Christ
hathe appointed him onelye to bee the
Prince ouer al nations, and ouer al kingdomes
               
Marke his wordes well, and sée
how they hang togither, he sayth I am a
Seruaunt, and that is not all: I am the
Seruaunt of Seruaunts, therefore I am
no Prince: But, as though he were sory
those words had escaped him, he mendeth
the matter, I haue power ouer all
nations, and ouer all kingdomes, therefore
I am no seruant. If he be a seruant,
& so vile a seruant, how is he a Prince?
or, if he be a Prince, and so mightie a
Prince, how is he a seruant? what shift
soeuer he vseth, néeds he must be taken.
If he be true in the one, he is false in the
other. It is well with him, that he can

not erre, and that his words must bee taken
as the worde of God: that he maye
iudge all men, but all the worlde maye
not iudge him: and that hee maye not
with M. Hardings liking) be accused by
               In the Confut. of the Apologie of the Church of England, fol. 282. pag. 2. 
               Hicke, Hob, and Haunce, and iudged by
Iacke and Gill. Were it not that he hath
giuen himself priuiledge, thus to sitte as
God in the Temple of God, and to beare
in hand, that he is God: Were it not that
his props and vpholders might so scorne
and disdaine the iudgement of the whole
world: it woulde be no harde matter to
trippe him in his tale, and take hym in
manifest vntrueth. For, when this Seruant
sitteth at table, the Emperour may
not sitte with him: When hée sitteth in
Councell, the Emperour sitteth below at
his féete: Princes and Kings doe him seruice:
they holde his Styrrop, leade his
bridle, carrie his traine, and beare dishes
to his Table: he walketh not foorthe on
foote, but is caried on mens shoulders, in
gorgeous attire, shining & glittering wt 
golde and pretious stones. It is worthye
the noting whiche Albertus Krantzius,
               
who writeth the Historie of Germanie,
reporteth of Pope Boniface the eight,
Vtrius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   penes se vnum gladij potestatem
manere affirmabat,
               Saxonic lib. 8. cap. 36. 
               quod ipso apparatu in eo
qui tum agebatur in vrbe iubileo solenniter
fertur ostentasse, primo quidem solenni die
in pontificalibus apparens populo, apostolicam illis
benedictionem impartitur: postero autem
die imperiali habitu, insula nihilominus
Cesarea insignis, gladium ante se nudatū iussit
deferri, & sedens alta voce testatur, Ecce
duo gladij hic, Boniface didde affirme,
that the power of bothe Swordes didde
remaine in hym alone, whiche thing
(they saye) hee didde solemnely declare
in his attyre at the Iubilee, which was
then kepte in the Citie. For, the first day
of that solemnitie, he shewed forth himselfe
before the people in Bishop-like arraye,
and gaue them Apostolike blessing.
But the nexte daye he was clothed
in Robes like an Emperour, hauing the
Imperiall Crowne vppon hys heade.
Hee commaunded a naked Sworde to
bee carried before him, and as hee sate
spake out in a loude voice, behold here

are twoo Swordes.
               
               Ibidem. 
               Vides ô Petre (sayeth
Krantzius) Successorem tuum, & tu salutifer
Christe tuum cerne Vicarium. Vide quò
ascendit superbia serui seruorum tuorū. Thou
seest thy successour o Peter: and thou o
Sauiour Christe looke vppon thy Vicar.
Beholde the pride of the seruaunte of thy
seruants, whether, and to what it is come.
            
            No doubt, his Holinesse hath bestowed
some studie about the matter, and therefore
would faine it shoulde be knowen, &
neuer forgotten, but registred Ad futuram
rei memoriam, to remaine and bee remembred
hereafter.
                Heare it therefore ye
men and brethren, yée Babes and children.
You are the sonnes of God, you are
the children of the holy fathers. You shall
sée that Babilon,
               Reuel. 17. 
               which hathe made drunken
the Princes of the worlde with hir
golden cup.
               2. Thes. 2. You shall sée him that dothe
sitte as God in the Temple of God, shewing
himselfe that he is God. And that you
may take the better viewe of him, I wil
lay opē before you the manifest vntruths
of his Libel, and so make you iudges of
his vniust sentence.
            
               First,1. Vntruth. it is vntrue, that hee is the seruant
of seruants, because he writeth him
selfe in the same Sentence, Prince ouer
al nations and kingdomes. Againe, it is
vntrue,2. Vntruth. that he is Prince ouer al nations
and kingdomes, because he writeth himselfe,
seruus seruorum, a seruant vnto seruants.
               
That also which foloweth is false.
Regnans in excelsis vni soli Petro Sanctam
Ecclesiam Catholicam & Apostolicam commist
gubernandam.
               3. Vntruth. 
               He that ruleth in the
Heauens hathe giuen to Peter alone the
gouernement of the holy, Catholike, and
Apostolike Churche. For, where didde
Christe make this commission to Peter
onely? where be the words? in what
Scripture? in what Gospell or Epistle?
where did Christ euer say to Peter, I cō
               mit
the gouernement of the Church to
thée alone? if Pope Pius tale bée true,
why doth he not proue it? if it be false,
how dare he write it? it is not méete the
Vicar of Christ should falsifie the words
of Christe. Christe spake to al the Apostles
and not to Peter alone,Matt. 20. 
               Goe to the
loste sheepe of the house of Israel. Christ
               
saide to al the Apostles, and not to Peter
alone,Mat. 28. 
               Goe and teache al nations, baptising
them in the name of the of the father,
and of the sonne, and of the holy Ghost.
Dauid the Prophet spake not of Peter alone,
but of al the Apostles,Psal. 19. 
               Their sound
is gone into the endes of the worlde.
Wherefore doth he then enclose that to
Peter alone, whiche is common vnto
al the Apostles? He saith, Christe hathe
giuen charge ouer his Church to Peter alone.
But Ciprian saith,Cipr. de simplicitate praelatorum. 
               Parem tribuit Apostolis
omnibus auctoritatem, hoc vtique erant
caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari
consortio praediti & honoris & potestatis. The
Lord gaue vnto his Apostles like power,
the reste of the Apostles were euen the
same that Peter was, endewed with like
felowship, both of honour and of power.
               
And Hierome saith,Lib. 1. aduersus Iouinianum. 
               Ex aequo super omnes
Apostolos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidatur. The
strength of the Church is foūded equally
vpon al the Apostles.
               
            
            He addeth further, Petri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   successori
Romano pontifici, And to the Bishoppe of
Rome Peters Successour.
                This is another

vntruth,4. Vntruth. and the cause of al this stir:
this is it, wherefore Peter is set so farre
before his fellowes. The Pope maketh
Peter a rocke, the other Apostles small
péeplestones to be builte vpon him: Peter
a Shéepheard, ye other Apostles shéep:
Peter a Schoolemaister, the other Apostles
his schollers: Peter a Giant, the other
Apostles little Babes. And al thys
he doth to enfeoff the Pope with that
fulnesse of power whervnto he entitleth
Peter. To proofe whereof M. Harding
sayth, Nowe wee are not bounde to obey
Peter and Paule, but him that sitteth
in their Chaire. This is their Doctrine,
thus they teache: so boldly dare
they sette out their blasphemies against
God.
            
               The whole Churche, (saieth Pope
Pius) is committed to the Pope alone,
by the commaundement and worde of
God. What Apostle or Euangelist euer
wrote so? where didde Christe at anye
time speake of the Pope, or of Peters successour,
or of the Byshoppe of Rome?
What auntient Counsell, what olde

Doctor, what Father, Augustine, Ambrose,
Hierome. Chrysostome, Basil, euer
saide, that the whole Church was committed
to the Pope alone? It is not fitte
the Pope should draw his owne Charter.
If no Euangelist, nor Apostle: no
auntient Doctor, nor olde Councel, wil
come in and beare him witnes, it is not
likely he hath giuen true euidence. Yet
he saith moreouer: In plenitudine potestatis
tradidit:
               5. Vntruth. 
               Christe hath giuen this commission
in fulnesse of power. This is a
fifth vntruth.
            It is wonderfull to sée howe muche
they make of this fulnesse of power. Abbot
Panormitane telleth vs,Extra. de constit. cap. 1. 
               Plenitudo
potestatis omnem superat legem positiuam, &
sufficit quod in Papa sit pro ratione voluntas:
The fulnesse of power passeth all positiue
lawe: and it is sufficient in the Pope,
that will stande in steade of reason. Durande
               
doth tell vs,Lib. 2. de minist. & ordinib. ecct. 
               al Bishoppes are deriued
from the Pope, as members from
the head, and all they receiue of hys
fulnesse: there was a Councell holden

at Laterane in Rome vnder Leo the tenth,
where one Stephanus Patracensis gaue
foorth these words: In the Pope is al maner
of power aboue all powers, as well in
Heauen as in earth. They tell vs, that
whatsoeuer he doe, no man maye presume
to saye,De concess. 
                     •
                  raeb. in gloss. 
               Domine cur it a facis? Sir,
why doe you so?
                To make an ende of
their tales and vaine ambitious claime,
an other of hys flatterers beareth the
world in hand,Hostiensis. 
               Potest Papa quasi omnia facere
quae Deus potest. The Pope in a manner
may do al things that God may do.
               
Nay,Zabarella. not so onely saith an other, Papa facit
quicquid libet, etiam illicita, & est plusquam
Deus: The Pope dothe whatsoeuer
he listeth, yea, althoughe it be vnlawful,
and is more than God.
                They saye, Hee
maketh right wrong, and wrong to bee
righte at his pleasure. Hee maye commaunde
Aungels, Archaungels, Cherubin
and Seraphin. This is the fulnesse
of power whereof they dreame. Who
would thus presume but that mā of Sin
and childe of Perdition? let them shew,
where euer Peter had like fulnesse of power.

If he neuer hadde it, with what
face can they require it? Ciprian tolde
vs, Christe gaue like auctoritie to al the
Apostles. The auctoritie of Peter was
suche as the auctoritie of Iohn and of
Iames, and no otherwise. Al the Apostles
were the light of the world, al were
Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the
secretes of God, they al had the same auctoritie
and fulnesse which Peter had.
            
               Extra quam (Ecclesiam Roman) nulla est
salus. Without whiche (the Churche of
Rome) there is no saluation.
                That is,
who liue not vnder the obedience of the
Churche of Rome, can not be saued. No
man can be saued without hir Buls and
Pardons. The Churche of Rome
                is the
Arke of Noah, whosoeuer is without it,
is drowned.Extra de maiorit. & obedien. vnam. S. 
               Subesse Romano Pontifici (saith
Pope Boniface) omni humanae creaturae
declaramus, dicimus, definimus, & pronuntiamus
omnino esse de necessitate salutis. Wee
declare, saye, determine, and pronounce,
that it is of the necesitie of saluation, for
euerie mortall creature to be subiecte to
the Bishoppe of Rome. If the case were

so harde as it is made by hys wordes,
then it woulde goe amisse with al those
Nations and Kingdomes, and people
whyche beléeue in Christe in Aethiopia,
India, Arabia, Africa, Asia, Graecia,
Moscouia, of whiche some are greater
than all Christendome. They are
not subiecte to the Pope, they yéelde no
obedience to the Church of Rome. Are
they al drowned, because they bée not
within that Arke? are they al damned
because they know not their good maner
to the Bishop of Rome? the kingdomes
of England, Scotlande, Denmarke, and Sweden:
the Dukes of Saxonie, Brunswicke,
& Wittenberge: the Palsegraue of Rheine,
the Lantgraue of Hessia, the Earles and
Noble men throughe the whole Countrey
of Germanie, the infinite number of
their people and subiectes: many hundred
thousandes in Spaine, Italie, Fraunce,
Hungarie, and in the kingdome of Pole,
are wythout that Churche, and liue not
vnder the obedience thereof: are they
all therefore damned: God forbidde:
the mercie of the Lorde is aboue al hys

workes, in euerie place, who so euer
calleth on the name of the Lorde shal bée
saued, who soeuer trusteth in the Lorde,
shal not be confounded. You may wel
recken this for the sixth vntrueth:6. Vntruth. all
whyche sixe are made in the compasse of
sixe lines.
            
               Nos nullum laborem intermittimus,
               7. Vntruth. 
               Wee
take paynes, we spare no trauell, we forsake
no labour. Alas good man, I hadde
thought he would haue sayde,2. Cor. 11. 
               I was often
in perilles of waters, in perilles among
the Gentiles, in perilles in the Sea, in
wearinesse and painfulnesse, in watching
often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often,
in colde & in nakednesse. I hadde
thought he woulde haue saide:Rom. 15. 
               from lerusalem,
and rounde aboute to Illyricum, I
haue caused to abounde the Gospell of
Christe.
               2. Tim 4. 
               I haue preached in season
and out of season. I haue done the work
of an Euangelist. I haue fought a good
fight,
               1. Cor. 9. 
               & haue finished my course. I made
my selfe seruaunte to all menne, that I
mighte winne the more. I am made al
things to all menne, that I mighte saue

some: and this doe I for the Gospelles
sake. He kéepeth him selfe safe ynoughe
from these paines and trauelles. Yet we
must beléeue him, that he spareth no labour.
He commeth not into the Pulpit,
he preacheth not the Gospel, he spareth
that labor. He is a Shepheard, but fedeth
not the Shéep, & féedeth not the Lambs:
he is a Stewarde, yet disposeth not the
mysteries of God: this labour also hée
spareth. As for some other his trauailes,
we deny them not. He sēdeth his Inquisitours,
Espies, Agnos Dei, and Buls. He
spreadeth rumors, styrreth sedition, raiseth
subiects againste their Princes, and
forceth Princes to plague their subiects.
He hath conference with Traytours in
Englande, wyth Traytours in Irelande,
with Traitours in Germany, with Traitours
in Heluetia, with Traitours in
Denmarke, wyth Traitours in Polelande.
He hath bene cause of all that spoile and
waste in the noble kingdome of Fraunce.
He hath loosed and weakened the state of
al Christendome: it was neuer so weak
as it is at this day. And can we thinke

al this coulde bée brought to passe without
paine and trauel: It may appeare
he spareth no labour. And this doeth he
(For the Gospels sake? and That hee
may saue some?) No, but as did Caiaphas,
to arraigne Christe, to crucifie the
Lorde of glorie, to cutte al those oute of
the land of the liuing, that their name
maye be no more in memorie, whose
mouthes the Lorde hath opened to publishe
the secret of the Gospel, by whom
the word of trueth is come vnto al the
worlde, and is fruiteful. Hée is childe to
them that murdered the Prophets, and
taketh al trauel and paines to fulfil the
measure of his Fathers.
            
               Sed impiorum numerus tantum potentiae
inualuit, vt nullus iam in orbe locus relictus
sit, quem illi pessimis doctrinis corrumpere non
tentarint: But, the number of the wicked
hathe encreased so muche, that there is
now no place in the worlde, which they
haue not sought to infect with corrupte
doctrine.
                Nowe at length it breaketh
from thē. Here is the matter of al their
griefe. When the Scribes and Pharisées

perceiued the passage and glorie of the
Gospell of Christ, and could not stay it,
they said among themselues,Iohn. 12. 
               Perceiue ye
how yee preuaile nothing? Beholde, the
worlde goeth after hym. And againe,
What shal wee doe?
               Iohn. 11. 
               if we lette him thus
alone, all men will beleeue in him. Our
credite is gone,Acts. 4. his doctrine is receiued,
and ours is forsaken. The Priests and
Saduces tooke it gréeuouslye that Peter
and Iohn taught the people, and when
they saw the boldnesse of them, they conferred
among themselues, saying, What
shal wee doe to these men? let vs threaten
and charge them that they speake
henceforth to no man in this name. So
they called them, and commaunded
them, that in no case they should speake
or teache in the name of Iesus. So did
Annas the chiefe Priest, and Caiphas,
and Iohn, and Alexander, and as manye
as were of the kindred of the high
Priestes, gather themselues togither, to
resiste the trueth then: so didde the Pharisées
then deuise, that the light of the
glorious Gospel of Iesus Christe might

not shine, and bée knowen to the world.
And so doeth Pope Pius nowe for the
like cause, rage, and storme, and speake
hys pleasure of vs. They are wicked
(sayeth hée) theyr number daylye encreaseth,
their doctrine spreadeth farre
and wide: it dothe muche harme, it
hathe preuailed in moste places: they
are a wicked rable, their doctrine is
corrupte, it hathe infected the worlde.
Belike his Holinesse is muche disquieted,
else hée woulde write more modestlye,
and make more aduised reports
of suche wyth whome hée is not acquainted.
A manne woulde thinke he
hathe to doe wyth Turkes and Infidelles:
wyth such who neither beléeue
in God, nor kéep his laws, nor dread his
Iudgementes. That he hathe made out
Commission againste Outlawries, who
rob, and spoile, and murder, and destroy,
without mercie: againste suche, who
haue no regarde of honestie, but being
paste shame, maintaine Stewes, and
Harlottes, euen as his Holinesse liketh

well, and suffereth to be done at Rome.
But where are they, and who be they,
whom he calleth wicked? what say they?
what do they wickedly? it is much, to bée
accused and condemned of wickednesse.
This he speaketh and writeth of you &
your children, whose eyes the Lord hath
opened to espie his errours. You are they
whome he accounteth wicked, euen you
and al such who (like as you doe) know
that Iesus Christe is the power of God,
               1. Cor. 1.
               and the wisedome of God. Which confesse
that he is the Lambe of God,
               Iohn. 1. 
               which
taketh awaye the sinnes of the worlde.
Which say with the Apostles,Act. 4. 
               Among
men there is giuen none other name vnder
Heauen whereby we must bee saued.
               Galat. 6.
And with Paule, God forbid that I shold
reioice, but in the Crosse of our Lord Iesus
Christe.
            
            We reade the Scriptures of God: we
sende the people to the fountaines, there
we require thē to examine our doctrine:
we call vpon the name of the Lorde who
liueth for euer: we teache the people to
make their prayers in a language they

vnderstande: we administer the Sacraments
according to Christs institution:
we say, that Christe is the onely Sacrifice
for the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and,
that God hathe appointed him ouer all
things to be the head of the Churche: we
doe not make our prayers to dead Creatures:
we séeke no helpe at their handes
whiche neyther heare vs, nor can helpe
vs. We moue the people to repentance:
we rebuke sinne: we séeke reformation
of life: we make it manifeste, that the
Pope hath shamefully abused the whole
world: that the man of sinne, euen the
son of perdition shall be destroyed with
the Sworde of the Spirite: that euerys
Plant which our heauenly Father hath
not planted, shall be rooted out, and that
the worde of the Lord shall continue for
euer. This is our profession, this is
that doctrine which we receiue frō God,
and learne by the worde of trueth, whiche
is able to make vs wise vnto saluation
thorough the Faith whiche is in
Christe Iesus. This doctrine the Pope
calleth wicked. This doctrine (he saith)

hath done muche hurte.Baruch. 4. Blessed be God:
For the things that are acceptable to god
are declared to vs.
               1. Cor. 2. 
               The things which eye
hath not seene, neyther eare hath heard,
neyther came into mans hearte, whiche
God hath prepared for them that loue
him, God hathe reuealed them vnto vs
by his Spirite.
               1. Cor. 1. 
               It hathe pleased God by
the foolishnesse of preaching to saue thē
that beleeue. The number of them whiche
are cōuerted vnto God by this word,
encreaseth, and will more and more encrease
in all places. It is not the counsell
or worke of men, for then it woulde
come to noughte. But it is of God: the
Pope cannot destroye it.Luc. 12. Christe came
to putte fyre on the Earth, it shall not
be quenched. If wée holde our peace,
or if we all (whome the Pope thus reuileth)
bée taken oute of the Worlde,
the stones shall crye oute, and gyue
witnesse to thys Doctrine. For GOD
is able of stones to raise vppe children
vnto Abraham.
               Mat. 3. He is GOD alone, he
wyll make his name to bée knowen, he
will not Giue hys glorie to an other.
               
This maketh vp eighte vntruths,8. Vntruth. plain,
and euident to be seene. Unto whyche
number hée layeth fiue more, al togither
in one line, so that he maketh almost a
seuerall falshoode for euery seueral word.
            
               Missae sacrificium, preces, ieiunia, ciborum
delectum, caelibatum aboleuit. Shee
(Queene Elizabeth) hathe cleane put
awaye the Sacrifice of the Masse, Prayers,
Fastings, choice or difference of
Meates, and single Life.
                I beséeche
you consider this spéeche, and iudge vprightly.
You are able to discerne truth
from falshoode. You haue knowledge
of these thyngs, be not deceyued. Haue
we no sacrifice? no Prayers? no Fastings?
no difference in meates? are none vnmaried?
be al these abolished? I aske you
againe, bée they all abolished? when was
this done? at whose sute? by what law, or
Statute, or Proclamation, or Parliamente?
in déede the Masse is abolished
thorough the gratious working of God.
It was a worke of his great merey to do
it away. For it was a dumbe, vncomforble,
& vnprofitable thing. They did tel vs

that in their Masse they were able to
make Christe the sonne of God, and to
offer him vnto God his Father for oure
sinnes. Oh blasphemous spéech, and most
iniurious to the glorious worke of our
redemption. Shal a vile wretch, a lump
of earth, a sinful man take vpon him the
power of God in Creation, and presume
to make his Creator? shall he whiche is
conceiued in sinne, in whom there dwelleth
no good, who is altogither vnprofitable,
which neuer can recompence hys
owne debte of tenne thousand Talents:
who is a straunger to the couenaunte of
promise, and hath no entrance vnto the
father, but through Iesus Christ, make
intercession to the Father, that for hys
sake, he will looke vpon, and receiue his
sonne, euen because he doeth offer him
for a Sacrifice? what is blasphemie, if
this be not? suche kinde of Sacrifice wée
haue not.
            
               Christ himself is our high Priest, whiche
offereth vs vp vnto God, which maketh
vs a pure, a liuely, and a well pleasing
Sacrifice: by whome also we haue

accesse thoroughe Faith vnto this grace
wherein we stand, and reioice vnder the
hope of the glorie of GOD: by whom
we are sanctified, euen by the offering of
the bodye of Iesus Christe once made:
who tooke away our sinnes, and fastened
them vpon the Crosse. It is therefore the
bloud of Iesus Christe, whyche clenseth
vs from all sinne. This is our Sacrifice,
this is our propitiation, this is the propitiation
& Sacrifice for the whole world.
How then saieth Pope Pius we haue no
Sacrifice?
               9. Vntruth. It is the ninth vntruth.
            Againe,10. Vntruth. he saieth wée haue no Prayers.
He thinketh we méete togither like wild
men, or rather like brute beastes. You
knowe hée speaketh vntruely. Beholde
the Suffrages, the Psalms, the Lessons
taken out of the olde and newe Testament.
Consider the fourme and order of
our Churches. We make humble confession
of our sinnes, we heare especiall
comfortable places of Scripture, whiche
shewe vs howe merciful God is, to them
that truely and earnestly repent. Wée
giue thankes to God for his mercies and

blessings whiche he poureth vppon vs.
We pray him to continue his goodnesse
towards vs, and to lead vs into al truth.
We pray for the Queenes Maiestie, for al
that are in aucthoritie, for al the people,
for those whice suffer affliction, for al
that either obstinately, or ignorantly refuse
the comfort of the Gospell. To bée
shorte, with one minde, and with one
mouth, we praise God, euen the father
of our Lorde Iesus Christe, and al the
people saye Amen. Why should Pope
Pius reporte vntruthes? what meaneth
he to saye we haue no Prayers? Is it because
we haue not his Latine Prayers?
The people do not vnderstāde them, they
are like the chirping of Birdes, and the
tinckling of Cimballes: thankes bée to
God for the Prayers which we haue, and
grant that we may holde them vnto the
ende.
            Againe,Vntruth. 
               Al Fasting is abolished. So
the Scribes and Phariseis saide vnto
Christe,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 15. 
               Why doe thy Disciples, breake
the traditions of the Elders?
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 5. 
               They eate
and drinke,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 58. they do not fast. Would God

we wereall more carefull than we are,
of kéeping the true faste, the fasting whiche
the Lorde hathe chosen (saieth the
Prophet) is it that a man shoulde afflicte
his soule for a daye, and to bowe downe
his heade as a bul rushe, and to lye down
in sackecloth and ashes? Wilte thou cal
this Fasting, or an acceptable daye to the
Lorde? Is not this the Fasting that I
haue chosen, to loose the bandes of wickednesse,
to take off the heauy burdens,
to let the oppressed go frée, that ye break
euery yoke? Is it not to deale thy bread
to the hungrie, and that thou bring the
pore that wandreth vnto thine house?
When thou séest the naked that thou couer
him, & hide not thy selfe from thine
owne fleshe?
            In like sorte the Apostle Paule hauing
occasion to speake of the true Fast,
               1. Tim. 4. saith:
Bodily exercise profiteth litle: but godlynesse
is profitable to al things. Whereby
we learne, not to estéeme the works
of the body, such as are, watchings, abstaining
from meates, often rehearsall of
Prayers, and long Prayers, going
barefoote, and lying on the ground,
               
and such like (which the bodie suffereth)
as an acceptable Faste: but we require
the crucifying of the flesh, with the affections
and the lustes, that in the dayes of
our Faste the Lorde be honored, in that
no manne doe hys owne wayes, nor
séeke hys owne will, nor speake a vaine
worde.
            
               And herein we folow the iudgement
of the holy Fathers.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 47. in 13. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Chrysostome saith,
Ib iest ieiunium, si pecuniam despicis, si ardeas
charitate, si famelicos pascas, si gloriam
contemnas.
                There thou doest faste, if thou
despise mony, if thou be feruent in loue,
if thou feede the hungrie, and if thou
forsake glorie.
                  
                     •
                  euit. cap. 16. 10. 
               And Origen: Wilte thou
that I yet shew what maner of Fast thou
must keepe? fast from al sinne, eate none
of the meate of malice, eate none of the
delicates of pleasure, stirre not vppe lust
with the wine of riotousnesse, fast from
doing euill, abstaine from euill wordes,
kepe thy selfe from euil thoughts, touch
not the stollē bread of corrupt doctrine,
desire not the deceiptfull meates of Philosophie,
which will leade thee from the

truth. Such a faste pleaseth God. But to
abstaine from meates which God hathe
created to be receiued with giuing thankes
of them which beleue and know his
trueth: and this to do after the example
of them whiche haue crucified Christe,
cannot be acceptable to God. And again
saith Chrysostome.Hom. 6. in 1. Gen. What profite commeth
of thy fasting, if thou eate nothing
all the day long, and yet playest, and triflest,
yea ofte times takest false Oathes,
and blasphemest, and so doest spend the
day? I pray you let vs not neglecte our
owne saluation: but let our talke rather
be of spirituall things, and let some one
take the Booke of God in his hande, and
call his neighbours togither, and with
godly speeches water the minde both of
himselfe, and the congregation: that so
wee maye escape the snares of the diuel,
and reape much fruit by our fasting, and
be partakers of the mercy of God. Thus
farre Chrysostome.
            Nowe, what if some fewe be wanton,
and neglect the wholsome vse of Fasting?
What if godly Preachers exhorte the

people to putte away the abuse, and doe
teache them out of the word of God, and
the auntient writings of holy Fathers,
the true order and vse of Fasting? should
Pope Pius therefore vntruely charge hir
Maiestie, that she hath abolished Fasting
dayes? You knowe the Lawes stand in
force, whiche are made for that purpose:
and moreouer that common. Prayers,
and an order for publique Faste to bée vsed
in time of contagious sicknesse, and
other troubles and vnquietnesse, haue
bene set foorthe by the Queenes Maiesties
speciall commaundement.Anno 5. Elizab. 
                     •
                  0. Augusti. You knowe
the maner and fourme of that generall
Faste was first, that it shoulde be kepte in
euery wéeke vpon the Wednesday: secondly,
by all persons betwéene sixetéene
yeares of age, and thréescore, (sicke folks
and laborers &c. excepted) that it appointed
but one onely competent and moderate
meale, that it leaueth it indifferent
in the same meale to eate fleshe or fishe,
so that the quantitie be small, and fit for
sober and spare diet, wythout varietie of
meate, spices, confections, or wines, but

onely suche as maye serue for necessitie,
comelinesse, and health: and that men
of wealth and habilitie, who by this order
did abate the costlinesse of their fare,
should encrease their liberalitie towards
the pore, with that wich they spared: thē,
that the same day ought to be bestowed
in Prayers, studie, reading or hearing of
the Scriptures, or good exhortations, and
other godly exercises: but no parte therof
to be spent in plays, pastimes, or idlenesse,
much lesse in lewd, wicked, or wā
               ton
behauiour. This Faste was commaunded,
and sette foorth in print, thys
Fast we obserued, and taught the people,
that they should aunsweare before God,
if in suche godlye exercises, they eyther
shoulde contemne publike order, or dissemble
with God, pretending abstinēce,
and doing nothing lesse. Let Pope Pius
shewe what Lawe of this Realme hathe
forbidden, or what doctrine of ours hath
condemned Fasting. We commende
it, and shewe the necessarie vse thereof.
            Again, She hath abolished all choice of

meates. I pray you where did God euer
commaunde the choice of meates? Paule
saieth:Colos. 2. 
               Lette no man condemne you in
meate and drinke: and to the Corinth:
Meat maketh vs not acceptable to God.
               1. Cor. 8. Mat. 15.
And Christ saith: That which goeth into
the mouth defileth not a man. What if
some eate flesh, whose weake stomackes
can not be nourished wyth fishe? Doe
they not kill and eate fleshe in the Citie
of Rome? Doth not Pope Pius for mony
sell licence to eate what a man listeth?
The thing is not made holy, because hée
selleth it, nor vnholy bicause it commeth
fréely. This might be sufficient for aunswere.
But yet, because he maketh him
selfe so priuie to our doings, and doeth so
precisely charge vs with his vayne accusations,
lette him consider, that we to
whome he maketh this reporte, and sendeth
ouer this tale, are Englishemen,
acquainted (better than he séemeth to be)
with the lawes of our countrey. What
one fishe daye is chaunged thorough the
whole yeare? What Lenten, Ember,
Saturday, Friday, or other vsuall Fasting
               
day? Our Law sayth,Elizab. Anno quinto. cap. 5. 
               It shall not
be lawful to any person or persons within
this Realme to eate any fleshe vpon any
dayes nowe vsually obserued as Fish
dayes. Nay, besides those dayes whiche
our forefathers kept, we haue appointed
that Wednesday in euery wéek through
out the yeare, be kept fishe daye, and that
no maner of person shall eate anye fleshe
on the same day. Wherby we haue made
nigh fiftie fish dayes more, than haue bin
obserued heretofore by the lawes and customes
of this realme. We cannot heare
of the like encrease of fasting dayes procured
by the Pope, and kept in the Coū
               treys
of Spaine, Fraunce, Italy, or in hys
owne Citie at Rome. It maye bée hée is
angrye, wyth the Prouisoe in the sayde
Statute,Ibidem. 
               Because no manner of person
shall misse-iudge of the intente of thys
Statute, limiting orders to eate fish, and
forbeare the eating of fleshe, but that the
same is purposely intended and meant
politiquely, and not for any superstition
to be maintained in the choice of meates,
bee it enacted, that whosoeuer shall by

preaching, teaching, writing, or open
speache, notifie that any eating of Fishe,
or forbearing of fleshe, mentioned in
this statute is of any necessitie for the sauing
of the soule of man, or that it is the
seruice of Cod, otherwise than as other
politique laws are and be, that then such
person shall be punished as Spreaders of
false news are or ought to be. Why doth
he laye it againste hir Maiestie, that she
hath abolished al difference of meates?
               Aug. ad Casulan.
we professe as doth S. Augustine, In nostro
i
                        ••
                     unio nihil melius est, quam vt non manducans
manducantem ne iudicet. In our Fasting,
there is nothing worthy better accompt
than this, that hee whiche eateth
not, doth not condemne another whiche
eateth. We warne the people in times
of abstinence to liue in the obedience of
such order, as the Lawe and Magistrates
haue appointed, and that, whiles they
forsake a common and necessarie diet of
flesh, they féede not their fantasie wyth
such costly sortes of fish, or suche daintie
banqueting and iunquets, whereby they
should giue force to the lustes of the flesh

in the day of their Fasting.
            
            It followeth:13. Vntruth. 
               Shee hath abolished single
life in Priests and Ministers. Is it not
lawfull for a Minister to be single? you
are witnesses to the contrarie, you know
some vnmarried, and againe you knowe
some that haue wiues, and are married.
They which marry do wel: God grant
they do no worsse which doe not marry.
The Apostle saith:Heb. 13. 
               Marriage is honourable
among all, and the bed vndefiled:
but Whoremōgers and Adulterers God
wil iudge. All haue not the gift of Chastitie,
saue they to whom it is giuen: for
euerie man hath his proper gifte,
               11. Cor. 7. 
               one after
this manner, and an other after that.
The holie Patriarks, the Prophets, and
the Apostles of Christe, Peter, Paule,
Iames, Philip, and others, had Wines:
they liued in Marriage. Eusebius reporteth
out of Clemens Alexandrinus,
               Lib. 3. ca. 30. that
Peter when he sawe his wife lead away
to execution, called hir by hir proper
name, and sayde O wife, remember the
Lord. Hierome saith,Hieron. epist. ad Oceanum. if he shoulde name
seuerally all the married Bishops, they

woulde be more in number than all the
multitude of the Councell of Ariminum.
And in another place:Idem lib. 1. aduersus Iouinian. 
               quasinon hodie quoque
plurimi Sacerdotes habeant Matrimonia:
As though at this day many Priests
hadde not their wiues.
                We heare of the
Bishoppes in Aethiopia, that they are at
this day married. It is not long sithence
Priests were marryed here in Englande,
and in Fraunce and in Germanie. Will
these men be more holye than so manye
Bishoppes, and Sainctes, and Martirs,
and Patriarkes, and Prophets, and Apostles,
whyche by theyr example haue
approued, and commended vnto vs thys
diuine ordinaunce?
            Let euery man consider the strength
of his owne dessell, for whiche he shall
render account before God in that Consistorie,
where we shall be iudged, not by
the lawes of Rome, but by the lawes of
God, our owne conscience accusing or excusing
vs. Paule sayth, If they can not
abstaine,1. Cor. 7. let them marry: it is better to
marry than to burne. The name of Uirginitie
is commendable, but euery thing

is not as it sheweth. I protest before the
liuing GOD which is the Iudge of the
quicke and the dead, that no filthinesse
vnder the Sunne is comparable to forced
Uirginitie. I condemne not, but rather
highly commende single life. No
doubt there are many true Uirgins, holy
in body, and holy in spirite: but yet al
are not Uirgins which liue vnmarried,
as Hierome séemeth to note:Lib. 1. aduers. Iouinian. 
               Eliguntur
mariti in sacerdotium, non nego, &c. Such as
are married are chosen into the Priestehode,
I deny not. For Virgins are not to
bee so muche accompted of, as Priestes.
               
And againe:Ibidem: 
               But why (say you) in giuing
of priestly orders, is one, whiche is a Virgin,
oftentimes refused, and another whiche
is married admitted? It may bee, because
his doings are not agreeable to his
Virginitie, or bicause he is thoght to be a
Virgin, yet is not: or bicause his virginity
is infamous. So much saith Hierome, for
reasō why married mē were preferred to
orders of the Church before others whiche
carried the shewe of Virginitie. Now
to conclude this, we say: our lawes (after

the counsell of the Apostle, & finding
so many examples in al ages of the godly
which were married, and the notable
inconueniences which grewe by forced
chastitie,) haue giuen libertie, that those
who haue not the gifte of Chastitie, to auoide
Fornication, may marry. But no
law made among vs, hath forbiddē 
               Virginitie,
or Single life. This is the thyrtéenth
vntruth. And so haue you in these
fewe words, the number whiche I spake
of: euen fiue vntruths in litle more than
fiue words.
            First, that we haue no Sacrifice. This
is not true. For we haue the Sacrifice of
the death and bloud of Christ, a Sacrifice
which lasteth for euer.
            Againe, that we haue no Prayers This
is vntrue. For we call vppon the name
of the Lorde. We glorifie God euen the
Father of our Lore Iesus Christe. God
grant all the Churches in Christendome
may do the like.
            Againe, that we haue no Fasting. This
is vntrue. Our doctrine requireth fasting
our lawes command it, we commend it.
            
               Againe, They make no difference of
Meates. This is vntrue. For we haue
not putte downe one Fish day: and we
haue appointed 50. more than our forefathers
kept.
            Againe, Single life is abolished. This
is vntrue: for, a Minister may liue single
if he wil, there is no law to the cōtrary.
God graunt our liues may be single and
simple, and pleasing him: else we are
like painted graues, faire and holy without,
but within ful of stincking carren.
            Nowe let vs procéede. You haue heard
13. vntruths: and maye we thinke, that
he which hath vttered so much falshode,
will stay there?
            
               Eadem occupato regno supremi Ecclesiae
capitis locum in omni Anglia,
               14. Vntruth. 
               eius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   praecipuam
authoritatem atque iurisdictionem monstrosè
sibi vsurpans, regnum ipsum rursum in
miserū exitiū reuocauit: She (the Quenes
Maiestie) inuaded the kingdome, and
by vsurping monstrously the place of
the supreame heade of the Churche in
all Englande, and the chiefe aucthoritie
and iurisdiction of the same, hathe

againe broughte the saide Realme into
miserable destruction.
            You must kéepe reconing, for here to
the 13. vntruths, he giueth thrée others,
more wicked and slaunderous than the
rest. Hathe Queene Elizabeth inuaded
the Realme? O vaine man. Is it beséeming
for Christs Uicar to speake so vntruely?
What sendeth he such tales vnto
vs, who know the trueth, and can reproue
him? Did hir Maiestie inuade this
realme? Came she by force and violence
to hir Crowne? No childe so simple, but
he may controll him herein. Was not
Quene Marie hir Sister? Was not King
Edwarde hir Brother? Was not King
Henrie hir naturall Father? and King
Henrie the 7. hir Grandfather? Is shée
not the right inheritour of both the houses

                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  orke and Lancaster? Hath shée not
both the Roses, that is, bothe the Titles
to the kingdome enclosed in one? Did
not the whole body of the Counsell take
their Oath to hir xxxv. yeres agoe? Was
not the Crown due to hir by inheritance
and by succession, and by the laws of this

Realme? Did not hir Father warrante
it to hir by Wil, as to his daughter? Did
not Queene Marie by expresse wordes
leaue it to hir, as to hir Sister? Did not
the whole Noblitie of the Realme confirme
it? Did not Queene Maries Byshops
knéele downe before hir, and acknowledge
hir to be their naturall and
lawfull Queene? Did not you? Did not
all the Commons of this Realme, willingly
of your selues, make Bonfiers,
ring your Belles, and clap your handes
for ioy? Did not the children and little
Babes crie out in your stréetes God saue
Queeene Elizabeth?
            
            Howe then dareth the Pope a wilfull
Frier, a wilfull and vnlearned Frier,
how dareth he say, that Queene Elizabeth
is no lawfull Queene, but didde inuade
this Realme with force and violence?
O good and gratious Ladie, what
Host had she? what Capitaine? what
Souldiours? what weapon was worne?
what Sworde drawne? what Speare
bente? what Banner displayed? what
Trumpet sounded? Shée entred to hir

right peaceably, & hath raigned in greate
peace, saue that Pope Pius hath practised
hir trouble by certaine rebels and traitors.
But God doth mercifully peserue
hir, to the confusion of hir enimies, to
the comforte of hir subiectes, and the adnauncement
of his glorie. Yong men
and Maydens, Olde men and children,
may sée and saye, Pope Pius is a forger,
a reporter of vntruth, hathe no regarde
what he saith or doth: that, he is paste al
shame, and hath no seare of God.
            Againe,
                  
                     ••
                  Vntruth. 
               Supremi capitis locum vsurpans:
Taking vpō hir the place of the supreme
head
                This is vntrue. Here laye a chase.
If the Pope goe forwarde, he wil winne
the game. Where is shée euer called the
supreme head? Peruse the actes of Parliament,
the Recordes, the Rolles, and
the Writs of Chauncerie or Exchequer,
which passe in hir Graces name: where
is she euer called the supreame heade of
the Church? No, no, brethren, she refuseth
it, she woulde not haue it, nor bée so
called. Why then doth Christes Uicar
blaze and spreade abroade so grosse vntruth?

why shoulde he say Queene Eliz.
maketh hir selfe the head of the Church?
            Nay, yet more,16. Vntruth. 
               Monstrose praecipuam eius
auctoritatem at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iurisdictionē vsurpans:
Taking vpon hir monstrously the chiefe
authoritie and iurisdiction of the same:
               
Here I might well say O monstrum hominis,
O monster in the likenesse of man.
               
He imagineth, that hir Maiestie preacheth
in the Pulpittes, that she administreth
the Sacraments, that she sitteth in
the Consistories and heareth all spirituall
causes. Whiche if she doe, she dothe
more than the Pope doth. It were monstrous
to sée the Pope in a Pulpit. And
it is monstrous to sée Antichriste sitte in
the Temple of God, to sée a Bishoppe
girded with both swords, to sée a Priest
take vppon him the rule of Heauen and
Earth, the seruant of seruants aduanced
aboue all the Princes of the worlde, and
to sette his foote vppon their neckes: a
wretched man to claime auctoritie ouer
the Angels of God, and a sinfull creature
to suffer himselfe to be called by y• name
of God. This is a mishapen wonder, & a

monster in nature. Let the Pope therefore
looke vpon him self, and know what
supreme authoritie and iurisdiction, and
ouer whome he taketh it vpon him monstrously.
            
               Queene Elizabeth doth not any thing
monstrously. She preacheth not, she ministreth
not ye Sacraments, she doth neither
excōmunicate, nor absolue frō excō
               munication:
shee sitteth not to giue sentence
in spirituall causes: she chalengeth
not the dispensation of the Keyes of the
kingdome of Heauen. She doth nothing
but which she may lawfully do, nothing
but wherevnto the Lord God hath giuen
hir especiall warrant. Hir Maiestie is supreame
Gouernour ouer hir Subiectes.
The Bishoppes within hir Realme are
subiects to hir. Shée gouerneth, they yéeld
obedience. When occasion is offered to
dispose of any thing, specially appertaining
to the seruice of God, or to iudge of
any controuersie arising in Spirituall
causes: She commendeth and giueth
to hir learned Diuines, the due consideration
thereof: All other pleas & suites

shée causeth to be ended at home, & suffereth
no appeales to flie to Rome. Which
is done for the ease, and quietnesse, and
wealth of hir good subiectes. For, wherein
grew more extremitie against plaine
dealing, simple, and honest pore menne?
Whereby were they oftener shifted off,
and put from the right of their suite, thā
by such appeales? when, after they had
bene haled thorough all the Courtes in
theyr owne Countrey, they were driuen
to followe the matter 1500. miles at the
Popes Courtes in Rome.
            
            To be short, Queene Elizabeth doth,
as did Moses, Iosua, Dauid, Salomon, Iosias,
Iehosaphat, as Constantine, Valentinian,
Gratian, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius,
and other godly Emperors haue
done. God hath giuē charge to hir of both
Tables. In the firste she hath charge of
Religion, in the other, of Ciuill causes.
By the Prophet Esay God promiseth to
his Church,Esay. 49. 
               Kings shall be thy noursing
Fathers, and Queenes thy Nursses. And
Dauid saith:Psalm. 2. 
               Be wise therfore ye Kings,
be learned ye Iudges of the earth, serue

the Lord in feare. Upon which place, the
learned father Augustine saith:Epist. 50. ad Bonifaciū Comitem. 
               Quomodo
ergo Reges seruiunt Domino in timore, nisi 
                     •
                  a
quae contra iussa Domini fiunt, religiosa seueritate
prohibendo atque plectendo? aliter enim
seruit quia homo est: aliter quia
rex est. Quia homo est, ei seruit viuendo
fideliter: quia verò etiam rex est, seruit ei
leges iusta praecipientes, & contraria prohibentes
conuenienti rigore sanciendo, sicut seruiuit
Ezechias, &c. Howe then doe Kings
serue the Lord in feare, but in that they
doe forbidde, and in a religious seueritie
punish suche things as are done againste
the Lordes commaundementes? for hee
serueth after one maner, as a man, and
after another, as a Prince: as a man he serueth
the Lord in liuing faithfully: but in
that he is also a King, he serueth hym by
making Lawes, which commaunde the
thinges that are right, and whiche with
conuenient rigour forbid the contrarie.
as Ezechias serued the Lord, when he destroyed
the Woodes, and Temples of
Idolles, and those highe places, whiche
were builte againste the commaundements

of God, as IOSIAS serued, doing
also the like: as the King of Niniute serued,
gathering togither al his Citie, to appease
the wrath of the Lord: as DARIVS
serued, giuing auctoritie to DANIEL to
breake the Idol, and casting his enimies
into the Lions: as NABVCHODONOSOR
serued, of whome we spake before,
who by a terrible Lawe forbad al within
his kingdome, to blaspheme God. In ho
                     •
                  
ergò (saith he) seruiunt domino Reges, quando
ea faciunt ad seruiendum illi, quae non possunt
facere nisi Reges. Herein therefore do
Kings serue the Lord, whē they do those
things to serue him, which none may do
but Kings.
                The Pope therefore writeth
vnaduisedly. We know not anye so mō
               strous
& vnlawful doing. It is hir office,
it is hir dutie. I trust God will giue hir
grace to discharge the same to his glorie.
            
               Regium concilium e
                     •
                   Anglica Nobilitate
conflatum diremit:
               17. Vntruth. 
               Shee hath remoued
the Noble men of Englande from the
Kings Councel. The Poets had a fonde
deuise of their great God IVPITER,
               
that he helde a golden Chain in his hād,
and tied to the ende of it both the Lande
and Sea, and coasts of the whole world,
and so might tosse and turne, and sette
them higher and lower at his pleasure.
Pope Pius bestirreth himselfe, as though
he were in Iupiters place, and mighte by
his Bulles and cursses set higher and lower,
place and displace, appoint who
shall, & againe who shall not be in Princes
Councels. Nothing may be done but
by his sufferance. Such a practise he hath
to make himselfe King of Kings, and
the God of this worlde. For, when hée
may rule the Councell, he maye rule the
King: and being able to rule the King, he
maye rule the people throughout the
worlde. Hée saieth Queene Elizabeths
Conncell is not to my liking. She hathe
put those from the Councel, which were
of the Nobilitie of Englande.
            
            Thus he goeth on, and increaseth hys
follie. He singeth by reportes, and speaketh
he wotteth not what. Hath hir Maiestie
remoued all the Nobilitie? Who
would thinke the Uicar of Christ wold be

so vaine? You which haue liued in countenaunce,
and haue béene at the Court,
and haue these many yeares knowne the
state of our Countrey, you knowe well
that this is false. The Nobilitie are all
in England, and in Courte, and in Councel,
as before. I doe not speake of suche
as became Traitours. You knowe what
vnnaturall attempts were lately made.
Their guiltie conscience did make some
to flie. I speake not of one in duraunce:
I dispute not his case. A Prince oughte
to be verye carefull and iealous, for hys
preseruation. It toucheth not himselfe
onely, but the welfare of his people. Of
these I speake nothing. Yet when thys
Bull was stamped at Rome, all were at
libertie. Marke the date, the fifth of the
Calends of March in the yeare paste:Anno Do. 1569. at
which time they were al at libertie and
of the Councell, or at leaste in good fauor.
Since which time, what hath bin wroughte
by this Bull, I praye you consider.
Remember what ensued the Sommer
following. The coales were kindled
here, but the bellowes whiche gaue the

wind lay at Rome, and ther sate he which
made the fire. At what time he wrote
this Bul, she had displaced none, neither
Lord, Baron, nor Earle: nor touched thē
in their liues, bodies, goodes, or landes.
Indéede Pope Paulus 4. cast Moronus into
prison, and there kept him al the time
of his papacie. Pius. 4. tooke Caraffa, a
chief Cardinal, he caste him into prison,
and in the midnight sent a slaughterman
to put him to death. Pope Vrbanus tooke
sixe Cardinals, and knit them in bags,
& threw thē into the sea. Hir milde, gratious,
& merciful nature, hath neuer béen
distained by any the like crueltie, neyther
haue any of hir Noble men béene so
by hir dishonored.
            Againe,
                  
                     ••
                  . Vntruth. 
               Hominibus obscuris compleuit:
Shee hath made hir Councell of poore,
darke, beggarly fellowes, and hath placed
them ouer the people.
                What hathe
Pope Pius to doe with the Councell of
Princes? Maye not a King choose a
Councellour, vnlesse he allow of hym?
Men take their owne eyes to choose ther
wiues, and Princes take their owne

heartes to choose their Councellours. As
wel he might say: No King shal haue any
Secretarie, any Iudge or Iustice, or
Sergeant, or Attorney, or Solicitour,
or man at Law: any Captain for wars,
any Garde to his person, any Phisition
to his body, any Sewer or Taster, but
by his appointment. Oh what a charge
this man taketh?
            He calleth hir honourable Councellours
darke, and obscure, and beggarly.
What if they had bene such? Maye not
Princes haue any other Councelloures
than Dukes and Earles? Cardinall
Woolsey was able to doe something in
this realm in the late time of King Henrie.
Of what noble house came he? Of
what noble house came B. Heth, Stephen
Gardner, Iohn Bourne, and M. Boxall?
Of what honorable Parentage, of what
noble bloud came they? They were of
the Councel: yet who was their Father
Grandfather, what Duke, Earle, Lord,
Barō, or Knight? I speak not this in dispite
of their persōs, let no mā so mistake
me: som of thē ar yet aliue, I pray for thē
               
for my selfe: God direct them to do those
things which may be for his glorie. Hée
is noble, whiche is the childe of God,
which is borne from aboue: he is honourable,
he is noble.
            But what are they who are nowe in
auctoritie, whome Pius calleth so poore
and beggarly? I will not name them. I
cannot flatter: it were vnséemly I shold.
You knowe them, and are thankefull to
God for them. There is none of them
which hath not bin at the least a Knight,
or worthy of that degrée, aboue these xx.
yeares: so wise, learned, vertuous,
and godly, so carefull of the Commune
weale as euer were bredde vppe in thys
Realme. They haue euer béene in credite,
in the countenance, and knowledge
of the worlde.
            As Pope Pius complaineth now of the
Councellors of England. so did the Wolf
sometimes make complaint to the shéepheard
against his Dogges. Thou haste
two vile ill fauored Curres, they iette
vp and downe, they barke, and howle,
and trouble thy flocke, which can not bée

quiet nor féede for them. Remoue them
away, tie them vppe, braine them, hang
them, what do they here? the Shéepehearde
aunsweareth: would you so? nay
I may not spare my dogges, they do me
good seruice. Spaniels and Greyhounds
are faire and daintie, yet they neuer do
me so much good: these watche when I
sléepe, they ease me muche paine, and
saue my flocke. If I should tie them vp,
thou wouldest be bold with me, and take
thy pleasure. I shall not néede to applye
this. The Queenes Maiestie is oure
Shéepehearde, we are left by God to hir
safe kéeping. The faithfull Councellors
are like the watchful Mastiffs, they take
paines, they ease our Shéepeheard, they
saue the flocke. Nowe you maye soone
iudge who is the Woolfe. If Pope Pius
coulde place his Pilot in our Ship, he
would make vs arriue at what Porte he
listed.
            Séeing Pius hath vpon ghesses or vain
reports after this maner vnséemely delt
with the Péeres and honorable estate of
our Countrie: let vs looke somewhat abroad,

and sée what worthie wightes the
Pope hathe placed in the Councelles of
Kings. And so lette vs be aduised by the
harmes of our neighbors. Didde he not
place one Dauid Retchio so high in Scotlande
that he tooke vppon him to rule the
Queene there, and sought al meanes to
disgrace and disquiet the Nobles, and to
vndoe that Country, and therefore was
slaine in the Queenes presence? Was
not the Cardinal of Lorraine the highest
Councellour in Fraunce? Did not Cardinall
Granvele beare the whole swaye
in Flaunders? they were appointed by
Pope Pius, they were endewed with his
spirite, they wente from his side, they
knewe what he would haue done. Haue
not they spoiled and wasted those two
noble Countries, and brought them to
suche vilanie and miserie, as they neuer
felt before? the King of Spaine suffereth
Monkes and Friers to gouerne him and
his Countrie. It is well known what
good they haue done him. By these fewe
you may sée what Councellors the Pope
alloweth, and for what purpose. Yet that

we maye the better marke the order of
their gouernment, and what good Cardinalles
worke in Princes Councels, one
telleth vs,Cornel. Agri. de Van. Sci. ca. 61. ex Camotense. 
               Legati Romanorum Pontificum
sic bacchantur in prouincijs, acsi ad flagellandam
Ecclesiam Satan egressus sit à facie Domini:
The Popes Legates keepe such reuels
in Kingdomes and Countries, as if
Satan were sent abroade from the face of
the Lord to scourge the Church.
                He was
wise, and did sée what was done. If wée
open our eyes and beholde the storie and
present course of their doings, wée maye
finde the like. What Prince soeuer receiueth
them, receiueth traitors and enimies
to his estate. They alwayes bréed
suspition, stir vp dissention, encrease hatred
betwéene Prince and Prince, and
set the one against another, they séeke to
aduance their maister ye Pope, they spoile
al Churches to furnish one, they be ye very
plagues and decay of Countries. Let
not Pope Pius complaine of the Councellors
of England no Prince in Christē
               dome
this day hath better, God graunte
them the spirite of vnderstanding and of
counsel, God continue them in his feare,

and direct them in his glorie. If Pope
Pius had but one so wise a Councellour,
hée neuer woulde haue sente suche Bulles
and Bables about the worlde.
            Againe, hominibus haereticis compleuit,
The Counsailours are not onely pore,
and beggarly, but also Heretiques. The
accusation of Heresie is heauie, & shoulde
not be laid vpō any, but after due proofe.
Paule the Apostle was accused for Heresie:
but he aunswered:Actes. 24. 
               After that waye,
which they call heresie, worshippe I the
God of my Fathers, beleeuing al things
which are written in the Lawe and the
Prophets. The high Priestes and Phariseis
called our Sauiour a Deceiuer.
               Mat. 27. All
the Christians of the Primitiue Church
were called Heretiques.
               Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 18. 
               Misistis per omnē
terram, qui circumirent & dicerent impiam
haeresim surrexisse Christianorum. You haue
chosen
                (saith Iustine the Martyr) certaine
men fit for that purpose, and haue
sent them ouer the world, to go about &
say there is a wicked heresie of the Christians
sprung vp. Euen so it liketh the
Pope to speake of them which be in auctoritie

among vs, and calleth them Heretiques.
God forbid his mouth shoulde
be a sclander, & all be Heretiques, whom
he so calleth. Then as many, as reprooue
his errors, and refuse to fall downe and
worship him, shall be Heretiques. They
spare not to say so.Dist. 22. omnes 
               Qui Romanae Ecclesiae
Priuilegium auferre conatur, hic procul dubio
labitur in haresim: He doubtlesse falleth
into heresie, which goeth aboute to
take away the priuiledge of the Churche
of Rome.
               
            
            But Heresie is an other matter. An
Heretique is he which denyeth the Articles
of our Christian faith. We deny thē
not, no not any one article. We hold the
Créede of the Apostles, and of the Nicene
Councell, and of Athanasius. We holde
all the Scriptures of the olde and newe
Testament. We holde all the auntient
Councelles. We holde all the auntient
Fathers, Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostome,
&c. We condemne all Heresies,
which our Fathers condemned. This
is our profession, and yet notwithstanding
doeth the Pope lightly and rashly

giue sentence against vs of Heresie. But
let him take héede, least whiles he calleth
others Heretiques, and reconeth
not the causes wherefore, his Arrowe
which he hath shot vp, fall vpon his own
head, and he fall into the pit he hath digged
for others.
            Yet there remaineth one pretence
more against hir Maiestie, ad quam velut
ad asylum omnium infestissimi perfugium
inuenerunt. Vnto whome all suche as are
the worst of the people resort, and are by
hir receiued into safe protection.
                Is it
not lawfull for the Queene to receiue
straungers without the Popes warrāt?
This he speaketh of the pore exiles of
Flaunders and Fraunce, and other Countries,
who either lost, or left behind them
all that they had, goodes, landes, and houses:
not for adulterie, or theft, or treason,
but for the profession of the Gospell. It
pleased God here to caste them on land:
the Queene of hir gratious pitie hathe
graunted them harbour. Is it become so
hainous a thing to shew mercie, GOD
willed the children of Israel,
               Deut. 10. to loue the

stranger, bicause they were straungers in
the land of Egipt. He that sheweth mercie,
shall find mercie. If God shal turne
his hand, thou maist be in case of pouertie
and banishment as wel as they. I am
not a Prophet, nor the sonne of a Prophet,
but I doubte the time will come,
when men shall looke for the Pope at
Rome, and not finde him. His seate shall
be remoued, he shall not be there. Then
shal he know what it is to be a stranger.
He whiche deuoureth, shall be deuoured.
            But what is the number of such, who
haue come in vnto vs? Are they thrée or
foure thousand? Thanks be to God this
Realme is able to receiue them if the
number be greater. You may remember
what other straungers arriued within
these parts not long sithence: These are
fewe, they were many: These are pore &
miserable, they wer lofty & proud: These
are naked, they were armed: These are
spoiled by others, they came to spoile vs:
These are driuen frō their country, they
came to driue vs from our coūtry: These

to saue their liues, they came to haue
our liues. The difference is greate béetwéene
these strangers. If we were content
to beare them then, nowe let it not
grieue vs to beare these: It is the commaundement
of God, that wee loue the
stranger: yet a Prince that doth it, shall
abide the Popes controlment.
            He himselfe is good to them, and spareth
the liberties of his Citie to some
number, and of worse condition. For
(besides those which resorte thither oute
of Englande, Germanie, Fraunce, Spaine, &c.
he giueth harbour to 6000. Iewes, which
liue by vsurie, and pay him yearely pensions.
He alloweth in his Citie of Rom
                     •
                  
               
20000. Courteghians or common women.
This was the old reconing. It may
be, the number is nowe improued. All
these liue by filthinesse, and yéelds hym
therefore a pension of 30000. Ducates.
            If the Pope may maintaine so many
thousand adultereres, harlots, Iewes, and
enimies of the crosse of Christ, why may
not Queene Elizabeth receiue a fewe

afflicted members of Christ, which are
compelled to carie his crosse? If it be no
fault in him to receiue so many seruants
of the Diuel, why may not Queene Elizabeth
receiue a fewe seruants of God?
Whome when he thought good to bring
safely by the daungers of the sea, and to
set in at our hauens, shoulde we cruelly
haue driuen them back again, or drowne
them, or hang them, or sterue them?
Woulde the Uicar of Christ giue this
counsel? or, if a King receiue such, & giue
them succour, must he therfore be depriued?
they are our brethren, they liue not
idlely. If they haue houses of vs, they
pay rent for them. They holde not our
grounds, but by making due recompēce.
They begge not in our streets, nor craue
any thing at our handes, but to breath
our aire, and to sée our Sunne. They labour
truely, they liue sparefully. They
are good examples of vertue, trauel, faith
and patience. The townes in which they
abide are happy, for God doth folow thē
with his blessings.
            Thus haue I opened 19. vntruthes all

packed in this Bul. If I woulde haue
béen curious or quarelous, I might haue
gathered twice so many. But I haue no
pleasure to passe farther in them. God
and man, heauen and earth knowe they
are vntrue.Psal. 4. I may say to Pope Pius, thou
sonne of man howe long wilt thou blaspheme
the honour of God? Why hast
thou such pleasure in vanitie, and séekest
after leasing? What opinion hath hee of
our nation? Doeth he thinke we are so
simple to bee ledde in a masket with so
vaine fables? Doth he thinke wee haue
neither eyes to sée, nor heartes to iudge?
Doth he thinke his bare word wil go for
Gospel? Woulde he write thus if hée
thought there were a God? If he deceiue
vs in these earthly thinges which we sée
with our eyes, no reason we credit him
in heauenly things, Christ is the trueth.
It becommeth not his Uicar to speake
falsehood.
            Now let vs examine how he wresteth
& corrupteth the Scriptures of God, how
he giueth vs a false interpretation, & corrupteth
them. In his whole Bul he hath

one only place out of the Scripture, only
one place, I say, and no more: & the same
he setteth downe to mainteine his owne
authoritie, & to vphold his power, wherby
he setteth vp, & deposeth the Kings, &
Princes, and states of the worlde. The
words be ye first Chapter of Ieremie:
               1. Ierem. 
               Behold
this day haue I set thee ouer the nations,
and ouer the kingdomes, to pluck
vp, and to roote out, and to destroy, and
throw downe, to build & to plant. If hée
abuse this place of Scripture, which hée
hath aduisedly chosē, & sent ouer to make
thereby some shew of his diuelish practises
to worke rebellion & treasons among
vs: we may well thinke hee dealeth the
like with other places, when he draweth
them to serue his turne.
            
               Hunc vnum super omnes gentes principem
constituit, qui euellat, destruat &c. He hath
appointed him onely (Peter and his Successour
the Byshop of Rome) Prince ouer
all nations, to plucke vp, and to destroy,
to roote out and throw downe to
build & plant.
                No doubt this cōmissiō is
large. There can be no greater authority

giuen in matters of the world. But this
authority hath no man. God kéepeth it to
himselfe.Prouerb. 8. 
               By me Kings raigne, and Princes
decree iustice. They beare my name,
they drawe my sword, they are my Ministers
to take vengeance on him that
doth euill: their hearts are in my hands,
I turne them whether soeuer it pleaseth
me: I take the praiers & supplications,
and intercession for Kinges, and for all
that are in authoritie, that men may
leade a quiet, and peaceable life in all
godlines and honestie. Daniel telleth
King Nabuchodonosor,
               Daniel. 4. 
               that the most
high beareth rule ouer the kingdomes of
men, and giueth it to whomsoeuer hee
will. Wherefore doth hée not giue this
glorie vnto God? Wherefore saith he I
will goe vp and be like vnto the highest:
I wil exalt my selfe, and shew my selfe
that I am God? I haue (saith he) a déede
of gifte. The wordes set downe by the
Prophet Hieremie, are my warrant to
place and depose whom I will.
            And he doth not onely say thus, but
as if it were too small and base a title, to

set the name of God or of our Sauiour
Christ before the wordes of his priuiledge,
he kéepeth his feete from ye ground,
and raiseth alofte, and ietteth in the ayre
aboue,Ephes. 6. as though he were one of the spirituall
wickednesses which are in the
hie places, and saith, Regnans in excelsis
cui data est omnis in caelo & in terra potestas,
&c. Hee that ruleth in the heights, to
whom al power is giuen both in heauen
& in earth, &c.
                Let him not deceiue you
with vaine wordes. You shall witnesse
against him, that hée taketh the name of
the Lorde his God in vaine. For, if any
worde in that péece of Scripture be spoken
either of Prince, or remouing of
Princes: if ye whole sense of those words
cary any greater authoritie to the Pope
than to the Bishop of any other place, or
to the simplest Minister in the world, let
me be no more credited. Marke therefore,
& sée howe boldly and fondly Pope
Pius séeketh to mocke the worlde. First
he sayth: Deus constituit me vnum Principem
super gentes: God hath appoynted
me alone, to be Prince ouer the nations.
               
               
Here is a shamelesse falsifying of Gods
words. The Prophet saith: I haue set
thee ouer the nations. The Pope thrusteth
in thrée words more, Me, alone, and
Prince, that so he, and none but he, may
reuel and rule in all places. Reade the
place of the Prophet, if you haue your
bookes. The wordes are: I set thee ouer
the nations. They say nothing, neither of
the Pope, nor of Peters Successour, nor
of one alone, nor of Prince. All these
the Pope hath péeced of his owne deuise.
            But Salomon warneth him,Prouer. 30. 
               Put nothing
to his words least he reproue thee,
and thou be founde a lyar. Also S. Iohn
telleth him,Reuel. 22. 
               If any man shall adde vnto
these thinges, GOD shall adde vnto
him the plagues that are written in this
Booke. Whose wordes, or what euidence
will hée not corrupt, which dareth
in such presumption to handle the
worde of GOD deceitfullye, and
without shame, sende it foorth so into the
worlde?
            As for Hieremie the Prophete, vnto

whom God spake the wordes, which the
Pope sendeth vs, will Pius say that hée
was a Prince, and had auctoritie ouer
nations and kingdomes? will hee saye
that Hieremie depriued Princes, and
thrust them from their royall seates?
Hieremie did no such thing. But al contrarie,
he suffered persecution, not onely
of the Princes,Hier. 2
                     •
                  . but of the wicked people.
Pashur smote him and put him in
the stockes. Hee was in derision dayly,
euery one mocked him. Hée hearde the
rayling of many, and feare came on him
on euery side. All his familiars laye in
waite for him, ye so they might preuaile
against him, and execute their vengeance
vpon him. Hee moneth his case before
God, saying, howe is it that I came forth
of the wombe, to see labour and sorowe,
that my dayes should be consumed with
shame? And in the sixe and twentith
Chapter,Hier
                     •
                  . 2
                     •
                  . all the people were gathered
against Hieremie in the house of y• Lord,
then the Priestes and the Prophets and
all the people tooke him and saide, thou
shalt die the death.
            
            
               Was al this done vnto him by rebellion
as against their Prince? was it because
he had vsed him selfe proudely or
cruelly in matters of temporal gouernement?Hiere. 19. & 20.
was it not rather, because he
stoode in the Courte of the Lords house,
where the Lorde had sent him to Prophecie,
and saide to all the people the
wordes of the Lorde of Hostes.
               Hiere. 26. Was it
not because hee prophecied in the name
of the Lorde?
            
            Woulde Pope Pius be thus set ouer
nations add kingdomes? would he bée
smitten and put into the stockes, & rayled
at?
                  
                     •
                  d. cap. 38. woulde he haue his dayes consumed
in shame? woulde he be let downe
with cords into the dungeon where was
no water but mire, and so sticke fast in
the mire? woulde he haue his friendes
mone his case to the King, and tell what
euill hath bene done to him, in that they
haue cast him into the dungeon, & say, he
dyeth for hunger in the place where hée
is? would he, I say, thus be set ouer nations
and kingdomes? or wil he say, that
Hieremie suffering these reproches of

the Rulers, and the Priests, and the people,
did enioy an earthly peace, and possesse
a worldly kingdome? or will hee
say, that God mocked his Prophet, whē
he saide vnto him, This day I set thee ouer
nations?
            
            
               The words therefore must néeds haue
an other meaning, and what that meaning
is, who is better able to declare
than Hieremie him selfe?
               Hiere. 1. The Lord stretched
out his hād, & touched my mouth,
and the Lorde saide vnto me, beholde I
haue put my words in thy mouth. I haue
ordained thee to be a Prophet vnto the
nations. Thou shalt go to all that I shall
sende thee, and what soeuer I command
thee, thou shalt speake. Be not afraide
of their faces. For I this daye haue made
thee a defensed Citie and an iron piller,
and walles of brasse against the whole
lande, against the Kinges of Iuda, and against
the Princes thereof: against the
Priestes thereof, and against the people
of the lande. For they shall fight against
thee, but shall not preuaile against thee.
For I am with thee sayeth the Lorde.

Such auctoritie had he ouer the nations:
to be their Prophet, to speake what the
Lorde commaunded, to reproue them
without feare.
            In like auctoritie spake Elias to Achab,
I haue not troubled Israel, but thou
and thy Fathers house in that you haue
forsaken the commaundements of the
Lorde, and thou hast followed Baalim.
In like auctoritie spake Iohn the Baptist
vnto Herode.
               Mark. 6. 
               It is not lawfull for thee to
haue thy brothers wife. And the like auctoritie
did God giue vnto Moses. Behold
I haue made thee Pharaos God.
               Exod. 7. 
               Thou
shalt speake all that I commaunde thee.
And thou shalt say vnto him, the Lorde
God of the Hebrewes hath sent me vnto
thee. As Moses was sette ouer Pharao
King of Aegypt, and Elias ouer Achab
king of Israel, and Iohn ouer King Herode,
so was this Prophet set ouer the
nations: not to remoue or pull them
downe, but to rebuke their errors, and to
direct their liues: to plante the trueth, to
ouerthrowe the vanitie of men, and to
builde the feare of the Lorde. In all

this wée finde nothing for the Popes
purpose.
            But, if it were so, and that had bene
the meaning of this place, what had that
made for him? Was Hieremie his predecessour
in the Bishopricke of Rome? or
is he the successour of Hieremie in Israel?
was the Prophet called the heade of the
Church? had he and did he exercise such
iurisdiction ouer Kings and Princes, as
the Pope hereby chalengeth? if he neuer
attempted any such thinges, howe doth
Pope Pius maintaine his procéedings
by the example of Hier.? or, if the wordes
wil car yno such meaning, why doth
he so vainely alleage them? one of their
owne Doctours saith,Ioh. de Pari
                     •
                  uh
                     •
                   cap. 15. 
               Hee speaketh not
of the ouerthrowing of the kingdomes
of the world, but of the ouerthrowing of
vices, and of the planting of Faith and
manners. And so Hierome
               Hieron. in. 1. Hierem. writing
vpon the same place. Omnis plantatio
quam non plantauerit pater caelestis eradicabitur,
& aedificatio quae super petram
non habet fundamentum, sed extructa
est in arena sermone dei suffoditur

atque destruitur. Euerie plante which our
Heauenly Father hath not planted, is
rooted vp: and that building which is
not founded on a Rocke, but is built vpon
the Sande, is vndermined, and ouerthrowne
with the word of God.
               
            
            Such poore Hieremies hath God giuen
vnto the worlde who haue ouerthrowen
and pulled vp the vanities and folies
which were growne to a great heigth in
the Church of God. They haue planted
faith and manners. They haue opened
and preached the trueth. The Lorde
hath prospered their labours, as wée
sée this day. Hée hath rooted out those
strange plantes, and throwen downe the
weake foundations with the breath of
his mouth. This is the plucking vp,
the rooting out, the destroying, and
throwing downe: this is the building &
planting whereof the Prophet speaketh:
as wée haue hearde it prooued by the
Prophet him selfe, by the interpretation
of Hierome a learned Father, who
maketh good this saying with two seuerall
places written in the newe Testament,

and by the confession of their
owne Doctour Iohan. de Paras
                     ••
                  s, and
might be further proued by sundrie others.
            Yet all this notwithstanding it must
be taken in the sense wherein Pius vseth
it, or else some of his predecessors Popes
of Rome might likewise be worthily blamed
for their doings.Auentinus in Adriano. 4. an. 1154. Pope Adrian
wrote somewhat roundly to the Emperour
Fredericke. Imperator quod habe
                        •
                     , totum
habet à nobis. Sicut Zacharias transtulit
imperium à Graecis ad Teutonicos: it a not
possumus illud transferre ab Alemannis ad
Graecos. Ecce in potestate nostra est, vt demus
illud cui volumus. Propterea constituti
sumus à Deo super gentes & regna,Hier. 1. vt
destruamus, & euellamus, aedificemus, &
plantemus. What soeuer the Emperour
hath, he hath it of vs. As Pope Zacharie
translated the Empire from the Greeks
vnto the Germaines, so may wee againe
translate the same from the Germaines
to the Greekes. Behold it is in our power
to bestowe the Empire vpon whome
we list. Therefore are we appointed by

God ouer nations, and kingdomes, to
pul downe, to roote vp, to build and to
plant againe. No mouth woulde vtter
these blasphemies but the mouth of Antichrist.
            
            Thus haue we tryed the Pope to bée
a corrupter, and a falsifier of the Scriptures
He putteth in thrée words, Me, Alone,
Prince. Hee applieth the place to
himselfe, and among all other to himselfe
alone, and so setteth him selfe aboue
Princes. Hée chaungeth the rooting
out of errour, to the ouerthrowing
of Princes: and the prea-ching of the
trueth, to the deposing of Kings. He
forgeth a sense which the spirit of God,
and the Prophet Hieremie neuer ment.
He saith, Thus saieth the Lorde, when
the Lord neuer spake it. He knew them
well, which said, They wrest the Scriptures
to maintaine their power. This
thou séest ô God, and sufferest. Hee calleth
himself the Uicar of thy Christ he abuseth
thy most holy word, he deceiueth
thy people, hee maketh thée to bee a false
witnesse to his folie, and all this doth he

to countenance his ambition and pride.
            Nowe vpon warrant of these wordes
so fondly applyed, he addresseth himselfe
solemnly to pronounce sentence. Declaramus
praedictam Elizabeth eique adherentes
in praedictis anathematis sententiam incurrisse.
We make it knowen, that Elizabeth
aforesaid, and as manie as stande on
hir side in the matters aboue named,
haue runne into the daunger of our
curse.
                This is a terrible thunderbolt
shot in among vs from Rome, in Paper.
These cloudes are without raine: These
Gunnes will doe no harme. Euen so did
the Phariseis, cast Christ Iesus out of
theri Sinagogues, and excommunicate
him, and accurse him. So did Diothrephes
excommunicate Iohn the Euangelist,
and did neither him selfe receiue
the brethren,Epist. 3. Ioh. but forbadde them
that woulde, and did thrust them out of
the Church. So was Hilarie accursed
and excommunicated by the Arians. Hée
layeth his curse not onely vppon the
Lordes annointed our blessed Queene,
but vppon all that followe hir godlye

procéedings, that is, vpon euery one of
you, and vpon al other hir Magisties true
subiects. Hée knoweth you not, and yet
accurseth you. You are children of God,
yet he maketh you the children of the diuel.
The Lorde hath shewed the light of
his countenance vppon you, and hath giuen
you his heauenly worde, whereby
you haue gotten vnderstanding, and are
made wiser than your enemies, and are
taught to refraine your féete from euerie
euill way, and therefore the Pope cryeth
out against you, and doth recken you
accursed. But his owne wordes tell vs:
Nem
                     •
                  em ligare debet iniqua sententia:
               11. Q. 3. 
               A
wrongfull sentence bindeth no man.
The curs shall come into his owne bosome.Deut. 23.
For the Lorde our God turneth
the curse vnto a blessing to vs, bycause
the Lorde our God loueth vs.Malac. 2. And, He
will sende a curse vppon them, and will
curse their blessings: yea, he hath cursed
them alreadie, because they doe not consider
in their harts, nor giue glorie vnto
his name. He hath also made them to be
despised & vile before all the people, because

they haue not kepte 
                     〈◊〉
                   wayes.
            
            In this case Christe saith, Ne
                     •
                  oice and
be glad. For so persecuted they the Prophets
whiche were beefore you.
               Origen. ho
                     •
                  . 3. in Exod. 
               Origen
sheweth howe all that be like minded
vnto Pharao crie out that men are seduced,
and led out of theri way, if Moses
and Aaron, that is, if the spéeche of the
Preachers call vpon them to be diligent
in the Lawe of God, and to followe hys
worde.Chryso. Hom. 1. ad popul. Antiochen. And Chrysostome telleth vs,
this is no newe thing. Ne admiremur
quod spiritualibus instantes multa patiamur
aduersa, &c. Let vs not maruell, if we abide
many aduersities, because we follow
after and desire those thinges whiche are
spirituall:
                For, as the théefe diggeth not,
nor layeth his waite at the place, where
straw, and chaffe, and feathers are layd,
but, there, where is golde and siluer: so
is the Diuell moste out of quiet, with
those whiche take in hande spirituall businesse.Ioh. 16.
               These things (saith our Sauior)
haue I saide vnto you, that ye should not
bee offended. They shall excommunicate
you: yea the time shall come, that

whosoeuer 
                     •••
                  leth you wil think that he
doth God 
                     〈◊〉
                  . And these things will
they doe vnto you, bicause they haue
not knowne he Father, nor me.
            
            But what are the effectes and force?
what successe take the Popes blessings &
his cursses? he stirred vp the K. of France,
to plague his subiectes, & to that purpose
he blessed him and his folowers: they &
their Countrie were brought to greate
miserie. He blessed Philip King of Spaine:
he hath bin wonderfully troubled by the
Moeres at home, and liueth in continuall
turmoyle with his subiectes in other
his dominions abroade. He blessed the
states of Venice: they are still disquieted
by the Turke. On the other side, he hath
accurssed England: thankes be to God it
was neuer better in worldly peace, in
health of bodie, in abundance of corne
and victuals. He hath accursed the Princes
and states of Germanie: they were
neuer stronger. He blesseth his own side:
but it decayeth and withereth. He cursseth
the Gospel, but it preuaileth & prospereth.
The more he cursseth, the more

it prospereth. This is the Lordes doing,
& it is maruellous in our eyes. So doeth
God turne the Popes cursse into a blessing
vnto vs. And so we maye well saye
with Seneca.
               Seneca in Hercule Oeto. 
               Caelestis ir a quos premit miseros
facit, humana nullos. The anger of God
maketh those mē miserable vpon whom
it lighteth: but so doth not the wrath of
man.
               
            
            
               Quin et
                     •
                  iā ipsam pret enso regni praedicti iure,
necnon omni & quocun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   dominio dignitate,
priuilegio
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   priuatam. We also make
it knowen, that wee haue depriued hir
from that right she pretended to haue in
the Kingdome aforesaid, and also from al
and euerie hir auctoritie, dignitie, and
priuiledge.
                This is the other part of the
Popes sentence. In this his vaine fantasie,
and by this childish mockerie hée
thinketh to depose Queene Elizabeth
from hir kingdome. O vaine man, as
though the coastes and ends of the world
were in his hands, or as if no prince in y•
world might rule without his sufferāce.
            So haue the proude Prelates of that
Sée, these manye yeares troubled the

states of al Christendome, & therby béen
cause of much slaughter & sheding innocent
bloude. And so at this present he seeketh
to disquiet Elizabeth: Elizabeth I
say our soueraigne and moste gratious
Lady, a Uirgin ful of wisedome, vertue,
grace and compassion: she is vnto vs as
a comfortable water in a drie place, as a
refuge for the tēpest, and as the shadowe
of a greate rocke in a wearie land.
            The greatest blessing whiche God gyueth
to any people, is a godly Prince to
rule ouer them. The greatest miserie
that can fall vppon a people, is to haue a
godly Prince taken from them. For by
a godly Prince he doth so rule the people
as if God himselfe were with them in
visible appearaunce. The Prince walketh
in the wayes of the Lorde: the Nobles
folowe the steppes of the Prince: &
the people fashion them selues to the example
of the Nobles. The face of a godly
Prince shineth as the Sunne beams,
and bringeth ioy and comfort to his subiectes.
            When the Lord was displeased with

the people of Israell, he tooke Samuell
from them, & gaue them Saul to be theyr
King. Saul did wickedly, without Iustice,
without Mercie. He deuoured the
people like a Lion, he ouerthrew the tabernacle,
and slewe the Priests. Then
was there no Reuelation: None that
did Prophecie, or care for the name of
the Lord.
            But when God tooke mercie vpon the
people, he gaue vnto them Dauid, a man
after his owne heart. He deliuered hym
from daunger, and tooke him out of the
Lions mouth. He crowned him, and
did set a crowne of pure golde vpon hys
head. Dauid loued the people, he taught
them the wayes of God, he put downe
Idolatrie, and destroyed the Groues, he
set vp a Tabernacle to the God of Iacob.
Under him the people had great prosperitie
in their houses, and abroad, in their
Uines, in their Corne, and in their Cattell,
in time of Peace, and in tyme of
Warre.
            When it pleased God to send a blessing
vpou vs, he gaue vs his seruant Elizabeth
               
to be our Queene, and to be the
instrument of his glory in the sight of all
the worlde. Who is so blind which séeth
not? who is so vnthankful that remembreth
not what things God hath wroughte
by hir? who séeth not the glorious
beames of the trueth? who séeth not the
wonderfull peace in which wee haue liued?
who séeth not the wise and safe guiding
of the people? one of those alone
were a great blessing, but al togither are
such a blessing, as our Fathers before
vs neuer enioied so happily.
            As touching religion, let vs thinke of
that time of ignoraunce, wherein wée
were before. How miserable a case was
it to sée suche deadlye dumbenesse in the
Church of God? to sée the people ledde
away in the darke, they knew not whether?
to sée the word of life taken away?
to sée the people fedde with fables? to sée
an Idol sette vppe in the place of God?
to sée Iesus Christe our Sauiour putte
to silence? In this case were we. This
we did sée, we did féele this. Out of this
deadly dungeon GOD deliuered vs

by the hand of our Queene. By hir hée restored
the trueth: by hir he sente vs the
light of his holy worde: by hir he hathe
reléeued the heartes of the people. God
himselfe hathe bene the worker hereof.
Elizabeth hath bene his instrument, and
the meane by whome he hath done thys
worke.
            And marke the tyme when shée attempted
this. Euen at the firste entrie
into hir kingdome: at whiche time the
King of Spaine, the King of Fraunce, the
Quéene of Scottes, and many of the Nobles
and the Bishoppes of thys Realme
were against it.Mat. 6. She had larned, First to
seeke the kingdome of God: she hadde
learned to séeke hys glorie, and not hir
dwne: shée had learned to saye as Dauid
saide,Psal. 13
                     •
                  
                
               I wil not suffer mine eyes to slepe,
nor mine eye liddes to slumber vntill I
finde out a place for the Lorde, an habitation
for the mightie God of Iacob: she
had learned to saye,Rom. 8. 
               If God bee on oure
side, who can bee againste vs? So
was hir gratious hearte consumed with

the zeale of Gods house. O who can conceiue
the ioy and comfort of the people? it
was so great, as no manne can declare.
They helde vp their hands to God, they
hadde not words to giue him, they could
not speake for ioye. They reioiced as a
Birde doth at the daye spring: as Ionas
reioiced when he came out of y• Whales
bellie: as Daniel reioiced when he was
brought safe out of the Lions denne: as
the children of Israel reioiced when they
came out of Aegipt: as the three children
reioiced whē they came forth of the burning
fornace: so did we reioice and said:
This is the daye which the Lorde hathe
made, lette vs reioice and bee gladde
in it.
            
            I néede not speake of the continuall
peace, which God hathe giuen vs all the
time of hir gouernement. He that knoweth
not the price of peace, and howe to
esteeme it, let him behold the kingdomes
which border next vppon vs, howe pitifully
they be afflicted. Let hym beholde
Spaine, Fraunce, Denmarke, Flaunders, and
Scotlande: and consider what they haue

suffred these few yeares past: what houses
haue bene ouerthrown, what Cities
haue béene burnt, what bloud hath bene
shed? how many women haue lost their
husbands? how many mothers haue lost
their children? and how many children
haue béene made fatherlesse.
            But God, euen our God, gaue vs
Queene Elizabeth. and with hir gaue vs
Peace, and so long a Peace as Englande
hath seldome séene before.
            What should I speak of hir wisedom
in gouernement. Let vs looke vppon the
state as it was before: what hunger was
in this lande? many of our brethren dyed
for lacke of foode. What cruel executions
were then in London? there were
few stréetes where was not set vp a galous
or a gibbet. In Oxford 52. were executed
at one Sessions. What diseases
fell vpon vs? the grauest, and wisest, and
richest men were takē away. Calais was
loste. A stranger and forraine people had
the rule ouer vs. Al thinges wente againste
vs, because God was not wyth
vs.
            
               But God restored by his seruaunt our
Queene those ioies againe, which wée
lacked. He hath giuen vs ciuill peace among
our selues, and peace with forrain
nations. He hath giuē vs health of body,
and store of victuals: discharge of debts,
and auoyding of strangers: he hath gyuen
vs mercie in iustice, abandoning all
crueltie. We are nowe with God, and
al things go well with vs.
            They talke much of an vnbloudy Sacrifice.
It is not theirs to offer it. Queene
Elizabeth shall offer it vp vnto God: euen
hir vnbloudie handes, and vnbloudie
sworde, an vnbloudie people, and an
vnbloudie gouernement. This is an vnbloudie
Sacrifice. Thys Sacrifice is
acceptable vnto God. I say not, that it
is not lawfull for hir to putte to death.
God saith,Deut. 13. 
               Thine eye shall not pitie the
wicked, nor shewe mercie: but thou
shalt kill him: that all Israell maye heare
and feare, and do no more anye suche
wickednesse as this, among you. Shée
muste doe it: if she woulde not, yet hir
laws would sée offendors punished. But

I speake it to shew the gratious goodnes
of hir mercifull nature.
            
               Oh how gratiously didde hir Maiestie
commend vs hir subiects, to the carefull
and wise gouernement of hir Counsell,
and Iudges, when she spake thus vnto
them: Haue care ouer my people. You
haue my place, Doe you that whiche I
ought to doe. They are my people. Euerie
man oppresseth them, and spoileth
them without mercie. They can not reuenge
their quarrel, nor help thēselues.
See vnto them, see vnto them, for they
are my charge. I charge you, euen as
God hath charged me. I care not for my
selfe, my life is not deare to me, my care
is for my people. I praye God who soeuer
succeede me, bee as careful as I am.
They whiche might knowe what cares I
beare, woulde not thinke I tooke anye
greate ioye in wearing the Crowne.
            These eares, heard when hir Maiestie
spake such words. I trust they wil work
suche affection in your heartes, whiche
heare them reported, as they did in me
when I heard them spoken. She loueth

hir Subiectes, and they reuerence hir:
She is carefull for them, and they are
true to hir, God continue his blessing towards
hir, and ouer shadowe hir wyth
his mercifull hande. For she is the comfort
and Diamond of al Christendome.
This is she againste whome Pope Pius
rageth and stormeth, and hath sente hys
cursse, & sentence of depriuation against
hir. If he had bene acquainted with oure
happye estate vnder hir, he mighte wyth
better grace haue said to hir, Because thy
God loueth England, to establish it for euer,
therefore hath he made thee Queene
ouer them to execute Iudgement and
Iustice. He might with more and better
aduisement haue saide,Num. 23. 
               How shal I curse
where the Lorde hathe not curssed? Or
how shall I detest where the Lorde hath
not detested? He is not so wise as Balaam,
which would not for a house full of gold,
passe the commaundement of the Lorde,
to doe eyther good or badde of hys owne
minde.
            
               Praecipimus & interdicimus vniuersis, &
singulis proceribus, subditis, & populis, & alijs

praedictis: ne illi eiusūe monitis, mandatis, &
legibus, audeant obedire: qui secus egerint,

                     •
                  os simili anathematis sententia innodamus:
Wee charge and forbid al and euerie the
Nobles and Subiects, and people, and
others aforesaide, that they be not so hardie
as to obey hir, or hir wil, or commandementes
vppon paine of like accursse
vppon them.
                Woulde you take thys
man to be the Uicar of Christe? He séemeth
rather to be some Maister of misrule,
whyche so dischargeth all manner
of Subiectes from all manner obedience.
For, what order will
he leaue vs, when wée maye not doe
those things whyche we doe vnder hir
obedience, by charge of hir will,
or commaundementes or lawes? His
wordes speake verye broade. I commaunde
vnder paine of damnation, that
no seruaunt obey his Maister, no wife
obey hir husbande, no childe obey his
Parentes, and that no Subiecte obey
hys Prince. I commaunde and
forbidde, that you dare not obey hir,
&c.
            
            
               But what if you shewe him of oure
lawes whyche Queene Elizabeth hath
made and established against Burglarie
and robbing by the high way, and anye
other kinde of theft: againste murther,
adulterie, and all f
                  •
               lthinesse (as kéeping
of Concubines and Courteghians) (like
to the vse of his City at Rome) kepe them
not saith the Pope, vnder paine of my
cursse. Againe, sir by hir lawes we are
required to resort to our seuerall Churches,
there to heare the worde of God,
to giue thankes vnto him, and to pour
                  •
               
out our prayers before him, &c. hée yet
sayeth, obey them not. What shal we
do then for lawes of common peace, and
of holding our possessions, and goodes to
our priuate vse, and so maintaining the
good estate of our neighbours? For paying
our rents to Landlordes, and custome,
and tribute, where tribute and
custome are due? Let not any obey these
lawes, saieth the Pope. Lette no man
dare obey hir, or hir will, or commaundements,
or lawes. Estéeme not hir law,
as a law, take not hir to be your Quéene.
            
               Is not this fatherly Counsel? Are they
not happy which follow it? What godly
creature euer gaue the like? What Patriarke,
or Prophet, or Euangelist, or
Apostle euer sent the like commissions
into the worlde? Pius wil be called the
Uicar of Christ. Did Christe euer sette
vp himselfe against the Prince, did hée
so teach his Disciples, was it any parte
of that doctrine he hath left vs?
            
               Pius telleth vs, he is Successour to Peter
and Paule, that he is inuested in their
auctoritie, and enthronized in their
chaire. Let vs conferre the doctrine of
Peter & Paule, with that whiche is written
vy their Successour. Pius sayeth of
our Soueraigne: Let no man be subiect
to hir,
               1. Pet. 2. 
               or obey hir. But Peter saith: Submitte
your selues to all maner ordinance
of man for the Lordes sake, whether it
be vnto the King, as vnto the Superiour:
or vnto Gouernours, as vnto them
whiche are sente of him for the punishment
of euil doers, and for the praise of
them that doe well: for o i
                     •
                   the will of
God. And againe he saith: Feare God,

honour the King. Peter sayeth, it is the
will of God, that you obey your Prince.
Pius gainesayth, Obey not your Prince,
my wil is, that you obey not.
            
            Paule hath left words for our obediēcs.
Let euerie soule be subiect to the higher
powers,Rom. 13. for ther is no power but of God,
and the powers that be, are ordained of
God. Whosoeuer therefore resisteth the
power, resisteth the ordinaunce of God,
and they that resiste, receiue vnto them
selues iudgement. For hee is the Minister
of God for thy wealth: But, if thou
doe euill, feare, for he beareth not the
sworde in vaine. Wherefore yée must be
subiect, not bicause of wrath onelye, but
also for conscience sake. Giue therefore
tribute to whome you owe tribute, custome
to whom custome, feare to whom
feare, honour to whome you owe honour.
Nowe sayeth Pius, Let no soule
be subiect to the higher powers, resiste
power, resiste the ordinaunce of God,
bee not Subiecte neyther for wrath,
nor for conscience. Yeelde youre
Prince no tribute, no custome, no feare,

and no honour. Howe agréeth this with
the Apostle? Whether it be right in the
sight of God that you be lead by Peter &
Paul, the Apostles of Christ, or by Pope
Pius, iudge yée.
            
            And for what Prince doth Paul require
this of the Romanes? for Nero, an
enemie vnto God and godlinesse, and al
that liued godly: who destroied and burned
their citie: who slewe his mother, &
ripped that bellie which brought him to
life: a Monster in nature, and the most
wicked ruler that euer raigned. And
yet doeth Paule require them to obey
him, bicause he is the Minister of God,
&c.
            Who was like to Nabuchodonosor,
King of Babylon? he was the rod of the
Lords wrath, he oppressed the people of
God: fired and razed their Citie, sacked
their Sanctuary,Baruch. 1. and spoyled their Tē
               ple,
yet are the people commaunded to
praye for the life of Nabuchodonosor
King of Babylon, and for the life of Baltazar
his sonne, that their daies may bee
vpon earth as the dayes of heauen. And

againe God speaketh by the Prophet
Hieremie: I haue caused you to be caried
away Captiues from Ierusalem vnto Babylon.
Seeke the prosperitie of the citie,
whether I haue sent you away Captiues,
and pray vnto the Lord for it: for in the
peace thereof shall you haue peace. If
the Apostle withdrewe not the Romanes
from the subiection of Nero, if the Prophets
willed the children of Israel to
praye for Nabuchodonosor, who were
wicked Princes, will Pope Pius tell
the Subiectes vnto a godly and vertuous
Ladie, that they muste not obeye
hir?
            Into what case doth he lead miserable
simple men, that giue him some credite?
Howe doth he amaze them? God
telleth vs we receiue to our selues iudgment,
if we resist his ordinance. Pius
saith, we are accursed vnlesse we doe resist
it. What shal a simple mā do? Which
way shall hée folowe? If he obey God,
he must forsake Pope: Or, if heé obey
the Pope, he must forsake God. If hée
obey the Prince as God willeth him,

then the Pope cursseth him: Or, if hée
disobey the Prince, as the Pope willeth
him, then doth God condemne him. The
commaundement of the one is as contrarie
to the commaundement of the other,
as light is contrarie vnto darkenesse.
But thankes be to God who hath
filled vs with the knowledge of his
will. We know Pope Pius is no God.
We pray for him that he may be the seruant
of God,
            
               Paul hath warned vs,Galat. 1. 
               if an Angel from
heauen, or if any man preach vnto you
otherwise than that you haue receiued,
let him be accursed. We haue receiued
of Paul, and of Peter, and of God him
selfe, that we shoulde obey: yet dareth
Pope Pius no Angel, but a man, commaund
vs that no man obey, no not vnder
paine of his cursse Accursed is he for
so commaunding, we haue good warrant
to say he is accursed.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  mnes qui illt quomodocunque iurauerunt,
à 
                     〈◊〉
                   amento huiusmod
                     •
                   ac omni prorsus domin
                     •••
                  
fidelitatis, & obsequij debito, perpetuò
absolutos declaramus: We pronounce that

all, whosoeuer by any occasion haue taken
their oathe vnto hir, are for euer discharged
of such their oath, and also from
all fealtie and seruice, which was due to
hir by reason of hir gouernement. Doth
Pope Pius knowe what an oath meaneth?
Doth hee knowe what it is to
sweare by the name of God? An oathe is
a solemne promise made betwéene men,
wherein God (who knoweth the secrets
of the heart) is called to witnesse of the
doing. As for example: wée haue taken
this oath. I will be a true and liege
Subiect to our Soueraigne Lady Queene
Elizabeth, I will neither in worde nor
deede procure hir euill, I will not conceale
any treason or conspiracie against
hir, and this doe I promise, as I hope to
be saued by the bloude of Iesus Christ:
and I take witnesse to this of God, who
seeth the singlenesse of my heart, beseeching
him to auenge it vpon me, to put
my name out of the booke of the liuing,
and to giue mee no portion in the kingdome
of Christ, & of God, if I willingly
or wittingly breake this my promise.

               Such is the oath, which we haue taken
to hir highnesse.
            
            
               This is nothing (saith Pope Pius) I can
dispense with it, I am able to dispense against
the lawe of nature, against the Canons
of the Apostles, against the newe
Testament: I can dispense for all thinges
done contrary to the commaundements
of the old and new Testament: I can dispense
against the lawe of God. I am aboue
all generall Councels, my wil must
be kept for a law. And doth he onely say
this? Or shall we thinke they be words
of reuerence, written by such as are deuout
to his holinesse, and that he doth
not so much as he may by vertue of his
speciall priuiledge? Who was it y• gaue
a dispensation to the brother, y• he might
marie his owne sister? Who was it that
gaue dispensation to Henrie the fifth to
rise vp against Henry the fourth his own
father, and put him from the Empire?
What dispensation Pope Pius sent to
King Philip God knoweth, but the yong
Prince the Kings sonne lost his life. I
know not what dispensation past lately

into Scotland, but the King was strangled,
&c.
            A horrible déede, the world knoweth
it was so, what mistes & pretēces soeuer
they make. To worke such practises, the
Pope sendeth abrode his dispensations.
            Such a dispensation did Pope Pius
lately send into England, and discharged
the Subiects from their due obedience to
our Prince, and thereby made way for
them, with his fauour and licence to
runne headlong into euerlasting damnation.
With some weake heades hée
hath preuailed. It is likely hée hath
vsed secrete conference with them some
long time, before they would be drawen
to be traitours to their owne country,
and be emboldened to put themselues in
armour, and robbe, and spoyle, & burne,
and kill their countrie men, & friends,
and kinsefolkes, and children, and parents
against the law of nature, and the
commaundement of God.
            This was done not long sithence. You
can not but remember it, they were in
armes, and had gathered a great cōpanie

of Confederats: the banner was displaied
in fielde. What thinke you was their
meaning? Or to what ende did they rise?
Among all those that liue within this
realme, whose person sought they? against
whom bente they their speares?
And against whose body drew they their
swordes? But the Lorde preserued his
anointed: he hath placed hir vppon his
holy hill of Sion: no traiterous malice
shall annoy hir.
            Consider nowe whence all this rebellion
grew. There is no treason, without
conference. There, euen there began all
our trouble. The maister of all this mischiefe
fitteth at Rome, as I tolde you before:
y• coales were kindled here, but the
belloes were there, & there sate he y• blew
the fire. We saw the poppets, but y• iuggler
that drew the strings kept him selfe
close. They which rebelled brake their
oathes, forswore thēselues robbed their
country, spoiled towns, burnt y• holy Bible
ye word of God, they cared neither for
God, nor man: neither for Prince, nor
for lawe. They were promised furtherance

in their doings, by insurrections
which shoulde haue bene likewise
made in other places of the Realme. In
all this they tooke courage and countenance
of Pope Pius. He furnished them
with all deuise of counsell, he blessed thē
in their purpose, he promised them forgiuenesse
of their sinnes, for part of their
wages.
            Miserable man which could finde no
better company: and in miserable case,
when he cannot be vpholden by other
meanes than by treason. But most miserable
are they which through his wicked
persuasions are content to cast themselues,
and to séeke howe their country
may be brought vnder the subiection of
foreine enemies, into bondage and miserie.
So doth he lose and set at libertie
the consciences of men, and flattereth
the wicked in their vngodlinesse, as if
his dispensation should be their excuse.
            It is an olde saying, Caueat emptor,
let him that buieth take heede.
                What
colour soeuer the Pope setteth on his
marchandize, let the buier take héede of

them. We haue called God to record vnto
our soules: our conscience standeth
charged. If we commit periury, God wil
auenge it. If we resist the power, wee
breake the ordinance of God, and then
we receiue to our selues damnation. Let
vs therefore be wise and circumspect. As
for Pope Pius word, it is no warrant for
vs against the iudgement of God. In
the day of the Lorde, when we woulde
call him forth for our discharge, we shall
not finde him. He is not able to warrant
himselfe.
            Yet for his better credite, and to preuaile
the more with vs, he saith well of
him selfe, & magnifieth and aduaunceth
his owne name, when he telleth vs, I am
a Prince, I am aboue nations and kingdomes:
I excommunicate Kinges and
Princes: I depriue them, and put them
downe, and roote them vp: I haue authoritie
ouer their Subiects, I discharge them
of their othes, I curse them and giue
them vp to the Diuel: I am like to the
highest. These are blasphemous, and abominable
words, méete words for him

that sent them: to whō is giuen a mouth
to speake great things, and blasphemies.
And thus he imagineth all the worlde
should fall downe before him with a Sā
                  ctus.
He imagineth he holdeth the Sunne
and Moone in his handes, and can rule
them as it pleaseth him: & thus he is fallen
into a pleasant phrensie: he dreameth
of great matters, and with his owne
breath he bloweth him selfe bigge like a
bladder.
            But this breath is nothing, it is easie
to let it out, and then the bladder will
also be as nothing. It wil not be so easie
as he thinketh, to haue such place giuen
him in the consciences of men, as hee
sometimes had: or to roote out all that
professe the Gospel of Christ, or to make
that the name of the holy one of Israel
shall be no more spoken of. Yet hee attempteth
it, and thereto employeth all
his power, and his wisedome, and his
counsaile.Psal. 2. But he that dwelleth in heauē,
laugheth him to scorne, the Lord shal
haue him in derision As though he were
a Sampson, he taketh hold of the pillars,

he crasheth them in péeces: but the house
which he pulleth downe, shall fall vpon
his owne heade. His heart is exalted against
his fall, which is at hand. All his
great boast is but a cloude of darknesse,
a cleare winde will blow it ouer.
            And now to giue you a short view of
the whole matter. Remēber that Pope
Pius hath sent vs ouer against our gracious
Queene, and all hir Subiectes, a
Sentence of his cursse and depriuation.
Wherein he hath dealt ignorantly, and
contrary to the lawes, without wit, or
discretion, and foloweth no order. For
the Sentence which shoulde be kept vntill
the last, is giuen out before the parties
were called, or the cause and proofes,
duely alleaged and examined.
            Remember, that he is no competent
Iudge, that he hath no iurisdiction ouer
vs, that he him selfe is a partie, that hée
hath bene accused and founde guiltie by
the iudgement of the whole worlde, that
he is ouer much affectionate in the case,
wherein he séeketh to exalt and enrich
him selfe.
            
               Remember that he hath conueied 19
vntruths into this one bundle: that hée
hath forged a false commission: that hée
hath corrupted and falsified the worde of
God, and hath made God a false witnes
vnto his folies. Remember that hée teacheth
vs contrary to that we haue receiued
of Peter, and of Paul, and of Christ,
and of God: and that he saith, Let no
soule be subiect to the higher powers, let
euery soule resist the Prince, let him
withstand the ordinance of God, be not
obedient neither for wrath, nor for conscience,
giue no custome, nor tribute, nor
feare, nor honour vnto hir.
            
            Remember, if thou obey thy Prince as
God hath commaunded thée, thou art accursed
by the Pope: or, if thou disobey the
Prince as the Pope requireth thée, thou
art condemned by the iudgemēt of God.
            Remember, that the Pope hath conferēce
with traitours in all countries, that
he raiseth Subiectes against their Princes,
that he causeth Princes to plague
their Subiectes, that he hath no regard of
the stranger and the fatherlesse, that hée

suffereth Iewes and Harlots to liue in
wealth and peace with him at Rome: &
yet will not suffer a Christian and lawfull
Prince, to liue in y• peace of hir own
Countrie at home, that he is the procurer
of theft, and murder, of rebellion and
dissention in the land: that he hath sent
in a Bul
                     •
                  
                to shewe his meaning, and to
worke our disquiet: so bold, and vaine, &
impudent a Bul, and so full fraught with
blasphemie and vntruth, as neuer before
him did any. Let these thinges neuer bée
forgotten. Let your children remember
them for euer.
            Let vs, & your children with vs pray,
God saue Queene Elizabeth, and confound
all those which rise vp against hir.
Let vs at the length take knowledge of
the Pope, & of his enterprise, & boldnes.
He & his Predecessours haue deceiued y•
worlde, & our Fathers before vs. Let vs
bee no more children in vnderstanding.
God hath giuen vs the light of his word:
we haue by it espied, wherein they robbed
vs, let vs be no more deceiued. I say
vnto you againe, I beséech you, let vs at

the length take knowledge of the Pope,
and of his enterprise, and boldnesse. Hée
and his Predecessours haue deceiued the
worlde, & our Fathers before vs. Let vs
be no more children in vnderstanding.
God hath giuen vs the light of his word,
we haue by it espied wherein they robbed
vs. Let vs be no more deceiued.
            And thou O most merciful Father bée
our defence in these daungerous times.
The Lyon rangeth and séeketh whome
he may deuour. Looke downe from thy
heauens vpon vs. Giue thy grace vnto
Elizabeth thy seruant. Thou hast placed
hir in the seate of hir fathers: thou hast
made hir to be a comfort vnto thy people:
thou hast endewed hir with manifold
gifts: shadow hir vnder the wings of
thy mercifull protection: confound and
bring to nothing the counsell of hir enemies:
direct the worke of thine owne
hands: establish that, O God, which thou
hast wrought in vs: so we which bée thy
people, and the shéepe of thy pasture, shal
giue thée honour and praise for euer and
euer.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            ¶A Treatise of the holy
Scriptures, gathered out of certaine
Sermons, which the reuerend
Father in God, Bishoppe Iewel
preached at Salisburie.
            Anno. Domini.
1570.
            
               AMONG al his
creatures in heauen
or earth God
hath not made
any like vnto the
Sunne in the firmament,
the
beames where of
are beautifull and pleasaunte, and
doe giue comforte in all places to all

things. It reioyceth the whole, and relieueth
the sicke: it causeth birds to sing,
fishes to play, cattel to stirre, wormes to
créepe, grasse to grow, and trées to bring
fruit: it reneweth the face of the whole
earth. Yet a blind man hath no pleasure
in the beauty therof, because he is blind,
and cannot sée it. Yet a deade man hath
no warmth by the heate thereof, because
he is dead and féeleth it not.
            
               Adam was placed in Paradise, in perfect
estate, and in the companie of Gods
Angles. God walked and did talke with
him. He heard the voice and behelde the
presence of God. The riuers yéelded waters
aboundantly, the trées brought him
foode of life. He had plentie without trauel,
he had pleasures, ioy, and his hearts
desire. But Adam was vnthankfull, he
knew not God the worker of his happinesse,
he knewe not the place in whic
                  •
               
he was, he knew not his owne state and
blessednesse: therefore the wrath of the
Lord grewe against him: he fell into the
snares of the Deuil, he became mortall,
and returned to dust.
            
               What nation in all the Worlde so
happy as Israel? they were deliuered by
a mightie hand out of Aegipt, from the
tyrannie of Pharao, from seruage and vilanie.
Their children were no more
slaine before their faces. They passed
through the bottome of the Sea, as vpon
drie land. When they were hungrie,
there went forth a wind from the Lord,
and brought them Quailes from the sea,
and Manna was giuen them from Heauen
to eate: when they thirsted, the rocks
opened and powred oute water that they
and theyr beastes might drinke. In battaile
they were mightie and strong, no
power was able to stande against them.
The Lord wente before them by daye in
a pillar of a cloude, to leade them the
waye, and by night in a pillar of fire, to
giue them lighte. When they called vpon
the Lord, he heard them. When they
trusted in him, they were not confounded.
But they grewe vnmindfull of all
these mercies, and murmured agaynste
the Lorde, and againste his seruauntes:
therefore God raught forth his hand against

them. He sware in his wrath that
they shoulde not enter into his reste. Hee
sent his Angel and destroied them in the
wildernesse.
            
               Euen so fareth it with all suche whiche
regarde not the worde of their saluation,
because they haue eares and heare
not, nor will vnderstande with their
harts, the furie of the Lord shal be kindled
against them. The Prophet saith in
the name of God to Israell,
               
               Hier. 7. I haue sent vnto
them al my seruants the Prophets, yet
would they not heare mee, nor encline
their eare.2. Esdra. 9. 
               And, Behold, I sowe my law
in you, that it may bring foorth fruit in
you. But our fathers which receiued the
lawe, kept it not: neither obserued thine
ordinaunces, neyther did the fruite of
thy lawe appeare. For they that receyued
it perished, bicause they kepte not
the thing that was sowen in them. Samuell
telleth Saul:
                  
                     •
                  . Sam. 15. Thou haste caste away
the word of the Lord, and the Lord
hathe caste awaye thee. Againe Ieremie
sayeth: How do yee saye, wee are wise,
and the Lawe of the Lorde is with vs?

they haue reiected the word of the Lord,
and what wisedome is in them? Againe,
Vnto whom shal I speake,Hier. 6. and admonish
that they may heare? Behold their
eares are vncircumcised, and they cannot
hearken: beholde, the worde of the Lord
is vnto them as a reproche: they haue
no delight in it. I wil cause a plague to
come vpon this people, euen the fruite
of theyr owne imaginations: because
they haue not taken heede vnto my
wordes, nor to my lawe, but cast it off.
            After this sorte dothe God shewe the
cause, why his word taketh not place in
vs, bicause we are wilfull, and will not
heare it, nor receiue it, nor take delight
in it, nor let the fruit therof appeare, but
reiect it, and make it a reproch, and cast
it away from vs: and therfore is it, that
the Lord doth cast vs away, that we are
vnwise, that we please our selues with
our own deuises, and follow our owne imaginatiōs,
and perish, because we haue
not vnderstanding to heare ye instruction
of the Lords word, but like ignorant mē
disallow it, and cast it behinde the backe.
            
               The consideration hereof moueth mée
to say somewhat of the holy Scriptures,
whyche are the bright Sunne of God,
whiche bring light vnto our wayes, and
comforte to all parts of our life, and saluation
to our soules. In whiche is made
knowen vnto vs our estate, and the mercie
of God in Christe our Sauiour witnessed.
That we may the better sée the
path whiche wée haue to walke in, my
meaning is, truely, and plainely, and
shortly, to shewe you, what Auctoritie
and Maiestie the worde of God beareth:
then, what Profite we maye reape by it:
also, howe needeful it is, that we be wel
instructed in the holy Scriptures: and,
what Pleasure and Delectation a Christian
conscience may finde in them: and
lastle, whether they be darke and doubtfull,
or plaine and easie for youre vnderstanding:
that, when we know the Maiestie
and Auctoritie of the worde, and
what comforte and profitte GOD giueth
vs by it, we depriue not our selues
thereof by oure vnthankefulnesse, nor
close vp our eyes that we sée it not: but

heare it in reuerence and in feare, that
it may be fruitfull in vs, and we receiue
it not in vaine.
            The Scriptures are the worde of God.
               The auctoritie of the Scriptures. 2. Pet. 1.
What title can ther be of greater value?
what may be said of them to make them
of greater auctoritie, thā to say. The Lord
hath spoken them? That they came not
by the wil of men, but holie men of God
spake as they were moued by the holy
Ghost? At the worde or Proclamation
of an earthly Prince we stand vppe, and
vaile our bonnets, and giue good eare to
it: we are bounde so to doe, it is oure
duetie, such honour belongeth to the powers
that are placed to rule ouer vs: for
they are ordained of God. And who soeuer
resisteth them, resssteth the ordinance
of God. If we shoulde haue a reuelation,
and heare an Angell speake vnto vs,
how carefull would we be to marke, and
remember, and be able to declare the
words of the Aungel? yet is an Aungel
but a glorious creature, and not God.
And what is a King? greate and mightie:
yet mortall and subiecte to death.

creature, and not God. And what is a
King? great and mightie: yet mortall
and subiecte to death. His breath departeth,
and his name shal perishe. Bothe
he and his worde, his power and his puissance
shall haue an ende. But the word
of the Gospell is not as the worde of an
earthly Prince. It is of more Maiestie
than the word of an Angel. The Apostle
sayeth:Heb. 2. 
               If the worde spoken by Aungels
was stedfaste, and euerie transgression &
disobediēce receiued a iust recompence
of rewarde: how shall wee escape if wee
neglecte so great saluation whiche at the
firste beganne to bee preached by the
Lorde, and was confirmed vnto vs by
them that hearde him? God saith by the
Prophet Esay,
               Esay. 55. 
               My word shal accomplish
that whiche I will, and it shal prosper in
the thing whereto I sent it. And the same
Prophet saith:Esay. 40. 
               The worde of God shall
stand for euer. And, It is more easie that
Heauen and Earth passe awaie,
               Luke. 16. 
               than that
one title of the Lawe shoulde faile, sayth
our fauiour. For, it is the worde of the
liuing and almightie God, of the God of

Hostes, whyche hathe done whatsoeuer
pleased him, bothe in heauen and in
earth. By thys worde he maketh hys
will knowen.Iohn. 12. 
               I haue not spoken of my
selfe (sayeth Christe) but the Father
whiche sente mee, gaue mee a commaundemente,
what I shoulde saye,
and what I shoulde speake.
               Iohn. 15. And againe,
If I hadde not come and spoken
vnto them, they shoulde not haue
had sinne: but now haue they no cloake
for their sinne. No man hath séene God
at any time: He is inuisible, no eie can
reach vnto him. The onelye begotten
sonne whyche is in the bosome of hys
Father, he hath declared him: he hathe
shewed vs the throne of grace, that wée
may seeke for mercie, and finde grace in
time of néede: he hath disclosed vnto vs
the will of his father. He hath lefte vnto
vs, and ordained that we should heare
his holy worde.
            Thys word the Angelles and blessed
spirits vsed when they came down from
Heauen, to speake vnto the people:
when they came to the blessed Uirgine,

and to Ioseph, and to others: they spake
as it was written in the Prophetes and
in the Scriptures of God: they thought
not their owne auctoritie sufficient, but
they tooke credite to theyr saying,
and auctoritie to their message, oute of
the worde of God. This Worde the
Prophetes vouched and alleadged to the
people. Albeit they were sanctified in
their mothers wombe: albeit God had
endued them with his heauenly spirite:
although a Seraphin came vnto one of
them and touched his mouth with a hote
coale: albeit he sawe the Lorde sitting
vpon an high throne: yet they woulde
not speake as of themselues, but onelye
in the name of the Lord: for thus they
vsed to say. The Lord hath spoken: this
is the worde of the Lorde. Heare what
the Lorde saith. Sainct Paule albeit hée
was taken vppe into the third Heauen,
and into Paradise, and hearde wordes
that are not lawefull for man to vtter:
yet he wrote not his owne words to the
Churches of Rome, of Corinth, and Thessalonica.
and of other places, but deliuered

which had receiued, and taught them according
to the Scriptures.
            This word is the true Manna: it is
the bread which came downe from Heauen:
it is the key of the kingdom of heauen:
it is the sauour of life vnto life: it is
the power of God vnto saluation. In it
God sheweth vnto vs hys mighte, hys
wisedome, and his glorie. By it he wil
be knowen of vs. By it he will be honored
of his creaturs. Whatsoeuer truth
is brought vnto vs contrarie to the word
of God, it is not truth but falsehoode, and
errour: whatsoeuer honour done vnto
God, disagréeth from the honor required
by his worde, it is not honour vnto God,
but blasphemie.Mat. 15. As Christ saith, In vaine
they worship me, teaching for doctrines
mens precepts.
               Esa. 1. By Esay God saith, Who
required this at your hands? And by Ieremie,
               Ierem. 7.
               I spake not vnto your Fathers,
nor commaunded them, when I brought
them out of the lande of Aegipt, concerning
burnt offerings & Sacrifices. But
this thing commaunded I them, saying,
obey my voice, and I will bee your God,

and yee shall be my people: and walke
yee in all the wayes whiche I haue commaunded
you, that it may bee well vnto
you.
               Ierem. 23. Againe, What is the Chaffe to the
Wheate, saith the Lord? What are your
dreames to be weighed with the truth of
God? Search the Scriptures: In them
yée shall learne to know me, and howe
you should worship me: in them you shal
finde euerlasting life: the wordes of the
Lord are pure words, as the siluer tryed
in the fornace: ther is no filth, nor drosse,
remaining in them. They are the storehouse
of wisdome, and of the knowledge
of God. In respect whereof, all the wisedome
of this world is but vaine & foolish.
            
               Numa Pompilius King of the Romanes,
Lycurgus
                King of Lacedemon, and Minos
King of Creta, were wise men, & of great
gouernment: they deuised lawes to rule
the people, and bare them in hande,
that they were taught by reuelatiō: that
so their ordinances might win the more
credite, and be established for euer. But
where are they nowe? Where is Numa,
Minos, or Lycurgus? where bée their

Books? What is become of their Laws?
They were vnwise, and had no knowledge,
nor vnderstanding of God: they
and their Laws are dead, & their names
forgotten. But the lawe of God came
from Heauen indéede, GOD wrote it
with his finger, it is the fountaine of al
wisedome, and therefore shal it continue
for euer, and neuer haue an ende.
            Here let vs beholde the great power
and worke of God.Exod. 19. When Moses receyued
the Law, God hymselfe came down
in person, wyth thousande thousande of
Aungels: the Aire was darkened at hys
presence, the Moūt stoode al couered with
fire, the earth shooke, the heauens thundered,
the people stood a farre off, and fled
for feare, and said vnto Moses talke thou
with vs, & we wil heare: but let not God
talk with vs, least we die. This was the
first proclayming & publishing of ye law:
such force and credite God gaue to his
word, & warrāted himselfe to be y• Lord.
            Since that time, so manye thousande
yeares are already passed. In the meane
time ye people of Israel were oppressed by

Tyrantes, were spoiled and chased out
of their Countrie. Firste by Nabuchodonosor
into Babilon: after that by Antiochus
into Syria, and lastly, were as vagabondes
driuen from countrie to countrie.
Thyir Citie Ierusalem was sackte,
their houses ouerthrowne, their Temple
razed, and not a stone lefte vppon a
stone: theyr Librarie destroyed: theyr
Bookes burnte: the tabernacle loste, the
couenaunt broken: No vision, no reuelation,
no comforte for the people left,
nor prophet, nor priest, nor any to speake
in the name of the Lorde. In all those
times of decayes, of sackings, of darkenesse,
& of miserie, what was done with
the word of God? It was wickedly burnt
by Ioachim King of Iuda:
               Ierem. 36. and Antiochus
burnt the Bookes of the Lawe,
               1. Mac. 1. 
               and cutte
them in peeces
                     •
                  
                No man durste be knowen
to haue them, and auouche the hauing.
So thought they vtterly to deface
the glorie of God, and abolish al remembraunce
of his Lawes.
            Then came the Phariseis, they drowned
the worde of God with their traditions:

they tooke away the key of Knowledge,
and entred not in them selues, but
forbade them that came in. After them
came Heretiques, they denyed some one
parte, and some an other parte of Scriptures.
They razed, blotted, corrupted,
and altered the word of God, of the word
of God, they made it their own word, or
which is worse, they made it the word of
the Diuel.
            By the space of so many thousād yers,
the word of God passed by so many dangers
of Tyrants, of Phariseis, of Heretiques,
of fire, and of sworde: and yet
continueth and standeth vntill this day,
without altering, or chaunging one letter.
This was a wōderful work of God,
that hauing so many, so greate enimes,
and passing thorough so many, so greate
daungers, it yet continueth stil without
adding or altering of any one sentence,
or worde, or letter. No creature was able
to doe this, it was Gods worke. He
preserued it, that no Tyrant should consume
it, no Tradition choake it, no Heretike
malitiously should corrupt it. For

For his names sake, and for the elects
sake, he would not suffer it to perish. For
in it God hathe ordained a blessing for
his people, and by it he maketh couenant
with them for life euerlasting. Tirants,
and Phariseis, and Heretiques, and the
enimies of the Crosse of Christe haue an
end, but the worde of God hath no ende.
No force shall be able to decay it. The
gates of Hel shal not preuaile against
                  •
                it.
Cities shal fal: Kingdoms shall come to
nothing: Empires shal fade away as the
smoake: but the trueth of the Lord shall
continue for euer. Burne it, it will rise
againe: kill it, it wil liue againe: cut it
downe by the roote,Prou. 21. it wil spring againe,
There is no wisedome, neither vnderstā
                  ding,
nor Counsel against the Lord.
            
            Let vs behold the nations & kingdoms
which somtimes professed Christ, & are
now heathnish: I
                     ••
                  yricum, Epyrus, Peloponnesus,
Macedonia, & others. Againe, let vs
behold such kingdomes & countries, whiche
wer in times past heathnish, & knew
not God: As England, Ireland, Rome, Scotland,
& diuers other. They were al without

y• Gospel, without Christe, without
God, & without hope of life. They worshipped
Idols, euen ye work of their own
hands. To them they appointed Priests
for their seruice, dayes and places for the
people to resort togither to worship thē.
Here in Englād, Paules Church
                in Londō,
was the Temple of Diana: Peters Churche
in Westminst. was the Temple of Apollo.
In Rome they had ye Temple of the
great God Iuppiter: & in Florence ye 
               Temple
of Mars, and in other places they had
Temples dedicated to other Idols.
            
               Iupiter, Mars, Apollo, & Diana wer vncleane
spirites, & filthie Diuels: yet gaue
they thanks to them for their peace and
prosperitie, prayed to them in war & in
miserie, & commended vnto them, their
wiues, their children, themselues, ye safe
keping and custody of their soules. They
built gorgeous Churches & Chappels, set
vp images of siluer & gold to thē: prayed,
lifted vp their hāds, did sacrifice, & offred
vp their children to thē. A horrible thing
to say, yet true it is: ye darkenesse of those
times were such, that mē slew their own

offered them vp to Idolles. They saide,
greate is Iupiter, greate is Apollo, and
greate is Diana of the Ephesians. These
are the Gods of our Fathers, our Fathers
trusted in them, they made vs, and
haue defended vs, and haue giuen vs victorie
againste our enimies. Whosoeuer
denyed thē, were thought worthy to die.
            Thus were the Kings and the Princes,
and the people persuaded. And so
cōtinued they by the space of some thousand
yeares, without controllment, or
contradiction. They had greate proppes
of Antiquitie, Vniuersality, and Consent.
Antiquitie of all times, Uniuersalitie
of al places, consent of al the people. So
strongly, and so mightily were they foū
               ded.
Who woulde thinke suche a religion,
so auntient, so vniuersall, and so defended
by common consent, should euer
possibly be remoued?
            But when the fulnesse of time came,
God sente forth his worde, and al was
changed. Errour fell down, & truth stode
vp: mē forsooke their Idols, and went to
God. The Kings and Priestes, and

people were changed: the Temples, and
Sacrifices, and Praiers were chaunged:
mens eyes, and heartes were chaunged.
They forsooke their Gods, their Kings,
their Priests: they forsooke their antiquity,
customes, consent, their Fathers, and
themselues. What power was able to
work these things? What Emperour by
force euer preuailed so much? what
strength could euer shake down so mightie
idols from their seate? What hand of
man could subdue and cōquer the whole
world, & make such mighty nations confesse
they had done amisse? This did the
Lord bring to passe by the power of his
word, and the breath of his mouth. This
was it, yt lead captiui
                  •
               ie captiue, & threw
downe euery high thing that lifted it self
vp against the Lorde: & brought all powers
vnder subiection vnto the Lord It is
the image, the power, the arme, ye sword,
and the glorie of God. It is mightie, of
great force and vertue, of authoritie, and
maiestie, because it is the worde of God:
therefore the glorie thereof is great.
            Now let vs stand a farre of, and humble

our selues, and in reuerence and
feare learne to take the fruite and comfort
of the same:The profite which Christians reape by the Scriptures. for so is the wil of God,
that we may be partakers of his glorie.
But where shal we finde enterance into
this matter? And howe shall we bée able
to come a land? For this is the Sea, and
the depth of all the workes, of the iudgementes,
and mercies, & of the kingdome
of God. This is a Sea that hath no shore,
a pit that hath no botome. The holy
Scriptures are the mercie seate, the registry
of the mysteries of God, our Chartre
for the life to come, the holy place in
which God sheweth him selfe to the people,
the Mount Ston, where God hath appointed
to dwel for euer. The more comfort
in thē, so much the more gréedily let
vs desire them: the more heauenly and
glorious they are, with so much the more
reuerence let vs come vnto them.
            For consideration of this mater of the
fruite & comfort which God worketh by
the worde: what may we better call to
minde,Rom. 15. than that is réecorded by S. Paul:
Whatsoeuer thinges are written aforetime,

are written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might haue hope. All that is
writtē in the word of God, is not writtē
for Angels, or Archangels, or heauenly
Spirites, but for the sonnes of men, for
vs and for our instruction: that by them
we may receiue strength, and comfort in
all aduersities, and haue hope of the life
to come. It is the word of God, God openeth
his mouth and speaketh to vs, to
guide vs into all truth, to make vs full
and readie in all good workes, that we
may be perfect men in Christ Iesus: so
rooted and grounded in him, that we bee
not tost to and fro with euery tempest.
            The profite which the worde of God
bringeth, shal best apeare, if we first take
a viewe of our estate, what we are, in
what place we stande, & what enemies
make force against vs. We are ye sons of
Adam, stubborne children, the children
of vanitie, and of wrath: The ch
                  •
               ldren of
those fathers which forsooke God, and
haue erred in their hearts, & were deceiued.
God which created man & breathed

into him the breath of life,Gen. 8. saith: The
imagination of mans heart is euill from
his youth. Such are we euē by the iudgment
of God: and his iudgement faileth
not. What errour, what idol, what wickednes
euer hath bene heard, which hath
not bene forged and wrought in the
heart of man? wée can neither doe, nor
speake, nor thinke the thing that is good:
our vnderstanding is heauie, our will
froward, our eyes blinde, and our heart
vncleane. We go astray through this
worlde as lost shéepe, euery man after
his owne way. Euen as a leafe is caried
vp and downe with a blast of winde,
so are we easily driuē into errour: in our
selues we finde no stay, no succour, nor
helpe. Such are we, and so weake of our
selues.
            But where are we? in the world. And
what is the world? Some thinke it to be
a place full of all delights and pleasures,
a goodly strong and gorgious palace, and
a paradise of ioy. Let no man deceiue vs,
nay rather let vs not deceiue our selues:
the world is a shoppe of vanities, it is a

dungeon of darkenesse, a potte full of
poyson, a shippe full of leakes, a way full
of snares. It blindeth our eyes, beguileth
our senses, and helpeth vs forwarde into
all daungers. We are blinde our selues,
and the place wherein we are is nothing
els but darkenesse.
            Wherunto may I resemble our case?
Ieremy the Prophet was cast into a dū
               geon.
There he sate without light, and
without comfort. His case was miserable,
and the place lothsome, yet he knew
where he was: he knew what he lacked:
he cryed vnto the Lord and was deliuered.
Daniel was cast into the den of Lions,
there to bee torne in péeces and deuoured.
But he sawe his misery, and the
daunger in which he stoode: he sawe the
Lions, the pawes which shoulde gripe
him, and the téeth which shoulde teare
him. His case was miserable: yet is ours
more miserable. We are in the déepe
dungeon of hel, and think we are in safetie:
we are in the middest of darkenesse,
and thinke it to be light: we are compassed
with Lio
                  •
               s, with Dragons, and

Scorpions, yet think not of our miserie.
            Who hath not heard the story of Ionas?
Ionas was in a Whales belly: The place
was very darke: the waues beat on euery
side: he was drowned, yet touched no
water: he was swallowed vp, yet not
consumed: he liued without any sense
of life: the fish was his death, y• sea was
death, & the tempest was death: yet he died
not, but liued in the mids of death: he
could not sée, he could not heare, he knew
not to whom he might call for helpe: hée
was taken & carried away, he knew not
whether. Let vs marke well this storie,
it is a true pattern of our estate, & sheweth
what our life is in this worlde. We
are beset wt like dangers, we are driuen
 wt tēpests we are drowned in like flouds,
we liue in ye middest of horrible darknes,
we are caried we know not whether.
            The Philosopher telleth vs, trueth &
falsehode are nigh neighbors, and dwell
one by the other: the vtter porch of ye one
is like the porch of the other, yet their
way is contrarie: the one leadeth to life,
the other leadeth to death: they differ

little to the shew saue that oft times the
dore of falshod is faire, painted, grauen,
and beautifully adorned: but the dore or
fore front of trueth, is plaine and homely.
Therby it hapneth that men be deceiued,
they mistake the dore, and goe into
errors house, whē they séeke truth. They
call euill good, falsehoode truth, & darkenesse
light. They forsake that is good, deny
the truth, and loue not the light. This
moued S. Paul to say of his brethren the
Iewes:
               Rom. 10. 
               I beare them recorde that they
haue the zeale of God, but not according
to knowledge: they haue the care and
feare of God: they are zelous in their doings:
they haue deuotion: they pretend
conscience: they think they do wel,
and that they please God.Rom. 1. 
               When they
professed themselues to be wise, they became
fooles. They knew not what they
did: for if they had knowlege, they wold
neuer haue crucified the Lorde of glorie.
But they knowe not the trueth of God:
they know not God: they are caried away
in y• vanity of their own hart. Their
prayers are no prayers: The truth they

holde is falshoode: their faith is no faith:
they are shéepe without a shephearde.
Thus we haue heard, what we are, and
in what place.
            Nowe let vs sée what enemies bende
their force against vs. We fight against
the gates of hell, with the Diuell, the
prince of darkenesse, the father of lies:
with the Diuel, which hath power ouer
the children of disobedience, by whose
malice death came into the world Euen
that Diuel bendeth his force against vs,
which deceiued Adam in Paradise:
which hath deceiued the learned Philosophers:
and beguiled the Princes, and
wisemē, and the worthies of the world:
Which doth abuse, and entice our hands,
our eyes, our learning, our wit, and our
owne heart to deceiue vs. He rampeth as
a Lion, and raungeth ouer the worlde,
séeking whom he may deuour. This is
his delite and studie. Hée hath bene a
murtherer from the beginning. If this
were euer true at any time, our times
haue founde it most true. We are they
vpon whom ye ends of ye world are come.
            
               
               Nowe is this Scripture fulfilled in
our eares. Now sée we the dayes whereof
Christ warned his disciples so earnestly:
               Matth. 24.
They shal say, Loe here is Christ, and
there is Christ, This is the truth, that is
the truth. There shall arise false Christs,
and false prophets, and shall deceiue many,
they shal betray the truth. Many shal
be offended by them: if it were possible,
the verie elect. They whose names are
written in ye booke of life shold be deceiued.
And except those dayes should bee
shortned, there should no flesh be saued:
but for the elects sake those dayes shal be
shortned. The sun shalbe darkned, & the
moone shal not giue hir light. The sun
is the word of God: the moone signifieth
the Church. The powers of heauē shal be
moued, all the kinreds of the earth shal
mourn. Abhomination of desolatiō shal
stand in the holy place. Let him that readeth,
consider it. This is the mysterie of
iniquitie of which S. Paul speaketh to the
Thessalonians,
               2. Thes. 
                     •
                  
                Which worketh among
them that perish. Thus are we forewarned.
God hath giuen vs his worde

to aduise vs, that we be not caste awaye
vnawares. They that walk in the darke
know not whether they go: if the blinde
leade the blinde, both fall into the ditch:
he that is ignorant, shal not be knowen.
Christ shall say vnto him, I knowe you
not: departe from mée yée curssed into
euerlasting fire. Their worme shall
not die, and their fire shal not be put out.
            
            In this case, what shal a godly disposed
simple man do? How shall he settle
himselfe? To which fide may he safelye
ioine himselfe? If he make reconing of
learning, there are learned men on both
sides: if he make reconing of vertue, and
godly life, there be vertuous men and of
godly life on both sides: if he make reconing
of zeale, either side is zelous in y• religion
they hold: if he make reconing of
ye name of ye Church, they take it as wel
to the one side as to the other: if he make
reconing of the multitude, there are many
on either side, but neither side hath so
many as hath the Turke. Whether then
may a man turne himselfe, and to which
side may he safely ioine? In this case we
find the comfort and profite of the word

of God. In this case S. Paule telleth vs,
whatsoeuer things are writtē aforetime,
are written for our learning: to lighten
our eyes, to resolue our doubts, and to
guide our féete. This lighte God hathe
kindled in his mercie, to lighten them
that sit in darkenesse. Except he had left
vs a sparkle of this light, we hadde perished,
& becom like to Sodoma & Gomorrha.
            
            
               Dauid saith,Psal. 119. 
               Thy word is a Lantern to
my pathes, and a light to my feete. By
it I may sée the way which is before me:
by it I can escape danger, and by it I can
kéepe the path wherein I ought to walk.
When Christ perceiued that the Capernaites
& the Iewes,
               Iohn. 6. misliked his doctrine, &
went back & walked no more with him,
he said to ye xij. Wil ye also go away? You
are my disciples, whō I haue chosen out
of this world: wil you also go away? Simō
Peter answered him, Maister, to whō
shal we go? thou hast the word of eternal
life. If we forsake thée, who shall instruct
vs? thy word is the word of eternall life.
            
               With this word Christ cōfounded the
Scribes and Phariseis, and put them to

silence.
               Maike. 7. Yee reiect (saith hée) the commaundement
of God, that yee may obserue
your owne tradition. For, Moses
said, Honor thy father and thy mother,
whosoeuer shall curse father or mother,
let him die the death. But ye say, if a man
say to father or mother, Corbam, that is,
by the gifte that is offered by mee thou
maiest haue profite, he shalbe free. With
this word he confounded them, for misusing
of the Temple by buying & selling,
It is written,Matth. 21. mine house shall bee called
the house of praier: but yee haue
made it a denne of theeues. With this
worde he put them to silence, & confounded
their error, in y• they thought it lawfull
for a man to put away his wife for
euerie fault:
               Matth. 19. From the beginning it was
not so. With this worde he confounded
the Diuel, and chased him from him: It
is written,Matth. 4. man shall not liue by breade
onely, but by euery word that procedeth
out of the mouth of God: And againe, It
is written, thou shalt not tempt the Lord
thy God: And againe, It is written, thou
shalt worshippe the Lord thy God, and

him onely shalt thou serue.
            This word confounded the Arians &
all sects of heretiks. What is become of
Marcion, of Nestorius, of Valentinu
                     •
                  
                of
Menander, of Sabellius, of Eutyches, and
others? they are blowen away as smoke
before the winde: the word of God hath
confounded them, and beat them away.
As Dagon fell, and brake his hands and
necke, and coulde not stande in the presence
of the Arke of the Lord: euen so
shall all falshode fall and hide it selfe in
the presence of the truth of God. As the
Rod of Moses deuoured the Rods of the
Charmers: as the beames of the Sunne
driue away and consume darknesse, so
shal the word of God chase away errors.
            When the two Disciples walked by
the way with Christ, they said betwéene
thēselues,Luke. 24. after their eyes were opened,
that they knew him: Did not our hearts
burne within vs, while he talked with vs
by the way, and opened to vs the Scriptures?
His words did possesse all our senses:
this talk was not like common talk,
we felt it forcible in vs, as the worde of

               Israel hearde Peter declare vnto them at
Ierusalem by proofe of the Scriptures,Act. 2.
that Christ was come, they were not able
to resist the worde of God, but were
pricked in their heartes and saide vnto
Peter and the other Apostles Men and
brethren what shall we do? we acknowledge
our errour: the words which you
speake are most true: they are the words
of life: teach vs and instruct vs what we
shal do. They felt the force of it, and yéelded
vnto it: they did acknowledge it was
the word of God.
            
               S. Augustine after he had continued
long in errour,Lib. 8. confession. cap. 12. and withdrewe himselfe
into a secret place where he might make
his prayer, and bewaile his ignorance,
hearde a voice say vnto him: Tolle, lege,
tolle, lege, Take vp and reade, take vp and
reade. And hee foorthwith tooke vp the
Epistles of Saint Paul, and opened them,
and secretely read the Chapter which he
first lighted on, euen these words: Not in
gluttonie,Rom. 13. and drunkennesse, neither in
chambring and wantonnesse, nor in
strife and enuying: but put yee on the 
               
               Lord Iesus Christ, and take no thought
for the fleshe, to fulfill the lustes of the
same. Nec vltra volui legere (saith he) nec
opus erat. Statim quippe cum fin
                     •
                   huiusce sententi
                     •
                  e,
quasi luce s
                     •
                  curit atis infusa cordi meo,
omnes dubita
                     •
                  ionis tenebrae diffugerunt. I
woulde reade no farther, for I needed
not. For when I had read to the ende
of this sentence, all the darkenesse of
doubtfulnesse vanished away, as if some
cleare light of securitie were powred into
my heart.  It was as if it had béene
saide: O man acknowledge thy miserie:
thou art naked, couer thy filthinesse:
put vpon thée Iesus Christe. And forthwith,
I felt a fire within me, my heart
was lightned, the scales fell from mine
eyes, I was able to sée. Thus was he
comforted, and staide by this, the worde
of God.
            This profite of the worde S. Cyprian
declareth.Ciprian: ad Pompeium. 
               Si ad diuinae tradi
                     •
                  ionis caput, &
originem reuertamur, cessat omnis error humanus.
If wee returne to the heade, and
the beginning of the Lordes traditions,
all errour of man must needs giue place.
               
               Theophilactus writing vpon these wordes
in the Gospell by Sainct Iohn,Theophil: in 10. cap. Ioh. Hee
that entreth not in by the doore into the
Sheepefolde, but climbeth vp an other
waye, he is a theefe and a Robber, sayth,
non ingreditur per ostium, hoc est, per Scripturas.
Non enim vtitur Scripturis testibus,
neque Prophetis. Nam profecto scripturae ostium
sunt per quas adducimur ad Deum: illae
lupos non permittunt intrare: prohibent haereticos
vt nos securi simus: & de omnibus rationem
dant de quibus voluerimus. Fur igitur
est qui non ingreditur per scripturas in
stabulum ouium, & ita per illas deprehenditur.
Sed ascendit aliundè, hoc est, aliam sibi
viam & insolitam parat. Talis erit Antichristus. He entreth not in by the doore, that
is, by the Scriptures. For he doth not vse
the Scriptures, nor the Prophets, as witnesses.
For indede the Scriptures are the
dore by which wee are brought to God:
and they suffer not the Woolues to come
in, they kepe of heretikes, that wee may
be in safetie: & they teach vs the reasō of
any thing, wherein we woulde be instructed:
therfore he is a theef which entereth
               
               not into the shepefold by the Scriptures.
And by the Scriptures, it apeareth he is a
a theefe, that climbeth vp an other way,
that is, maketh himselfe an other waye, a
way which was not knowen, nor beaten.
Such a one shall Antichrist bee. What
greater profite? they bring vs to God:
teache vs the trueth, and giue vs reason
of all things: they kéepe vs in safetie:
suffer not Wolues to deuour vs, kepe off
Heretiques, bewray a théefe, and make
knowen who is Antichrist. Therefore,
vppon the Gospell by Sainct Luke he expoundeth
these words,Theophil: in 12. Lucae. 
               Let your lights
bee burning, that is, haue not your being
in the darkenesse, and bee yee not
voide of Iudgement: but take vnto you
the light of Gods word: which wil teach
you what things you shoulde doe, and
what things you ought not to doe.
            
            And as the worde of God is the light
to directe vs, and to bewray errours: so
is it also the standerde and beame to trie
the weightes of trueth and falsehoode.
Chrysostome writing vppon the foure
and twentith of Sainct Mathew,
               Hom. 49. in opere imperf. sheweth

it were vnpossible for a mā to stay
himselfe, and finde out which is the true
Church, but by the worde of God,
For it
could not be tried by working of myracles,
bicause the gift of working miracles
is taken away: and such false myracles as
carrie some shewe, are rather to be found
among false Christians: nor yet by their
conuersation and life, because Christians
liue either as il, or worse than Heretiques. Nulla probatio potest esee verae Christianitatis,
neque refugium potest esse Christianorum
aliud, volentium cognoscere fide
                     •
                  
veritatem, nisi tantummodò per scripturas: There can be no triall of true Christianitie,
and Christians, which desire to know
the trueth, wherevpon they may builde
their faith, haue no other refuge, but to
trie and learn this by the Scriptures. For
(sayth he) Heretiques haue the counterfaite
and likenesse of those things which
are proper to Christ. They haue Churches,
they haue the Scriptures of GOD,
they haue Baptisme, they haue the Lords
Supper, and al other things like the true
Church: yea they haue Christe himself. 
He therefore that will knowe whiche is
the true Churche of Christ, howe maye
he know it, but by the Scriptures? Therfore
our Lord, knowing that ther should
be such confusion of things in the latter
dayes, commaundeth, that Christians
whiche liue in the profession of Christian
faith, and are desirous to settle them
selues vppon a sure grounde of Faith,
shoulde goe to no other thing, but to the
Scriptures. Otherwise, if they had regard
to other things, they shoulde bee offended,
and perishe, and not vnderstande
whiche is the true Church.
            
            The maister of the Ship, when he is
on the maine Sea, casteth his eye alwayes
vpon the Loade Starre: and so
directeth and guideth his wayes. Euen
so muste we which are passengers and
straungers in this world, euer settle our
eyes to beholde the worde of God. So
shall no tempest ouerblowe vs: so shall
we be guided without danger: so shal we
safly arriue in the hauen of our rest. The
Prophet Dauid therefore saith: Blessed
are they that keepe his testimonies, and

seeke him with their whole heart. Their
faces shal not be ashamed: they shal not
bee confounded which haue respect vnto
his commaundement. Blessed is the man
whose delight is in the law of the Lord,
and, in that lawe do the exercise himselfe
daye and night. The Lawe of the Lord
is perfect conuerting the soule: the testimonie
of the Lorde is sure, and giueth
wisedome vnto the simple. This is the
rule of our faith: without this, our faith
is but a fantasie, and no faith: for faith
is by hearing, and hearing by the worde
of God.Iohn. 5. Therefore Christe saith, Search
the Scriptures, they are they that testifie
of me. There shall ye finde testimonie
of my doctrine, there shal ye know what
is the wil of my heauenlye Father, and
there shall you receiue the comforte for
euerlasting life.Iohn. 8. Againe, He that followeth
mee shall not walke in darkenesse
but shall haue the light of life. If a man
keepe my word, he shal know the truth,
hee shall neuer see death. Therefore
Baruch saith,Baruch. 4. 
               O Israel, wee are blessed,
for the things that are acceptable vnto

God, are declared vnto vs. This is thy
blessednesse, herein hath God shewed his
fauour vnto thée, he hathe reuealed the
secreats of hys will vnto thée, and hath
put his worde in thy mouth. He sheweth
his word vnto Iacob, his statutes and his
iudgements vnto Israell: hee hathe not
dealte so with euerie nation, neyther
haue they knowen hys Iudgementes.
Therefore the Prophet Dauid teacheth
vs to pray vnto God for the knowledge
of his worde,Psalm. 25. 
               Shewe mee thy wayes O
Lord,Psalm. 25. and teache me thy pathes. Take
not thy holie spirite from mee,Psal. 51. and incline
my hearte vnto thy testimonies:
Giue mee vnderstanding,Psalm. 119. that I maye
learne thy commaundementes, open
mine eyes, that I may see the wonders
of thy Lawe.
               Psalm. 13. And, Lighten mine eies,
that I sleepe not in death: that I maye
discerne betwéene safetie and daunger,
that I may knowe truth to be the truth,
and error to be error.
            Thus I haue declared parte of that
profite which groweth to vs by the word
of God: but it doeth not onelye directe

our iudgement in the triall of truth, but
dothe also graffe in vs a boldenesse and
constancie in the defence of the truth. Salomon
saieth,cle. 27. 
               A foole chaungeth as the
Moone: He is alwayes vnstable, and inconstant,
he knoweth not, neither what
to do, nor what to beleue: he is somtimes
ful, & sometimes emptie: & turneth and
changeth as the Moone: He buildeth and
layeth his foundation vppon the sande:
therfore his house falleth to the ground.
He halteth on both sides: somtimes worshippeth
God, and sometimes worshippeth
Baal: he is neither hotte nor colde:
he ebbeth and floweth like the waues of
the sea, he doubteth and staggereth, & resteth
in nothing. He knoweth not the
truth, he knoweth not that the scripturs
are the word of God, so he wandereth
in the darke, and knoweth not the way
in which he walketh: He hath no féeling,
no hart, no vnderstāding. He is vnfaithful
towards God, and kepeth no faith towards
man: he is wauering in all hys
wayes. And why? because he knoweth
not the wil of God, nor hath the light of

his word to guide his féete.
            But a wise man is one and stedfast as
the sunne. He buildeth his house vppon
a rocke, and that rocke is Iesus Christe
the sonne of God. Therefore his house is
neuer shaken downe. Be the storme or
tempest neuer so rough, yet it shall stand
faste like Mount Sion, because his truste
is in the name of the Lord. He knoweth
that his name is written in the Booke
of Life, he knoweth that he belongeth to
the Lords Shéepefolde, and that no man
can take him away out of the Lordes
hand.Psalm. 23. In this boldenesse Dauid sayeth,
Thoughe I shoulde walke thorough
the valley of the shadow of death, I will
feare no euill: for thou arte wyth mee:
thy rodde and thy staffe they comforte
mee.
               Psalm 27. And againe, the Lord is my light
and my saluation, whome shall I feare?
And againe,Psalm. 219. 
               Except thy lawes had bene
my delight, I should now haue perished
in mine affliction:
               2. Kings. 19. when Ezechias heard
y• proud message of Sennacherib sent to
him & his people by Rahshaketh, that they
should not obey Ezech. nor trust to him,

when he said, The Lord wil deliuer you:
and, let not thy GOD deceiue thee, in
whom thou trustest: hee wente vp into
the house of the Lord, and prayed vnto
the Lorde, to saue hym and hys people
out of their handes, that al the kingdomes
of the earth might know, that hee
is GOD alone. Euen so the Apostle:
Whether wee liue or die, wee are the
Lordes.
               Rom. 14. And in this boldenesse our sauiour
Christe setled himselfe to beare their
reproches,Luke. 22. and to carry his Crosse: Father,
if thou wilte take away this cup frō
me, neuerthelesse, not my wil, but thine
bee done. Thus they that are taught by
the word of God, to put their trust in the
Lorde, and are thereby rooted and setled
in him, can not be remoued by any practise
of Sathan, but stand fast, and continue
for euer.
            Which shal more plainely appeare, if
we looke backe into the times of persecution,
and beholde the boldenesse of constancie
of the Sainctes of God. They
were brought before Magistrates, caste
into prisōs, spoiled of their goods, cruelly

murthered. Some were hanged vppon
gibbets, some run through with swords,
some torn with wild horses, some drowned
in the water, and some burnt in the
fire. They were hated of all men for the
name of Christ. They were despised as
the filth of the worlde, and dung of the
earth. Yet continued they faithfull and
constant. They armed their heartes
with the comforte of Gods worde: therby
wer they able to resist in the euil day.
They were faithfull vntil death, therefore
GOD gaue them a Crowne of
glorie.
            When they were called before Kings,
and Princes, and others of auctoritie,
and commaunded to forsake the trueth
they had learned, and the comfort which
they tooke in the truth, they aunswered
in this manner: O my gratious Lorde,
I would faine do your commandement:
I am your subiect: I haue done faithfull
seruice with my body, & with my goods,
but I cannot serue you against God: He
is King of Kings, & Lord of Lords: He is
my Lord, before whom I stande: I haue

put my life in his handes. He hathe forbidden
me to doe this thing whiche you
commaunde: I cannot therefore doe it.
Iudge vprightly, whether it be méete
to obey you, rather than God. My liuing,
my wife, my children, and my life,
are deare vnto me. I am a man like others,
and haue mine affections. Yet
neither liuing, nor wife, nor children,
nor my life is so deare vnto me as the
glorie of God. I am but a pore worme,
yet am I the worke of his handes. God
hathe putte his worde in my mouth: I
may not deny it. I may not beare false
witnesse against the Lord. My life is not
deare vnto me in respect of the trueth. I
knowe if I shoulde deny him to saue my
life, I shoulde lose it: and if I lose my
life for his sake, I shall finde it. That
which your auctoritie shal lay vpon me,
is not done without his will. All the
haires of my head are numbred. I owe
you obedience, I will not resiste your
power, for if I shoulde resiste, I shoulde
resiste the ordinaunce of God. I am subiect
to you for conscience sake. I will

forsake my countrey, my goods, my children,
and my selfe at your commaundement.
I will say to mine owne fleshe,
I knowe thée not: onely I can not forsake
my Lorde God.
            Deare sir, you fight 
                  •
               ot against me. Alas,
what am I? What can I doe? You
fight against God, against the moste holy,
against him, which can commaunde
your life to goe out of your body: it is a
hard thing for you to kicke againste the
spur. It is no hard matter for you to kill
me: for so mightie a Prince to kill so
wretched a worme. But this I declare
to you, that my bloud which you shed is
innocēt, & shal be required at your hāds.
            It maye please God to giue vnto you
repentance, and the knowledge of the
truth. If my bloud may be a mean therto:
if my bloud may open your eies: if my
bloud may soften your heart: it coulde
neuer be spent in a better cause. Blessed
be the name of God whiche hathe made
me his instrument for youre so happye
conuersion: thys is the onelye
thing wherein I can not yéelde.

The Lorde hath spoken vnto me: I haue
heard his voice: my hart hath felt it: my
conscience knoweth it: I can not denye
it. No sworde can cutte me from it: no
water can drowne it: no fire can burne
the loue I beare vnto it: there is no creature
in heauen or earth, that can carrie
me from that blessed hope I haue conceiued
by his word.
            So constant is he that hathe learned
the worde of God, & hath set his delighte
vppon it, and is through it assured of the
wil of God. Heauen shal shake, the earth
shall tremble, but the man of God shall
stande vpright. His foote shall not faile:
his heart shall not faint: he shall not bée
moued. Such a ground, such a foundation,
suche a rocke is the worde of God.
Blessed is the man whose hope is in the
name of the Lorde. He shal builde vppon
a sure place: he layeth his foundation vpon
the corner stone. He néedeth no armie
to make him strong: he néedeth no
friendes to comforte him in aduersitie.
His strength is within, the gates of hel
shal not preuaile againste him. His comfort

is inwardly, within his hearte. He
speaketh to God, and God vnto hym.
His eyes beholde the kingdome, and power
and glorie of God.
            But what say we of the Fathers,The auctoritie of the Fathers. 
               Augustine,
Ambrose, Hierom, Cyprian, &c.
What shall we thinke of them, or what
accompt may we make of them? They
be Interpretors of the worde of God.
They were learned men, and learned
Fathers: the instruments of the mercie
of God, & vesselles full of grace. We despise
them not, we reade them, we reuerence
them, and giue thankes vnto God
for them. They were witnesses vnto the
truth, they were worthie pillars and ornamentes
in the Churche of God. Yet
may they not be cōpared with the word
of God. We may not build vpon them:
we may not make them the foundation
and warrant of our conscience: we may
not put our trust in them. Our trust is in
the name of the Lorde.
            And thus are we taught to estéeme of
the learned Fathers of the Churche, by
their owne iudgement: by that whiche

they haue written, either for the credite
of their owne doings, or of the
auctoritie whych they haue thought due
to the writings of others. S. Augustine
said of the Doctours and Fathers in his
time:Aug. ad For
                  
                     •
                  un
                     •••
                  num, Ep. 111. 
               Neque quorumlibet a
                     •
                  sputationes,
quamuis Catholicorum, & laudatorum hominum,
velut Scripturas Canonicas habere debemus:
vt nobis non liceat, salua honorificentia
quae illis debetur, aliquid in eorum scriptis
improbare, aut respuere: si fortè inuenerimus,
quod aliter senserint, quàe veritas
habet. Talis sum ego in scriptis aliorum,
tales esse volo intellectores meorum: Neither
weigh we the writings of all mē, be they
neuer so worthy and catholique, as wee
weigh the canonical Scriptures: but that
sauing the reuerence that is due vnto
them, we may mislike and refuse somewhat
in their writings, if wee finde that
they haue thought otherwise, than the
truth may beare. Suche am I in the writings
of others, and such would I wishe
others to be in mine.
                Some things I beléeue,
& some things which they write, I

can not beléeue. I weigh them not as the
holy & Canonicall Scriptures. Cyprian
was a Doctor of the Church, yet he was
deceiued: Hierome was a Doctor of the
Church, yet he was deceiued: Augustine
was a Doctor of ye Church, yet he wrote
a Booke of Retractations, he acknowledged
that he was deceiued. God did therfore
giue to his Church many Doctors,
& many learned men, whych all shoulde
search the truth, and one reforme an other,
wherein they thought him deceyued.
S. Augustine saieth:Aug in Ps. 57. 
               Auferantur de
medio chartae nostrae, procaedat in medium codex
Dei: audi Christum dicentem: audi veritatem
loquetem: Take away from amongest
vs any our owne Bookes: lette the
Booke of God come amongest vs: heare
what Christe saieth: hearken what the
truth speaketh.
                He is the wisedome of
his father, he can not deceiue vs. Againe
he saith:Aug. Epi. 48. 
               Audi dicit dominus, non dicit Donatus,
aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut
Hilarius, aut Ambrosius, aut Augustinus:
Heare this, the Lorde saieth: heare not

this, Donatus saith, or Rogatus, or Vincentius,
or Hilarius, or Ambrose, or Augustine
saith.
                Al these were learned, most
of them were holy: yet saith Augustine,
we may not yéelde to that which is saide
by learned men: but we must yéelde our
ful consente and beliefe to the worde of
God.Orig. in Hier. cap. 1. 
               Origen saith Necesse nobis est in testimonium
vocare sanctas Scripturas. Sensus
quippe &c. Wee muste needes call to
witnesse the holy Scriptures: for oure
iudgementes and expositions, without
those witnesses, carry no credite.
                Marke
wel:Aug. contra Crescen. Gra. li. cap. 29. our words and expositions & constructions,
vnlesse they be warranted by
the Scriptures, are not ynough, they cary
not credite. Augustine saith: Nos nullam
Cipriano facimus iniuriam, cùm eius
quaslibet literas, &c. Wee offer no wrong
to S. Cyprian, when wee seuer anye his
Letters or Writings from the Canonical
auctoritie of the holy Scriptures.
                Thus
speaketh Aug. a Doctor of the Church of
Cyprian another Doctor also of ye Churche.
Cyprian was a bishop, a lerned Father,
a holy man, & a Martire of Christe:
               
yet saith Augustine his worde is not the
Gospell: his worde is not the worde of
God: there is no wronge done to him,
though his writings cary not like credit
as the holy Scripture.
            I could shewe many the like spéeches
of the auncient Fathers, wherein they
reuerence the holy Scriptures, as to
which onely they giue consent without
gainsaying: which can neither deceiue
nor be deceiued. In this sort did Origen,
and Augustine, and other Doctours of
the Church speake of themselues and of
theirs, and the writings of others, that
we should so read them, & credite them,
as they agréed with the worde of God.
Hoc genus literarum non cum credendi necessitate,
               Aug. contra Faustum. lib
                     •
                   12. cap. 5.
               sed cum iudicandi libertate legendum
est: This kinde of writings is to bee
read not with a necessitie of beleeuing
them, but with a libertie to iudge of thē.
S. Paul
                saith,Gal. 1. 
               though that we, or an Angel
from heauen preach vnto you otherwise,
than that which we haue preached
vnto you, let him bee accursed.
               Aug. lib. 3. cap. 6. contra lit. Petil. Out of
which place, S. Augustine speaketh thus:

               Siue de Christo, siue de eius Ecclesia, siue de
re quacunque alta, quae pertinet ad fidem, vitam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
nostram, non dicam, si nos, sed si Angelus
de caelo nobis annuntiauerit praeter quam
quod in Scripturis legaltbus & Euangelicis
accepistis, anathema sit. Whether it be of
Christ, or of his Church, or of any thing
else whatsoeuer, perteining either to
our life, or to our faith: I will not say, if
I my selfe, but if an Angel from heauen
shall teach vs otherwise, than ye haue receiued
in the bookes of the lawe, and in
the Gospels, hold him accursed.
               
            
            Now, to conclude this matter, ye same
father saith:Aug. lib. 2. ca. 
                     •
                  . cont. Cresc. 
               Ecclesiastici iudices, vt homines,
plerum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   falluntur: The iudges or Doctours
of the Church, as men, are often
deceiued.
                They are learned: they haue
preheminence in the Church: they are
Iudges: they haue the giftes of wisedome,
and vnderstanding, yet they are
often deceiued. They are our fathers,
but not fathers vnto God: they are stars,
faire, and beautifull, and bright, yet
they are not the Sunne: they beare witnesse
of the light, they are not the light.

               Christ is the Sunne of righteousnesse,
Christ is the light, which lighteneth euery
man that commeth into this worlde.
His word is the word of truth. He is the
day-spring which hath visited vs from
an high: he came downe from the bosome
of his father: he shal guide our féete
into the way of peace. Of him God the
father spake:Mat. 3. 
               This is my welbeloued
sonne, in whom I am well pleased, heare
him. He is the Lambe without spot, out
of his mouth goeth a two edged sworde.
This is he in whom all the endes of the
world shalbe blessed, heare him, giue héed
to his saying, embrace his gospel, beleue
his worde. Thus much touching the credite
and authoritie which is to be giuen
to the writings of auncient fathers.
            S. Paul speaking of the worde of God,
               2. Tim. 3.
               saith: The whole Scripture is giuen by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to improue, to correct, and to instruct
in righteousnesse. To teach the
truth, to improue falshoode, to correct all
vice, to instruct in all vertue. Again I am
not ashamed of the Gospel of Christe:Rom. 1.
               
for it is the power of God vnto saluation
to euery one that beleueth.Basil. praefat. in Psal. S. Basil saith:
The Scripture of God is like an Apothecaries
shoppe, ful of medicines of sundrie
sortes, that euery man may there chuse a
conuenient medicine for his desease.
There are salues, and ointmentes to
cure all maladies. Whosoeuer can not
be cured by the word of God, his disease
is growne desperate, and past cure.
            
            Many thinke, the Apostles spéech is
hardly true of the whole Scripture, that
all and euery part of the Scripture is
profitable. Much is spokē of genealogies,
and petidegrees, of lepers, of sacrificing
goates, and oxen, &c. these séeme to haue
litle profit in them, but to be vaine and
idle. If they shewe vaine in thine eyes,
yet hath not the Lord set them downe in
vaine.Ps. 12. 
               The wordes of the Lorde are pure
wordes, as the siluer tried in a fornace of
earth fined seuen times. There is no sentence,
no clause, no worde, no syllable,
no letter, but it is written for thy instruction:
there is not one iote, but it is
sealed and signed with the bloude of the

Lambe. Our imaginations are idle, our
thoughts are vaine: there is no idlenesse,
no vanitie in the worde of God.
Those Oxen and Goates which were sacrificed,
teach thée to kill and sacrifice the
vncleannesse and filthinesse of thy hart:
they teach thée that thou art guiltie of
death, when thy life must be redéemed
by the death of some beaste: they leade
thée to beléeue the forgiuenesse of sinnes,
by a more perfect sacrifice, because it was
not possible that the bloud of Bulles and
Goates,
               Heb. 10
                     •
                  
                
               should take away sinnes. That
leprousie, teacheth thée to know the vncleannesse
& leprousie of thy soule Those
Genealogies and Petidegrees leade vs to
the Birth of our Sauiour Christ. So
that the whole worde of God is pure and
holye: No worde, no letter, no syllable,
no poynte or pricke thereof, but
is written, and preserued for thy sake.
            Art thou a King? Reade the Scriptures,
thou shalt finde who hath stablished
thyne estate: and what dutie thou
owest to God. God there telleth thée: By
me Kings rule,
               Prou. 
                     •
                  . 
               & Princes decree iustice.
               
I haue giuen thée authority, thou cariest
my sworde: I haue put a crowne vpon
thy head: thou art my seruant, walke before
me, let thy heart bée perfecte in my
sight.
            
               Art thou a subiect? Reade the Scriptures,
they will teach thée to knowe thy
dutie.
               Rom. 13. 
               There Paul biddeth thée, giue tribute
to whom tribute: custom to whom
custome: feare to whome feare: honour
to whom honor is due. Ye must be subiect,
not because of wrath onely, but for
conscience sake. For he beareth not the
sworde for naught: for he is the Minister
of God to take vengeaunce on him that
doth euil.
            
               Art thou a Minister? Read the Scriptures,
they will teach thée thy duty. The
Prophet saith to thée:
               Esai, 58. Cry aloud, spare
not: lift vp thy voice like a trumpet, &
shew my people their trāsgressions. The
Apostle sayth vnto thée:
               2. Tim. 4. Preach the word,
be instant, in season and out of season.
Watch in all things, doe the worke of an
Euangelist, make thy ministerye fully
knowen. Thou shalt giue an acompt for

the soules of the people, their bloud shal
bée required at thy hands.
            
            
               Art thou a Father? hast thou children?
Reade the Scriptures, they will
teach thée:
               Eccles. 7. if thou haue sonnes, instruct
them.Eccle. 30. 
               Againe: Hee that teacheth his
sonne, grieueth the enemie, and before
his friends he shall reioyce of him. Giue
him no libertie in his youth, and winke
not at his folie. Chastise thy childe, and
bee diligent therein,1. Sam. 2. least his shame
grieue thee. Ely the Prophet, by sparing
his wanton children, cast away
himselfe, and his children. They were
slaine, the Arke of God was taken, and
olde Ely fel downe and brake his necke.
            
               Art thou a Child?Ephes. 6. 
               hast thou a Father?
Reade the Scriptures, they wil teache
thée: Children obey your Parents in the
Lorde, for this is right. Honour thy father
& mother (whiche is the first commandement,
with promise) that it may
bee wel with thee, and that thou maiest
lyue long on earthe. And agayne:
Chyldren,Colos. 3. obey youre Parentes in all
thinges, for it is wel-pleasing vnto the

Lord.Prou. 30. 
               The wise man warneth thée,
The eye that mocketh his father, and despiseth
the instruction of his mother, let
the Rauens of the valley plucke it out, &
the yong Eagles eate it.
            
               Hath God blessed thée in Wealth? Art
thou rich? Reade the Scriptures, they
will teach thée:
               1. Tim. 6. Be not high minded, and
trust not in vncertaine riches, but in the
liuing God, which giueth vs aboundantly
all things to enioy. Againe,
               Ps. 62. Trust not
in oppression and robberie: be not vaine:
if riches increase, set not your hart thereon.
Thou shalt depart, and leaue them
behinde thée: they shal forsake thée. Thou
shalt dye, thou knowest not howe soone.
Salomon sheweth thée:
               Prou. 11. Riches auayle not
in the day of wrath: but righteousnes deliuereth
from death.
            
               Art thou poore? and sufferest scarsitie
in this worlde? Reade the Scriptures,
they will teache thée.
               Iob. 1. 
               Say with Iob. Naked
came I out of my mothers wombe,
and naked shall I returne againe. Learne
of Salomon:Prou. 16. Better is little with righteousnes,
than great reuenues without equitie.

               And againe:
               Prou. 28. Better is the poore
that walketh in his vprightnesse, than
he that peruerteth his wayes, though he
be rich. S. Paul saith:
               1. Tim. 6. Godlinesse is great
gaine, if a man be content with that hee
hath: for wee brought nothing into the
world, and it is certaine, that we cary nothing
out. And againe, Let him that is
poore, labour, and worke with his hands,
the thing which is good, that hée may
haue to giue to him that néedeth.
            
            
               Art thou a Marchant? Usest thou to
buye and sell? Reade the Scriptures,
they will teach thée:
               1. Thess. 4. This is the will of
God, that no man oppresse or defraude
his brother, in any matter.Prou. 20. 
               Thou shalt
learne, that diuers weights and diuers
measures are abhomination vnto the
Lorde, and deceiptfull balances are not
good.
            
               Art thou an Vsurer? thy case is harde:
yet heare the Scriptures, they wil teach
thée.
               Exod. 22. 
               God commaundeth thée thus: If
thou lende mony to my people, to the
poore with thee, thou shalt not be as an
Vsurer vnto him: yee shall not oppresse

him with vsurie.Leuit. 25. 
               Againe, if thy brother
be impouerished, and fallen in decaye
with thee, thou shalt relieue him: thou
shalt take no Vsurie of him, nor vantage:
thou shalt not lend him thy vittailes for
encrease, but thou shalt feare thy God,
that thy brother may liue with thee.
And,
               Mat. 7. Whatsoeuer yee woulde that men
should do vnto you, euē so do ye to thē.
And,
               Ps. 15. He that giueth his money vnto Vsurie,
shall not enter into the kingdome
of heauen.
            
               Art thou a Fornicatour & liuest in adultery?
Reade the Scriptures, they will
teach thée:
               1. Cor. 6. He that committeth fornicatiō,
saith S. Paul, sinneth against his own
bodie. Know you not that your bodie is
the Tēple of the holy Ghost? Know you
not that your bodies are the members
of Christ? Shal I then take the members
of Christ, and make them the members
of an Harlot?1. Pet. 1. God forbid. As hee which
hath called you is holy, so bee 
                  •
               e holy in
all maner of conuersation,1. Thes. 4. 
               saith S. Peter
The reason is set downe by S. Paul: For
this is the will of God, euen you holines,

and that you shoulde absteine from
fornication, that you may be holy both
in bodie and in spirit.Heb. 13. 
               And, Whoremongers
& adulterers God will iudge. They
shall haue no inheritance in the kingdome
of Christ, and of God.
            
            
               Art thou a seruant? Reade the Scriptures:
they wil teach thée.
               Coloss. 3. Seruants be obedient
vnto thē that are your Maisters,
according to the flesh in all things, not
with eie seruice as men pleasers, but in
singlenesse of heart, fearing God. And
whatsoeuer ye do, doe it hartely, as vnto
the Lorde,Tit. 2. and not vnto men. Againe,
please your Maisters, not aunswering againe,
be no pickers, but shewe all good
faithfulnesse, that you may adorne the
doctrine of God our sauiour in al things.
            
               Art thou proude?Rom. 11. 
               Reade the Scriptures,
they wil teach thée.
               1. Cor. 14. Be not high
minded, but feare. What hast thou, that
thou hast not receiued? If thou hast receiued
it, why reioicest thou as though
thou hadst not receiued it?Mat. 11. 
               and, learne of
me, that I am meeke, & humble in hart.
And,
               Iam. 14. God resisteth the proude, but giueth

grace to the humble.
            
               Art thou in aduersitie? Read the Scriptures.
Great are the troubles of the righteous:Psa. 34.
but the Lord will deliuer him out
of them all.Ps. 91. 
               And he shal call vppon me,
and I will heare him: I will be with him
in trouble. I will deliuer him, and glorifie
him.1. Pet. 3. 
               And Saint Peter telleth thée,
the eyes of the Lorde, are ouer the righteous
& his eares are open to their prayers.
God is faithfull,1. Cor. 10. which will not suffer
you to be tempted aboue that you be
able, but will giue the issue with the tē
               tation,
that yee may bee able to beare it.
The Lorde is neare vnto all them that
call vpon him,Psa. 145. yea to all that call vppon
him in truth.
            
               Art thou A sinner? hast thou offended
God? reade the Scriptures, they will
teach thée.
               Amos. 5. Hate the euill, and loue the
good.Psa. 37. 
               And againe, flie from euill and do
good,Luke 15. and dwell for euer. Rise vp, and go
to thy father, and saie vnto him, Father
I haue sinned against Heauen, & against
thee, and am no more worthy to be called
thy sonne.
            
               
               Doest thou dispaire of the mercye of
God? reade the Scriptures, they will
teache thée.
               Mat. 9. Christ telleth thée, I came
not to cal the righteous but sinners to repentance.
Againe,
               Mat. 11. Come vnto me al ye
that are wearie and laden, and I will ease
you.Ezech. 18. At what houre soeuer a sinner doth
repent him of his sinne from the bottome
of his heart, I will put all his wickednesse
out of my remembrance, saith
the Lord.Ezech. 33. 
               Againe, I desire not the death
of the wicked, but that the wicked turne
from his waye,Psal. 145. and liue. And, the Lorde
is good to all, and his mercies are ouer al
his workes.
            
               Art thou going out of this life? reade
the Scriptures: they will teach thée, I
am the resurrection and the life:Ioh. 11. hee that
beleeueth in me, though he were deade,
yet shall hee liue, and whosoeuer liueth
and beleeueth in mee, shall neuer dye.
Saye with Sainct Paule.Philip. 1. Christe is to
mee bothe in life, and in death aduauntage.
I desire to be loosed and to be with
Christ.
            What shoulde I saye more of the

Scriptures, how profitable, and comfortable
they be in all cases and parts of
our life? in aduersitie, in prosperitie, in
life and in death, they are our especiall
comfort. If we must fight, they are a
sworde: if we hunger, they are meate: if
we thirst, they are drinke: if we haue no
dwelling place, they are a house: if we
be naked, they are a garment: if we be
in darknesse, they be light vnto our going.
            They are comfortable to kings, to
subiects, to old men, to yong men, to mā
and to wife, to father & to childe, to maister
and seruant, to captaine and souldiour,
to preacher and people, to the learned,
to the vnlearned, to the wise, and to
the simple.
            They are comfortable in peace, in
warre, in heauinesse, in ioy, in health &
sicknesse, in aboundance, in pouertie,
in the day time, in the night season, in
the towne, in the wildernesse, in
companie and when thou art alone. For
they teach faith, hope, patience, charitie,
sobrietie, humilitie, righteousnesse,

and all godlinesse. They teach vs to
liue, and they teach vs to die.
            Therefore hath Paule said well, The
whole Scripture is profitable: It is full
of great comforte: It maketh the man
of God absolute, and perfect vnto al good
workes. Perfect in faith, perfect in hope,
perfect in the loue of God, & of his neighbour:
perfect in his life, and perfect in his
death. So great, so large and ample, and
heauenly, is the profite whyche we doe
reape by the worde of God.
            Nowe it followeth we consider howe
necessarie,
               The necessitie of the Scriptures. 
               and needefull it is for vs to be
guided by the word of God, in the whole
trade of our life. The worde of God is
that vnto our soules, whiche our soule is
vnto our body. As the body dyeth when
the soule departeth, so the soule of man
dyeth,Deut. 8. when it hath not the knowledge
of GOD. Man liueth not by breade
onely, but by euerie worde that proceedeth
out of the mouth of God. Beholde
saith God,Amos. 8. 
               I will sende a famine
in the lande, not a famine of breade,
nor a thirst of water, but of hearing

the word of the Lord. Their tongue shal
wither, their heart shall sterue, they shal
dye for hunger: They shall wander from
sea to sea, and from the North vnto the
East, shall they runne to and fro to seeke
the word of the Lord, and shall not finde
it.
               Esa. 59. 
               They shall stumble at noone dayes,
as at the twilight: they shall grope for
the wall like the blind: and truth shall
fall in their streetes. For, howe shal they
be saued vnlesse they call on the name of
the Lord?Rom. 10. 
               how shal they call on him, in
whom they haue not beleeued? Howe
shall they beleeue in him of whom they
haue not heard? & how shall they heare
without a Preacher? & howe shall they
preach except they be sent? Chrysostom
therefore saith, Neither can it be, I say, it
can not be, that any man shall attaine to
saluation, except he be alwayes occupied
in spiritual reading. The wise man faith,
Where there is no prophecie,
               Pro
                     •
                  . 2
                     •
                  . 
               the people
decay. Where the Scriptures are not
opened, when there is none that can
edifye, and exhort, and comfort the people
by the word of God, they must néeds

perish: for they knowe not the waye in
whiche they shoulde walke: they know
not whome to honour, nor vpon whose
name they shoulde call: they know neyther
what to beléeue, nor what to do. Hel
hath enlarged it selfe, and hathe opened
hys mouth without measure, and they
that are wilfull and ignorant, and the
children of darkenesse, goe downe into
it. They become thrall, and captiues vnto
Sathan. Their hearte is bounde vp,
they vnderstande nothing: theyr eies are
shutte vppe, they can sée nothing: their
eares are stopte vppe, they can heare nothing.
They are carried away as a pray
into Hel, because they haue not y• knowledge
of God.
            
               So doth Christe tell the Sadduces:
               Mat. 22.
Yee are deceiued, because you know not
the Scriptures, nor the power of GOD.
Thus he teacheth, that error is the child
of ignorance. The cause why you are so
deceiued, is because you knowe not the
Scriptures: You haue hated the light,
and loued darkenesse: You haue neyther
knowen the Father nor mée. Hée

that knoweth not the truth of God, knoweth
not God. Herein, in this case there
is no plea of ignorance. Ignorance shall
not excuse vs.
               Hom. 17. ad Hebraeos. Chrysostome saith: Dices,
non legi: non est haec excusatio, sed crimen.
               
Thou wilt saye I haue not read the Scriptures:
this is no excuse, but a sinne. Againe
he sayeth,
               Hom. 2. in Mar. This is the working of
the Diuels inspiration, hee woulde not
suffer vs to see the treasure, leaste wee
shoulde gette the riches. Therefore hee
counsaileth vs, that it vtterly auaileth vs
nothing to heare the Lawes of God: least
that vppon the hearing hee may see our
doing folowe.Greg. in pastor. li. 1. ca. 1. Gregorie saieth: Qui e
                        •
                     quae
sunt domini, nesciunt: à domino nesciununtur:
               
Who so know not the things that
pertaine vnto the Lorde, be not knowen
of the Lorde.Hom. 27. in Numeri. Origen also giueth reason
of this practise of Sathan. Vnto the Diuels
it is a torment aboue all kindes of
torments, and a paine aboue all paines, if
they see any man reading the worde of
God, and with feruent studie searching
the knowledge of Gods Lawe, and the
mysteries and secretes of the Scriptures.

Herein standeth all the flame of the Deuils:
in this fire they are tormented: for
they are seased and possessed of all them
that remaine in ignorance.
            
               Carneades a Philosopher, was wont
to say of his Mayster and Reader Chrisippus,
if it hadde not bene for Chrisippus,
I neuer hadde béene any body. He
was my Maister and teacher: he made
mée learned: whatsoeuer I haue, I haue
it of him. How much better may we vse
the like words of the Scripture? and say,
vnlesse it were for the worde of God, our
wisedom were nothing, & our knowlege
were nothing. Whatsoeuer we haue, we
haue it by the worde. Without it, our
prayer were no prayer: without it, our
Sacramentes were no Sacramentes:
our Faith were no Faith: our Conscience
were no Conscience: our Churche
were no Church. Take awaye the light
of the Sunne, and what remaineth but
darkenesse? Heauen and Earth are darkned.
No man can sée his way, or discerne
the things about him. Euen so, if y• word

of God be taken away, what remaineth,
but miserable confusion, and deadlye ignoraunce.
            When the Philistines had shorne the
haires of Sampson, they fell vppon him,
tooke him, bounde him, and plucked oute
his eyes: they daunced aboute him, and
made scorne and games of him. We are
Samson, the strength of our haires is the
knowledge of the will of GOD: It is
laide vp in our heades, in the highest and
principal part of vs: if that be shorne off,
if we be kept from hearing, reading, and
vnderstanding of the worde of God: then
will error, superstition, and all wickednesse
get the vpper hande, and fall vpon
vs, and bind vs, and plucke out our eies:
and make scorne of vs, and vtterlye destroy
vs.
            When the people of Ierusalem were
besieged and wanted foode to eate, they
fedde on Rats and Mice, and many vnwholesome
and filthie things. A woman
was driuen for wante of meate to doe
a cruel part vpon hir own child: she tooke
hir own babe, which was the fruit of hir

own bodie, killed it, cut it in péeces, dressed
it, and fed vpon it: a lothsome meat,
especially, for a mother to eate hir owne
childe. But she was driuen to it by extremitie
and hunger: it was so cruell a
thing to lacke wherewith life mighte
be preserued.
            Euen so fared it with vs, and our Fathers,
after it pleased God to take away
his Gospel, & to send a famine of hearing
the word of the Lord. We were driuen
to eate those things whiche were loathsome
and horrible to beholde, we were
driuen to féede vpon our owne children,
euen the phantasies and vanities of our
owne heart. There was no substance
in them, they coulde not féede vs.
            In this case were the children of Israel,
when they grewe wearie of the word
of God, and lefte the ordinaunces sette
downe vnto them. God had no pleasure
in them, their prayers and sacrifice were
not accepted.Esay. 
                     •
                  . 
               I can not suffer saieth the
Lorde, youre newe Moones, nor Sabbaoths.
nor solemne dayes. Who hathe
required this of your handes?
            
            
               In such case were the Scribes & Phariseis,
when they forsooke to be guided by
the word of God, and tooke awaye the
key of Knowledge, they fedde vpon their
own deuises, they neglected the commā
               dements
and will of God, and followed
their owne traditions. Therefore Christ
reprooued them:Mat. 15. 
               O Hypocrites, Esaia
                     •
                  
prophecied well of you, saying: Thys
people draweth neare vnto mee wyth
their mouth, and honoureth mee wyth
their lippes, but their heart is far off from
mee. But in vaine they worshippe mee,
teaching doctrines mens precepts.
            
            Therefore, if wée séeke to knowe the
Sacramentes of the Churche, what they
are: if wée woulde bée instructed in the
Sacrament of Baptisme, or in the Sacramēt
of the body and bloud of Christe:
if wée woulde learne to knowe oure
Creatour, and to putte the difference
betwéene the creatour and a creature: if
wée desire to knowe what this presente
life is, and what is that life whiche is to
come: if we woulde beléeue in God, and
call vpon the name of God, and doe worshippe

vnto God: if we would be settled
in perfect zeale, and true knowledge: if
we woulde haue an vpright conscience
towards God: if we would know which
is the true Church of God, it is verye
néedeful that we heare the word of God.
There is no other word that teacheth vs
vnto saluation.
            Now it remaineth we speake of the
delectation and pleasure which the word
of God giueth.Ioy & pleasure, by reading the Scriptures. The worde of God is
full of sadde and graue counsell, full of
the knowledge of God, of examples of
vertues, and of correction of vices, of the
ende of this life, and of the life to come.
These are the contentes of the worde of
GOD. These things (saye you) are
greate, and weightie of themselues:
there is no vanitie or pleasure in
them.
            They are greate and waightie, I
grant, and bicause they are so waightie,
they be the more worthie, that we heare
them. But we muste take a delight and
settle our fansie, that it maye like of the

weight and greatnesse. They were vnto
the Prophet Dauid, more sweete than
home, and the honie combe. If we taste
them with suche an affection as hée did,
wée shall féele and sée the greate, and
weightie, and heauenly pleasure whiche
is in them.
            Many are delighted in the stories of
Iulius Caesar, of Alexander the Greate, of
mightie and victorious Princes. They
haue pleasure to reade of their warres, of
their victories, and of their triumphes.
And many take their pleasure in trauell
to far countries, to sée the diuerse fashions
and behauiour of men.
            If it were possible we mighte stande
vpon such a Hill, from which we might
at once see al parts of the world, the Citties
and Townes, and Mountaines, and
Forrests, and Castels, and gorgeous
buildings: and al the Kings and Princes
of the world, in their princely estate:
if we might sée the varietie of the whole
worlde, how some liue quietly in peace,
others are turmoyled in war: some liue
in wealth, others in pouerty and miserie:

some rise, others fall. To sée and beholde
so greate varietie of things, it cannot
be but it would delight vs.
            Such a Hill, from whence wée maye
take view of so great varietie, such a story
in which we may reade of noble princes,
of their warres and victories, is the
worde of God. Upon this Hill you may
at once behold al the works of his hāds,
howe he made Heauen and Earth, the
Sun and Moone, the Sea & Flouds: the
fishes in the water, the fouls in the aire,
and the beastes in the fielde. Upon this
Hill you may stand and sée his Aungels,
and his Archangels, and blessed spirites,
howe some of them fell, and some continued
in glorie: howe God hath sent
them in message, howe they haue come
downe from Heauen to serue the sonnes
of men.
            Here you may reade of the warres of
the God of Hostes, howe he hath pitched
his tentes in the middest of hys people,
and hath gone before them, and foughte
for them. How the Amorrheans, and Canaanites
were rooted out: howe the Amalekites

were ouerthrowen by the lifting
vp of Moses hands in prayer: howe
the wall of Iericho fell downe flat at the
sound of a Trumpet, and the shooting of
the people: and howe 185. thousand Assirians
were slaine in one night by the
hande of one Aungel when God raughte
out his hand from Heauen to giue victorie
to his people.
            Here may you sée howe God plagued,
& ouercame his enimies: how he drowned
Pharao in the red sea, and his horses
and men, and Chariots altogither. Her
                  •
               
may you sée Nabuchodonosor a mightie
Prince, so bereft of his wittes, that hée
forsooke his Palaces, and the companye
and order of men, and liued in the fieldes
after the maner of beasts. Here may you
sée how God stroke King Antiochus and
King Herod with filthy diseases, & caused
lice to eate their fleshe. Howe he sent
downe fire and brimstone from Heauen
and destroyed Sodome and Gomorrha, for
their sinnes. Howe he made the earth open
and swallowe vppe Dathan and Ab
                     ••
                  am,
howe King Ozias was stricken

with Leprosie, and carryed from the
Temple, and cut off from his kingdom.
What stories of any princes or people
in any age can report vnto vs so strange
battels, so mightie conquests, so wōderfull
deliuerance in extremities, so dreadfull
subduing of the enimies, as the hand
of God hath wrought, and the storie of
the Scriptures declareth vnto vs?
            This worde also sheweth the goodnes
and mercie of God towardes the people
which put their truste in him. Howe he
made them terrible to their ennimies:
howe he made their enimies their footestoole:
how he ledde them safe thoroughe
the red Sea: how he sent his Aungell to
go before them, and guide them: how he
gaue them water out of a rocke, and
rained downe breade from Heauen:
howe hée brought them into a Lande
that flowed with Milke and Hony,
and sware vnto them, that hée woulde
bée their GOD, and they shoulde be his
people.
            In this worde, are to be séene wonderfull
and straunge workes of God,

such as are beyonde the course of nature,
and passe the reason of man. That the
Sea parted, and stoode on both sides as
a high wall: that at the worde of Iosua,
the Sunne stoode still, and went not on
his course:Ios. 10. 
               Ezechias spake the word and
required it,2. Kings. 20. and the Sunne went backe
tenne degrées. At the word of Elias, fire
came down from heauen to consume hys
sacrifice. Here may you sée an Asse open
his mouth and speak, & reproue his Maister:
thrée seruants of God walk in a hot
burning fornace without hurte: Daniel
in the den among Lions and not deuoured:
Peter in the raging Sea and not
drowned: Leapres clensed: the lame to
goe: the dumbe to speake: the deafe to
heare: the blinde to sée: the dead to rise
out of theyr graues and liue: simple and
vnlearned men to speake in strange tongues:
the diuell to go out of the possessed,
and to saye, I knowe thou arte Christe
the sonne of God.
            Here may you sée twelue pore séelie
men without speare or sworde, or force,
make conqueste and winne the whole

worlde. No power coulde represse them,
no might coulde withstande them. It is
reckoned a great matter for a King, or a
nation to yéeld submission vnto an other
King or nation. It must therefore bée a
matter of greate wonder to sée al Kings
throwe downe their Maces, and all people
to yéelde before so fewe, so simple, so
vnarmed: And to acknowledge, they embraced
lies, and liued in ignorance: and
that these twelue are the seruants of the
highest: and to sée how God hath chosen
the foolish things of this world, to ouerthrow
the wise: and the weake things
of this worlde, to confounde the mightie
things. Such force did God giue to their
wordes. He made them the sonnes of
thunder: they shooke the foundations of
the worlde: they threw downe whatsoeuer
stoode againste them.
            Here may you see the fight of Gods electe
children. How they patiently suffered
afflictions in their bodies, rather
than they woulde deny the truth of God:
they gaue their backes to the scourge,
theyr neckes to the sworde, their bodies

to the fire. No tyrant, no menacings, no
racke, no torment, no sworde, no death
could remoue them from the loue of the
Gospell which they had receiued. The
more of them were cut downe, the more
did spring vp: the more were killed, the
more wer left aliue.De ciuit. dei li. 22. ca. 6. 
               Augustine saith, Ligabantur,
includebantur, torquebantur, vrebantur,
& multiplicabantur: They were
bounde, and shutte vp, and racked, and
burnt, and yet were encreased.
                This is
the victorie that hath ouercome ye world.
For the Lord answered S. Paule,
               2. Cor. 12. 
               My power
is made perfect through weaknesse.
It liueth in death, it is made whole and
sound, by woundes and stripes: it is increased
by those meanes, whereby men
destroy it. Iacob sawe a ladder stand vpon
the Earth, and the toppe of it reache
vppe into heauen: and the Aungelles of
God goe vp and downe by it. This was
but a dream, and vision in his sleepe, yet
when he awoke he tooke pleasure & comfort
of this Vision,
            
            We haue not onely the delight of this
with Iacob, but wée haue other farre

greater visions. We sée Esay beholding
the Lord as he sate vpon an high throne:
we sée Paule taken vp into the third heauens:
we sée the glorie of God appeare,
and heare the voice whiche came out of
the cloude, saying:Mat. 17. 
               This is my welbeloued
sonne in whome I am well pleased.
here him. We sée Iesus Christe the
sonne of God, borne of a Uirgin, and
how he made himselfe of no reputation.
               Phil. 2.
               and toke on him the forme of a seruant,
and was made like vnto men, and was
found in shape as a man. That he humbled
himself, and became obedient vnto
the death euen the death of the Crosse:
We heare him crye with a loude voice.
My God,
               Mat. 27. 
               my God, why haste thou forsaken
mee?
               Luke. 23. We heare him say, Father
forgiue them: for they knowe not what
they doe. And, Father, into thine hands
I commende my spirite.
            
            Here we may sée, the Sun to be darkened,
that the Moone giueth no light: the
Earth to shake, the rockes cleaue asunder,
the vaile rent, the Graues to open,
and Christe rise from the dead, and goe

vp into heauen, and sit at the right hand
of this father.
            Here maye we sée the ouerthrowe of
Babilon,
               Re
                     •
                  e. 14. 
               which made al nations to drinke
of the Wine of the wrath of hir fornication.
Howe shée is destroyed with the
breath of Gods mouth. Here we behold
the resurrection of the dead: and foure
and twentie Elders sitte before God on
their seates, and the antient of dayes sit
vppon his throne: and the iudgemente
seate, and the Bookes opened, and all
flesh appeare before him, and how some
are taken into euerlasting life: and some
are sent into euerlasting death.
            What tongue is able to expresse these
pleasures and delightes, which are laid
open to vs in the word of God? We buy
Images and Pictures, and Mappes of
men, and of diuers things, & Countries.
But what Mappe or Picture can shewe
vs the like varietie and chaunge of thinges.
            Wée purchase Landes, and haue a liking
so to doe. Here we are taught, how

we may come to that lande which shall
stand with vs, and in which wee shall
continue for euer.
            To sée any one of these, it were great
pleasure, either the creation of heauen
and earth, or the Angels, & Archangels,
and blessed spirites: or the battailes of
the God of Sabaoth: or Amalech dasht
in péeces like a Potters vessell: or the
wals of Iericho blowne downe with the
sound of a trumpet: or Pharao drowned
in the sea: or Nabuchodonosor eating
grasse among the beastes: or Antiochus
smitten from heauen: or Sodome and
Gomorrha burnt with fire and brimstone:
or the earth to open, and swallow
vp the wicked: or the sea to stand like a
wall: or water to come out of a stone: or
breade to come from heauen: or the
Sunne to stande still, or to chaunge his
course: or an Asse to speake and teache
his Maister: or fire to be extreame hot,
yet not burning: or Lyons hungrie, yet
not eating their meate; or the Sea tempestous,
yet not drowning: or blind to
sée, deafe to heare, dumbe to speake, dead

to rise: or ignorant men to speake in
languages they neuer learned: or the
Diuel to roare, and confesse Christ: or
God sitting in his Maiestie, and Christ
at his right hande: or Babylon throwne
downe, and become a Tabernacle of
fowle spirites, & a denne for the Diuel:
or Christ to sit in iudgement, and giue
sentence vpon the quick and the dead: to
sée any one of all these wōderous works
of God, it were great pleasure.
            Howe can it be then, but that we reioice
and take delight to sée so many, so
great so marueilous, so heauenly, and so
glorious wonders in one heape altogither?
Howe farre would we ride, or go,
to sée the triumph of a mortall King?
Here is to be séene the triumph of God,
the Lorde of Lordes, and the King of
Kinges: howe he hath made the name
of his Sonne, triumph ouer principalities
and powers, and ouer the whole
worlde. Here is a Paradise full of delightes,
no tongue is able to speak them,
they are so many: No heart is able to
conceiue them, they be sogreat.
            
               Here is a shoppe, wherein is set out
the wisedome, and knowledge, the power,
the iudgements and mercies of God.
Which way soeuer wée looke, we sée the
workes of his handes. His workes of
creation, and preseruation of all things:
his workes of seuere iustice vppon the
wicked, and of gracious redemption to
the beléeuer. If we desire pleasant Musicke,
or excellent harmonie: it speaketh
vnto vs the wordes of the Father,
and the consent of the Sonne: the excellent
reportes of the Prophets, Apostles,
Angles; and Saintes of God, who haue
bene all taught by the holy Ghost. If
we woulde learne, it is a schoole, it giueth
vnderstanding to the simple. In it
there is, that may content the heart, the
eare, the eye, the taste, and the smelling.
It is a sauer of life vnto life.Ps. 34. 
               Oh taste ye
and see, howe gracious the Lord is, saith
the Prophet Dauid. So manifold and
marueilous are the pleasures which are
giuen vs in the worde of God. God hath
made them, and wrought them all for
the Sonnes of men.
            
               Thus haue I perfourmed promise,
and simply and homely opened those
foure things which I tooke in hande. I
haue declared what weight and Maiestie
the word beareth: what huge haruest of
profite we may reape by it: howe needefull
it is for vs trauailing thorough the
wildernesse of this life: and what repast
and pleasure wee may finde in it.
            But, all this notwithstanding, some
take exception, and say: the Scriptures
are darke and doubtfull, the matters are
déepe, the words are hard, fewe can vnderstand
them. One taketh them in this
sence, an other in a sence cleane contrarie.
The best learned can not agrée about
them: they are occasion of many
great quarels:
                  
                     ••
                  euel. 5. 
               Iohn seeth this booke sealed
with seuen seales, and an Angel preaching
with a loude voice, who is worthy
to open the booke, & to loose the feales
thereof? No man cā open it, no man can
read it.
                  
                     •
                  . Pet. 3. 
               S. Peter saith, among the Epistles
of Paul, some thinges are harde to be vnderstande,
which they that are vnlearned
and vnstable, peruert as they doe all

other Scriptures, vnto their own destruction.
And S. Paul saith:
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. 
                     •
                  . 
               God dwelleth
in the light that none can attaine vnto,
whom neuer man saw, neither can
sée.
            Therefore, although the Maiestie bée
neuer so weightie, the profite, the necessitie,
and the pleasure neuer so great: yet
it is not good for the people to reade thē.
Pearles must not be cast before swine,
nor the breade of the children vnto dog
                  •
               .
Thus they say. In déede the worde of
God is pearles: but the people are not
swine. They may not reade them (say
some): they are not able to wéelde them:
the Scriptures are not for the people.
Hereof I wil say something, and a word
or two of the reuerence and feare, with
which we ought to come to the hearing
of them.
            They say, the Scriptures are harde,
and aboue the reach of the people. So
saide the Pelagian Heretique Iulian,
whom S. Augustine therefore reproueth:Aug. lib. 
                     〈…〉
                   Iulia.
               Exaggeras quàm sit difficilis, pancis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   con
                  
                     ••
                  niens
eruditis, sanctarum cognitio li
                     •
                  erarum:

                  Yee enlarge and lay out with many
wordes, how harde a matter the knowledge
of the Scripture is, and meete onely
for a fewe learned men.
                You say the
Scriptures are harde, who may open
them? There is no euidence or triall to
be taken by them: they are fit onely for
a fewe learned men, they are in no wise
fit for the people. Thus saide Iulian an
Heretique.
            But God himselfe, and the auncient
Fathers of ye Church said otherwise. God
saith in Deuteronomie,
               Deut. 30. 
               this cōmaundement
which I commande thee this day,
is not hid from thee, neither is it farre of.
It is not in heauen that thou shouldest
say, who shall goe vp for vs to heauen
and bring it vs, and cause vs to heare it,
that wee may doe it? Neither is it beyond
the Sea, that thou shouldest say,
Who shall goe ouer the Sea for vs, and
bring it vs, and cause vs to heare it, that
we may doe it? But the worde is verie
neare vnto thee: euen in thy mouth,
and in thy heart, for to doe it. Thou
néedest not runne hither and thither, nor

wander ouer the Sea, nor beate
thy braines in searching what thou
shouldest doe, or by what meanes thou
maist liue vprightlye: the worde and
commaundement of God will teach
thée sufficientlye.Ps. 19. The Prophet Dauid
saith: The commaundement of the
Lorde is pure, and giueth light vnto
the eyes. And, Thy worde is a lanterne
vnto my feete, and a light vnto
my pathes. Thy worde is not
darke, it is a lighte vnto my pathe, it
giueth lighte vnto the eyes. What
is cleare if the light be darke? Or,
what can hée sée, which can not sée the
light?
            Humaine knowledge is darke, and
vncertaine. Philosophie is darke, Astrologie
is darke, & Geometrie is dark.
The Professours thereof oftentimes
runne a masket: they léese themselues,
and wander they knowe not whether.
They séeke the depthe and bottome of
naturall causes: the chaunge of the
elements: the impressions in the aire:
the causes of the rainebowe, of blasing

starres, of thunder, and lightning, of the
trembling and shaking of the earth, the
motions of the planets, the proportions
and the influence of the celestial bodies.
They measure the compasse of heauen,
and count the number of the starrs: they
goe downe and search the mynes in the
bowels of the earth: they rippe vp the
secrets of the Sea. The knowledge of
these thinges is harde, it is vncertaine.
Fewe are able to reache it. It is not fit
for euery man to vnderstand it.
            
               But the holy spirit of God, like a good
teacher, applieth himselfe to the dulnesse
of our wittes. He leadeth not vs by the
vnknowen places of the earth, nor by
the ayre, nor by the clouds: he astonieth
not our spirites with naturall vanities.
He writeth his lawe in our heartes: hée
teacheth vs to know him, & his Christ:
he teacheth vs, that we should deny vngodlinesse
and worldly lustes,Tit. 2. 
               and that
we shoulde liue soberly, and righteously,
and godly in this present worlde: hée
teacheth vs to looke for the blessed hope,
and appearing of the glorie of the mightie

God, and of our Sauiour Iesus Christ.
This matter is good, and it is plaine: the
wordes are plaine, and the vtterance is
plaine. Chrysostome sayth:
               Hom. 3. de Lazaro. 
               proprere à
Spiritus gratia dispensauit illa, temper auitqúe,
quo Publicani piscatores, &c. Therfore
hath the grace of the holy Spirit disposed
and tempered them so, that Publicanes,
and Fishers, and Tente makers,
Shepeherdes, and the Apostles, and simple
men, and vnlearned, might bee saued
by these bookes: that none of the
simpler sort might make excuse by the
hardenesse of them: and that such things
as are spoken, might be easie for all men
to looke on: that the labouring man, &
the seruant, the widowe woman, and
whosoeuer is most vnlearned, may take
some good, when they are read. For
they whome GOD euer from the
beginning endewed with the grace of
his spirite, haue not gathered all these
thinges for vaine glorie, as the Heathen
writers vse, but for the saluation of the
hearers.
            Some things in the Scriptures are

harde, I deny it not. It is very expedient
that somewhat shoulde be couered,
to make vs more diligent in reading,
more desirous to vnderstand, more feruent
in prayer, more willing to aske the
iudgement of others, and to presume the
lesse of our owne iudgement. Gregorie
sayth:In Ezech. hom. 6. lib. 1. 
               Magnae vtilitatis est ipsa obscuritas
eloquiorum Dei. Facit enim, &c. The
hardenesse whiche is in the worde of
God, is verie profitable: For it causeth a
man to take that profite by paines,
which hee coulde not take with negligence.
If the vnderstanding were open,
and manifest, it woulde be litle set
by.
               
               Lib. 4. c
                     •
                  . 13. in Iohan. 
               Cyrillus saith: Omnia plana & recta
sunt illis, qui cognitionem inuenerunt: fatuis
verò etiam facilima
                     •
                   ob secura videntur:
All thinges are plaine and straight to
them, that haue founde knowledge: but
to such as are fooles the most easiest
places seeme harde.
               
               Cyril. in Io. 14. And againe: Eaequae
perspicua sunt, difficilia sunt haereticis.
Quomodo enim in maleuolam animam intrabit
sap
                     •
                  entia? Those thinges which are
plaine, are harde vnto Heretiques. For

howe can wisedome enter into a wicked
heart?
                It is true, which S. Peter
hath saide, some thinges are hard to be
vnderstande. But it is also true, that
they which peruert them vnto their own
destruction are vnlearned, and vnstable:
that is, they to whom they are hard,
haue not their eyes opened, that they
may sée the light of the worde: or they
be wicked, and turne the truth of God
into lies, and abuse the Scriptures to
their owne damnation. The Howlet
séeth not by the brightnesse of the
Sunne, not because the Sunne beames
are dark, but for that his eyes are weak,
and cannot abide so cleare light: it is
therfore but a pretence and a colour for
their ignorance, and a meanes to deceiue
the people more boldly with their
errours, when they charge the worde of
God wyth darkenesse and hardnesse.
For how many hundred places are there
which be as cleare as noone day? God
saith:Exod. 
                     ••
                  . 
               I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt
haue none other gods before me. Thou
shalt make thee no grauē image, neither

any similitude of things that are in heauen
aboue, neither that are in the earth
beneath, nor that are in the waters vnder
the earth, thou shalt neither bow downe
to them, neither serue them. Againe
he saith:Wisd. 14. 
               that is cursed that is made with
hands, both it, and he that made it: hee,
because he made it: and it, because it was
called God, being a corruptible thing.
And againe:Ps. 97. 
               Cursed be al they that worship
carued images, and delight in vaine
Gods. This is the word of God. What
darkenesse is in any of these sayings?
            
               God saith:
               Exod. 22. If thou lend mony to my
people, to the poore with thee, thou
shalt not be as an Vsurer vnto him: yee
shall not oppresse him with vsurie. Againe:
               Ezec. 18.
If a man hath not giuen forth
vpon vsurie, neither hath taken any encrease,
&c. hee shall surely liue: but hee
that hath giuen forth vpō vsurie, or hath
taken encrease, shall he liue? He shal not
liue.Rom 6. Ezech. 18. 
               And, the wages of sinne is death.
And, the soule that sinneth, it shall die.
And againe:
               Eph. 5. This yee knowe, that no
whoremongers, neither vncleane person,

nor couetous person, which is an Idolater,
hath any inheritāce in the kingdome
of Christ, & of God. Let no man
deceiue you with vaine wordes: for, for
such things commeth the wrath of God
vpon the childrē of disobedience. These
are the words of God, and what darkenesse
is in them?
            
            Saint Paul saith:
               Rom. 12. If it be possible, as
much as in you lieth, haue peace with
all men. Abhorre that which is euill,
and cleaue to that which is good: auenge
not your selues, but giue place
vnto wrath. Againe,
               Rom. 13. Let euerie
soule bee subiect to the higher powers,
there is no power but of God. He is the
Minister of God for thy wealth: but if
thou doe euill, feare: for he beareth not
the sworde for naught. These bée the
wordes of God, what darkenesse is in
them? Saint Iohn saith:
               Ioh. 1. Christ is the
Lambe of God, which taketh away the
sins of the world. And,
               1. Ioh. 1. the bloud of Iesus
Christ his son, clenseth vs from al sinnes.
Saint Peter saith:
               1. Pet. 1. His owne selfe bare
our sinnes in his bodie on the tree, that

wee being deliuered from sinne, should
liue in righteousnesse. Christe saith:
Aske, and it shall bee giuen you:Luke. 11. seeke
and yee shall finde: knocke, and it shall
be opened vnto you.Mat. 11. 
               And againe, Come
vnto me all ye that are weake and laden,
and I will ease you. The Prophet saith:
Whosoeuer shall call on the name of the
Lorde, shall bee saued. These bée the
words of God.
               loel. 2. 
               What darkenesse is in
them? What eye so simple, but he may
sée them?
            
            
               The wayes of the Lorde are straight,
and his wordes plaine, euen vnto the
simple.
               Hom. 3. in 2. ad Thessa. C
                  •
               rysoft. saieth: Omnia clara &
plana sunt in scriptures diuinis: quaecunque
necessaria sunt, manifest a sunt:
                All things
are cleare and plaine in the holy Scriptures.
Whatsoeuer things there is
necessarie for vs, is also manifest: Some
thinges are couered, as men couer pretious
stones, and precious garmentes.
They are couered, and yet we sée them.
Wée sée them, and yet they are couered.
Yet all thinges that are necessarie
are plaine and open. Clemens saith:

                  Nullis caelatum est verbum,Clem. Alex. in Orat. ad gen. lux est communis,
omnibus illucescit hominibus, nullus
est in verbo Cymmerius:
                The worde of
God is hid from no man: It is a light
common vnto all men: there is no
darkenesse in Gods worde. Marke, it
is a common light, and shineth to all
men. It is as bright and beautifull as
the Sunne, there is no dungeon or darknesse
in it.
               Lib. 1. cap. 31. 
               So sayth Irenaeus: Scripturae
in aperto sunt, & sine ambiguitate: &
similit
                     •
                  r ab omnibus audiri possunt: The
Scriptures are plaine, & without doubtfulnesse,
and may be heard indifferently
of all men All men may heare them,
euen all sortes of men without exception.
            
            Where be they then which say it is
not lawfull for the people to haue the
worde of God, and that the Scriptures
are not méete for their reading? they
are breade: they are drinke: they nourish
vnto euerlasting life: great crueltie
it is to sterue Gods people to death.
Are they vnfit to haue the Scriptures,
because they bée poore? Christ sayth:

               The poore receiue the gladde tidings
of the Gospell.
               Mat. 11. And,Mat. 5. 
               Blessed are the
poore in spirite, for theirs is the kingdome
of heauen. They want riches,
and worldly glorie, but God giueth his
feare and grace to them, as well as to
the rich. Are they vnfit to reade the
Scriptures, because they are not bred
vp in other learning?1. Cor. 2. 
               S. Paul saith: I esteemed
not to know any thing among
you, but Iesus Christ, and him crucifyed.
The Prophet Dauid saith:Psa. 94. 
               Blessed is the
man, ô Lord, whom thou teachest in thy
lawe.
               Mat. 11. And Christ saith: Thou hast hid
these things from the wise, and men of
vnderstanding, and hast opened them
vnto babes. The Apostles were sent into
all the world to preach the Gospel vnto
euery creature, to learned & vnlearned,
to poore and rich. There is no man
too poore, none too riche, none too yong,
none too old. Whosoeuer hath eares to
heare, he hath learning enough, to be a
hearer.
            As for the wisest and learned men, in
matters of this worlde, they haue not

alwayes proued the readiest and moste
willing to set forth the glorie of GOD.
They haue not béene the méetest schollers
for this schoole. Who were they that
resisted Moses and Aaron, the seruantes
of God? Not the people, but the wisest
and beste learned in Aegipt. Who were
they that stoode againste Elias? not the
people: but the learned and wise men,
and the Prophets, and Priests of Baal.
Who were they that stoned and killed
the Prophets? not the people: but the
chiefest and wisest in Israel. Who were
they that resisted Christe, and his Gospell,
and sought to deface the glorie of
God? not the people: but the Scribes
and Phariseis, and high Priestes, and
at the troup of their Cleargie. They called
Christ, a deceiuer: and Beelzebub: a
companion of Publicanes and Harlottes:
they lay in wayte euerie where
to entrappe hym: they sued hym to
death.
            Saint Paule saith for conclusion in this
matter:
               1. Cor. 1. It is written, I wil
                  •
               destroye the
wisedome of the wise, and wil cast away

the vnderstanding of the prudent.
Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe?
Where is the Disputer of this worlde?
Hath not GOD made the wisedome of
this worlde foolishnesse? For seeing the
worlde by wisedome, knewe not God,
in the wisedome of God, it pleased God
by the foolishnesse of preaching, to saue
them that beleeued. Brethren, you see
your calling, howe that not manye wise
men, after the fleshe, not many mighty,
not many noble, are called, but GOD
hathe chosen the foolishe thinges of the
worlde, to confound the wi
                  •
               e: and God
hathe chosen the weake thinges of the
worlde, to confound the mightie things,
and vile things of the worlde, and things
which are despised hathe GOD chosen.
Marke, saith he, how mercifully GOD
hath dealt with you. Fewe of the learned
sorte, few such as are counted wise,
embrace the Gospell with you, or ioine
with you in Faith, or kéepe you company.
God hath let thē be deceiued in their
wisdom. They take thēselues to be wise,
& yet are become fooles. And, contrary to

worldly iudgement, God hathe made
you, which were weake and simple, and
of no reputation, wise, and righteous,
and sanctified, and redéemed in Christe
Iesus. And Christe saith:
               Mat. 18. Except ye be
conuerted, & become as little children,
yee shall not enter into the kingdome of
Heauen.
            
               Therefore, the godly father Chrysostome
calleth vpon the people, to reade
and heare the Scriptures.Hom. 9. in 
                        •
                     p. ad Coloss. 
                  Audite saeculares
omnes: comparate vobis Biblia, animae
pharmaca. St nihil aliud v
                        ••
                     is, vel, nou
                        •
                     m
Testamentum acquirite: Apostolum, Euangelia,
Acta, continuos & sedulos doctores:
               
Heare me ye men of the world: get yee
the Bible, that moste wholesome remedie
for the soule, if yee will nothing else,
yet at the least, get the newe Testament,
S. Paules Epistles, the Gospelles, and the
Actes, that they may be your continuall
and earnest teachers. And againe:Chrysost. ho
                        •
                      2. in Io
                        •
                     . 
                  Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
in hoc tantùm consessu, sed domi quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vir cū
vxore, pater cū filio, inuicem de his frequenter
loquantur, & ultrò, citro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      suā & ferāt & inquirant
sententiā, velint
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      hanc probatissimā
                     
inducere consuetudinem:
                Hearken not
hereto, onely here in the Churche, but
also at home, let the husband with the
wife, let the father with the childe, talke
togither of these matters, and both too &
fro, let them both enquire, and giue their
iudgements, & would God they woulde
beginne this good custome.
            
               In like sorte saith Orig.Orig. in Esai. hom. 2. 
               Vtinam omnes
faceremus illud quod scriptum est, scrut amini
Scripturas: Woulde God wee woulde al
do accordingly as it is written search the
Scriptures. It were a token that we do
loue Christe. Then woulde the Father
loue vs, and Christ would loue vs, and
shewe himselfe vnto vs: and he, and his
Father woulde come vnto vs, and dwel
in vs.
               Hom. 9. ad Co
                     •
                  oss. Chrysostome saith: Hoc omnium
malorum caussa est, quòd Scripturae ignorantur:
               
This is the cause of all ill, that the
Scriptures are not knowen. To knowe
nothing of Gods lawes,Hom. 3. de 
                     •
                  azaro. 
               saith he in an other
place, is the losse of saluation, ignorance
hath brought in heresies, and vitious
life: ignorance hath turned al things
vpside downe. S. Hierome expounding

those wordes of the Apostle:
               Hierom. in 3. cap. Ep. ad Coloss. Lette the
word of Christe dwell in you plenteously,
saith Hic ostenditur verbum Christ
                        •
                     , nō
sufficientèr sed abundantèr etiam laicos habere
debere, & docere se inuicem, vel monere:
               
Here we are taught, that the laye people
ought to haue the word of God, not only
sufficiently, but also with abundance,
and to teache, and counsell one another.
            
               And nowe to conclude what the learned
Fathers, and antient Doctors haue
said in this matter. Theodoretus saith:
               Lib. 5. de curādis graecor. affect.
               Passim videas haec nostratia dogmata non ab
ijs solum teneri, qui sunt ecclesiae magistri, populorum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
praeceptores, sed ab ipsis quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sutoribus,
fabris
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ferrarijs, lanificibus, &c. Ye
may commonly see, that our doctrine is
knowen, not onely of them that are the
Doctors of the Church, and the Maisters
of the people: but also euen of the Taylours,
and Smithes, and Weauers, and of
al Artificers: yea, and further also of women,
and that not only of them that be
learned, but also of labouring women, &
Sewsters, and Seruants, and handmaides:
Neither onely the Citizens, but also the

Countriefolkes do very wel vnderstand
the same. Yee maye finde, yea, euen the
verie ditchers, & deluers, & cowheards,
and Gardners, disputing of the holy Trinitie,
and of the creation of all thinges.
Thus we sée there was a time before ignorance
crept into the Church, and gotte
the vpper hand, when the worde of God
was not counted harde, and darke, and
doubtfull: when children, and women,
and seruants, and men of the Countrey
had the knowledge of God, and were able
to reason of the works of God. Then
went it wel with them: they coulde not
easily be deceiued, because they had that
worde which bewrayeth the théese: they
caried with them like good exchaungers
the weights, and touchstone, and were able
to trie coynes whether they were
true or false. Such were the people, such
was the state of Gods Churche in those
dayes.
            
            Golde, and siluer, and lands, and possessions,
are the portions but of fewe.
They are not common to al alike.Pro. 19. The
wise man saith, House and riches come

by inheritaunce of the Fathers. But the
worde of God, the Law, and the Prophetes,
the Apostles, the Guangelistes,
the gift of the spirite, and the knowledge
of God are giuen vnto al men: they are
made common for all menne. If the
word were ordained but for a few, then
Christe was giuen into the worlde but
for a fewe. The heauen was made, but
for a fewe. The mercie and loue of God
was but for a fewe. But the mercie of
God is ouer al, and vpon al, and for all.
Al haue right to heare the word of God,
al haue néede to know the word of God.
Al haue sinned,
               Rom. 3. 
               and are depriued of the
glorie of God. Therefore Christe calleth
all,Mat. 11. 
               Venite ad me omnes, &c. Come
vnto mee all yee that bee wearie and laden.
               
Yong men and olde men: men and
women: rich and poore come to mée.Acts. 10. 
               God
is no accepter of persons. It is not the wil
of your Father which is in Heauen,
               Mat. 18. saith
Christ, that one of these little ones shold
perish. Who wil,1. Tim. 2. 
               that al men shall be saued,
& come to the knowledge of truth.
God wil loke to him that is pore,
               Esay. 66. 
               & of a

contrite spirite, and trembleth at hys
wordes. God wil regard such a one, and
make him a fitte vessell to receiue hys
truth. Upon him that is suche a one shall
the spirite of wisedome and vnderstanding,
the spirit of knowledge, and of the
feare of God reste. Not only vppon the
rich, the wise, and the learned: but vpon
him that is pore, and of a contrite heart,
and trembleth at his words. Upon hym
that humbleth himselfe vnder the mightie
hand of God. He is the temple and
the Tabernacle of the holy Ghoste. He
that is humble in heart, shall be saued.
God resisteth the proud, but giueth grace
to the lowly.
            Therefore Christe saide,Mat. 11. 
               I giue thee
thankes O father, Lorde of heauen and
earth, because thou hast hid these things
from the wise and men of vnderstāding,
and hast opened them vnto babes. Euen
to suche as haue no learning, whych reioice
in nothing but in thée. The wise
and learned of the worlde can not heare
them, can not sée them: but they to
whome it pleased thée to giue vnderstanding.

It is thy mercie. Flesh and bloud
cannot reach the knowledge of thy will.
The spirite of the Father hath reuealed
it. Christe saith:Iohn. 1
                     •
                  . 
               My sheepe heare my
voice, and I knowe them, and they followe
mee. They will not follow a stranger.
My people are simple as shéepe:
they are rude, and knowe not what they
doe. Yet they knowe my voice, and followe
me: they knowe their Shéepheard
from a théefe: they followe not the call
and voice of a straunger. So we sée that
God chaceth no mā away from hearing
his worde: he loatheth not the pore, because
of his pouertie, he refuseth him
not: for he is the God of the pore: they
be his creatures, S Augustine saith, Deus
in Scripturis,
               Aug. ep. 3. ad Volusianum. 
               quasi amicus familiaris loquitur
ad cor doctorum, & indoctorum. Almightie
God, in the Scriptures, speaketh
as a familiar friend without dissimulation,
vnto the hearts, both of the learned,
and of the vnlearned.
                He abaseth hymselfe,
and speaketh to their capacitie: for
his will is, that all shoulde come to the
knowledge of the truth and be saued.
            
               Nowe let vs consider with what fear
                  •
               
and reuerence we oughte to come to the
hearing or reading of the worde of God:
The Aungel of the Lord appeared vnto
Moses in a flame of fire,Exod. 3. out of the middest
of a bushe. When Moses turned aside
to sée, God said vnto him, Come not
hither: Put thy shoes off thy feete for the
place whereon thou standest is holye
ground. Againe, when God had appointed
to speak vnto the people from Mount
Sion,
               Exod. 19. he said to Moses: Go vnto the people,
and sanctifie them to day, and to morow,
and let them wash their clothes, &
let them be readie on the. 3. day, for the. 3.
daye, the Lorde will come downe in the
sight of al the people vpon mount Sinai.
               
            
            The worde of the Lorde is the Bush,
out of which issueth a flame of fire. The
Scriptures of God are the mount, from
which the Lord of Hostes doth shew him
selfe. In them God speaketh to vs. In
them we heare the words of euerlasting
life. We muste be sanctified, and washe
out garmentes, and be readie to heare
the Lorde. We muste strippe off all our

affections: we must fal do 
                  〈…〉
               
with fear: we must 
                  〈…〉
               
speaketh: Euen God 
                  〈…〉
               
and Earth: God 
                  〈…〉
               
Lord Iesus Christe: God, 
                  〈…〉
               
iudge the quicke and the dead: 
                  〈…〉
               
whome al flesh shal appeare.
            His worde is holie: Let vs take 
                  〈◊〉
               
into what hearts we bestow it. 
                  〈◊〉
               
euer abuseth it, shall be founde guilti 
                  〈◊〉
               
high trespas against the Lord. We may
not receiue it, to blow vp our harts, and
waxe proude with our knowledge: We
may not use it, to maintaine debate and
cōtentiō: we may not vse it to vaunt our
selues, or to make shew of our cunning.
            The word of God teacheth lowlinesse
of minde: it teacheth vs to knowe oure
selues. If we learne not humilitie, wée
learne nothing. Although we séeme to
knowe somewhat, yet knowe we not
in such sorte as we ought to know. The
Scriptures are the mysteries of God: let
vs not be curious: lette vs not séeke to
knowe more than God hath reuealed by
thē. They are ye sea of God: let vs take

               
                  〈…〉
                drowned in the. They

                  〈…〉
               : let vs take comfort by

                  〈…〉
                take héed, they burne

                  〈…〉
                gaze ouer hardly vpon

                  〈…〉
                blemish in their eye sight.

                  〈…〉
                the people of Israel sawe the

                  〈…〉
                in the desart, they said, Man Hu
                  •
               
               
                  〈…〉
                this? so they reasoned of it, whē
               
                  〈…〉
                it vp in their handes, and behelde
it. They asked one an other, what
good it woulde do. The Scriptures are
Manna
                  •
               , giuen to vs from Heauen, to
séede vs in the desart of this worlde. Let
vs take them, and behold them, and reason
of them, and learne one of an other
what profit may come to vs by thē lette
vs knowe, that they are written for our
sake, and for our learning, that through
patience & comfort of the Scriptures we
may haue hope. They are giuen vs to instruct
vs in faith, to strength vs in hope,
to open our eies, and to direct our going.
            If we withholde the trueth in vnrighteousnesse:
if we know our Masters wil,
& do it not: if the name of God be ill-spoken
of through vs: the word of God shal

be taken away from 
                  〈…〉
               
nation which shal 
                  〈…〉
               
thereof: God shall send 
                  〈…〉
               
on, that we shall beléeue 
                  〈…〉
               
heart shal condemne vs: an 
                  〈…〉
               
beaten with many stripes.
            Therefore we ought 
                  〈…〉
               
giue héede to those thinges 
                  〈…〉
               
heare: we must cōsider of them, 
                  〈…〉
               
chew the cudde. Euerie beast that 
                     〈…〉
                  
not the cudde is vncleane, and no
                  ••
               
for sacrifice. Let vs be poore in spirit, 
                  〈◊〉
               
méeke in heart: let vs be gentle as be
commeth the Lambes of Christ: and as
his shéepe, let vs heare his voyce, and
followe him. Let vs be of a contrite
spirit & tremble at the words of God: let
vs when we know God glorifie him as
God. So shall God looke vpon vs: so shal
the spirit of wisdome & vnderstanding,
and of coūsel, & of knowledge, and of the
feare of God rest vpon vs: so shall we be
made perfect to all good workes: so shall
we reioyce in his saluatiō, and with one
mouth glorifie God euen the Father of
our Lord Iesus Christ.
            FINIS.
            
               
               
               
            
         
      
   