
      
         
            
            
            THE LIFE
OF THE GLORIOVS
BISHOP
S. PATRICKE
APOSTLE AND PRIMATE
OF IRELAND.
TOGEATHER
WITH THE LIVES
OF THE HOLY
VIRGIN
S. BRIDGIT
AND OF
THE GLORIOVS ABBOT
SAINT COLVMBE
PATRONS OF IRELAND.
            At S. OMERS, For IOHN HEIGHAM, 1625.
VVith Approbation.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
            And the rest of his deere countreymen, the Catholikes
of Ireland, the Translator wisheth
all happinesse.
            
               BEING to publish to the view of the world, and
by way of dedication to present to your worthy
selues (deere Countreymen) this volume, contayning
the liues of the three renowned Patrons
of our Countrey, I deemed it very wel befitting
the argument I handled, and the condition of the tymes we liue
in, to addresse the selfe same Commonitory to you, that the Euangelicall
Prophet directed to the Israelits:Isa. 50. 
               Attend (sayth he)
to Abraham your Father, and to Sara your Mother that boare you. For
in these turbulent times, wherein the fury of armed heresy hath
thrust her violent hāds to the stelth of your choisest treasure, the
Roman faith I meane, which you haue peaceably enioyed during
the reuolution of many ages, what is more powerfull to
stirre vp in your breasts the zeale of Catholike Religion? What
more able to kindle in your hartes the flame of perfect charity?
What more soueraigne to scatter the cloudes of your afflicted
mindes? Or what more potent to breath into your soules the
sweet gale of Christian comfort? Then to offer vnto your intellectuall
view, S. Patricke the Abraham from whome you descended,
and Irland the Sara, by whome you were borne? Truly
on whome soeuer of them both you cast your eyes, the contemplation

of either him, or her, will inrich your memories
with the knowledge of so worthy matters, as are able to glutt
your minds with content, and rauish your soules with delight.
            Vouchsafe then (deere Countrymen) to cast a fixed eye
on the ancient dignity of Irland,Lectiones Eeclesiae Tarentēsis de Sancto Cathaldo tractatus Collegij Conceptionis fol. 8. & 9. and you shall find, that shee
hath exposed on the theater of the Catholicke Church, such
firme pillars of fayth, such burning lights of Religion, such clear
mirrours of perfection, such perfect paternes of sanctity, & such
rare miracles of learning, that other Christian Kingdomes are
so farre from ouer-peering her, that few peere her in flying so
high a pitch of true glory. And fearing to be branded with the
foule note of adulation, to your worthy selues, or partiality to
my deere Country,Thyreus in Panegiri de Sancto Patricio. I will keep within compasse, so as I meane
to produce nothing, but what hath beene deliuered from the
pens of famous Authors, who either for their antiquity claime
veneration,P. Fitzimons in sua Brit
                  
                     •
                  onomachia. or for their learning deserue credit, or for their sanctity
chalenge authority. Euery Author I will alleadge by
name speaking in his genuin sense, if not in his proper wordes.
            And to commence from the splendour of learning, I wil
not detaine you with a longe discourse, touching our domestique
Academies,Lupoldus Babarbugius dezelo veter
                     •
                   principū Germanorum. Lismor, Dune, Cashell, Magon, Dublin, and
Ardmach, the happy nurses, & fecundious mothers of al human
and diuine literature, but will remit such as are curious after
fuller content in this behalfe, to the perusall of the lessons of
of the Church of Tarentum: The treatise of the Colledge of the
Conception: Bishop Thyrrie, and Father Fitzimons, and wil my
selfe passe to take a Suruey of forraine kingdomes, and externe
Academies,S. Antoninus 2. p. hist. tit. 14. cap. 15 §. 12. that receaued from Irland the first beginnings, or at
least the increase, and propagation of learning. Lupoldus Babarbugius
sayth: The French may be matched with the Romans, by the industry
of Clement the Irish man.
               Sabell. Ae
                     ••
                  . 8. l 9. Nauclerus tom. 2. vol 3. gen. 28. This Clement to geather with one
Iohn a Monke by profession, and an Irish-man by birth, layd the
first foundations of the famous vniuersity of Paris, which was,
and hath beene accounted for many Century of yeares, the florishing
Athens of Christendome, as witnesseth S. Antonine, Sabellius,
               Baron. to 
                     •
                  0, ad Ann. 876.
               Nauclerus, Barronius. The same learned, and graue Authours
depose in like manner. That the renowned vniuersity
of Padua in Italy, was erected by the prementioned Irishmen,

who were the founders of the vniuersityes of Oxford, Landesfarne,
and Malmsbury in England? Who were the erecters of
the Academies of Herbipolis, Cullen, Sengallensis, and Fulda in
Germany? Who the authors of Bobium in Italy, and Luxouium
in France?Cambden. in impress. Londinensi fol. 185. 177. 267. 730. Irishmen, as auerreth Cambden, the renowned English
antiquary. What infinite numbers flocked out of the
Neighbour kingdomes into Ireland, to be enriched with the
ornaments of learning and treasures of piety, the foresayd learned
Cronicler consecrateth to posterity, telling vs in these
wordes: That his Countrymen the English Saxons, did throug from all
parts into Irland,
               S. Adelmus in epi. ad Elfridū Regem. 
               as vnto the mart of all good litterature, in so much that
it grew to a common Prouerbe among them of such as were giuen to their
studies, he was sent into Irland to be trayned vp. This we may further
confirme from the suffrage of S. Adelme, who in his epistle
to King Elfride speaking of Ireland, sayth: It florished and was
stored with as copious a number of Studients, as the heauens were adorned
with the syderiall beames of glittering starres.
            
            These then were the burning lampes of learning, and
brightsome lights of wisedom that shined so gloriously at home,
and extended their lustre so spaciously abroad, for the publique
good, and common benefit of all Europe. Where you are to obserue,
that albeit they were men of rare learning, of profound
wisedome, of deepe iudgment, and subtile vnderstandings,
yet did they submit their vnderstanding, and iudgments, and
captiuate their wisedomes and learning, to the obedience of
fayth: so that in all their number there was none found to deny
the deity of the second person, with Arrius, nor the diuinity
of the holy Ghost with Macedonius, nor the truth of the
reall presence with Caluin, nor the necessity of good workes
with Luther, none was found to be a Manichean, Marcionist,
Donatist, Eunomian, Anabaptist, or Puritan: none I say was
found among them to adhere to ould sectmasters, or to follow
new Dogmatizers, none to embrace the heresies that grew in
former ages, or sprunge vp in these later tymes; so happy was
Ireland by the fauour of heauen to liue still in the perpetuall
sunne-shine of Catholicke Religion, without the interpositiō
of any cloud of errour or heresy. Neither was Ireland our deere
Coūtry happy only, in cōseruing the integrity of faith, without

any touch of disloyalty, and being enriched with the treasures
of wisedome and learning, but she was much more fortunate,
and fecundious in producing from out of her wombe miriades
of Saints,S. Bern. in vita. S. Malachiae. Henric. and holy men, whereof we haue infinite proofes extant,
of which I will, for your comfort recite a few.
            S. Bernard sayth, Out of Ireland, not only into the forementioned,
but euen into forraine regions,Antisidorē. in epist. dedicatoria vitae S. Germani ad Carolū Caluum. Ioselinus infra c. 19. §. 4. as it were after an inundation, such
swarmes of Saints did breake out, of whome S. Columbanus comming
to these our quarters of France, there builded the monastery of Luxonium,
being made into a great nation. And Henricus Antisidorensis
sayth: What need I speake of Ireland, passing (almost all) without any
regard of the dangers of the sea to these our shores, with whole troupes of
Philosophers, and the more skillfull any of them is, so much the more willing
is he to vndertake a voluntary banishment, that he might serue our
most sage Salomon at will. And Iocelinus beneath in this volume
sayth: Within a short space, there was not a wildernesse, noe nor scarce
any corner,Theod. Ab in vita S. Rumoldi. nor place in all the Iland, but was replenished with perfect
Monkes, and holy Nunnes, so that Ireland by a peculiar name was iustly
called, all the world ouer, The Iland of Saints. They liued according
to the prescript, and tenour of life, which S. Patricke set thē down;
for contempt of the world,Gaufridus in vita S. VVironij. Mari
                     •
                  nus Scotus in Cronica l. 2. aetat. 7. anno 614. Guliman. in vita S. Florent
                     ••
                  . Ionas Ab. apud Surium 21. Nouemb. desire of heauenly thinges, mortification of the
flesh, abdication of selfe will, they matched the monkes of Egipt, both in
merit and number. Many forraine regions were by them illustrated with
doctrine, and religion. Theodorus Abbot sayth: This iland, as it surpasseth
all the world for fertility of soyle, so is it more blessed for the glorious
simplicity of Saints. Gaufridus likewise testifyeth: Scotland,
which is also called Ireland, is a fertile Ile of Saints, and equalling almost
the number of starres, with the patronages of Saints. Marianus Scotus
sayth: Ireland is an Iland full of saints, and very wounderfull men.
Gulimanus: Ireland is the shoppe of most holy and learned men. Ionas
Abbot sayth: Ireland for fayth excelleth all the Neighbour Countryes.
Baronius: Ireland is most constant in the Catholike Religion. Doctor
Sanders: The people of that Country, are farre more Catholike, then
many other Nations. Flodoardus sayth: Ireland for fayth, surpasseth
all the neighbour Nations.Card. Bar. ad Annum 1503. 
               Ioannes Maginus: The Irish maint aine the
Christian religion purely.Sanderus descismat. Anglicano. Flodoard. in vita S. Hellani. Ioannes Maginus Patauiensis t
                     •
                  n. 2. fol. 36. 
               These then be the testimonyes (deere

Country men) that learned and graue Authors giue to the sanctity,
fayth, and learning of Ireland.
            
            But perchance your pious curiosity will not be satisfyed
with these generall notions, therefore I will descend to some
particulers, and giue a sight of a few of the many trompets of
truth,Ioan. Mol in addit. ad Vsuardum & I
                     •
                  d. 51. Belgij. preachers of the ghospell, and mirors of sanctity, which
Ireland hath dispersed all Europe ouer, as witnes Ioannes Mōlanus,
Antonius Yepes, Venerable Bede, Wyon, the English martyrologe,
Cambden, and others: Ireland hath sent S. Columbe the Great with
his twelue holy companions into Scotland.Yepes in Cron. generalib. S. Columban with
his twelue companions into France. S. Clement with his twelue
companions into Almaine. S. Buan into Island. S. Kilian into
Franconia.Ord. S. Benedicti. S. Scruan into the Orcades. S. Brendan into the fortunate
Iles. S. Aydan into Northumberland. S. Finian into
Marcia,Beda in hist. Eccl. or the kingdome of the middle Englishmen. S. Albuin
into Lorraine. S. Gallus into Switzerland. S. Virgile into Carinthia.VVion in ligno vitae & appendice Martyrologium Anglican. Cambden. vbi supra, & alij.
S. Cathald into Tarentum. Ireland hath giuen the
Diocesse of Cambray S. Etton, Adalgisus, Mombulus. And the
Archbishop of Rhemes S. Abel. She hath giuen to the Diocesse
of Mecklin S. Pumold Archbishop of Dubline, and King of Irelands
sonne, and S. Hiniclin. To the Diocesse of Liedge S. Moman
Martyr, S. Foylan, Vltan and Bertuin. To the Diocesse of S.
Omers S. Luglius King of Ireland, and S. Luglianus Archbishop.
To the Diocesse of Gaunt S. Liuin, and Columban. To
the Diocesse of Antwerp S. Fredegand. To the Diocesse of Namures
S. Foranan, and S. Eloquius. To the Diocesse of Bruges
S. Guthagon. To the Diocesse of Harlem S. Geron. To the Diocesse
of Ruremond, S. Wiron and Plechelmon. To the Diocesse
of Balduke S. Dymphna, and Oda Martyrs, and Virgins of roiall
blood, and S. Gereberne. These were the masters of fayth, the
Embassadors of Religion, the Euangelistés of peace, Ireland emploied
in illustrating forraine Countryes (not to speak of Iliades,
& millions that shined at home like so many meridian sunnes)
Pastors and Bishops (to vse S. Augustines phrase) who were graue,
               Aug. lib. 1. cont. Iuli
                     •
                  
               
               learned, holy, earnest defendors of the truth, who sucked the Catholicke
fayth with their milke, and tooke it with their meate, whose milke, and
meate they ministred to the little and great.
            
            Hitherto deere Countrymen, I haue exhibited Ireland to

your consideration, giuing you rather a transitory sight, then a
full vieu of the beauty, and maiesty, the finger of the Almighty
hath imprinted on her face. Now it resteth that I present to
your fauourable aspects another no lesse gratefull, and eysome
an obiect S. Patricke your glorious Abbot, from whom Ireland
receaued fayth, religion, piety, and whatsoeuer els in this
kind she holdeth glorious, deemeth deere, or accounteth honorable.Plauius Dexter in sua omnicomoda historia.
I doe not deny that S. Iames the Great came long before
S. Patricke to plant the Christian Religion in Ireland, as Flauius
Dexter an anciēt Author liuing in the same age with Ierom,
Ioannes Gill, and Vincentius Bellouacensis teach. Grant S. Mansuetus
an Irish man by birth, and disciple to S. Peter the Apostle,
was sent by S. Peter himselfe in the yeare of our Lord 49. to
preach the Ghospell in Ireland,Vincentius Belloua. & Ioannes Gill. as it pleaseth Fisingrēnsis Admit
Palladius, suppose Cataldius, grant Derlanus, Ytarus, Riaranus, &
Hildebertus for the reduction of Irelād from paganisme, this notwithstanding
the full reclaime and entiere conuersion of Irelād
was reserued for S. Patricke,
               Fisingresis. who won her to the detestation of
Idols, and worshipp of one true and liuing God, and this none
will controll or gayne stand, but such as are possessed with the
spirit of contradiction, and who are more earnest to iangle, thē
desirous to be informed of the truth. His life which heere we
offer you, will aboundantly teach how stupendious he was in
perpetrating of miracles, how admirable in al kind of sanctimony,
and how enflamed with the zeale of gayning soules.
            He wrote as Pitseus witnesseth, many workes.Pitseus de illustrioribus Brittaninae scrip. aetat. 5. fol. 90. Of the future
life of the Elect, one booke. Of the three habitacles, one
booke. A Iournall of Confession, one booke. The history of
Ireland, one booke. Offermons, one booke. One booke of
Epistles against the superstitions of the Gentils. An epistle to
the inhabitants of Aualon. Seuerall epistles to the Brittons. Seuerall
epistles to the Churches of Ireland. Hodeoporicon or (Itinetarium)
of Ireland, one booke.
            He liued an hundred and two and twenty yeares, most
part of which tyme he spent in reclayming the Irish from idolatry
to the agnition of one true God: during the course of so many
yeares so fruitfully spent among vs, his pen neuer deliuered,
his tongue neuer vttered, nor himselfe neuer practifed indeed

any thing that might haue the least colour of fauouring or establishing
that Religion, which the preachers of the fift Ghospel
proudly vaunt, and vainely boast, to be the doctrine and fayth
of the Primitiue Church. And since they obtrude their new
found Ghospell on you, vnder the specious vizard of venerable
antiquity; loe we offer heere S. Patrickes life, written by
a learned pen 400. yeares agoe, and extracted out of the seuerall
volumes, S. Luman, S. Benignus, S. Mel, S. Patricke the yonger,
and S. Leuinus haue compiled of his famous acts and stupē
               dious
signes. Loe I say we offer them Saint Patrickes life, who
liued in the purer times of christianity, let them examine it, let
them search it, & point vs out what they shall find in it to coū
               tenance
their cause, or to aduance their religion: but sure I am
they will shrincke from such a disquisition, as would turne to
their notable preiudice and open confusion, by discouering the
fondnes and nouelty of their religion. For nothing will occure
heere but quires of sacred virgins cap. 17. §. 2. and cap. 18. §.
4. and troupes of holy monkes, ibid. &c. 13. §. 5. cap. 12. §. 3.
They will admire at the frequent mention of holy Vayles cap.
10. §. 1. &c. 13. §. 5. and Ecclesiasticall tonsure, cap. 4. §. 1.
Holy water, cap. 16. §. 5. Vessels of holy oyles cap. 15. §. 4.
Hallowed fire, cap. 5. §. 2. The signe of the Crosse cap. 18. §.
2. & alibi, sound very harshly in Protestants eares. Our wiuing
Ghospellers hold no commerce, or society with a continēt
and chast Monke cap. 20. §. 3. cap. 22. §. 1. The refined Ritualists
of Geneua, will neuer acknowledge our glorious Prelate,
walking in the maiesty of a Romaine Pallium. These delicate
reformers, wil neuer challenge a religious, consumed with fasts
and weakned with hayre-cloath cap. 1. §. 7. cap. 20. §. 3. as a
disciple of their sensuall Palenesse, comming of long standing in
cold water cap. 20. §. 3. a thing neuer practised by our tender

                  •
               olifidians. Short and broken sleepes taken all alone on a hard
flint cap. 20. §. 3. seeme strange and absurd in the Theology of
our libidinous Ministers, who lie immersed in beds of downe,
not alone, but embracing their sweet harts with greater deuotion,
then euer any Genua Bible.
            This rigid tenor of life, sauoureth much of Martin, and
German, those austere old men, whome S. Patricke glorieth to

haue been his masters & instructors c. 3. §. 1. This child of grace
glorieth to haue had so worthy educators, whose liues, if any list
to peruse, he shal quickly discerne, how far they were from impressing
in his hart, any thing that relisheth to Lutheranisme or
Caluinisme. But what need I run so far into these proportionles
parales? Whē as the monasteries our glorious Apostle erected;
the Churches he foūded; the Cloisters he gouerned; the Bishops
he cōsecrated; the Priests he ordained; the Virgins he vayled;
the pennance he preached; the mortificatiō he exersiced; & the
progeny frō him descended proclaime to the world that he aduāced
no other colors of religiō, thē those, vnder which Christs
militant spouse the Catholike Roman Church marcheth at this
present day. And though the whole body of the reformed religiō
lyeth a bleeding at al her veynes (and had been long since
buryed in the cenders of obliuiō did it receaue no more support
from the tēporal sword, then it doth frō the sword of the spirit)
being so deeply lanced, & cruelly wounded by the irresistable
weapons wherwith Ekius, Castro, Bellarminus, Baronius, Feuardē
                  tius,
Becanus, Cano, Stapleton, Panagaroll, & other valiant chāpions
of the Catholike cause, haue copiously stored the Arsenals of
their famous writings: yet wil I here (to remoue all ambiguity
in behalfe of S. Partrick) furnish the scrip of your memoryes with
fiue most bright stons taken vp out of the torrent of our glorious
Apostles life, wherwith if you charge the sling of your tongues,
the weakest among you shalbe able to encounter, & cast downe
any temerarious, & Goliah-harted protestant that should vndertake
to renew the lost field, or to recouer the gayned breach, or
to breath life a new into these fiue (for exāples sake) death-sicke
members of the fift Ghospell. Euery King, & tēporall Prince is
head of the Church within his own dominions, and signeories.
The holy Sacramēt of the Eucharist, is but a bare type & naked
figure: no religious worship is to be exhibited to the sacred reliques
of Saints: the Masse deserueth not the honour or name
of a sacrifyce, it being but a phantastical stage-show, fraught
with ridiculous gesticulatiōs: sole & naked fayth is able to trā
               port
vs to the hauen of interminable happines. What, is this the
symbole that Patricke hath planted with infatigable paynes, &
roborated with stupendious miracles? Is this the forme of belief
that hath ingendred in our worthy Ancestors such contempt of

sublunar felicity, such detestation of sensuall blandishments, &
such thirst of heauenly beatitudes? Why then did Patrike seeke
and accept of his mission from the Roman chaire c. 3. §. 2. & 4?
Why did he procure her priuiledges and indults c. 17. §. 2? Why
did he not misprize the title of Apostle, the office of Legat, the
Pallium of Bishop she bestowed of him, c. 17. §. 33? Where doth
he treate with Kinges, touching the vndergoing this care of
preaching? Or where is the least mentiō to be foūd that he was
emploied by them in this charge? We find in this volume, c. 10
§. 2. & 4. that he reuoked to life, & enspirited againe, the dead
bodyes of Kinges, but neuer that he entituled them heads of the
Church, & surely he was no lesse faythful in designing of these
liuing vnder one supreme and soueraigne Pastour, then he was
fortunate in reuiuing them. By S. Patrickes verdict then, not
Kings, but Bishops are gouernors of the Church & Presidents
of fayth. The moderne sect masters depriue you of the substāce,
and substitute but a bare shadow of Christs body in the holy
Eucharist. But more liberall is Patricke, who confidently teacheth
(q) the bloud & body of our spouse, to be shrouded vnder
these visible symbols c. 6. §. 6. &c. 16. §. 5. and stileth it, a diuine
Viaticum, c. 10. §. 2. These pure Gospellers daigne not scarce the
honor of sepulture to sacred bodies, of whose cinders S. Patrick
deliuereth magnificent eulogies, & prophecieth gloriously c. 12
§. 5. and brought himselfe frō 
               Rome reliques of the Apostles &
Martyrs, togeather with a sheet died with our Sauiours bloud,
causing thē to be shrined sumptuously, & worshiped religiously
c. 17. §. 3. Calum & Luthers progeny, are so incensed against the
holy sacrifice of masse, that they are not only cōtent to abrogat
the vse therof, but they would haue the very name obliterated.
But S. Patrike was a most earnest establisher of the Masse, by the
cōfessiō of protestants thēselues, so that with the bare instrumēts
used in that misterious oblatiō he wrought stupēdious signes, c.
11. §. 2. & deliuered many honorable encomioms of it. Now as
for saluatiō attained by sole fayth, the Proto-patriark of the fift
gospell, is so serious to establish this wicked Theorem, that in
fauour of it, he shameth not to discard canonicall Scripture;
thinking perchance that himselfe being the Apostle of a god &
goddes Bacbus & Venus might by authority down waigh & ouer

the Apostle of Iesus Christ. S. Patricke was so farre from allowing
of this exoticall and vnchristian paradoxe, the sluce to all
flagitiousnesse, that he tearmeth with S. Iames, Fayth that is
not animated by good workee, a dead, and life-lesse fayth, nay
no fayth at all, that in any wise auailes towardes our finall
happinesse. By this Antithesis of these fiue articles in debate
betweene vs and Protestants (not to enterlarge me any more
in a cause so perspicuous in any dispassionate eye) the Antinomy
or opposition of the fift ghospell, and S. Patrickes religion,
is rendred so luculent and manifest, that the proudest Achilles
of the Protestant side, vnlesse he be moone-sicke, wil neuer
presume to accept of the combat on the open playne of S. Patrickes
life. Now to declare the triall of so indifferent and vnpartiall
a barre, and to flinche from the vnpreiudicate verdict
of Saint Patricke (who liued within the compasse of the fiue
prime ages of the confessed purity of fayth and religion) cannot
but put all Catholikes, and especially Irishmen, in suspicion of
their fraudulent dēportement, and foule wracking impostures,
since it was Patrike that brought to them the brightsome light
of true, and neuer fayling fayth, if euer she blazed her glorious
beames on the face of Ireland (and I suppose none will be soe
impudent as to deny she did) since it was Patricke that planted
Ireland, a Paradise of pleasures, whether Elias would not disdaine
to be transported in his fiery Caoch to glut his mind with
her marueilous delights, since it was he that consecrated her as
it were a third heauen, whether S. Paul would willingly be
rauished to contemplate her delightfull maruayles, since it was
he that disimpestered her by the soueraigne influxion of his sacred
benediction, of the encombrance of serpents, scorpions &
other venemous animals, since it was he that beautifyeth her
with the stately structures of religious monasteries, garnished
her with many miriades of renowned Saints, enriched her
with copious treasures of sacred priuiledges, so that scarce any
corner can be found in Ireland, that is not sanctifyed with some
worthy monument of his holy benediction. What hitherto we
haue instanced in a more ample and diffuse manner concerning
S. Patricke our chiefe patron and Apostle, the same we may
auouch no lesse of S. Bridgit the seconde in the number of our

holy patrons: how farre she was from houlding with Protestants,
or breaking with Catholikes, her life will giue ample
testimony. The same we may as well auerre of S. Columbe,
who is the third in the glory of patronizing Ireland; for he
taught no other religion in Brittany or the lesser Scotland, then
that himselfe learned in Ireland, or the greater Scotland. What
this religion was, Protestant or Papisticall, I leaue it to the arbittement
of any that wil with conscience peruse his life, which
heere we haue compendiously set downe. Heare then, O worthy
childrē with an obsequious eare, the doctrin of your thrice
worthy Father S. Patricke, and of your two other holy Patrōs,
bind it on your fingers,Prou, 1. and write it in the tables of your hartes,
to preuent that you sincke not so deepe in the gulfe of true misery,
as you haue soared high in the ayre of Christian glory, to
preuent that the world, that hitherto hath proclaymed your
impregnable fidelity, declayme not against your damnable perfidie:
If sinners entise you, do not condescend to them; for their feete
do run to euill. What greater euill can they runne into, then to
varnish their nouuell religion, with the graue colours of venerable
antiquity? Or what greater imposture can they impose on
you, then to father their protestant paradoxes, on the primitiue
Christians? Can any conceaue that our moderne sect-masters,
after the reuolution of so many ages, see more clearely, or practise
more faithfully, the religion that flourished in the first fiue
centuryes after our redemption, then S. Patricke who liued
within the compasse of the sayd tymes? O no! This bragge
then of their pretensed concordance with the Christians of these
purer tymes, is a vaine flourish, a painted shew, a mere collusiō.
who is meanly conuersant in the Epistles ofAnac. epist. 1. & 2. 
               Anacletus the
first, Sixtus
               Sixtus epist. 2. the first, Euaristus
               Euari. epist. 1. the first, Alexander
               Alex. epist. 1. the
first, or inDiony. epist. 2. 
               Dionysius,
               Euseb. epist, 3. 
               Eusebius
               Silues. in Concil. Rom. c. 20 
               Syluester
               Dam. epist. 2. ad Stephanū. & Concil. Africae. 
               Damasus, or
Anast. ad Ger. & Burgundiae Episcopos. 
               Anastasius, but knowes what to hould, and embrace concerning
the primacy, and headship of the Roman sea? Who euer
perusedTert. de resur. carnis c, 8. 
               Tertullian,
               Cyprian. epict. 54. 
               S. Cyprian,
               Hylar. lib. 8, de Trin. 
               S. Hilary,
               Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 5. cap. 4. 
               S. Ambrose,
               Hiero. in Ezech lib. 14. 
               S. Hierome,
               August in Psal. 33. 
               S. Augustine, but see how patently they
confesse the reall presence of our Sauiours bloud, & body in the

holy Eucharist. There is none so little versed inAlex. epist. 1. c. 4 
               Alexander,
               Telesp. epist. ad omnes viriliter. c. 2.
               Telesphorus,
               Anac. ep. 1. c. 2. 
               Anacletus,
               Cypri. ep. 60. & 68. 
               S. Cyprian,
               Euseb. apud Gra
                  
                     •
                  tanum de consecrat. distinct. 1. 
               Euseb,
               Sylue. in actis Cō
                  cil. Rom. 
               Syluester,
               Hil. ad Constan. l 3 
               S.
Hilary,
               Hier. ad Helbidium epist. 150. 
               S. Hierome, but can tell, that they acknowledge the
masse to be a true and perfect sacrifice. Who is so alphabeticall
a Controuertist, but can beare witnesse thatBasil. erat. 40. 
               Basil the Great.
               Greg. Niss. orat. in Theod. 
               Gregory Nissen,
               Nazi. in Iulianū opostatam 
               Nazianzen
               Amb. serm. de S S. Naza. & Celso. S. Ambrose,
               Cyr
                     •
                  l. Hieros. cathe. 18. S. Cyrill of Hierusalem,
               Chrys. hom. 66. c
                     •
                  p pulum Antioch. & lib. aduersus Gentiles S. Chrisostome,
               Hier
                     ••
                  . aduersus Vigilantium. S. Hierome, allow of religious honour
done to Saints reliques? Euery yesterday-reader of the famous
monumēts of the holy Fathers, can tel you that(h) Origen,(i) Didimus
Alexandrinus,(k) Cyril of Hierusalem,(l) Nazianzen,(m) S.
Gregory Nyssen,(n) Theophilus Alexandrinus,(o) S. Hierome,(p) S. Austin,
(q) Sedulius,(r) Saluianus, openly teach and publikly professe
the necessity of good works, and generally declaime against the
Lutheran iustification by sole fayth.
            By these points insisted vpon, and instanced by vs, you
may learne the sympathy between vs moderne Catholikes and
S. Patricke, & betweene S. Patrike and the Primitiue Christiās:
and on the contrary, discouer the discrepancy of the Protestāts,
not only with S. Patcrike, whome I am sure they wil discard for
a very superstitious papist, but from all the current of the anciēt
Catholiks, hauing no more alliance with thē, then truth with
falshood, light with darkenes, or Christ with Belial. And to
returne home, deere Contrymen, it is not they that conuerted
Ireland, being a pagan Kingdome, but rather peruerted her being
a Catholike country, they haue not illuminated her faythlesse,
with the light of faith, but on the contrary, obscured her
faythfull with the fogge of heresy. For which respect that remarkable
censure of Tertullian may be deseruedly pronounced of
them: Of the administration of the word, what shall I say? Since it is
their study, not to conuert the Ethnicks, but to peruert ours: and this glory
they ayme at, if they may procure the ruine of such as stand, and not the
erection of them that are prostrate; for their worke consists not of their
owne proper building, but of the destruction of the truth; they digge vp
our workes, to build their owne, so it comes to passe, that they contriue
more easily the ruine of stāding houses, then the structure of ruinous buildings.
Sinc it is so deer Contrymen, perseuer constantly to the
end, in that fayth our glorious Apostle S. Patricke hath denounced
& preached to you: keep your selues intrenched within the

strong & impregnable fortresse of the Catholick Roman Churche,
which the fraud of heretiks shall neuer vndermine, nor the
force of Tyrants could neuer ouerthrow, and to the new and
late borne-ghospellers answere with Tertullian.Tertul 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               Who be yee?
Whence, and when came yee? Whence do yee now come abroad? Where
did yee lurke so long? We neuer hitherto heard any thing of you. And
with blessed Optatus:
               Optatus, 
               Show vs the beginning of your Chayre, yee
who claime to your selues holy Church? And with holy Hilary:
You came newly, you rose too late, we haue, what we ought to beleeue
touching Christ, the Church, and Sacraments; for we may well suspect
that it is not long since you began to appeare, in regard that the good corne
was sowen, and grew before, and not after the darnel. You may likewise
seuerely admonish them with that holy Doctor S. Hierom.
               S, Ierome.
               Whosoeuer thou beest that art a teacher of new opinions, spare the Romās
eares, spare the fayth that hath beene praysed by the Apostles mouth. Why
do you labour to teach vs after 400. (now 1500.) years? What we neuer
heard of before? VVhy did you bring to light that which S. Peter, & S.
Paul would not preach? VVithout this your fayth, the world hath beene
Christian to this present day: I will professe being now an old man, that
fayth wherein I was borne a child. Lastly you may iustly obiect to thē
the goldē trumpet of the ghospel S Paul,
               Gal. 1. thundring out this terrible
commination: But although we or an Angel from heauen, euangelize
to you, beside that which we haue euangelized to you, be he Anathema
or accursed. By this is most euidēt with what feare, with what
care, with what solicitude, with what zeale nouelty is to be detested,
and antiquity to be maintained, Protestancy to be auoided,
& Catholik religion to be embraced, since it is not lawfull
for S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Iohn, no nor the whole senat of the Apostls,
nor yet for al the hostes of Angels, to set down any forme of belief,
other then that which hath byn preached already. Now if
the dissemination of the tares & new dogmats, be liable to this
Apostolical Anathema or curse, & subiect to so heauy a cēsure,
questionlesse the ēbracement of them is as damnable, & implyes
no lesse then wrack of our souls euerlasting weale. The terror of
which dreadful menace, I pray God by the merits of our glorious
Patrōs & intercession of their numerous & holy progeny of
Saints, that it may alway soūd in your eares, & sinke into your
harts to the end, that amidst the swelling billowes & boyling

waues of enraged heresy, you may sticke fast to the irremoueable
rocke of the Roman Church, by the stronge cable of true &
ancient Religion, and after attaine to that euerlasting beatitude,
which God of his inexhausted manificence, bestoweth of
them that neuer change their fayth from him. For this and no
other end, haue I vndertaken this traduction of our glorious
Patrons liues. So wishing you deere Contrymen, all edification,
and furtherance in vertue, by the perusall of this little
Volume, & humbly begging for my selfe a part in your holy
deuotions, I will vpon confidence of your fauorable allowance,
take the quality of
            
               Your most obsequious seruant in all Christian
duty, Fr. B. B. one of the Irish
Franciscan Friars at Louain.
            
         
         
            
            ADVERTISEMENTS
TO THE READER.
            
               FIRST (gentle Reader) I would haue thee
vnderstād, that in this Translation of S.
Patrickes life, I haue followed Iocelinus
of Tornesio, who had written it in latin
aboue 400. yeares agone, at the intreaty of S. Malachy
Bishop of Conerthen, of the right Reuerend Father
in God Thomas, Lord Primate of Ireland, & of
the honorable Knight Syr Iohn de Curcy, as himself
signifyeth in his Preface, which togeather with many
other celebrious and note-worthy thinges, I haue willingly
left out, contenting my selfe in this present edition,
to publish a summary abridgment of the matters,
that are most remarkable, and best befitting our tymes.
If I learne that this my labour will proue gratefull, I
will God willing, put my hand to an entiere edition.
            Secondly, I would haue thee know, that in seuerall
Chapters and passages, I haue for the latin word Brittānia,
translated England, wherof I would haue none
to take aduantage. I know the English lay clayme to

               S. Patricke, so doe the French, so doe the Moderne
Scots. Therefore it was not my minde, or meaning to
giue a decissiue verdict or suffrage in a matter so disputable
on all sides, or to depriue any of the former nations
of the right, or title they haue to him. For S.
Patricke is too rich a iewell, to be lost but vpon good
euidence, and better then I haue alleadged.
            Thirdly, concerning S. Bridgits life, I haue
translated it partly out of Cogitosus her nephew (as
some do thinke) and partly out of Capgraue, & haue
my slefe distinguished it by Chapters and Paragraphes
otherwise then it is in the latin, thinking that the methode
I obserued therein, would be more for thy spirituall
profit, the ornament of the worke, and perspicuity
of the life it selfe.
            Fourthly, this summary of S. Columbes life,
I haue abridged out of S. Adamnan, whome I haue
preferred before many other authors, supposing that
none will be so impudent, as to deny what hath beene
deliuered from so holy, and innocuous a pen Further
for the latin worde Scotia, I haue most commonly
translated Ireland, in regard that Ireland was anciently
called Scotia, by the conspiring confession and
vniforme consent of all learned Writers, and especialy,
because it is cleerer then midday, that my Authour
meaneth by the latin word Scotia, Ireland, which he

calls sometymes Scotia, and sometimes Hibernia, in
one and the selfe same paragraphe, whereof see cleere
and vndenidable proofes lib. 2. cap. 6. §. 1. and
lib. 3. cap. 2. §. 1. Which we haue faythfully
translated as they lye in the latin, to show with what
sincerity and candour, and vpon what iustifyable
groundes, we haue proceeded in this matter.
            Fiftly gentle Reader, I trust that as the desire of
of aduancing thy spirituall profit, made me vndertake
this translation: so thou wilt be pleased of thy
curtesy to correct patiently, or to couer charitably, the
faults escaped both in the English, and print. Truly
were I able (as I was not) to inuest these Saints liues in
a lofty and magnificent stile, yet would I preferre a
a plaine and simple phrase. I know that would sound
sweetest in the eare, but this sinketh deepest into the
hart, whereof holy Scriptures written in a phrase
plaine inough, giue aboundant testimony. But as for
the faults of the presse, they could not but be many, by
reason of my owne absence from the Print: the most
principall I haue noted downe in the correctiue table,
the rest I leaue to thy fauourable correction, Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE LIFE OF THE
GLORIOVS BISHOP
SAINT PATRICKE
APOSTLE AND PRIMAT
OF IRELAND.
            
               Of S. Patrickes Country, Parents, Byrth, and some
miracles wrought by him in his Infancy.
CHAP. I.
               
                  IN the village of Taburnia in Brittany,
hard by Emptor Towne, in the South of
England, there liued a man named
Calphurnius, who took to wife a french
Damoiselle named Conquessa, Neece to S. Martin
Archbishop of Tours in France. This holy couple,
liued togeather in great sanctity, and perfectiō,
being iust before God, and walking in his iustifications,
and commandements without blame.
In processe of tyme, it pleased God to blesse
them with a holy, and happy issue, whome they
named Patricke, who was no sooner regenerated

in the lauer of holy Baptisme, but God began
to denounce to the world, his admirable sanctity,
by the voyce of stupendious miracles, in mā
                  ner
following.
               2. A certaine man strucken with blindnes
from his mothers wombe, named Gormas, heard
in his sleep a voyce commanding him with the
right hād of the child Patrick (newly christened)
to make the signe of the Crosse on the ground:The signe of the crosse.
which voice added further, that thereupon would
gush out a vaine of liuing water, wherewith if he
washed his eyes, he should recouer his sight. The
man obeyed the diuine oracle, & found the vertue
of Siloe rieterated in that miraculous fountaine:
Nay (which is more prodigious) at the same
tyme, his spirituall eyes were opened, being
illustrated with the guift of infused knowledged,
so that of an ingorant blind man, he became a
learned Reader, and vnderstander of holy Scriptures.
               3. The holy child Patricke, encreasing in
yeares, grew likewise in grace, and as a shop full
fraught with sweet perfumes, breathed forth the
fragrant odours of astonishing miracles. In Emptor
Towne, where the holy child and his sister Lupita
were brought vppe, vnder the care of an

Aunt of theirs, after the dissoluing of the frost,
a certaine sinke, or Va
                     •
                  te, did so swell vp with waters,
that it threatned the destruction of many
houses, and particulerly the inundation did ouerwhelme
the house wherein the holy child liued,
so that al the houshold stuffe was ouerflowen: the
Blessed child being hungry, called to his Nurce
for bread: Who answered, that he was neerer
drowning, then getting any thing to eate. With
that the holy child dipped his fingers in the swelling
waters, and sprinckling them thrice ouer the
same with the signe of the holy Crosse, commanded
the sinke in the name of the most holy Trinity,
to retyre. It was a wounder to see, the inundation,
ceased, the sinke or Vault became sodainly
dry. For from his sacred fingers, it seemed to thē
that stood by, in lieu of droppes of water, sparckles
of fire to issue forth, which dryed vp those swelling
waters.
               4. On a certaine day in the winter tyme, the
holy child being among a company of his play-fellowes,
gathered vp in his lap some pieces of Ice,
and carrying them home, layd them on the floor.
To whome his Nurce sayd, that it had beene better,
and much more fitting for the season, to haue
brought home wood for the fire, then so to play

the wanton with the peeces of Ice. The sweet child
answered wisely, saying: It is easy for the Author
of nature, to dispense with the course of nature,
aud to make euen this frozen water, seruiceable
for the vse of fire: Then he layd the peeces together,
and after praying and making the signe of
the Crosse vpon them, he blew them: with that
they tooke fire, which cast out such flammes, and
heat, as yeelded forth not only the benefit of warmeth,
but also ministred great matter of admiratiō
to all that saw it: which, what els could the same
foreshew, but that this great Saint, shold inflame
the cold and frozen hartes of many, and with
the word of God, breathed from his sacred soule,
inflame them in the loue of so potent a Lord?
               5. One tyme as Lupita, S. Patrickes sister, went
to weane the lambes from their Dames, she fell,
and in falling burst her head against a sharp edged
Flint, that wounded her cruelly: many ran to see
that great mischance, and among them the Blessed
child Patricke, who by making the signe of the
crosse on her forehead, restored her to perfect
health. In like manner did the Blessed child reuine
his Vncle, who dyed of suddayne death, by
making the signe of the Crosse vpon him, and
offering his deuout prayers for him. S. Patricke
                  
was by his Aunt, deputed to the charge of keeping
sheep; One day, as he ledd them out to their
pasture, there rushed out of a wood hard by, a famished
wolfe, who carryed away one of the sheep:
his Aunt missing the sheep, imputed the losse of
it to the Saints negligēce, in performing his charge:
he supported patiently her vndeserued check,
& prayed to God earnestly for the bringing back
of the lost sheep. Behould the next morning, the
Woolfe came carying the sheep in his mouth, &
layd the same before the Saint, and so went his
way. The holy childs Nurce in her sickenes longed
much for hony, but none being to be gotten,
she fell a greeuing and lamenting: the holy child,
blessing a cup of cold water, conuerted it into
hony, and gaue it to his Nurce, wherewith she
satisfyed her longing, and recouered her health
perfectly.
               6. A noble man that liued in Emptor-Towne,
forced S. Patrickes Aunt, to vndergo the heauy
yoake of seruitude, giuing her in charge to cleanse
or empty euery day, the dirt and filth of a great
stable or Ox-stall, where many Oxen and Horses
were stabled. The vertuous woman supporred
with great meeknes this affliction, as comming
from the hand of God. But S. Patricke offering

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
his prayers to God for his Aunt, all the roomes
were made cleane, & so continued for a long time
without any human help: which great miracle exciting
all men to admiration, was the cause that
the woman was set at liberty, and the Saint held
in great veneration.
               7. The admirable progresse the holy childe
made in the course of vertue, went farre beyond
the number of his yeares: for his tender breast abounded
with plenty of diuine gifts, that pure receptacle
was enriched and stored with all vertues,
so that in the slippery course of youth, he slidd
not into any lapse that might ly as a stayne on the
spottles robe of his chastity; such was his care in
keeping the integrity both of soule and body vnblemished.
And albeit the inward motiō of grace
did instruct, and direct him in all his actions, yet
when he came to competent yeares, his parents
tooke care for his trayning vp in learning. The
child plyed his booke very diligently & particularly
he gaue himselfe to learne Psalmes, Hymnes,Fastes, Watchinges, & other workes of Pennance.
and spiritual Canticles, which he got by hart;
for euē from the prime of his youth, he was wont
euery day to say the whole Psalter. His tender body
he chastised with fastings, watchinges, and other
exercises of devotion; exhibiting it a liuely

host, holy, and pleasing to God, & representing
in his mortall body, the life of an Angel without
a body.
            
            
               Of S. Patricks being carryed into Ireland: and of his
captiuity, and release from the yoke of seruitude.
CHAP. II.
               FIER tryeth gold, and the furnace of tribulation
the iust: to the end, that S. Patricks vertues
should becom more illustrious, & his crown
of blisse more glorious, he was exposed to the assaults
of tentation. For some Pirates, breakinge
into England, carryed away many captiues, and
among the rest S. Patricke, being then sixtene
yeares old, of whome they made sale in Ireland
to a certaine Pagan petty-king named Milchoe,
who raigned in the North. By Milchoes appointement,
S. Patricke was deputed to the seruile
charge of keeping Hogges: the holy youth, imbraced
patiētly God dispostition, & omitted not
in the meane season to exercise himself in deuotiō
& in the care of his saluation. An hundred times
a day, and as many more in the night, did he prostrate
himselfe in prayer before God. As for his
fastes, they were admirable, liuing on roots, hearbes,

and such other slight food, and full often
without any corporall sustenance, neyther could
the rigour of the season, or sharpenes of the weather,
cause him at any tyme to intermit his exercises
of deuotion.
               2. After the enduring of six yeares captiuity,
the Blessed Saint ceased not with vnfatigable
groanes, and feruent prayers, to solicite the diuine
Maiesty in behalfe of his freedome, & returne to
his natiue soyle, and parents. Whereupon one day
as he was in prayer, an Angel appeared to him, assuring
him that his fastes, and prayers had ascended
vp in the sight of God, & that his releasemēt
was neere at hand. The Angel added further, that
himselfe was named Victor, that he was peculiarly
deputed to his custody, and that at all occasions
he would be ready to releeue, and assist him. Thē
the Angel directed the Saint to a place which the
Swine had digged and rooted vp, where he was to
find a summe of gold wherewith to pay his ransome.
Moreouer the Angell told him, that at the
next hauen there was a Ship bound for England,
which could not (God appoynting it so) haue a
fauourable wind without his presence.
               3. S. Patricke hauing payd his ransome to
his greedy, aud cruell Lord, hastened to the hauen

fore showen to him by the Angell, where imbarking
himselfe in the formentioned Ship, after
three dayes sayling (the windes being fauourable)
they arriued safely on the coast of England, where
going ashore, in traueling through a solitary, and
baren Countrey, some foure & twenty dayes togeather,
they began to feel the extremity of hunger.
S. Patricke all this while 
                     ••
                   not to preach
vnto them the kingdome of heauen, and the saith
of the most holy Trinity, but they willfully shut
their eyes against the light of truth, vital that vexation,
the mistris of vertue, gaue them vnderstā
                  ding:
for being pinched with the implacable rage
of hunger, the eldest of the broke out into these
wordes: Thou seest, O worshipper of Christ, to what
extremity we are brought, inuocate then thy God, whose
omnipotency thou blasest to the end, that tasting of his
liberality, we may be 
                     ••
                  cited to a dore, & 
                     〈◊〉
                   knowledge
his Maiesty. Saint Patricke offered vp his players
to god in their behalfe, and loe suddenly there
appeared 
                     〈…〉
                   and wild hony in such
plenty, that they 
                     〈◊〉
                   their present distresse
and were wel prouided for against their future necessaryes.
And though for the present they both
thanked God, and had his Saint in great veneration;
yet the 
                     〈◊〉
                   gale of prosperity & plenty

ingendred in them an obliuion of their bountiful
benefactour, and ingratitude for his singuler benefite,
in so much that of that miraculous prouision,
they offered victimes and sacrifices to their
Idols, and after eate of them, of which idolatrous
victuals S. Patricke would not in any case tast, albeit
he were earnestly intreated thereunto, but by
Gods fauour, fasted out twenty dayes without any
kind of corporall sustenance.
               4. Least the greatnes of miraculous signes
or fastes, should extoll Godds chosen vessell Saint
Patricke, the Angell of Satan was permitted to
buffet him. One night, the prince of darknes
rushed vpon the Saint so fiercely, that he depriued
him of the vse, and exercise of his members,
and senses, and thus molested him for the space of
three dayes: the Saint in his distresse had recourse
to God, his sure, and soueraigne refuge, twice
inuoking for his helpe,The inuocatiō of Saints 
                  Elias the prince of Prophtes:
Elias being sent by our Lord, chased away that diabolicall
tentation, restored the Saint to the vse
of his senses, and members, illustrating him both
inwardly & outwardly with immense splendour.
The Saint ouercoming this assault of the aduersary,
togeather with some other difficultyes in the
way, returned home to his natiue soyle, to the vnspeakable

ioy of his Parēts, who requested him with
teares in their eyes, not to depriue them any more
of the contentment Parents reap of their childrēs
presence. The mirrour of obedience Patricke, out
of reuerence & respect to his Parents, remayning
with them for a while.
            
            
               Of a vision Saint Patricke had touching the conuersion
of Ireland: of his iourney to Rome, where he was
made Bishop, and of his mission by the Popes holynes
for Ireland.
CHAP. III,
               WHILES S. Patricke liued with his Father,
one night, he saw in a vision as it
were a man of a comely countenance, and cariage,
bringing many letters from Ireland, and giuinge
him one to reade: which when he began to reade,
he found written in the very beginning: Haec est
vox Hibernigenarum. This is the voyce of the Irish
nation. Hauing read the beginning, and intending
to go on with the rest, it seemed to him that
he saw in spirit, the Irish infants shut vp yet in
their mothers wombes, crying to him with a loud
voice: We pray thee, O holy mā 
                  Patrick, that thou
come, & conuerse with vs & set vs free. The Saint

could not read any further, but awaking out of
sleepe, he rendred many thankes to God, and by
reason of the vision, he persuaded himselfe, that
God called him to conuert the Irish nation, that
seemed to craue and desire his presence: & being
desirous to know further the diuine pleasure touching
this affaire, he had recourse to God, who by
the Angel Victor, commaunded him to repaire
into France, there to be trayned vp in Christian
learning, and discipline.
               2. S. Patricke, as God appointed him, went
into France, and there repaired to S. German Bishop
of Antisiodorum, with whome he liued some
eighten yeares al which tyme he imployed in studying
the holy Scriptures: He was by S. G
                        •
                     rm
                        •
                     n
promoted to holy orders successiuely, & lastly inuested
with the sacred order of Priesthood.Holy orders Priesthood. Saint
Patricks earnest desire of attayning to greater grace
of diuine knowledge, made him repayne to his
Vncle S. Martin Archbishop of Tours: this holy
Bishop being a Monke himselfe, cloathed his Nepheu
Patricke with a monkes weed and instructed
him in regular discipline,S. Patricke was a Monke. and monasticall obseruances,
which the Saint embraced very willingly,
and according to the tenour of them, directed his
life 
                     〈…〉
                  . So taking their leaues each of

other, S. Patricke returned to his old maister S.
Germain againe.
               3. S. Patricke determined with himselfe to
go to Rome,S. Patricke would not vndergo the conuersion without the Popes speciall leaue. to be better instructed in the Ecclesiasticall
constitutions, and Canons being 
                     〈◊〉
                  
with all that his iourney for Ireland might be approued,
and ratifyed by Apostolicall authority;
which his determinatiō when he opened to S. German,
he liked well thereof, and ioyned with him
the seruāt of God Sergerius the Priest as a comfort
in his trauailes, & as a faythfull witnes of his holy
conuersation. Setting himselfe on his way, by
diuine inspiration he went to a certaine Ermite of
great fame, sanctity, and merit, named Iustus, liuing
in an Ile of the Tyrrhene Sea, where after charitable
saluations, and some spirituall conference
passing betweene them, the holy man Iustus, deliuered
to S. Patricke a little staffe, which he sayd
he receaued out of our Sauiours owne handes, to
giue to him. Saint Patricke after some dayes abod
with the seruant of God Iustus, went on his iourny
to Rome, being enriched with that holy staffe,
that God had sent him. O singular guift descending
from the Father of lights! For as by Moyses
Rod, God wrought many prodigious wounders
in bringing the Israelites out of the house of bondage,

so by this holy staffe, which himselfe sent to
his true seruant Patricke, did he worke wonderful
miracles in the conuersion of many Nations.
               4. After the Saints safe arriuall at Rome, he
visited with great deuotion,S. Patricke honoured the reliques of Martyrs, & prayed at their shrines. and reuerence, the
memoryes of the Apostles, and Martyrs, & comming
to the Popes aquaintāce, his holynes admitted
him to great fauour, & grace. There sate then
in the Apostolicall chayre (both by name, and
conuersation) Pope Celestimus the first, the three
and fortith after S. Peeter. The Popes holynes
finding S. Patricke sound in fayth, learning, and
sanctity,S. Pat. was made Bishop by the Pope. consecrated him Bishop, & determined
to employ him in the conuersion of Ireland. His
holynes had sent before into Ireland for that end,
another Doctour named Palladius his owne Archdeacon,
on whō he bestowed store of bookes with
Reliques of the Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, &
of many other Martyrs. But he finding the Irish
nation, obstinatly bent against the doctrine of
truth, departed from Ireland, & intending to returne
backe to Rome, dyed in the way. The Popes
holynes being certifyed of Palladius death,S. Patrickes mission.
commanded S. Patricke to succeed him, in that
charge of preaching the Ghospell to the Irish nation.
S. Patricke, with twenty more famous for

learning, and sanctity, whome his holynes had giuen
him as his coadiutors in that great worke he
was to vndertake, set himselfe on his iourney towardes
Ireland: In the way he repaired to his ould
master and instructor, S. German, of whose guift
he receaued chalices, vestements, and other like
Church stuffe.
               5. As S. Patricke tooke shipping in England
for to passe into Ireland, where a poore leaper besought
the Saint most earnestly to carry him into
Ireland, the Saint of the aboundance of his piety
cōdescended to the distressed leapers request, but
the Mariners would not in any case admit him into
the Shippe: the Saint ful of confidence in God,
cast out into the sea a hallowed Altar stone,Hallowed Altar stones. which
his holynes had bestowed vpon him, and made
the leaper to sit on it. O prodigious wounder,
that stone set on & loaden in that manner, being
supported by the Head corner stone, floted on the
waues against its owne nature, and went side by
side with the Shippe all the seas ouer, and euen
with it came to the shore. When they came in
sight of the land, the Saint saw an host of Diuells
inuironing the Iland, and opposing themselues as
a strong Bulwarke, to hinder his entrance into
the Country. But the Saint was nothing terrifyed

at the sight of these vgly spirits, knowing
that there were more, and farre more potent with
him, then against him: wherefore making the
victorious signe of the Crosse against them, he
chased away all that army of diabolicall fiendes.
            
            
               Of S. Patrickes arriuall in Ireland: of the conuersent
                     •
                  
a noble Man named Dichum; and of many miracles
wrought by the Saint.
CHAP. IIII.
               SAINT Patricke with his holy family, landed
at Inuerds hauen in Leinster, and thence, hauing
first refreshed him after his long nauigatiō,
sayled towardes the North: for he had a great desire
to bring Milcho, in whose seruice he was all the
tyme of his bondage, to the knowledge of the true
God, and of his Religion; but God disposing it so
for the greater gaine of soules, the Saint arriued
in Vlidia, where being ready to go ashore, a multitude
of Pagans stood there in a readines to hinder
his entrance; for the Magitians, and Diuines
of that Region, prophecyed of his comming in
manner following: There will one come with his
crowne shauen, & in his hand a croked staffe, his 
                        〈◊〉
                     
shalbe set in the East of his house, and his people shall

stand behind him, from his table he wil sing blasphemies
and all his family will answeare, Amen, Amen: This
man when he shal come, will destroy our Gods, ouerthrow
our Altars, and Temples, seduce the people after
him, he will subdue, or cut off our Kinges, that will resist
him, and his doctrine shall raigne for euer. Which
moued Leogarius the sonne of Neil being then the
Monarch of Ireland, to commaunde his subiects
throughout all his dominions, to watch al the hauens,
and ports, to the end, they might driue S.
Patricke away, whersoeuer he meant to land.
               2. As S. Patricke went to the shoare, being
all alone, the cruell Pagans incited a most fierce
dogge to assayle the Saint, but the Dogge no sooner
saw Gods seruant, but he became mute, and
as stiffe as a stone, which when a certaine man of
great strength, of a huge stature, and fierce spirit,
named Dichu, saw, he drew out his sword, thinking
to kill the Saint, but God opposinge the sheild
of his diuine protection, all his strength fayled
him, and such a stifnes grew ouer al his body, that
he could neyther sturre hand, nor foot. The noble
man seeing this great miracle wrought vpon
himselfe, became another man; for he, and al his
house beleeuing in Christ, were baptised, & Dichu
hauing obtayned health both of soule, and body,

bestowed vpon Saint Patricke the place where that
miracle hapned, with all the appartenances for
the building of a church. The place is called, S.
Patrickes Barne euen to this day: in processe of
tyme,Sauall, that is S. Patricks grange. the Saint built theron a faire Monastery,
which he furnished with a company of perfect
Monkes, ouer whome he placed S. Dunnius his
owne disciple, as Abbot.
               3. One day as the Saint sayd Masse in the
sayd Church,S. Patrike said masse. a sacrilegious Magician, the child of
perdition stood without, and with a rodd put in at
the window, cast down the chalice, & shed the holy
Sacrament; but God without delay seuerely punished
so wicked a sacriledge, for the earth opening
his mouth after a most strange manner, deuoured
the Magician, who descended a liue downe
to hell: the Saint sorrowed much for the effusion
of the Chalice, and as he afflicted himselfe with
bitter teares, the Chalice by diuine vertue was erected
in its owne place with the sacrament so entyre,
that there appeared no signe, nor marke of
the effusion. The same seuere reuenge did almighty
God exercise vpon another Magitian, for attempting
to kill the Saint.
               4. S. Patricke leauing his furniture in the
custody of Dichu, his first be gotten in Christ, wēt

himselfe, as he had purposed often, to visit his old
Master Milchoe, in hope by his preaching to subdue
him to the sweet yoke of our Sauiour, but the
wicked wretch fearing that S. Patrickes efficacious
preaching should soften his stony hart, and withal
disdayning to submit himselfe to the doctrine of
him, who in former tymes had beene his slaue,
when he heard of the Saints approching, being
giuen ouer into a reprobate sense, and gatheringe
all his substance in a heap togeather, he set fire to
it, and after cast himselfe into the midest of the
flames, as a sacrifice to the infernall Furyes: But
Milchoes two Daughters, were conuerted to the
faith by Saint Patricke, and receaued the grace
of Baptisme, wherein both were named Emeria.
These holy virgins were endued in their life, with
many ornaments both of grace,Miracls wroght at the sepulcher of Saints and vertue; and
the many miracles wherewith according to S. Patrickes
prophecie God honoured their sepulcher
in Cluainbron, giue euident testimony, that they are
translated to a better life.
               5. As S. Patricke passed through the coūtry,
sowing the seed of euangelicall doctrine, he became
acquainted with a youth named Mochna,
whome by diuine inspiratiō he knew would proue
a chosen vessell; the holy youth Mochna, imbraced

willingly S. Patrickes doctrine; the Saint himselfe
baptised him, and taught him his crosse row.
The youth within the compasse of one month
learned all the psalter, and before a yeare came to
an end, attayned the vnderstanding of holy Scriptures.
After a while as S. Patricke passed by that
place, Mochna repaired to him, and being both
in talke of diuine matters, a pastorall staffe sent
from heauen, fell iust betweene them: S. Patricke
tooke great ioy in that miraculous guift, & turning
to Mochna, sayd to him: Know my deerest
child, that by this pastorall staffe, you are designed
to take vpon you the charge of soules, promoting
him therefore (though much against his
will) to holy orders, at last he installed him Bishop
of Edruim.
                  Holy orders. S. Mochna did great good in the
Church of God, by meanes of his holy conuersation,
and singular doctrine, and ascended to the
triumphant, being indued with the ornaments of
rare vertues, and glory of many miracles.
               6. Leogarius the Monarch, to keepe his subiectes
in awe, and subiection, constrayned all his
Princes, and great Lords, to giue him hostages of
their loyalty, amōg others he had Dichues sonnes
as pledges of their Fathers fidelity: when King
Leogarius, who was wholly addicted to superstitiō,

and idolatry, heard that Dichu and all his family
was conuerted to the Christian Religion, he fell
into a great rage, and chafe against him, & commaunded
that his two sonnes, who where hostages
should be put to death, by keeping all manner of
liquour, and drinke from them. The Saint knowing
by diuine reuelation of that most cruel commandement,
had his recourse to his wonted weapons
of holy prayer; and loe the night following,
an Angell comming into the prison, presented to
the young noble men a soueraigne liquor, that
quenched their present thirst: and which is farre
more strange, extinguished in them all appetit of
drinking, vntil within a few dayes he came againe,
and released them at S. Patrickes intercession.
            
            
               How S. Patricke prophecyed that S. Benignus should
succeed him in the Primacy of Ireland, and of
many hard conflictes the Saint had with King
Leogarius, and his Magitians.
CHAP. V.
               THE solemne feast of our Sauiours triumphant
Resurrection approached, which S.
Patricke determined to celebrat with great solemnity
in a fayre, and spatious field called, Breage,
                  
and there by euangelizing the Kingdome of heauen,
and administring the sacrament of holy Baptisme,
to encrease the number of the faythful; for
which end he went to a certaine noble mās house,
hard by the field aforesayd. The noble man,
whose name was Sesgnen, entertayned the Saint
very courteously, and was himselfe with all his
house, conuerted to the true fayth. This noble
man had a Son, whom at the sacred font, the Saint
called Benignus, a name rightly beseeming him;
for in his life and demeanour, he was most benigne
and sweet, being beloued both of God & men,
worthy of eternall glory in heauen, and to be reuerenced
of all men vpon earth. This holy child
could not be separated from the company of the
Saint; for when the Saint layd him downe to rest,
the child stealing from his Father and Mother,
fell downe at his feet, imbracing thē very louingly,
and fixing many a sweete kisse vpon them.
The next morning as the Saint got vp into his
Coach, hauing one foot in the boote of his Coach
& another vpon the ground, the child tooke him
by the feet, beseeching him after a most earnest
manner, not to leaue him behind: and returning
to his Parents, that laboured to detayne him, he
sayd weeping, & crying out aloud: Get you hence,

Get you hence, dismisse me, I pray you, that I may follow
my spirituall Father. The Saint behoulding,
& admiring such great deuotion in such a tender
breast, gaue the child his benediction, & prophecied,
that he should be his Successour in the Primatship
of Ireland, which thing fell out accordingly.
               2. The holy Bishop solemnised the Paschall
feast in the foresayd field,Candels vsed in the diuine office. and according to the
custome of holy Church, did light the candells
with hallowed fire. The Idolatrous people celebrating
at that tyme, a great solemne feast of
theirs called Rach,Hallowing of fire on Easter saturday in which feast (dedicated to
the Prince of darknes) the children of darcknes
vsed no light, for it was the custome with them,
to quench the fire in all places thereaboutes, and
it was treason for any to light it, before it were
seene lighted in the Kings pallace. King Leogarius
with all his nobility, then kept court at Tarach
his principall howse, from whence seeing the fire,
which the Saint had kindled, he raged extremely,
and diligently inquired who presumed to attempt
such a matter. One who was in the company presently
answeared, as it were by way of prophecy;
If this fire be not extinguished this night, the
kindler of it with his followers, shal beare rule in

all this kingdome. The King being wholly incensed
hereat, hastned with all expedition to quench
the same, taking with him thrice nine, that is 27.
chariots, in regard that his Magicians put him in
the head, that that number was fortunate, and
prosperous.Psal. 19. v. 8. Vpō the sight of all these chariots, the
Saint sung that verse of the psalme. These in charriots,
and these in horses, but we will inuocate in the
name of the Lord our God. When the King came
neere the place, he sent for the Saint, cōmanding
him to make his appearance before him. The diuine
office being ended, the Saint came, but none
of the Courtiers, as the King commanded, exhibited
him any reuerence or honour, except one
Hercus, who rose & saluted the Saint very officiously.
The Saint gaue him his benediction,
and promised him life euerlasting. Hercus receiuing
the grace of regeneration, and leading a life
conspicuous both for miracles and vertues, being
after made Bishop, departed to a better life in the
citty of Slane.
               
               3. A certaine Magician that was in great fauour
with the King, & whome the King honoured
as a God, opposed himself against S. Patrike,
euen in the same kind that Simon Magus resisted
the Apostle S. Peter: the miserable wretch being

eleuated in the ayre by the ministery of Diuels,
the King and the people looked after him, as if he
were to scale the heauens, but the glorious Saint
with the force of his feruent prayers, cast him
downe vnto the ground, where dashing his head
against a hard flint, he rēdred vp his wicked soule,
as a pray to the infernall Fiendes.
               4. The Magitians death put the King in a
great rage, so that with a great troup well appointed
for so cruell a masacre, he attempted to kill
the Saint. Who perceiuing their desperate intention,Psal. 6
                        •
                      v. 1.
began to sing that verse of the Psalme: Let
God arise, and let his ennemyes be dispersed, let them
that hate him fly from his face. Almighty God, in
whose protection the Saint was, with thunder and
lightning stroke some of them downe starke dead,
and the rest he put to flight. The King hauing
but foure in his company, hid himselfe in a close
roome from the fury of God: the Queene falling
prostrate before the Saint, vndertooke in the behalfe
of her husbād, that he would adore the true
God, & submit himselfe to the Saints directions,
who praying to Almighty God, the vehement
storme ceased; The King came, as the Queen had
promised, couering with the vaile of humility the
obstinate malice of his hart, in shew and outward

adoration acknowledging the soueraigne maiesty
of God, he intreated the Saint, that he would be
pleased to come to his court, promising that he
would be wholy directed & gouerned by the St.:
wherto he condescended, albeit he were not ignorant
of the Kinges deep & wicked dissimulations
               5. But the wicked King being obdurate in
his malice, beset al the way, wherby the Saint was
to passe, with armed chariots; for euery seuerall
passage he belayd with nine chariots, to the end if
he escaped one passage, he should be intrapt in another.
But the malice of man, cannot preuaile against
the goodnes of God, who conducted his
true seruant Patricke with eight more, and the holy
youth Benignus inuisible through the midst of
their blood-thirsting ennemyes to Tarach, where
the King kept court. When the Saint entred the
Kings pallace, none did exhibite him: any honor,
or reuerence, excepting the Kings Poet, who with
great submission saluted him: which was reputed
in him to iustice, for he receaued the grace of baptisme,
& the poems, which before he sung in honor
of the false Gods, thence forwards he imploied
in praysing the true and liuing God.
               6. The wicked King seeing he could not by
force cut off the Saint, attempted to make him away

by fraude; for by the hand of his Magitiā, he
offered the Saint a poysoned cuppe, which to the
great astonishment of all the company, he drunke
off without receauing any dommage thereby, but
the Magitian fearing to be ouercome with his diabolicall spels,
caused a fantasticall snow to fall ouer
all the adioyning country: in like manner by
force of his magical charmes, he ouercast all the
land with a palpable darknes, the one or other he
was not able to remoue, as himselfe publikely cō
                  fessed.
But S. Patricke, the child of light, offering
his deuout prayers to the Sunne of iustice, chased
away both the fantasticall snow, and diabolicall
darknes: the people of that Region, who sat in
darknes, now seeing this great light, praysed the
true God & magnifyed his holy seruāt S. Patricke
               
               7. All this could not bring the child of Belliall,
the Magitian, to any good; therefore to discerne
the light of fayth from the darkenes of idolatry,
& the verity of true doctrine, from the vanity of
magical leuity, a new course of tryal was set down:
for by the appointment of al the company, S. Pawicke,
and the Magitian according thereunto, a
new house was built after a strange & extraordinary
manner, the one halfe being made of greene
Oake, the other of dry, and withered Timber,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
then binding both Saint Benignus, and the Magician,
they placed them in the house opposite
one against another: S. Benignus attyred in the
Magitians apparell, was placed in the part that
was made of dry wood, and the Magitian with S.
Patrickes vestement, was placed in the part that
was built of greene Timber: this being done, fire
was put to the house. O strange and vnheard euent▪
the fire burnt the Magitian with the greene
part of the house, euen to ashes, leauing not so
much as the least signe of burning in the Saintes
vestement. But the holy youth Benignus was not
touched by the fire, nor receaued any harme by
it, the Magitians garment being consumed into
ashes. Behold then the renouation of the miracle
of the three Childrē in the Babylonian furnace,
registred by Daniel in his booke of prophecyes.
               8. For all this King Leogarius, relented not
from his wicked malice, but rather hardned his
hart like another Pharaoe; for in reuenge of the
Magitians death, he contriued by al meanes possible
the Saints vtter destruction, finding many of
his subiects willing & prompt to execute his blody
purpose but Almighty God the powerful protector
of his seruant, armed the zeale of senseles
creatures to fight against those senceles idolaters,
for the earth gaping horribly, swallowed downe to

the bottomles pit of hell those officers of malice,
and many of the Cittizens of Tarach, who had any
hand in this wicked designe. This seuere reuenge
strooke such a terrour in their mindes, that
all the people of the Country thereabout, fearing
to incurre the like danger, became Christians, &
receaued the grace of Baptisme, but the wicked
King, he could not reclaime: therefore he thūdred
out his malediction against him, denoūcing prophetically,
that none of his progeny should raigne
after him in the kingdome, but that it should descend
to his yoūger brother. But the Queene imbraced
the Christian Religiō, receaued Baptisme
at the Saints hands, and ended her dayes happily.
After this he went ouer al the coūtrey, preaching
the Gospel, our Lord working withall, & dayly
confirming his doctrine with sundry miracles.
            
            
               Of S. Patrickes sisters Tygridia, Darercha, & Lupita,
and of S. Patrickes iourney into Meath and
Connacke.
CHAP. VI.
               SAINT Patricke had three sisters of remarkeable
sanctity & perfection, whose names were
Tygridia, Darercha, and Lupita. Tygridia was the

happy mother of seauentene sonnes, and three
daughters, all the sonnes were eyther Bishops of
renowned sanctity, or els Priests, and Monkes of
great perfection. The daughters became Nunns,
& ended their dayes in great sāctity. The Bishops
names were Brochaduis, Brochanus, Mogenochus, &
Lumanus, who came with their Oncle into Ireland,
and laboured diligently in cultiuating the field of
our Lord. Darercha his youngest sister was mother
to the three holy Bishops Mal
                        ••
                      Moch, and
Munis, who also following their Oncle, became
diligent worke men in our Lords vineyard.
               
                  
                     •
                  . S. Patricke departing Vlidia, came by sea
vp to Meath, and strucke in at Brine-mouth, where
leauing his Nepheu S. Lumanus to keep the ship,
he hastned into the country to preach the Ghospell.
S. Lumanus added forty dayes more to the
forty dayes, which S. Patricke had commaunded
him to expect his owne returne, then being weary
of his longe abode in that place, one day (the
windes being contrary) he commanded the shipp
in the name of God, and of S. Patricke, to conuey
him to some commodious place. O miracle, the
ship without any pilot, sayled against the wind &
water, and carryed him so farre as Trim into the
Country, there did he conuert to the Catholicke

Religion, a young noble man, named Forkernus,
& afterward his Father named Feleminus, & baptised
him with many others in a fountaine, which
in their presence, he produced out of the earth by
his prayers. There by furtherance of Feleminus
Gods seruant, he builded a Church some twenty
fiue years before the foundatiō of Ardmach, where
himselfe was installed Bishop; his Nephew hauing
beene well trayned vp in learning, he inuested
with the holy order of Priesthood, & at his death
he commanded him to take the gouernement of
that Bishopricke vpon him: which he did for the
space of three dayes of obedience to his spirituall
Father, & then resigned it ouer to one Cathladius
an English man.
               3. King Leogarius had two brothers, the eldest
(named Coibre) was like himselfe in wickednes,
& infidelity. The other brother (called Conall)
tooke no more of his brothers nature, then
the fish taketh of the salt sea, nor the rose of pricking
thorn. The child of perdition Coibre, would
not listen to the Saints doctrine, but threatned to
kill him, and whipped his seruants. The Saint
perceauing him to be obstinate in his infideliry,
and reproued of God, sayd to him by way of prophecy:
In regard thou hast cast off the sweete yoke of

Christ, none of thy posterity shall enioy thy Kingdome▪
but it shalbe transferred to thy yoūger brother. Which
afterward fell out to be most true.
               4. S. Patricke left the children of darknes, &
repayred to the place where Conall liued, who
receaued the Saint with great ioy and exultation,
and opening his eares and hart to the doctrine of
life, was incorporated to Christ by the lauer of regeneration.
Conallus the child of grace bestowed
his court, with all the adioyning territory vpon
the Saint, whom he besought most earnestly, that
for the better enlargeing of Christian Religion,
he would be content to build a citty for himselfe,
and for his holy company, in that place. The
Saint accepted thereof, and congratulating much
at his charity, yelded to his louing request, and
built the citty, which now is called Domnach Phadruig,
that is, Saint Patrickes citty, and not farre
off, appointed a place for the building of a new
pallace for Conall, as himselfe desired. Then giuing
his benedictiō by way of prophecy, he sayd:
Happy and fortunate shall his pallace be, and many shal
liue happily in it, Gods blessing will blesse thee, and will
establish thy throne, he will enlarge thy dominion, and
thy Brethrens ofspring shall serue thy posterity for ener.
               
               
                  
5. S. Patricke determined with himselfe to
go into Connact, there to preach the Ghospell to
the inhabitants of that Prouince. By the way he
went to a place, where King Leogarius had an Idol,
gilded magnificently ouer with gold and siluer,
called Ceancrochie, that is, the head of the Gods.
This Idoll was compassed about with diuers petty
Gods made of brasse, that inclined towardes it in
signe of subiection.
               6. The Saint seeing he could neyther by feruent
Sermons, nor great miracles, reclayme the
people from the madnes of their Idolatry, had his
recourse to his wonted weapons of holy prayers,
no sooner did he then eleuate his pure handes in
prayer, for the subuersion of the Idol, and had after
a threatning manner lifted vp the rod of IESVS
against it, but it fell downe vpon the left side,
and all the gold and siluer dissolued into dust, the
litle Gods were swallowed vp by the earth, euen
to their neckes. Hervpon many who saw that prodigious
accident, belieued in the true and liuing
God, and were baptized in a fountaine, which the
Saint by his prayers produced out of the earth.
               7. After the subuersion of the Idols, the S.
held on his intended iorney, but when he drew
neare the frontiers of Connact, two Magitians

their magicall charmes ouer cast all the region
with a horrible darcknes for the space of three
dayes, hoping by that meanes to debar his enterance
into the country; but the Saint with fastes
and prayers, chased away that diabolical obscurity,
and so got into the country. King Leogarius
so often spoken of, had two daughters, one was named
Ethne, and the other Fedella, both of them
were fostered by these Magitians. One daye that
these yong ladies walked abroad for their pastime
to a fountaine hard by, there they found the Saint
with his holy retinue, who indeuoured to bring
them into the waye of saluation, promising that if
they yelded to his persuasion, they should contract
a holy matrimony with the heauēly spouse:
with which diuine exhortation, the virgins were
so inflamed, that they imbraced without all delay
the Christian Religion, and were baptised. Then
they requested the Saint in performance of his
promise, to exhibit to them the sight of their heauenly
spouse. The Saint answeared, you must first
receyue the B. blood, and flesh of your spouse, to
the end that being strenghtned by tasting of that
diuine viaticum, yow may passe to his heauenly
mansion. The holy virgins belieuing the Saint,
craued with great feruour the holy Eucharist, &

receyued it, with no lesse deuotion, then giuing
nature her due, they ascended to their heauenly
spouses nuptiall feast: the Magitians, who fostered
them, were also conuerted to the Christian
Religion, and receyued the grace of regeneration.
            
            
               Of the Conuersion of Connact, and of some miracles
wrought by the Saint, during his abode there.
CHAP. VII.
               AFTER this, a great and solemne Councell
of all the prouince was assembled, whether
came with a great retinue, the seauen sonnes of
Amlaic, a potent and rich noble man, who liued
in that prouince. To this assembly the Saint repaired,
hoping to gayne many of that great multitude
to Christ: A certaine Magitian opposed
himselfe against the Saint, and laboured extremely
to dispatch him out of the way, but Almighty
God stretched out his potent arme, & with lightning
of thunder, cut off the child of perdition, in
the presence of all the assembly. This great, &
terrible miracle induced the sonnes of Amlaic,
with twelue thousand more, to embrace the Christian
Religion, wherein they persisted firme, &
constant euer after. Heere I forbeare to treat,

how the Saint conuerted the two holy Virgins,
daughters to Gauranus: how he brought a Magitian,
whome the earth had swallowed vp euen to
the eares, for attempting some mischeefe against
the Saint, to the detestation of Idolatry: and how
by rowling a stone, which a hundred men could
not stirre, he drew a grat multitude, to beleeue in
the corner stone, our deare Sauiour Iesus Christ.
               2. The glorious bishop S. Patricke, ceased
not in all places to enlighten the hartes of such,
as were blinded with Idolatry, so that the number
of the faythfull increased dayly. One day cō
                  ming
to a place called Fearta, he found two womē
dead, ouer whom inuocating the name of Christ,
he restored them againe to life, who being reuiued
exclaymed against the Idols, & panyme Gods, &
in the hearing of all the company, proclaymed
Christ to be the true and only God: all who were
present, gaue glory to God, & deuoutly receaued
the sacrament of Baptisme. A certaine woman
named Fidelina, dyed in trauayle of child birth,
her friendes brought her dead corps, & layd it
before the glorious Bishop, requesting him with
teares in their eyes, to restore her to the number
of the liuing, which the B. Saint did by vertue
of his feruent prayers: the woman after her restoring

to life againe, was deliuered of a sonne, &
both of them were christned within a few dayes.
The woman relating what she had seene of the
glory of heauen, and paynes of hell, excited many
thousands to become Christian: this miracle the
Saint reiterated in another woman.
               3. The holy Saint trauailed about all Connact,
neuer ceasing from preaching, or working of miracles,
vntill such tyme as he brought all the coū
                  trey
to imbrace the fayth of Christ. In many places
he builded Churches, appointed Priests, & other
ecclesiasticall persons to direct them in the
way of saluation, & to sing the diuine office. In a
fayre and spatious field farre distant from woods,
& quarryes, he built by miracle a fayre Church,
which standeth to this day. Of two riuers that
were in those quarters, one called Dubh, aboūding
with fish, & another called Drobhois, which wanted
that commodity: the holy Bishop requested
some Fishers who drew in their nets full of Fish,
to help him to some, but the Fisher men deuoyd
of all charity, dismissed the faythfull seruant of
our Lord empty: but God the louer, and author
of charity, depriued Dubh of that benefit, & bestowed
it vpon Drobhois, which vntill that tyme,
had beene barren. Hereby the prudent Reader

may learne, how meete it is to entertaine with all
charity, the true members of Christ, and faythful
seruants of Almighty God.
               4. In regard of the great scarsity of Churches
in Ireland, in the infancy of Christian Religion,
the Blessed Saint ordained, that at the sepulcher
of euery Christian, who could not be buryed in a
Church-yeard, a Crosse should be erected, the
better thereby to distinguish the faythfull sheep,
from the vnbeleeuers, as also to excite the faythfull
who suruiued, to impart their charitable suffrages
to their deceased Brethren. It happened,
that at what tyme the Saint departed Connact, he
saw the head of one, at the tombes of two lately
interred, a crosse standing. The Saint bid his
coach man make a stand, then turning himselfe to
the graue where the crosse was, he questioned with
the dead, What sect or Religion he was? Who
answered, that he was a Pagan, ignorant of the
Christian Religion. To whome the Saint replyed,
what then haue you to doe with the Crosse of
Christ? The dead man answered, He that is buried
neere vnto me, was a Christian: & one of your
Religion (bringing a crosse by mistaking) fixed it
ouer our graue. The Saint without delay, descended
out of his coach, to put the Crosse ouer the

Christians graue, and after departed.
            
            
               Of S. Patrickes iourney into Leinster, of his prophecy
of Dublin, and conuersion of that Citty.
CHAP. VIII.
               SAINT Patricke hauing confirmed the inhabitants
of Connact in the Christian Religion,
made a iourney into Dalnardia in the North, wher
with his doctrine, example & miracls, he brought
the inhabitants of that Country, to the profession
of Christianity; thence he departed, and passing
through Meath, & Leinster, in all places he preached
the Ghospell & kingdome of heauen, & in
places cōuenient he ordayned Bishops. It would
be a worke able to blunt the penne of the most eloquent
Oratour, to set downe the stupendious
miracles, which he wrought in that iourney; for
euen like another S. Peter, with the very shadow
of his body did he worke miraculous cures, & so
many as he receaued to Baptisme, knowing that
our aduersary would labour to entangle them in
his snares, he endeauoured to confirme in fayth,
fearing their relapse into infidelity. And because,
as witnesseth S. Iames the Apostle: Faith without
good workes is dead, yea which is more, that a dead

fayth, is not fayth. The glorious Saint laboured
to excite in them that pure and sincere fayth,
which through loue performeth good workes.
               2. When S. Patricke came in his iourney,
so farre as Finglas, a place distant a mile from Dublin,
being then but a little village, and contemplating
the place & territory there about, blessing
it, he prophetically broke forth into these
wordes. That village which now is very small, shalbe
hereafter very eminent, it shal be enlardged in riches
and dignity, neyther will it cease to increase, vntill
such tyme as it become the principall seate of all the
kingdome. The inhabitants of that village hearing
what great miracles, and signes God had wrought
by the meanes of his faythfull seruant Patricke,
went forth with great ioy to meet him. The Lord
of that places only sonne lay sicke, euen ready to
yeild vp his Ghost: the Saint being intreated by
his father, and all the assembly thereunto, went
to the place, where the sicke was, and by prayer
restored him to perfect health, the people seeing
this miracle, beleeued in the author of life, our
Sauiour Iesus.
               3. In that village, an honest matron, in
whose house then the Saint lodged, complained to
him of the penury of fresh water. The B. Bishop

taking pitty of her, as also what the whole multitude
(newly regenerated) there suffered, & that
he might inkindle their thirst after the fountaine
of life, our dearest Sauiour, he deemed it expediēt
to mainfest his vertue and power. The next day
in the presence of many, he went to a commodious
place, where stricking the earth with the end
of the staffe of IESVS, and making his prayer,
he produced thence a faire Well, full of sweet and
pleasant water, and soueraigne in curing many diseases,
which well to this day is called S. Patrickes
Well.
               4. Here the course of my history requires,
that I declare how the glorious Bishop S. Patricke
came to the famous citty of Dublin which he foūd
lying in the suddes of Paganisme and Idolatry,
but the Saint washed it with the pure waters of
euangelicall doctrine, and that with great facility,
by reason of a memorable accidēt that happened,
the which was this. The King and all the Cittizēs
were drowned in sorrow & anguish, for the death
of the two flourishing hopes of the kingdome, the
Kinges only sonne, who dyed of a naturall death
in his bed roome, and the Kinges daughter, who
was drowned in the adioyning riuer; the young
ladyes body was drawne out of the waters, and

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
layd by her brothers dead corps, to solemnise
their obsequies both together: In the meane time
newes was spread ouer ouer all the Citty; that S.
Patricke of Ardmuch, the potent reuiuer of many
dead to life, was seene in the towne. The King
hearing thereof, reioyced much, and caused him
to come where his two children were dead, & full
of fayth promised, that if God by his prayers did
restore his children to life, he himselfe with all the
Citty, would become Christians. The Saint seeing
such gayne of soules in a readines, in the sight
of the King, his Nobles, and all the communalty
raysed from death to life the princely children,
whose corporall resurrection, cooperated much
to the spirituall resurrection of their Father, with
the rest of the people. The King was named Alphinus,
his sonne Cochad, & his daughter. Dublinia,
who gaue her owne name to the Citty. The King
and all the Citty being astonished at this great
miracle, abiured the worship of Idols, and were
baptised in S. Patrickes Well, which to encrease
the beliefe of the faythful, the Saint made to gush
out, by stricking the point of the staffe of Iesus in
the earth. From that day forwards King Alphinus,
with all the Cittizens of Dulbin obliged themselues
by vow, and their posterity, to the seruice of

Saint Patricke, and the Primates of Ardmach: moreouer
as a perpetuall gage of their seruice, ordained
that euery company of trades-men, should
pay a yearely annuity to the Primat of Ardmach.
The King, and the Princes offering each of them
a talent of pure refined gold to the Saint, al which
liberall guifts, the true professour of pouerty bestowed
vpon the poore, reseruing ōly a part which
he kept for the building of Churches.
               5. The glorious Bishop, gaue his benedictiō
to the people of Dublin, and taking his leaue of
them, he went to a towne called Cnoc, where he
sent often for one named Murinus, a man of Belial,
who would not in any wise present himselfe before
the Saint, whose wisedome he deemed able to
conquere the hardest hart: the Saint sent for him
often, but all in vaine, for he caused answer to be
made, that the S. should suffer him to sleep. The
Saint knowing by inspiration of the holy Ghost,
that he was a child of perdition, adioyned therunto
saying: Let him sleep, let him sleep, and before the
generall day of iudgment, let him not awake, or arise.
Which being sayd, the Saint hastned on his iourney,
and the wicked wretch dyed a double death,
both of soule and body.
               6. A wicked man named Foilge, carryinge

great malice, and spite to the Saint, for the destruction
of the formentioned idoll, called the head
of the Godes, attempted to lay violent handes vpon
the Saint, and being not able to compasse his
wicked intent, he rushed very violently vpon Odranus
the Saints Coachman, and murdered him
in the Saints sight: the Saint stunge at the hart,
thundred out his malediction against the man of
Belial, who being stricken therwith, yelded vp his
wicked spirit to be ingulfed in hell fire: But as for
Odranus his soule, the Saint saw it carryed vp betweene
Angels to heauen, where it was ranged among
the triumphant hostes of Martyrs.
            
            
               Of S. Patrickes iourney into Munster, and of the miraculous
refection of 1400. with many other miracles
wrought by the Saint in those quarters.
CHAP. VIIII.
               THE Saint leauing Leinster, tooke his iorney
towards Mounster. The King of that
Country named Oengus, hearing of the approach
of the glorious Bishop, went to meet him, and receaued
him with great honour and exultation.
A principall motiue of the Kinges ioy, and of receauing
the Christian fayth, was, that hauing entred

his Idolatrous temple that morning to adore
his false Gods, he found them all prostrate vpon
the ground: and albeit he did set them often vp
in their owne place, yet still they tumbled downe;
for as Dagon could not stand before the Arke of
Gods couenant, so could not these Idols stand in
their place, whē the Blessed Bishop Patricke drew
neere vnto them, who deseruedly we may call the
Arke of the couenant, seeing in his cleane hart,
he carryed as in a golden vessel, the diuine Manna
of contemplatiue sweetnes, the table of the diuine
Law, and the Rod of heauenly discipline. The aforesayd
King, led the Saint with great reuerēce
and honour to his Court at Cashell, where, vpon
the Saints preaching he beleeued in the most holy
Trinity, and receaued the grace of regeneration.
               2. As the Saint gaue the King his benediction,
by laying his sacred handes vpon his head,
the King requiring it often, & with great deuotion,
it happened that the point of the Saints staffe
wounded the kinges foot, which yet put him to
no payne, in regard that his hart being wounded
with ardent charity, expelled all sense, & feeling
of that bodily sore: but whē the Saint saw in what
case the kinges foote was, blessing it with the figure

of Christs bāner,The signe of the crosse. he cured it perfectly. The
king reioycing, & giuing thankes vnto God, for
so great a signe wrought vpon him, the holy Prelate
ful of the spirit of prophecy, spake to the king
as immediatly followeth: The blood of no King of
thy stocke, who shall fit in this place vpon thy throane,
shalbe shed, but of one only. Which prediction, the
inhabitants of that Country constantly auerre to
haue proued true, in as much as no king of his
posterity was euer kild, vnto the tenth generation
but only one.
               3. From Cayshell the holy Saint went into
Ormand, there to extirpate & roote out the briers
of Idolatry, and to sow in steed thereof, the pure
wheate of Euangelicall doctrine, where God with
suddaine death seuerely punished a wicked wretch
with al his complices, for disgorging impious obloquies
against the Saint. At what time the Angell
of peace S. Patricke passed through the country
of Ciarragi, he saw two brothers named Bibradius,
and Locradius, at mortall debate about the
parting of their Fathers inheritance, in so much
that from high words, they fell to bloody blowes,
and stroakes: the Saint fearing least so heinous a
sinne as fratricide, should be cōmitted in his presence,
with his holy prayers he so benummed

their handes, that they hunge stiffe and inflexible
in the ayre; vpon sight of that stupendious miracle,
the two brethren referred their cause to be decided
by the Saints arbitrement, who not only reneued
between them the league of brotherly loue,
but also restored to them the perfect vse both of
their armes & hands; the place where this miracle
hapned the two brothers, was bestowed vpon the
Saint towardes the building of a Church there.
               4. After that the blessed Bishop had confirmed
the people of Munster in the knowledge, and
loue of the true God, he tooke his iourny towards
the North, king Oengus being attended vpon with
twelue of his Princes, and 1400. of his subiects,
followed the Saint, whē he came as farr as Coiueach
a towne lying vpon a riuer Prosnach, where a holy
Bishop named Frianus, a Romā by nation kept
his residence, by diuine prouidence it fell out,
that noe victuals could be had for that great company;
the blessed Bishop being desirous to giue
the multitude a spirituall and corporall refection,
commanded a Cow, by whose milke S. Frianus
liued, to be made ready for supper: but what was
it among so great a company? The Saint therfore
directed his prayers to the heauenly sanctuary, &
loe there ranne out to the adioyning wood, two

great Stagges, and two great Hogges, which presented
themselues before the Saint, who commā
                  ded
that they should be likewise made ready: so al
the company being set to supper, that little prouision
was layd before them, which by vertue of
the Saints sacred benediction, serued to satisfy all
the company so plentifully, that a great deale of
reuersion was gathered vp, and carryed thence,
which need not seeme incredible to any, who will
reflect with the eye of their consideration, vpon
our Sauiours promise: He that beleeueth in me, the
miracles that I doe, he shall also doe, and greater then
these shall he doe.
               
               5. This miraculous refection was seconded
by as miraculous a signe; for the holy Saint to remoue
and roote out of their harts the tares of infidelity,
in presence of that great assembly, restored
to life 19. dead bodyes at once: all those who were
so miraculously restored to the number of the liuing,
rehearsed in the hearing of all the assembly,
what they had seen touching the torments of hel,
proclayming Patrickes God, to be the true and liuing
God. King Oengus, and his subiects magnifyed
God, and honoured the Saint as their proper
Apostle: the men who were reuiued were christned,
& became Monkes vnder the obedience of S.
Frianus.
               
            
            
               
               Of S. Patrickes returne into the North, of the resuscitation
of King Echu, and of his prophecy touching
the sanctity of S. Columba.
CHAP. X.
               THE holy Bishop came againe vnto the
North, where King Echu reigned, who had
a daughter named Cynnia, whome he loued most
tenderly. This young Princesse imbraced S. Patrickes
doctrine, and against her Fathers will, &
loathing a carnall wedlocke, she resolued to dedicate
her virginity to her heauenly spouse: her Father
seeing the loue of chastity soe deeply rooted
in her hart, sent for the Saint, and spoke to him as
followeth; The hope I had by my daughter, to be blessed
with a copious posterity of Nephueus, is cut off by your
meanes; if then for the want of so great a blessing, you
promise me the kingdome of heauen, without compelling
me to receaue Baptisme, she shall serue her Creator, as
you shall thinke good, otherwise you shall misse of your
desire. The Saint full of confidence in God, leauing
all the matter to his diuine disposition, yeilded
to the Kinges request. The young Lady, being
vayled, & consecrated by the Saint, led a life
so excelling with many ornaments of vertue, that

she by her example, drew many to the seruice of
Christ, & both in this life, & after her death, shined
aboundantly with the glory of miracles. The
Saint commended her to the care of S. Cethuberis,
who was the first of all the Irish Virgins, that receaued
the veyle of virginity from the Saint: to
her being Superiour of the Monastry of Druimduchan
where a great number of sacred virgins liued,
the Saint wrote a letter of exhortation.
               2. Within a few dayes King Echu departed
this life, who before his death commanded, that
his buriall should be deferred vntill such tyme as
the Saint came, who knowing by reuelation all
what happened, made al hast possible to the kings
court, where arriuing he offered his feruēt prayers
to Almighty God in the behalfe of his resurrection.
The King being reuiued, rehearsed what
he had seene touching the glory of heauen, and
the torments of the damned: and further added,
that he saw the place, which the Saint promised
him in the heauenly glory, whereof he could not
take possession, because he was not baptised: after
baptisme the Saint put the King to his choice,
eyther of prolonging his dayes in this life, or going
speedily to heauen: the King misprising al the
glory of this world, in comparison of the celestial

felicity, did choose to be dissolued, and to be with
Christ: so taking the diuine Viaticum of the holy
Eucharist, he was translated to an immortall life.
               3. The Blessed Saint by occasion of difficultyes
and doubtes, which in some places where he
preached the Ghospell, were obiected against the
last, & generall resurrection of the dead, brought
to life againe men, whose bodyes were resolued
into cinders many yeares before, as himselfe in an
epistle directed to a deare friend of his beyonde
the seas, deposeth in these tearmes: Our Lord imparted
to me, his vnworthy little one, the vertue of
doing such signes among this Pagan people, as we reade
neuer the like to haue beene wrought euen by the Apostles
themselues, so that in the name of our Lord Iesus, I haue
reuoked from the dead, bodyes turned into ashes many
yeares before, yet notwithstanding I pray that none esteeme
me, for these or other like miracles, worthy to
stand in comparison with the Apostles, or any men of
perfection, considering I am a wretched sinner, and contemptible.
Stay thy selfe heere, courteous Reader,
and obserue to what height of perfection this B.
Bishop had attained, who working such, and so
great miracles, was so abiect, and so contemptible
in his owne eyes; for my part I admire more this
profound humility in him, thē the raysing of the
cad.
               
                  
4. My intended course of breuity, makes me
not to set down at large, how the Saint reclaymed
from idolatry a petty King called Elelius, with all
his kingdome, by reuiuing the kings sonne, whō
swine had torne in peeces. As also a noble man,
who was very hard fauoured, and contemptible
in his person, by vertue of S. Patrickes prayers,
became very faire of complexion, and very
personable of stature, to the great astonishment
of all that knew him. A tender suckeling, found
in the tombe where his mother lay buryed, was
brought to S. Patricke, who named him Olcanus,
and set him to his booke, & being come to riper
yeares, he passed into France, where he attayned
to great learning. Afterward comming into Ireland,
he taught in publick schooles, and was master
of many a holy Bishop, and himselfe became
a Bishop of great merit and vertue.
               5. A certaine Prince named Conallus, sought
and obtayned S. Patrickes blessing: his younger
brother named Fergusus, came to the Saint with
the like intention: the Saint hauing first prayed,
blessed Fergusus with great attention; Conallus seeing
what diligence and deuotion the Saint vsed in
in blessing his younger brother aboue him selfe,
was not a little astonished, and troubled thereat.

S. Patricke obseruing that alteration in the Princes
countenance, declared what moued him to vse
such diuersity in blessing them, fortelling prophetically:
Blessing, I haue blessed thy brother Fergusus,
in regard of a blessed sonne that shall descend from him,
for his sonne Feleminus, shal beget a sonne, who shalbe
called Columba, a name very answerable to his holy
life, for from his Mothers wombe, he shalbe full of the
holy Ghost, and shalbe inriched with the treasures of diuine
wisedome, and vnderstanding: he wilhe the shyning,
and burning lanterne of his generation, and shalbe
iustly called the Prophet of the highest, & from the time
that he comes to yeares of discretion, a deliberate vntruth
shall not escape out of his mouth. How truly this
hath beene presaged of S. Columba called Columcill,
who was the founder of an hundred Monasteryes,
the history of his life, sufficiently declareth.
               6. Within the compasse of seauen weekes,
which S. Patrike spent in the country called Turtirini,
he builded seauen Churches, ouer which he
ordayned Pastour S. Connendus, a man of great vertue,
and learning. After a few dayes S. Connedus
came to S. Patricke, who commanded him to returne
back to his Church, fortelling that he need
not to feare the effusion of his blood, for that
none should be killed in that place for euer. The

euent hath showed his prophecy to haue beene
most true. The B. Bishop prophecied of the natiuity
of S. Treha,
                  Vayling of virgins. at whose consecratiō a vayle was
sent from heauen, wherwith the Saint vayled her.
            
            
               Of the conuersion of the Ile of Man, of a strange vision
S. Brigit had, and of the prophecye touching
the future sanctity of the Saints, Colmanellus,
and Comgallus.
CHAP. XI.
               SAINT Patricke seeing that in Ireland the
haruest was great, and the workemen few,
tooke shipping to passe into England, there to gather
many coadiutors and fellow-helpers, in cultiuating
our Lords field. In those dayes the Arrian
perfidy, and Pelagianisme tooke great rootinge
in England, which the Blessed Bishop laboured
to extirpate, by reclayming with signes & sermōs
his deere Country-men to their former integrity
of fayth: so comming backe into Ireland, he
brought with him many learned and Religious
men, of which number, thirty were installed by
him Bishop in seuerall Episcopall seas. In his returne,
he conuerted the Isle of man, ordayninge a
learned and holy person named Germanus, Bishop

ouer that young flocke, the like he did in seuerall
other Isles. It was his custome not only in citties,
but euen in principall townes, to install Bishops,
to the end the faythful should not be depriued of
the sacrament of Confirmation.
               2. After the Saints returne out of England,
he bestowed vpon six Cleargy-men, that were going
in pilgrimage ouer the seas, a Whales skinne,
wherin himself was accustomed to stād whē he said
Masse; hauing that guift of the Saints loue, they
neuert felt in all the tyme of their trauaile, any
penury or want. In processe of tyme they all six
became very learned, and were made Bishops, &
ended their dayes in great sanctity: their names
were Lugacius, Columbanus, Meldanus, Lugadius, Cassanus,
Ceranus.
               
               3. Three whole dayes without intermission,
did the Saint preach to infinite multitudes, that
flocked from all parts to heare him, they thought
they had not beene there one day, so sweet and attractiue
were the Saints doctrine & discourses. In
that assembly, was present the most holy virgin
S. Brigit, who reclyning her head slept, which
Saint Patricke perceauing, forbad that any should
awake Gods beloued spouse, till she pleased her
selfe: by the issue it was manifest, that that passage

of the Canticles might be fitly applyed to her: I
sleepe, but my hart waketh, in regard that her heauenly
spouse imparted his secrets to her. Whē she
awaked, the Saint cōmanded her to tel in the hearing
of all the people, what she had seene, who obeying
him, tould that she saw first a Synod of mē
all in white, with ploughes, oxen, and fieldes all
white: after that she saw them to be stayned with
spots, and lastly to become wholy blacke. S. Patricke
interpreted the former part to his own time
wherein good workes and fayth,Faith & good workes. were vnited together,
and exercised: the second state to the following
generation, which would indeed persist in
the candour of fayth, but would deface it with depraued
workes: the third state, he referred to the
insueing ages, wherein men would not only giue
ouer the exercise of good workes, but also would
prophane their liues with renouncing of their
fayth.
               4. On a tyme S. Patricke made a iourney into
Dalnardia, as he passed by a place called Mucoomuir,
his disciple Benignus saw quires of Angells
inuironing that place with celestiall splendour, &
piercing the skyes with the harmonious concent
of diuine prayses; the vision disappering, he related
to S. Patricke, all what he had contemplated,

who being inspired by God, declared to his disciples,
what that admirable vision pretended: Know
then, sayd he, that a sonne of life, whose name shalbe
Colmanellus, will build a Church in that place, where he
will gather togeather manny sonnes of light, who will
become with the Angels, cohabitants of the heauēly citty,
and he himselfe shalbe the primate and legate of all Ireland.
In processe of time all fell out to be true, as
the Saint foretould.
               5. Another time S. Patricke with his holy family,
ascended a little mountaine, not far distant
from the valley, where afterwardes the monastery
of Bangor was built: from the hill topp they
saw al the valley replenished with celestial brightnes,
and Angelicall quires: which admirable vision,
moued all the company to intreate the Saint
to build a Church in that sacred valley, which the
Saint would not doe, but prophecying foretould:
After the space of 60. years completely expyred, there
will be borne a sonne of Light named Comgallus,
which is interpreted a fayre pledge, who shalbe beloued
both of God and men, and shall build in the place a foresayd,
a Church of Saints, wherein shalbe gathered innumerable
troupes of the children of light, that shall dedicate
themselues to the seruice of Christ. Not one iote
of all this did passe vnaccomplished; for in the

tyme fortould, Comgallus being borne, built the
monastery of Bangor, wherein he begot to Christ
by meanes of the Ghospell, many thousands of
perfect Monkes: in so much, that that holy place,
the fruitfull mother of Saintes as a vine fructifying
in sweetnes of odour, did extend its branches
to the sea, and its plants beyonde the sea; for it
filled Ireland, Scotland, and many other Ilandes
with perfect Monkes, and monasteries, as also
forraine Countryes. One of the sonnes of that
Monastery named Luanus founded a hundred monasteries,
another named Columbanus a most holy
man full of diuine grace, erected many Monasteries,
and was the father of a numberles number of
holy Monkes: he builded the famous Monastery
of Luxonium in France, and Bobium in Italy, where
he ended his dayes most gloriously, and happily.
               6. A wicked man named Fergus, who liued in
Meath, hindered the Saint from building a church
within his territoryes, which the Saint taking in
euill part, prophecied, That none of his posterity
should inherit his liuing, or thriue in any other Country
except the infant yet shut vp in his Mothers wombe:
which fell out accordingly. As the Saint for the
like respect was to giue his curse vpon two brothers
named Fiechus, and Enda, his disciple S. Secundinus
                  
requested him not to lay his curse vpon
the man, but vpon the stones, that in great heaps
layd hard by, wherto the Saint condescended. A
marueilous thing ensued; for from that tyme forwardes,
those stones proued vnseruiceable for any
building, or structure. Enda did pennance for the
iniury offered to the Saint, & presented his ninth
sonne named Cormacus, with the ninth part of all
his liuing to S. Patrike: the child grew vp in years
and grace, and ended his dayes in great sanctity.
            
            
               How Saint Mell, and S. Lupita, cleared themselues before
S. Patricke, and of some miracles wrought
by the Saint.
CHAP. XII.
               SAINT Lupita, S. Patrickes sister liued in one
house with S. Mell her nephew, by occasion
whereof, some suspected the holy Bishop S. Mell
with committing of incest with her, which aspersion
the holy Bishop remoued by taking many
great Fishes on the dry land in S. Patrickes sight.
Lupita in like manner to declare her innocency,
carryed hoate embers in her lappe without signe
or token of any burning; S. Patricke seeing such
great miracles, pronounced them both innocent,

yet to cut off all occasion of scandall, he ordayned
that the men should liue in houses apart from the
women, building for them distinct houses, and
Churches.
               2. S. Patricke being to passe the Sinny, a deep
and vnwadable riuer, that runeth betweene Meath
and Connact, could not get a boate to ferry him ouer,
he prayed therfore to God for help; & loe the
earth did ryse vp so high in the riuer, that it gaue
a dry passage ouer to the Saint, & all his cōpany.
The Saint thought it expedient for the aduancement
of Religiō, to build a Church there in a certaine
field, but the Lord who owed the place, gaue
him a repulse, & would not giue way to the building,
vnles the Saint bought it with gold. The S.
offering his prayers to God, went to a place, wher
Swine had rooted vp the ground, and found there
so much as was sufficiēt to purchase the field. Another
tyme also did he find in the same place, so
much gold, as serued to buy a peece of ground,
whereupon he ment to built a Church.
               3. In that Church called Ellfin, S. Patricke
installed one of his disciples named Asicus, who was
a Monke, making him a Bishop. S. Asicus, as Saint
Patricke had appointed, brought thither a great
company of Monkes, whom himselfe gouerned as

Abbot. This holy man vpon a certaine tyme told
a lye, when he should haue vttered the truth sincerely,
which ouerlashing of his tongue, he so seuerely
chastised in himself, that he retyred himself
from the company of men, and liued in a desert 7.
years, vnknowne, & vnseene to any person where
he might be foūd: at last by his Mōks, they requested
him, that he wold returne home to his Bishopricke,
but he would not yeild to their persuasion,
iudging, & pronouncing himselfe vnworthy to
exercise episcopall authority, since his tongue had
beene defiled with a witting vntruth, which in the
mouth of a Priest is, as the holy Canons declare,
sacriledge; the forsayd Monkes would not in any
case depart from S. Asicus, but liued within that
place all the dayes of his life, after whose death
they builded a monastery there, wherein they serued
Almighty God in iustice, and sanctity.
               4. As some of S. Patrickes disciples came by
sea to visite him, there arose a great tēpest, which
moued the Saint to great compassion for his beloued
children: some who were with him said, that
the ship was not able to sustayne so boysterous a
storme. The Saint immediatly betooke himselfe
most feruently, to his prayers; and then
within a little while, in the hearing of all them

who were present, he commanded the windes &
waues to become calme. O stupendious euent!
Without delay the wind was allayd, the seas ceased
to boyle, and there ensued a great calme: the same
day the disciples arriued, and tould how they escaped
that eminent danger. Another tyme the
disciples aforesayd, comming to visit their holy
father, and traualing by the sea side, they were
encompassed by the tide before they were aware,
which put them in great feare of death. The Saint
knowing in spirit, what danger his children were
in, commanded the sea in the name of God, to
giue his disciples a free passage: the sea obeyed the
Saints commandment, so that his discipls returned
to their father, to their great ioye, and to the
vnspeakable admiration of all those who heard of
so prodigious a miracle.
               5. S. Patricke of his profound humilty and
charity, kept alwaies in his company some leaper
or other, whome himself tended most carefully,
washing with his owne hands his vlcerous soares,
and prouiding him of al his necessities. A certain
leaper that liued with the Saint, being depriued
of his bodily health, laloured by frequent
prayers and other exercises of piety, to procure
and conserue the health of his soule. This leaper

fearing to be offensiue to others, withdrew himself
from the cōpany of men, liuing solitary in a great
hollow tree: One day he requested a Christiā that
passed by, to bring him out of a place hard by, a
bundell of reedes, the man went to the place, and
as he pluckte vp the reedes, a faire fountaine gushed
out, whereof he gaue notice to the leaper,
when he brought him the reedes, who replied:
Know then my deare brother, that God sent thee
hither to wash me in that fountaine, and lastly to
bury me in that place, which said, he gaue vp the
ghost: as the Christian washed the leaper in that
miraculous water, there remained not a spot of leprosy
vpon him, and so burying him he departed.
It hapned that S. Munis, much about that time,
bringing from Rome many relikes with him, was
forced to lodge neare that place. In the night he
saw squadrons of Angells to descend from heauen,
and to keep watch, and warde about the leapers
sepulcher vntill it was moring, al which visiō
he related to S. Patricke, signifying that he intended
to remoue that holy body out of that solitary
place. S. Patricke forbid him so to do, fortelling
that a sonne of light, not yet borne, whose name
should be Keranus, would inhabit in that place,
which he would furnish with a holy company of

Saints, and that he would exhibit great honour
to that leaprous body, all which fel out to be true
in processe of tyme.
               6. The foresayd S. Munis, with S. Patrickes
leaue, made him a cell in a certaine place, where
he suffered great distraction, and disturbance of
mind, by reason of the frequent cōcourse of courtiers,
who came oftē to visite him from the kings
pallace, being built ouer a great water that lay
hard by the place, where S. Munis liued: which
difficulty he made knowne to S. Patricke, who
offered deuout and feruent prayers vp to God for
this effect. And loe the next night after, God trāsferred
the water and the pallace so farre of, that it
wrought his seruant no annoye, who afterwardes
(though very much against his will) was ordained
Bishop, & departed this life, shining with vertues,
and miracles.
            
            
               How S. Patricke penetrated S. Fiechus his conscience:
of S. Fiecus his sanctity, and some great miracles
wrought by S. Patricke.
CHAP. XIII.
               A Young gentleman of excellent education,
and learning named Fiechus, had marryed

a wife, which within few dayes dyed. As this man
came where S. Patricke was, the Saint by inward
illustration of the holy Ghost, penetrating his
conscience, said: Behould a man or one wife, who
according to the Apostle may be worthely aduanced
to the sacred order of preisthood, and Episcopall
diginty. The younge gentle man, admiring
how he came to see the secrets of his hart, receiued
the lauer of regeneration, and by vertue of Saint
Patricks blessing, made such progresse in learning,
that in one day he learned the whole Psalter, and
in a short time attayned to the vnderstanding of
sacred Scriptures; he was successiuely inuested
with holy orders, and in fine made Bishop in the
Church of Sclepten,
                  Monks. who in his episcopall sea, erected
a faire conuent of Monkes.
               2. Because this holy Bishop, in regarde of
his many infirmityes,Fastes. & weakning by long fasts,
could not visite his Diocesse on foote, or exercice
his Bishop-like function, S. Patricke sent him a
Coach, which S. Secundinus, being ouercome by
humane frailty tooke ill, thinking that himselfe
deserued it better. S. Patrike knowing of the trouble
Secundinus was in, sayd vnto him; fearing that
by following of our own iudgmēt we may erre, let
vs leaue the discussiō of the matter to the arbitremēt

of an Angel. With that the Saint prayed to
God, who sent an Angel, by whose order the horses
were put into the coach, & dismissed without any
to driue thē, adding further: that they were sent to
him, with whome they would make a stay. The
horses being harnished, and dismissed in manner
as the Angell had set downe, the first night they
came to S. Secūdinus dwelling place, the next night
to another Saints house, and the third night to S.
Fiechus house, where they stayed: giuing therby to
vnderstand, that they were chiefly sent to him.
               3. Another tyme the Angell commanded S.
Fiechus to build a monastery, and the Angell himselfe
designed the Refectory, Oratory, & all other
houses belonging thereunto. This holy Bishop
was accustomed in the beginning of lent,Fasting of Lent. to retire
himselfe to a solitary place, bringing with him for
his sustenance but fiue barly loaues mingled with
ashes. On Palme Sunday, or Maundy Thursday
he would returne, bringing with him halfe of one
of the loaues vneaten: this Blessed Fiechus sent before
him to heauen 60. Saintes, whome himselfe
followed, being renowned both for sanctity and
miracles.
               4. Some wicked men sent the Saint as it were
by way of present some poysoned cheses, which to

the great astonishment of many he conuerted into
hard stones, wherwith they were nothing reclaimed
from their malice, but rather became more
obstinate; for conspiring together against him,
they sent fifty men to kill him. As they entred a
certaine Forde to passe ouer it, the Saint seeing
them, and knowing by diuine instinct, what mischiefe
they intended, sayd vnto them with a loud
voyce: You shall neyther come hither to vs, nor yet
returne backe to your owne people, for your bodyes shal
remaine in that water vntill the day of iudgment. According
to the Saints censure, they were without
delay drowned, neither could their bodyes be euer
after found, albeit great, and diligent search had
beene made after them.
               5. Another tyme, some children of Beliall
digged vp deep pits and holes, in the way which
the Saint with al his retinue was to passe, couering
them ouer with greene grasse. The Saint full of
confidence in God, gaue his benediction to his
holy family, and so he, and they passed without
receauing any hurt or detriment, the green grasse
like solid earth yealding them firme passage. The
Saint commanded a yong mayd, who gaue them
notice of the ambush layd, for to call her Father,
whome with his ten sonnes, and three daughters

he conuerted to the Christian faith:Nunnes the daughters
became Nunnes, and were vayled with the Saints
owne handes. Of the sonnes, fiue florished in the
world in great prosperity,Monks. and the fiue others, became
Monkes of great perfection and sanctity, as
the Saint had prophecied of them.
               6. A certaine mā named Domnardus, being blind
for a long time, & hearing that S. Patricke passed
by, went forth to meet him, hoping by the Saints
merits to recouer his eye-sight. As the blind came
along in the way, he stunbled very often, which
moued a cleargy man who was in the Saints cōpany
to laughter, which when the Saint vnderstood,
that none of his cōpany should euer after presume
to do the like, he spoke, as followeth to the Clergy
mā: Amen I say to thee, that the eyes of this blind shalbe
opened, & thy eyes excyting to thee irrilegious laughter
shalbe stricken with blindnes: with that making the
signe of the crosse, he opned the blind mās eyes, &
shut the eyes of the cleargy man. The same day
did the Saint erect vpon their feet three criples.
               7. Nine Magitians cōspired the Saints death, &
to haue the more free accesse to him, they coūterfeited
thēselues to be Monks, putting on religious
weeds. The Saint by diuine inspiration, knew thē
to be wolues wraped in sheeps cloathing, making
therfore the signe of the crosse against the childrē
                  
of Satan, behould fire descended from heauen, &
consumed them all nine: The Saint lifting vp his
hāds anathematized anidolatrous wood dedicated
to Idols. O most strāge & remarkable miracle, all
the wood like vnto the figge tree, spoken of in the
holy Ghospel, withered by & by, and neuer after
was seruiceable for any other vse, then the fire.
            
            
               Of a mountaine swallowed downe, by the earth, and cast
vp againe at the Saints intercession: and of seueral
other great miracles.
CHAP. XIIII.
               ONE of the noble men of Munster, named
Coruallus, would not permit S. Patricke to
build a Church within his territoryes. Not farre
from the noble mans house was a faire & spacious
poole very pleasāt to behold, but the house by the
interposition of a great mountayne, was depriued
of the pleasure of that gratful prospect: the Saint
vrged the noble mā, very much, to giue him leaue
to build a church: who answeared. If you remoue
this great mountaine, that depriues my house of
the pleasāt prospect of the broad & spatious poole
that lyes on the further side, I will then yeild to
your request. The Saint offered his prayers vp to
God, and with that the earth swallowed downe

the mountaine, notwithstanding the wicked man
would not stand to his former promise, wherefore
the Saint prayed to God, the second tyme, & the
mountaine did forthwith swell vp to its former
height, & greatnes.
               2. A wicked Tyrant named Euchodius, who
liued in the country of Vlibia, caused two holy
Virgins to be stiffled, and misprised S. Patricks intercession
for them.Holy Virgins. The Saint denounced prophetically
to him, That none of his posterity should
succeed him, but that his Lordship should be transferred
to his younger brother. The Tyrants wife came, &
begged the Saintes blessing both for her selfe, &
for the child, which she carried in her wombe,
which the Saint gaue her, and foretould that she
should be deliuered of a most holy issue. The
childe being borne, was named Douengardus, and
was most renowned both for sanctity & miracles.
Euchodius within a few dayes, was depriued both
of life, and of his lordship, which his yonger brothers
posterity inioyed, according to S. Patrickes
prophecy.
               3. S. Patricke founded an Episcopall sea in
a place called Achadfouiur, where he made one of
his disciples namned Sennachus Bishop, a man of
admirable purity, and innocency. S. Patticke
                  
blessed him, and all his family, prophecying, that
many Saintes and holy Pristes should spring out
of it, in which place Sennachus ended his daies in
great sanctity.
               4. As S. Patricke passed through a wood in
Midernia, he found there a great company of men,
cutting downe of great oaken trees, & in regard
their axes were edge-lesse, and that they had no
whetstons to whet thē, the poore mē were quite
wearied out of breath, the skin & flesh was torne
from their handes, euen to the sinewes, & bones.
The Saint compassionating their distresse, gaue
them his blessing, wherupon they recouered their
strength, their hands were healed vp, & their hatchets
so well edged, that they cut the solid oake
trees with as little difficulty, as if they had beene
tender twigges. This prodigious effecte of the
Saints blessing, did perseuer in them, vntill such
tyme as the Saint procured their release, for which
end, he went to their cruell Lord named Tremei,
but he wold not admit the Saints intercessiō.Fast and prayer. The
Saint after three dayes fast & prayer, came againe
with great submission to procure their exemption
from bondage, but this cruell man he found to be
āother Pharao, who presētly got vp into his coach,
with purpose to agg rauate their yoake of affliction,

but God reuenged the contempt offered his
new Moyses, for loe the horses precipitated themselues
with great violence into a standing water,
nere by, & the man of Belial being drowned, the
captiues were restored to their long expected and
wished liberty.
               5. S. Patricke intended to erect an episcopal
sea in a place called Luda, but an Angell wished
him to desist from that worke, for that S. Micheus;
who came out of England in pilgrimage into Ireland,
should there build and inhabit that place;
which fell out accordingly. One day as Saint Patricke
and Micheus were in spiritual conference, an
Angell tendered them a letter, wherin S. Patricke
was commaunded to bestow that place, with all
the appartenaunces vpon S. Micheus, and himselfe
to erect his Archepiscopall sea at Ardmach. The
Saint obeyed willingly the diuine commandement,
committing to S. Micheus his care of twelue
leapers, whome himselfe was accustomed to tend,
and so departed.
               6. Twelue brethren, whose Father was lately
deceased, made a meeting for the parting of their
portions, and excluded their younger brother named
Fergusius from any share in that diuision: who
had recourse to Saint Patricke, by whose intercession

he receaued a competent portion of his fathers
inheritance: the young noble man, bestowed one
halfe of his estate vpon S. Olcan, who erected an
Episcopall sea in a place called Derkan. S. Patricke
blessed Fergusius, & prophetically sayd vnto him:
Albeit thou seemest now humble, and contemptible in the
eyes of thy brethren, yet thou shalt be shortly prince ouer
them, and many good Kings will descend from thee,
which shall not only reigne in their owne country, but
also in foraine Kingdomes. This prophecy of the
Saint was fullfilled; for from him descended Edanus
the sonne of Gabranus, who subdued Scotland,
and whose posterity reigneth yet in that kingdome.
            
            
               How S. Patricke gaue Prince Conall his benediction,
and the Crosse for his armes, and of many remarkable
miracles.
CHAP. XV.
               SAINT Patricke came to his deare ghostly
child Prince Conall, demanding of him whether
he would be content or no, to be cloathed
with a Monkes weede: the Prince answered, that
his hart was ready to performe what the Saint
would inioyne him. The holy Bishop reioycing

much at his deuotion, is reported to haue sayd to
him: Thou shalt carry a sheild, and staffe as the markes
of soueraigne power, and as the signes of thy great
merit: Thou shalt represent the person, and habit of a
lay man, but shalt enioy the merit and dignity of a
Monke; many Saints shall spring from thee, and many
nations of the earth shalbe blessed in thy seed. Moreouer
with the rodde of Iesus the Saint made the
signe of the Crosse vpon Prince Conals shield,
which he and his posterity, euer after tooke for
their armes.
               2. A certaine man named Victor, hid himselfe
in the night, fearing that if he appeared in
the Saints presence, he should be forced by the euidence
of his doctrine, and signes to renounce Idolatry.
The Saint comming to the place where
Victor was, so bright & subtill a light issued from
him, that the splendour thereof pearced euen to
the secret place, where Victor lay lurking. Victor
being conuicted, or rather attracted by so euident
a signe, became a Christian, bestowed all his estat
vpon the Saint, and made himselfe the Saints disciple,
who in processe of tyme, attayned to such
learning, and sanctity, that he was made a Bishop.
               3. S. Patricke had a disciple named Volchanusa
                  
a man of great vertu, but specially of most remarkeable
obedience. The Saint being desirous that
his vertue knowne only to God, should be manifested
to the world, for the edificatiō, & exāple of
others, cōmanded Volchan to go & build a church
wheresoeuer God would vouchsafe to prouide him
a place: he without delay taking an axe vpon his
shoulders, went his way. The Saint seeing the alacrity,
and promptnes of his obedience, sayd to
him: Doe not despayre, my most deare Volchan, of
finding a place, wheresoeuer the Axe shall fall, build in
that place; for there thou shalt increase into a great nation.
After Volchan had walked on all day long,
towardes the euening the Axe by chance slipped
off his shoulder, in which place the obedient
Volchan builded a Monastery, wherein himselfe
and many others liued and dyed in great perfection.
               4. S. Patricke had a Drouer named Rodanus,
who after became very learned, and a Bishop of
great merit, and miracles: the Saint likewise preferred
S. Reuternus to the episcopall sea of Ciocher,
and when he had consecrated him Bishop, he bestowed
vpon him a Chrismatory, or vessell of
holy oyles for extreme Onction, and Confirmation,
that was sent him from heauen. A

child named Lunanus by vertue of the Saints blessing,
learned all the Psalter in fiften dayes, who after
led a most holy life, and dyed glorious for vertue
and miracles. The Saint by reuiuing a noble
mans wife named Ethra, gayned the noble man
himselfe, with all his followers, vnto Christ.
               5. Some wicked men enuying the progresse
of Christian religion, and the Saints glory, suborned
a woman that vsed to beate and to dresse flax,
in the way the Saint was to passe, to hide a great
quantity of the flax in a hollow tree not farre off,
and when the Saint should passe that way, they
wished her to exclaime against him, and his holy
company; as hauing stolne the flaxe. The womā
did as she was put in the head by those wicked
men, who rushed out of their dennes, when the
woman began to crye, and flocking about the
Saint, and his companions, they accused them as
theeues, guilty of torments, and of death: Neere
the place where this tumult was excited, there was
one buryed, whome the Saint reuiued; the reuiued
man by his testimony, cleared the innocency
of the Saint, and freed him from that slaunder,
shewing where the flaxe was hidden. The contriuers
of this mischiefe, were by this miraculous euent
reclaymed from idolatry, to the acknowledgement

of the true God.
               6. A man of Iueach, hauing stolne, & eaten
a he-Goate, S. Patricke had, and thinking by oath
to cleare himselfe of all suspition, swore that he
had no hand at all in the theft; loe the eaten goate
by a hideous noyse made in his belly, bewrayed
him to be the author of the theft, whose posterity
euer after wore goates beardes. It was S. Patrickes
custome to keepe company, to loue and frequent
the society of vertuous and holy men, which custome,
how gratefull it was in the eyes of the Almighty,
himselfe vouchsafed to manifest by this
insuing miracle. For as he, and a man of a most
venerable life named Vinnocus were in conuersatiō
together of diuine matters, and hauing bestowed
their garmentes vpon the poore, behold there
came from heauen a cloake, that fell iust between
them both.S. Patrickes charity to the poore. Each of the Saintes alleadged, that it
was sent to the other, they being in this humble,
and charitable debate, the cloake disappeared, and
two others were brought by an Angell, for each
of them one.
               7. In that part of Britanny which is now
called VVales, there reigned a wicked Tyrant, a
cruell persecutour, and ennemy of Christians named
Cereticus. The Saint directed to him a commonitory

epistle, hoping thereby to reclaime him
from his wicked courses, but he derided the Saint,
and became more obstinate in mischiefe, and iniquity,
which when the Saint vnderstood, he prayed
to God in manner following: Our Lord God
omnipotent cast this foxe-natured man, who is so monstruous
in vices, after a monstruous manner from the
face of the earth. Our Lord inclined his eares to
the voyce of his seruant, for he transformed him
into a fox, who flying away, was neuer seene afterwards.
            
            
               Of S. Machaldus conuersion, and most rigid pennance,
and of S. Memessaes holy life.
CHAP. XVI.
               A Wicked man named Machaldus, the prince
of theeues and robbers, seeing S. Patricke
passe by the way, determined to kill him, but after
holding it a disgrace to shed the blood of so poore
weake and seeble a man as the Saint was, he and
his ruffian like company thrōged about the Saint,
and by way of contempt, and derision, requested
him to reuiue againe one of his company named
Garbanus, whome they had couered with a cloake,
counterfeiting him for dead. The Saint could

them that their iest was turned into a truth, and
so departed. The theeues found their companiō
dead, and fearing that the like mischance might
fall vpon themselues, they rann apace after the
Saint, & prostrated themselues before him, & acknowledging
their heynous offence, they became
Christians. The Blessed Bishop at their request,
restored againe their dead companiō to the number
of liuing.
               5. Machaldus hauing confessed his sinnes,
requested the Saint to set downe for him some
course of pennance,Pennāce meritorious of glory. by which he might purchase
eternall life, the holy Bishop being inspired from
aboue, inioyned him to forsake his natiue soyle,
for euer, and to bestow all his substance vpon the
poore: then did he attyre himselfe in a course and
despiceable weed, and locked his feet in fetters,
casting the key into the sea: after he commanded
him to enter all alone into a boate, whither soeuer
the boate should carry him, there to liue all the
dayes of his life. The truely penitent Machaldus,
followed the Saints direction, and so committing
himself to the sea, he lāded in the Isle of Man. The
two holy Prelates Counidrius, and Romulus, whome
S. Patricke sent to succeed S. German in the gouernement
of that Isle, seeing the man in so miserable

a plight, & knowing the cause, intertayned him
very charitably, detayning him with themselues.
After the compasse of many yeares in the
belly of a fish, that by diuine prouidence, was
brought to Machaldus, was found a key which vnlocked
his fetters. S. Machaldus attayned to such
eminent sanctity, that after the death of the two
forementioned Bishops, he was created Bishop of
the Iland, and ended his dayes there in great sanctity,
being famous both for vertue, and miracles.
               3. The glorious Saint by conuerting stones
into milke, & milke into stones, conuerted a Magitian
from the worshiping of stones, to the seruice
of the true and liuing God. Such reuerence
did the Blessed Saint carry to Sunday, in honour
of our Sauiours triumphant resurrection, that he
was neuer accustomed to trauaile vpon Sonday;
for wheresoeuer he was belated vpon Saterday,
there did he stay vntill Munday morning, giuing
himselfe wholy to diuine contemplation.
               4. One Saterday, he was benighted in a great
field farre from any shelter, it began to rayne heauily,
but not a drop did touch the Saint, or any
of his company. This miracle was seconded with
a farre greater, for euen that night, the Saint was

thus sheltred miraculously from the rayne, the
plane was ouercast with so thicke a mist, that the
Saints coach-man could not find the coach horses
which he let out to pasture. The Saint knowing
in what affliction his faithfull seruant was, of cō
                  passion
towardes him, he stretched out his sacred
hand, and loe an vnseene, and neuer heard of prodigy,
his fiue fingers like fiue brightsome Sunne
beames, illuminating all the country ouer, conuerted
the darknes into light, and the night into
day. By helpe of this immense splendour, the
coach man found his horses, and so returned ioyfull,
and greatly conforted to his good Father.
Whiles the Saint preached the Ghospell to a certaine
noble man, there came a flame out of the
Saints mouth, which entered in at the noble mās
mouth and eares, heating therewith his hart, and
also all his inward powers.
               5. A yong Lady named Memessa, daughter
to a great Prince in England, by contemplation
of the creatures, attayned to such perfect knowledge,
and loue of the Creator, that for his loue
she misprised all the world; her parents laboured
very much, but could not nether by faire or foule
meanes enforce her, euer to contract with any of
the great Lordes that were suters to her, so constant

she was in her purpose of dedicating her virginity
to her maker,Profession of chastity. her parents seeing nothing
could preuaile with her, sent her into Ireland to
S. Patricke, who instructed her in the Christian
religion, and after receiuing the blessed Sacrament,Holy water & a great miracle wrought by it.
being in prayer, she yeilded vp her pure
soule, which was carried betweene Angells, into
the bed chamber of her heauenly spouse. Holy
water made by the Saint, was no sooner besprinkled
vpon a noble man named Darius, who lay
sicke vpon a dead horse, but the noble man recouered
his health, and the horse his life.
            
            
               Of a vision S. Patricke had touching the building of
Ardmuch, and of the cure of 16. Leapers.
CHAP. XVII.
               THE formentioned noble man Darius, being
willing to gratify the Saint, bestowed
vpon him a faire, pleasant, and delightfull peece
of ground, antiently called Druimsallac, and now
Ardmuch: the next night after, the saint saw the
Angells squaring the forme and compasse of a
faire Citty, that was to be built, in that pleasant,
and delightful field. One of the Angels commanded
him the next day, to goe to a place called S.

                  Patrickes well, where he should cure 16. leapers,
couered ouer with vgly soares; the Saint did accordingly,
and baptized the leapers in the well aforesayd,
which miracle comming to the notice of
the people, was a mayne helpe towardes the building
of the citty. At the Saints request an Angel
remoued out of his place a great rocke, that was
like to make the entrāce into the citty very cumbersome
and difficulte.
               2. The glorious Bishop, with Gods help and
fauour begun, & throughly built a citty, faire for
the situation, greatnes, and compasse, & brought
many principall cittizens to inhabit therein.
The citty it selfe, was adorned with faire and decēt
churches, wherin were ordained by the Saint,
Cleargy men for the singing of the diuine office,
the gouernement of soules, and instruction of the
people. There were besides, Monasteryes furnished
with Monkes, and others replenished with
sacred Virgins. In a monastery of holy Virgins
liued a virgin the King of Englands daughter, &
nine other ladyes which accompanyed her: when
she came to S. Patricke, the Saint saw with his
owne eyes, three of his holy number ascend vp to
heauen. In this Citty did the Saint erect his
Archepiscopall sea, intending to make it the

principall and metropolitan Church of all Ireland,
and that this his intention might be established
for all succeeding ages, he purposed to make
a iourney to Rome, there to haue it confirmed, and
ratifyed by Apostolicall authority. The Angell
appearing, liked well thereof, and because for the
present the Saint wanted horses, he prouided him
miraculously of coaches to carry him and his retinue,
to the water side.
               3. The glorious Bishop, after that with infatigable
trauaile of preaching,Priests, cleargymen. & marueilous plē
                  ty
of miracles, he had conuerted the kingdome to
the Christian religion, hauing ordained Bishops,
Priests, and other Cleargy men in all places that
he thought conuenient, blessing and taking his
leaue of them all, he went with some of his company
to Rome. Comming thither, he acquainted
the Popes holines with the affaires of Ireland, and
the cause of his iourney.S. Patr. the Popes Legate. His holynes imbracing
the Saint as the Apostle of Ireland, honoured him
with a palle, and constituted him as his owne Legate
ouer all Ireland,The antiquity of a Pallium in Ireland. confirming with his apostolicall
authority, all what the Saint had ordered,
disposed, or done in Ireland. His holynes gaue
him rich presents and pretious guifts, among other
his guifts, were relicques of the Apostles S.

                  Peter, and S. Paul, and S. Stephen the Protomartyr,
and that which passeth all, his Holynes bestowed
vpon him a certaine sheet died with our
Sauiours blood. The Blessed Bishop after his returne,
placed all these rich relicques behinde the
high Altar in the Metropolitan Church of Ardmuch.
It was the custome in that church euery
yeare,Honour done to Relikes. to expose these relicques at Easter, and at
Whitsontide, to be seene, and honoured of the
people.
               4. It passeth our abilityes to set downe the
innumerable signes, which he wrought in his iorney,
going and comming from Rome; for in all
places did he manifest signes of his sanctity. In
Englād his natiue soyle, he made some stay, where
he built many Monasteryes, and repaired many
more destroyed by the Pagans, which he furnished
with Monkes, which liued according to the
forme of religious discipline & life, that the Saint
prescribed them: he also prophetically foretould
many aduerse and prosperous euents, that should
happen in England. In like manner did he forsee
and fortell the sanctity of S. Dauid, being as yet
in his mothers wombe. After his returne from his
tedious & paynefull iourney, bringing with him
from beyond the seas thirty Bishops, whome he

sent to labour in the feild of our Lord, he began in
time conuenient, to celebrate solemne councells
in which he cut off any thing he found to be preiudiciall
to Christian religion, or contrary to the
churches canons: placed & established such constitutions,
as were conformable to the holy Canons,
and made for the aduancement of religion,
piety, and good life; in the meane space he dayly
shined with the splendour of infinite miracles,
whereof this insuing, as it cannot but be deemed
most stupendious, so questionles is to be accounted
most beneficiall.
            
            
               How S. Patricke freed Ireland from the encombrance
of Diuels, Magitians, and venemous beasts. And
how he fasted 40. dayes without corporall food.
CHAP. XVIII.
               IRELAND since its first inhabitation was pestered
with a triple plague, to wit, with great
aboundance of venemous beastes, copious store
of Diuells visiblely appearing, and infinit multitudes
of Magitians, that the like is not recorded of
any other country or kingdome. The glorious,
and most holy Bishop laboured by intercession of
most feruent prayers, and other exerecices of deuotiō,

to deliuer the Iland of that triple pestilēce,
the most excellent Prelate taking the staffe or
wand of Iesus into his sacred hand, and eleuating
it after a threatning manner, as also by the fauourable
assistance of Angels, he gathered together in
one place, all the venemous beastes that were in
Ireland,Honour done to Relikes. after he draue them vp before him to
a most high mountaine hanging ouer the sea, called
then Cruachanailge, and now Cruach Padruig,
that is S. Patrickes mountaine, & from thence he
cast thē downe in that steepe precipice to be swallowed
vp by the sea: O singuler signe, O magnificent
miracle vnseene, & vnheard of since the beginning
of the world, now known & spoken of by
al nations: after directing his face towards the Ile
of Man, & blessing it with all the other Isles by
him conuerted to Christ, by help of his prayers
he procured them the same singuler benefit. Of
the Magitians he conuerted, and reclaimed very
many, and such as persisted incorrigible, he rooted
them out from the face of the earth. By his
prayers he obtayned of God, that the apparitions,
and illusions should not molest the Christians
from thence forwardes.
               2. To the end that Ireland neuer after should
be molested with venemous beasts, nor yet encō
                  
with the accustomed habitatiō of Diuels, the most
excellent Bishop fasted forty dayes without any
corporall food, imitating in that holy fast Moyses;
who obserued it in the law of nature, and Elias,
who obserued it in the written law, and especially
our deare Sauiour, who consecrated in his person
that mysticall fast. The Saint therfore ascended
the high mountaine of Cruachanailge, where
he disposed fiue stones in forme of a Crosse, and
in the midst of them he placed himselfe, shewing
aswell by the forme, and manner of his sitting, as
by the mortification of his abstinence, himselfe to
be the true seruant of Christs crosse. The Diuels
grieuing much that their power, and dominion
in Ireland had beene ouerthrowne and weakned,
thronged about the Saint in the shap of most vgly,
and deformed birdes, labouring with their
horrid skrikes, to annoy and hinder the Saint
in his holy prayers, but he being preuented by
the grace of God, and assisted by his power, making
the signe of Christes triumphant banner against
those fowle fiendes, he chased them away
farre from him, and with frequent percussion of
his cymball, he draue them out of all the coastes
of Ireland, so that from that tyme euen to this
present day, no venemous beastes were seene in

Ireland, nor yet are the inhabitants since molested
with illusory apparitions of Diuells, as they
be in other countryes the Saints cymball being
broken with often playing vpon it, was amended
by an Angell.
               3. By Gods fauour, whose wont it is after a
storme to cause a calme, the Diuels being chased
and driuen away, a great multitude of Angels illustrated
the mountaine with heauēly splendour,
and recreated the Saint with their sweetest harmony,
the Saint after immolating the hostes of
thankesgiuing and prayses to God, for inabling
him to performe so long a fast, & for conferring
such admirable fauours to Ireland at his intercession,
descended from the mountaine, and played
on his cymball, the sound wherof was heard ouer
all the kingdome: then eleuating his handes, he
blessed all Ireland, with the inhabitants thereof,
and commended them to Christ; then did he
make glad all the Church with his presence, solemnizing
with great deuotion, our Sauiours triumphant
Resurrection.
               4. The paschall festiuityes being duely, and
deuoutly accomplished, the Saint with a great
traine of spirituall children in his company, made
a circuit about the land, teaching the wayes of

Lord in al places, & with his efficacious sermons,
strēghtning the inhabitāts in the faith of Christ.
The people being incited by that admirable, and
most prodigious signe of chasing away the diuels,
venemous beasts, and Magitians, flocked from al
parts to the saint, & submitted thēselues & al they
had, to his holy will & pleasure, embracing with
great deuotiō his doctrine & precepts. The Saint
seeing what disposition our Lords field was in, to
yeild not only the 30. or 60. but euē the hundred
fold fruit, caused al the land to be deuided, and equally
distributed, & being deuided, to be tithed
with al the inhabitāts of both sexes, & euery tēth
head▪ aswel in men, women, as cattle and moueables,
did he separate for our Lords part, al the mē
he made Monks, & al the women he consecrated
Nunnes, building innumerable monasteryes for
thē, & assigning them the fifthes of lands, cattle,
& other moueable goods for their sustentation:
within a short space there was not a wildernes, no
nor skarce any corner, or place in all the Ilād, but
was replenished with perfect Mōks, & holy Nunnes,
so that Ireland by a peculier name was iustly
called al the world ouer: The Iland of Saints: They
liued according to the prescript, & tenour of life,
which S. Patrick set thē downe; for cōtempt of the

world, desire of heauenly things, morrtification of
the flesh, abdication of self wil, they matched the
Monks of Aegypt both in merit & number. Many
foraine Regions were by thē illustrated with doctrine,
& religion.
            
            
               How the present, & future state of Ireland, was reuealed
to S. Patricke: and of the patronage the Saint
affoordeth them, who are deuout vnto him.
CHAP. XIX.
               THE B. Saint with great instāce of praiers beged
of God to know in what estate Irelād was
in his Maiestyes eyes. God did heare the desire of
his hart; for being in prayer, he saw al Irelād on a
flame of fire; flaming vpward euen to heauen, an
Angel telling him, that such was the estate of Ireland
in the eyes of God for that present. Within
a little while, he saw mountaines as it were of
fire, ascending to the cloudes; a short while after
he saw brightsome torches shining▪ afterwardes
small lightes, and lastly a few coals raked
in ashes, but yet aliue, to whome the Angell appearing
said: That by that variety was expressed▪ the
seuerall estats Ireland should vnder go in the succeeding
time. Saint Patricke bathing his face in tears, often
redoubled that of the Royall Prophet: VVil

God reiect for euer? Or will he not add to be better
pleased? Or will be cut off his mercy for euer from generation
to generation? Or will God forget to haue
mercy? Or will be in his wrath keep in his mercyes?
The Angell sayd, looke towardes the North, &
thou shalt see the mutation of the right hand of
the highest. The Saint lifted vp his eyes, and saw
a little light arising in Vlidia, which striuing for a
long space with the darknes, chased it away, and
after illuminated all the Country, neuer ceasing
to increase, vntill it brought Ireland to its free
resembling and florishing estate. By the Saints
interpretation, the fiery ardour, designed the present
deuotion, and zeale of Religion and charity,
wherewith the inhabitants were inflamed in the
Saints dayes. The flaming mountains, the Saints
who were conspicuous for miracles, vertuous life
and learning. The diminution of light, the decrease
of sanctity; and the mist ouerclouding all
the land, the infidelity that should preuaile in
the Country.
               2. As some of S. Patrickes disciples discoursed
together of his guiftes & vertues, one of them
sayd, he was the holiest man breathing vpon the
face of the earth: to whom S. Secundinus answered.
Truly he had beene most holy, had he not beene

indued with lesse fraternall charity then it behoueth
him. Which comming to S. Patrickes hearing,
he asked Secundinus what moued him to vtter
such censure against him. Secundinus answered,
because you accept not of the liuinges, and rich
presents that are offered you, with which you
might maintaine great multitude of holy men.
To whome S. Patricke replyed: Charity makes
me not to accept of such great charity; for if I did
accept of what would be giuen me, I should leaue
not so much as the pasture of two horses for the
Saints who shall liue after vs.
               3. The aforesaid S. Secundinus, being of great
learning and wisedome, signifyed to S. Patricke,
that he had a desire to compose a hymne in honour
of a Saint that yet was liuing, and because
it was S. Patricke himselfe he ment, he concealed
the Saints name; the glorious Bishop answered,
it is iust and reasonable, that people display the
vertues of Saintes, and that the Church declare
their prayses, which yet is more securely done
after their deaths, when all occasion of sinning is
cut off: but if you will put in execution what you
entende, do it quickly, loe death is at the doore,
of all the Bishops that are in Ireland, you are the
first that shal depart this life, Secundinus made the

hymne, and within a few dayes after he dyed at
Donnachseachluin his episcopall citty, showing by
frequent miracles, that he reigneth with Christ.
               4. S. Kennechus, saw a company of Diuels, to go
fetch the soule of a flagitious sinner, who for his
many misdeedes, deserued to be buryed in Hell.
The Saint abiurde them at their returne, to let
him vnderstand the successe of the matter. After
a little respit the Diuels comming againe, tould: S.
Kennechus, how S. Patricke defended the sinners
soule from thē, in regard that he was accustomed
vpō the Saints day to keep a great feast in honor
of him▪ & euery day to sing some chapter of that
hymne: S. Kennechus reioyced much thereat, and
by telling that miracle, excited many to sing that
hymne very deuoutly in honour of the Saint. An
Abbot S. Patrickes disciple named Colmanus, did
sing the foresayd hymne very often: being demanded
the cause, he answered, that whilest he
sung it, he enioyed stil the Saints presence before
him, and that his eyes could neuer be satiated
with the contemplation of his delectable face:
wherby it is cleare how faythful a friend this blessed
Saint is, to all those who frequent his memory,
or haue him for their patron.
            
            
               
               Of the Saints admirable contemplations, reuelations,
mortifications, and prayers.
CHAP. XX.
               OFtentims did the glorious Saint see our Sauiour,
the heauens open, & our Lord Iesus
stāding in the midst of the multituds of Angels, &
this sometimes whē he sayd masse, & other times,
when he deuoutly sung S. Iohns reuelatiōs: besides
the Angel Victor so often mētioned in this volum,
was wont to appeare to him thrice euery week for
to recreate him with his diuine colloquies, & discourses:
Of soules departing this life, our B. Saint
saw ful often, some to go to endure the paynes of
hel, & others to be sent to enioy the ioyes of heauen;
one example very remarkable, which the
Saint himselfe for edificatiōs sake was wont to recite,
I will here recount. A great noble man, who
liued in much prosperity, & dyed with no lesse
glory, was accounted by them that knew his life
& end, most happy, & pleasing vnto God, wheras
a poore indigēt lazar, who liued al his life in great
misery, & after his death wanting the honour of
burial, became a prey to the fouls of the ayre, was
esteemed most wicked before God, but the B. Bishop
seeing the blindnes of humane iudgement,

tould them that he saw the rich mans soule to be
buryed in hell, and the poore mans soule to be
carryed vp to heauen, and this which the Saint
saw concerning these two, he was wonte to recite
of many other.
               2. The fame of S. Patrickes vertues, excited
a holy man of great merit and vertue named Vinuualoeus,
who liued in Britany in France, to leaue
his natiue soyle and to go for Ireland, there to become
S. Patrickes disciple, & scholler. The night
before he was to begin his iourney, he saw in a vision,
a most venerable man attyred in episcopal
robes, who tould him that himselfe was S. Patrike:
know my dearest Vinuualoeus that I am Patricke to
whō you repaire, know that the time of my resolutiō
is neere at hand, so that before you can come
where I am, I shall depart this life: it is the wil of
God that you forsake not this place; with that the
vision disappeared.
               3. The course which the Saint held in his
deuotion, as it was most admirable, so did he continue
it daly without any intermission: euery day
was he wont to say deuoutly the whole Psalter,
with canticles, hymnes and S. Iohns reuelation,
besides two hundred other prayers: three hundred
times in the day did he prostrate himselfe in

adoration before God, and in singing euery canonicall
hower, he was accustomed to blesse himselfe
a hundrd times with the signe of the Crosse:
moreouer it was his wont euery day, to say masse
with great deuotion and reuerence, neither did
he omit to preach to the people or to teach his
disciples. The night tyme, which he deuided into
three partes, he spent after a most heauenly
manner; the former part he imployed in reciting
twice fifty Psalmes, and in making two hundred
genuflexions: the second part he spent in saying
of the third quinquagenary of psalmes, and of other
prayers, all which time he stood immersed
in colde water: the third part he allotted to his
sleep, hauing for his bed a bare stone, & another
stone in steede of a bolster, giuing himselfe in
this manner to his rest, he would girde his loines
with a roughe, and course haire cloath steeped in
cold watter, to keepe his body in due subiection,
fearing it should stirr vp any dishonest motions
against the spirit: in this manner did the blessed
Bishop, offer himselfe a holy liuing and gratfull
victime vnto God.
            
            
               
               Of Saints Patrickes most profound humility, and of his
many miracles.
CHAP. XXI.
               THE glorious Bishop, ouer his other attire
wore a white robe, repesenting by the forme
and colour of his attire, the candour of his inward
powers, nay he would accept of no guifts or
presents, esteeming it happier to giue, then to
receaue; and if sometymes rich men did bestow
any present vpon him, he would without delay
giue it to the poore, easing himselfe of it as of a
heauy burthen. In his countenance, in his aspect,
in his talke, in his gate, euen in the motion of his
members, and deportement of all his body, the
beholders might see and learne lessons of edification,
his speech being tempered with sweetnes,
and seasoned with the salt of discretion, he accomodated
himself to al sexes, people, & occasions,
he was wel seene in foure languages, the English,
Irish, French and Latin, & attained to good insight
in the Greeke, he wrote a volume called S.
Patrickes canons, which is furnished with excellent
doctrine for all sorts of people.
               2. When any difficulte or obscure questions

were put vnto him, he was wont of his profound
humility, first to answeare: I know not,
God knowes. He was indued with the gift of prophecy,
& whatsoeuer he foretould, fell out without
any ambiguity: He did prophecie of the
Saints of Ireland, and especially of all the Saints
of Munster & Connact, that were to be borne within
the compasse of one hundred yeares, so clearly,
that he fortould their names, liues and places
of their habitation. In giuing his benediction,
he extended his right hand, and in bestowing his
malediction, he stretched out his left hand: whō
                  soeuer
he blessed, Gods blessing did light vpon
him, and whomesoeuer he cursed, Gods curse
came vpon him.
               3. And though in all vertues he did match,
or rather surpasse other Saints, yet in humility
he did farre surpasse himselfe, hence it came, that
in his missiue letters he styled himselfe: The greatest
sinner in the world, the least and most despiceable
among them; and setting little by the signes he
wrought, he deemed himselfe vnworthy to be
compared to any perfect man. He exercised himselfe
in the manuall workes as S. Paul did of tilling
the ground, and fishing, but especially in
building of Churches, three hundred and fifty

Bishops did he consecrate with his owne handes,
fiue hundred did he inuest with the holy functiō
of Priesthood, the number of them, that were ordayned
in inferiour orders, as also of Monkes, &
Nunnes, is so numberlesse, that God alone doth
know them.
               4. The Blessed Bishop liuing and leading
a life of this tenour, shined with so many,
and so great miracles, that in them he was not
inferiour to any of the Saints that went before
him. It was in a manner a dayly exercise with
him to cleanse leapers, cripels, deafe, dumbe, to
cure palseies, lethurgies, lunatickes, epilephies,
to erect cripls, to restore sight to the blind, speach
to the dumbe, to the deafe hearing, & in a word
to heale all diseases: he merited to be the magnificent
reuiuer of three and thirty dead persons,
threescore and six treatises were written of his
giftes, vertues and miracles, a great part of them
perished by fire vnder the Pagan Princes Iurmundus
& Turgesius. Foure volumes are yet extant
written by foure of his disciples S. Benignus, S.
Mell, S. Lumanus, S. Patricke the yonger, who lyes
buried in Glastenbury monastery in England: S.
Euinus compiled his actes and miracles partly in
Irish, and partely in Latin, out of which holy

authors, we haue extracted what we thought
good, and digested it into this volume.
               5. The most glorious bishop, being loaded
with yeares, and abounding with merits, knew by
diuine reuelation, that the dissolution of his
earthly tabernacle was neere at hand, which moued
him to goe towardes the citty of Armuch,
thinking to inrich that his Metropolitā Church
with the pretious depositum of his sacred body,
but the Angell Victor appearing to him, tould
him that it was the diuine pleasure, he should expect
the generall resurrection in the Cittie of
Downe in Vlidia. The Saint embracing with great
resignation the disposition of the diuine prouidence,
returned backe againe to Vlidia.
               
               6. Within a few dayes after, as the most
holy Prelate S. Patricke preached of the glory of
heauen to a great multitude of religious and ecclesiasticall
men, there descended from thence,
an immense splendour that illustrated a place in
the east part of the Church-yeard, the pearle of
Ireland S. Brigit being present. The Saint commanded
her to declare the mistery of that diuine
light, she tould in the hearing of all the assembly,
how that celestial light, sanctifyed and designed
the place, where a Saint most glorious, &

most deare vnto God shold be shortly interred▪
then rounding S. Ephembria in her eare, she tould
it was the patron & Apostle of Ireland, S. Patrik,
adding further, that she would account her selfe
happy, if his sacred body might be wraped in a
winding sheet which she had spunne, and weaued
with herown hands, & had prepared for that
purpose.
               7. The Blessed Saint knowing by diuine inspiration
the holy Virgins desire, commanded her
to go, and bring that sheet, wherein for the most
tender loue he carryed to the most blessed vigin,
he would haue his sacred body wrapt: himselfe
went to the Monastery of Sauall, where sickning
he expected the end of this life, or rather the beginning
of the other life that hath no end: the B.
virgin Brigit was so ouer wearied with the length
and difficulty of the iourney, that she could not
come so soone as she purposed. The Blessed Bishop
knowing in what distresse the holy virgin
was in, he sent his coach-man to meet her, & the
sacred virgins that came in her company, so the
virgins comming to Sauall where the Saint laye
sicke, she presented him with the sheet, which he
receaued very gratefully, then kissing his feet &
handes, she and her virgins receaued his benediction.
            
            
               
               Of S. Patrickes death, of the Angelicall obsequies exhibited
to him, and of his entertainment at Downe.
CHAP. XXII.
               THE Blessed Saint being brought very low
by his infirmity, as the Angell had admonished,
receaued the holy Sacraments at the hā
                  des
of his disciple S. Tasach Bishop; & eleuating
his eyes, he saw Iesus standing in the midst of a
multitude of Angels; then blessing his disciples,
and rendring thankes to God, he passed out of
this life, his blessed soule was receaued into the
ioyes of his Lord by the all-immaculate Virgin
the Mother of God, and sacred quires of virgins,
with the Patriarkes, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessours
and Angels, no maruaile that he was honored
of all Saints, sith there shined in him, the
vertue of all Saints; an Angell he was, not by
nature but by office, since his lips did keep science
and the law of life: a Prophet, since few of the
Prophets were indued with the foresight of future
thinges so copiously as he was: an Apostle
he was, since Ireland, and the neighbour Ilands,
are signes of his Apostleship: a Martyr he was, in
regard of the many coflicts he had against Kings

Magitians, Idolaters, and Diuels. A confessour
he was, since that he neuer ceased from the preaching,
and confessing the name of Christ. A
virgin he was, for as much as he kept the integriof
fayth, in body & soule. The glorious Saint deceased
at the age of a hundred and twenty three
yeares: he was sixteene yeares old, when he was
carryed away by the Pirates: six yeares did he serue
in captiuity: eightene yeares did he liue with
S. German in France: he was fiue and fifty when
he came into Ireland to preach the Ghospell:
fiue and thirty yeares did he imploy in the conuersion
of Ireland, and the adioyning Iles: afterwardes
for three and thirty yeares, he gaue himselfe
to the sweet rest of contemplation, eyther at
Ardmuch, or at Sauall monastery, during which
tyme he neuer came abroad, vnles it were for
great affaires, or keeping a Councel once a yeare
for the redresse of abuses.
               2. After his departure his sacred body was
wrapt vp in the sheet, which the blessed virgin
S. Bridgit had prepared, and a great multitude of
cleargy men and seculers, came to bemone the
death of their common father, and Apostle, and
to solemnize his funerals. The night following a
brightsome quier of Angels that kept watch at

his body with their sweet harmony, cast all the
multitude into an extaticall sleepe, vntill their
departure, the next morning the Angels left so
fragrant an odour behind them, that it continued
for the space of twelue daies, whilst the holy body
was vnburied, during which time in all that region,
they inioyed the brightnes of the day light,
without the interposition of any night. By occasion
of this stupendious miracle, the Archmachians,
and Vlidians fell into grat debate and contention,
for the possession of that sacred treasure,
and as they were vpon the poynt of entring into
a fierce and bloody conflict, they heard a voyce
from heauen, which seemed to be S. Patricks, cō
                  maunding
them to surcease from the effusion of
blood, the sea moreouer passing its wōted boundes
swole vp so high, that it impeached their mutuall
fight, and slaughter for the present.
               3. The Vlidians put the blessed Saints body
vpon a new wayne drawen by two kine, and
so carried it away, with great ioye and singing of
psalmes, hymnes, and spiritual canticles, wherat
the Ardmuchians fury was so inkindled, that
they intended by force of armes to detayne the
holy body of their patron, and primat: but Almighty
God to stint that bloody strife, substituted

before the Ardmuchians eyes a phantasticall
wayne which resembled so fully the former, that
they being perswaded it was the same that carried
the rich treasure of the Saintes sacred body, followed
it so farre as the riuer Caulune, in the confines
of the prouince of Ardmuch, where that imaginary
wayne disappeared out of their sight: in
the meane time the Vlidians entred the citty of
Downe, and after great solemnity of masses, they
interred the holy body in the place aforesaid. S.
Patricke departed this life in the yeare of our redemption
493. Felix being Pope, Anastasius being
Emperour, Aurelius Ambrosius being Gouernour
of England, and Forchernus reigning in Ireland,
and Iesus Christ being sole monarch of all the
world, to whome all honour glory and prayse for
all eternity. Amen.
               Heere ends S. Patrickes life.
            
         
         
            
            THE LIFE
OF THE HOLY VIRGIN
SAINT BRIGIT
PATRONESSE OF
IRELAND.
            Abridged out of what COGITOSVS her owne
nepheu, and IOANNES CAPGRAVIVS
haue written more largely of her famous
Actes, and Miracles.
            
               Of S. Brigits Countrey, Parents, Birth, and many
vertues; and especially of her charity to the poore.
CHAP. I.
               
                  THE glorious virgin S. Brigit, who descended
of the ancient, and honorable
family of Etech in the kingdom of Ireland,
was borne at Fochart, a village a
mile distant from Dundalke in the country of
Louth. Her Father was a noble man of Leinster,
named Dubtacus, who falling in loue with a handmayd
of his named Brocseca, a woman indued

with singuler beauty, and admirable comlines, he
got her with child of this sacred virgin, which
when his owne wife perceiued, being in great
trouble therat, and taking the matter very greeuily,
she said vnto him; cast out this handmayd,
fearing her posterity surpasse mine. Dubtacus cō
                  strayned
through his wiues importuinty, made
sale of her to a certaine Magitian, in whose house
falling in trauaile, she was safe deliuered of the
holy child; such as were present at her birth,
saw the cloath, wherewith her tender head was
couered, to burne with a flame of fire, whereupon
hastning to quench it, they found no fire
at all.
               2. So much did the holy virgin loath to feed
of the Magitians meats, that she was constrayned
euery day to cast vp what she eate. The Magitian
considering attentiuely the cause therof, said: I
am vncleane, & this holy virgin (ful of the spirit
of God) cannot taste of my meate; choosing out
therfore a white merch cow, he bestowed it vpon
her to liue by her milke. The holy virgin increased
in vertue, no lesse then in yeares; for she excelled
in all kind of holy conuersation and sanctity
of life, aed became very conspicuous for her
modestie, chastity and temperance, but aboue al

her charity to the poore is most remarkable.
               3. The sacred virgin being deputed by the
Magitian to keepe his cowes, gaue all the butter,
and milke she could gather to releiue the present
wantes, and necessities of the poore. When the
Magitian saw but a small quantity of butter in a
great vesel, wherin the butter was to be kept, he
chafed extreamely. The Saint seeing what passion
he was in, offered her pure prayers vp to God,
and so by diuine vertue, filled the vessell with
butter euen vp to the topp: wherat the Magitian
was so much astonished and moued, that he beleiued
in Christ, setting both her, and her mother
at liberty.
               4. In regard she gaue to the poore, all whatsoeuer
she could lay handes vpon, and among othings,
her Fathers sword, he purposed to sel her;
for which end bringing her where the King was,
he requested him that he would be pleased to buy
his daughter. To whome the Kinge spoke in
this manner; what made you to giue away your
fathers sword, to the poore man? To whome she
answeared, I haue giuen it to Christ, & Sir if my
God did aske your maiesty, and my father too
of me, I would bestow you both, and whatsoeuer
els you haue vpō him, if it lay in my power. Thē
                  
the King turning to her father sayd to him; this
your daughter is of too great worth to be bought
by me, and of farre greater to be sould by you, so
giuing her another sword to giue her father, he
dismissed her.
            
            
               Of S. Brigites singuler chastity, and of some miracles
wrought in approbation thereof, as also of other
stupendious signes.
CHAP. II.
               WHEN this sacred spouse of Christ saw
herselfe pressed, and importuned by
her freindes to marry, she prayed to God, that he
would be pleased to disfigure her body with
some deformity, to the end that men shold cease
from making further loue vnto her; and without
delay her eye burst, and melted in her head; then
taking three other maydes in her company, she
repayred to a holy Bishop, called Machella, S.
Patrickes disciple, to be vayled at his handes▪ the
holy Bishop saw a piller of fire appeare ouer her
head, and contemplating moreouer her earnest
and ardent loue of virginall integrity, he gaue
her the holy vayle of chastity: at which time as
she fell prostrate before the venerable Prelate to

offer her selfe a holy, cleane and impolluted host
to her heauenly spouse, she touched the alter
postle, which incontinently budded forth a fresh
with leaues, and so continueth greene and florishing
to this day: Being vayled with the sacred
cognizance of chastity, her bursten eye was restored
againe to perfect health.
               2. Against Easter the sacred virgin made bere
of one onely measure or pecke of malt; fending
part therof to eighteen Churches that were roūd
about, and besides during all the octaue, that
small quantity sufficed aboundantly, and serued
to satisfy all those who would, and were desirous
to taste therof. At the same time a Leaper came
to the holy virgin, requesting her to help him to
a cow, but she hauing none said to him; Wil you
that we pray God to deliuer you from your sicknes?
who answeared, that he preferred his cure
before all other guiftes; whereupon she hauing
blessed water, sprinkled the leaper therwith, and
immediatly he became cleane: in like māner two
sicke virgins taking water, which the holy Virgin
had blessed, recouered their perfect health.
               3. Two blind men being Brittons, or English
men by birth, with a leaper who was their
guide, came to her Church doore, and besought

the sacred Virgin to help them to their bodily
health; She intreated them to haue patience a little,
and to enter into the lodging to refresh thē
                  selues,
and that she would in the meane time pray
to God in their behalfe; which delay they tooke
so impatiently, that with great indignation they
replied; you heale the diseased of your owne nation,
but as for vs being strangers, you neglect to
cure vs for Christs sake. The holy virgin receauing
this reproach, went forth vnto them, and casting
holy water vpon them, she cleansed the
leaper, and restored the blynd men to their
sight.
               4. A certaine woman, brought some apples
to the Saint, at which time there came some leapers
to begge alms of her: thē the said Saint dealt
these apples amongst them. The woman hearing
it, cōuayed her aples away saying: I brought
those apples for your selfe, and your virgins, &
not to be giuen to leapers: whereat the Saint being
not a little offended, she answeared; You
haue done very ill in hindering vs to giue almes,
therfore your trees will neuer more produce any
fruit. The woman going forth into her orchard,
which she left full of apples, found none at all,
and so it remayned fruitles alwayes after.
            
            
               
               Of S. Brigits great austerity, and of many admirable
miracles wrought by her.
CHAP. III.
               ONE night the season being frosty an cold,
whē al had taken themselues to their rest;
and were fast a sleepe, the holy virgin went to a
deepe poole, wherin she stood all night long weeping
and praying, firmely purposing with herself
to obserue the same custome euery night: but our
deare Sauiour out of the aboundance of his infinit
mercy, would not haue her to continue it any
longer, for the next night following, she found
the poole dry without any water, and comming
to see it the next morning, she saw it as full as it
was before: the same hapned to her the second
night, which was a sufficient reason that she forbore
that austere exercise of mortification.
               2. Vpon a time that some venerable Bishops
came to seeke lodging at her house, she being vnprouided
of all prouision, the diuine munificence
releiued her wantes by miracle: for thrice
in one day did she milke one cow that she had,
which yeilded so much milke, as the three best
cowes would. Another tyme a Dog did fawne vpon

her for meate, the holy virgin, with whom
mercy grew euen from her infancy, hauing nothing
but flesh, that was boyling for some guests
that were to come, drew it out of the pot, and
gaue the doge a peece therof. When the flesh was
laid vpon the table, it appeared, so intire, as if nothing
had bine cut off, which excited the beholders
to great admiration of the miracle, & veneration
of the Saint.
               3. The blessed virgin laboured very earnestly,
to reclaime nine men from fulfilling their
nefarious vow made of killing a man in the Kalendes
of Iuly, yet for nothing that she could,
either say, or doe, would they relent from their
wicked designe: Betaking her selfe therefore to
prayer for the desperate wretches, loe there appeeared
before their eyes a figure, resembling to
the full, the man whome they intended to kill,
whom they incontinently assayled with their
swordes and launces, & after, as it were insulting
by way of triumphe ouer their slaine ennemy,
came backe immediatly to the Saint with their
wepons all imbrued in blood, where learning the
truth of the matter, they did pennance for their
cruell intent.
               4. Vpon a time that a certaine farmer came

with all his family to celebrat some solemne feast
with S. Bridgit, he being there, his Cowes were
stolne away by theues, who in their way came to
a riuer, which they found so swolne vp with water,
that they could not passe ouer, tying therefore
their garments & armes, to the cowes hornes,
they made them enter into the water, but
they returning backe with great violence, came
and ranne directly to S. Bridgits aboade, and the
men being starke naked, followed them, doing
afterwardes pennance for their heinous fact, in
the Saints monastery.
               5. The holy virgin being once benighted in
a spatious field in Meath, declined to a certaine
poore womans howse, with whome she lodged
all night, and albeit the woman roceiued, her
with great ioye, rendering God many thankes
for the happy and safe arriuall of the most holy
virgin, yet her pouerty was such, that she wanted
wherwithall to entertaine so worthy a guest, but
neuertheles of reuerence to the Saint, she broke
downe a frame she vsed to weaue in, and
boyled therewith the calfe of one onely cow
which she had. Supper being ended, and after
resting her selfe all night, the next morning, to
the end the charitable woman shold not sustaine

any dommage or detriment, by the entertaynement,
or refection of the Saint, she found another
calfe like to her owne with her cow, and
found likewise a weauing frame, in forme and
greatnes iust alike to her own that she had burnt.
            
            
               Of the great power S. Brigit had ouer Diuels, & how
much they feared her.
CHAP. IIII.
               WHEN a certaine person, tormented
with a malignant spirit, knew that he
was to be led to S. Brigit, he fell downe to the
ground, saying: You shall not carry me thither.
Do you know sayd they where she liues? yes sayd
he, and I will not go by any meanes. And when
they could not remoue him from the place, they
sent for the Saint, intreating her to come thither;
when the Diuell saw the sacred virgin comming
a farr off, being terrifyed, he departed from
the man out of their sight.
               2. Another obsessed person, who by reason
of strange fits of fury and rage, wherewith he
was vexed, bred great annoy & trouble to many,
was brought to the Saint, to whome she sayd;
Preach to me the word of our Sauiour Iesus

Christ, he answered, O most holy Virgin Brigit,
I am compelled against my wil to obey your cō
                  maundement,
saying: Loue God then, and all
men will loue thee: honour God, and all men
will honour thee: feare God, and all men will
feare thee, this being said, the diuell fled away
with a loud cry.
               3. As Saint Brigit sat at the table with a certaine
virgin whom she had inuited, she saw a
Diuell sitting hard by her, the other virgin said:
I would fayne see him, if it were possible. It is
not impossible quoth S. Bridgit, but first signe
your eyes, that they may be able to sustaine his
sight, and contemplate his face: hauing signed
her eyes, she saw the ennemy in a most vgly, and
blacke shape, with a terrible great head, exhasing
forth at his nostrils smoke, and flames of fire.
Speake to vs Diuell, said S. Bridgit. To whome
he answeared, O most holy virgin, I cannot speak
to you, neither yet can I contemne your commaundements,
since you contemne not Godes
holy ordonances, and are so affable to his poore,
and little ones. Wherfore camest thou hither?
sayd the Blessed Virgin. I remaine with this virgin,
sayd he, and in regard of her slugishnes, I
haue gotten a place in her. Behould then sayd

the holie virgin (turning to the other virgin)
whome you haue intertayned these many yeares?
And from that day forwardes, the virgin
was deliuered from the Diuell.
               4. There assembled together a great multitude
of men with oxen and engines to draw away
a great tree, which was cut downe that was
to be vsed in some building, but all in vaine, for
neither the multitude of men, the strength of
the oxen, nor yet the variety of engines, could
preuaile any thing towardes the remouing therof.
The men were almost ready to depart, thinking
it impossible to stir it out of its place; at
last by the help and force of Saint Bridgits prayers,
together with her pregnant faith like to a
mustard seede, by which faith as our Sauiour
sayth, Mountaines are transfered, they carried away
that tree without the asistance of any humane
help, and found no difficulty in bringing
it to the place, whither the Saint appointed them
to carry it.
            
            
               
               Of the obedience that vnreasonable creatures exhibited
to Saint Bridgit.
CHAP. V.
               ONE day as the Saint saw Duckes, sometimes
swimming in the waters, and other
tymes flying in the ayre, she commanded them
to come to her; They as if they had beene trayned
vp vnder humaine discipline, flew in great
haste with prompt obedience to the Saint. The
blessed virgin touched them gentlely, and imbraced
them sweetly, which doing for a pritty
space, permitted them after to fly away. Another
tyme a great wile bore being pursued very eagerly,
came in great hast to S. Bridgits heard of
swine; she beholding the boare among her swine,
gaue him her blessing, and he remayned familiar)
& without any feare euer afterwith her heard.
By this and the other precedent, example it is
cleare and euident, that the fowles of the ayre,
and beastes of the earthe, were subiect to her
commaund, and obeyed her will and pleasure,
as we may further gather from these ensuing accidents.
               
                  
2. A simple country man comming to the
Kinges court, saw there a Fox, who being taught
for that purpose, made the King great recreation
with his many sleightes, and trickes, and
thinking it was not tame or familiar, he killed it
in presence of all the multitude, for which being
reprehended, & cast into fetters, he was brought
fast bound to the King, who commaunded that
he should be put to death, vnles he procured him
another Foxe like vnto the former in all conditions,
and subtill feates, and that his wife & children
should be made slaues. S. Brigit hearing
thereof, prayed very earnestly to God for the
release of the poore man: by and by another Fox
entring into her coach, sat quietly, and familiarly
by her side, whome when she had presented to
the King, and that he saw it to play trickes, and
pranks, and in all thinges to be conformable to
the other Fox, his wrath appeased therewith, he
set the poore man at liberty, S. Bridgit returning
to her monastery, and the Fox remayning as yet
amongst the presse of people, fled backe againe
into his denne: all those who saw what had passed,
wondered much at the miracle, and honoured
noe lesse the Saint by whose meanes it was
wrought.
               
                  
3. As the sacred Virgin sat with her virgins
in her coach, she saw a man, with his wife, family,
and oxen, toyled very much with carrying heuy,
and cumbersome burthens, euen in the extreame
heat of the sunne, and taking compassion
of them, she gaue them her owne coach-horses
to helpe, and ease them of their insupportable
paynes. In the meane tyme she sat downe by the
way side, and spoke to some of her virgins, bidding
them to digge vnder the adioyning earth,
to the end that water might spring forth, wherewith
such as were drye might quench their thirst.
Vpon the digging vp of the ground, there gushed
out a cleare, and faire riuer. Within a little
time after, there came a certaine Captaine to the
place, who hearing of what S. Bridgit had done
with the horses, he bestowed vpon her wilde, and
madd horses, which became without delay so tame
and gentle, as if they had beene alwayes wont
to draw a coach. There came leapers sometymes
to Saint Bridgit, who begged her coach of her,
which she gaue them without delay, & her horses
likewise.
               4. A certaine Queene came to visit S. Brigit,
bringing with her many rich presents, and amongst
the rest a very fayre siluer chayne, which

her maydes tooke away, hiding it, the Saint bestowing
the rest vpon the poore. Not long after
when a poore man cried to the Saint for almes,
hauing nothing, she tooke the chaine, and gaue
it him. The maydes seeing it, sayd, you are the
cause that we loose all that God sendes vs, for
you giue all to the poore, leauing vs poore and
needy. To whome she answeaed, seeke the chaine
in the place, where I am wont to pray in the
Churche, and peraduenture you shall find it
there: they finding the chayne, showed it to
many, and kept it euer after, as an euident testimony
of her sanctimony, and vertue.
            
            
               How S. Bridgit protected, and assisted such as inuocated
her in their distresse and dangers.
CHAP. VI.
               SAINT Bridgit came one time, being intreated
therunto by her father, to the King, saying,
Let me haue your sword for my Father, and
release me one of your slaues. To whome the
King answeared, what will you giue me for these
two great petitions. She replied, if you will, the
life euerlasting, and that your seede thall reigne

for euer after you. The King answeared againe;
I couet not a life, which I doe not see, neither
am I sollcitous in behalfe of my children, that
shall liue after me: two other thinges I desire,
and couet, the first is, that I may enioy this life,
which I loue; and the second is, that in all places
and conflictes, I get the vpper hand ouer
mine ennemies. These two thinges, said the
Blessed virgin, shalbe graunted you. Not long
after, with a few in his company, he went to
fight with a great multitude, and inuocating S.
Bridgits helpe and assistance, he saw her goe before
him, and a piller of fire to burne all vp euen
to the skies, soe the King hauing defeated
his ennemies, he returned homewardes, magnifying
the glory, and name of the most sacred
virgin.
               2. A virgin that suffered shipwracke by inuocating
S. Bridgitts helpe, walked drie foote, vpon
the liquid waues, escaping by that meanes
the daunger of death. Some of Saint Bridgitts
maydes hauing receiued from a certaine rich
man, many measures of meale, could not passe
ouer a water that was in the way, being therfore
destitute of all humane helpe, and assistance,
they inuocated the powerfull suffrages of their

their most holy mistris, and they were suddainly
transported to the further side. A man that
prohibited S. Bridgits coach to passe through his
feildes, and stroake at her horses, fell downe to
the ground, and yeilded vp his ghost suddainly.
               3. A gentleman who was in the country, loned
dishonestly a certaine woman, & contriuing
with himself how to compasse his filthy delights,
he gaue her in custody a rich siluer pynne, which
he stole away priuily at vnawares from her, and
cast it into the sea, thinking that when she could
not restore it, she should become his slaue, and so
should glut his wanton desires: all which wicked
plot he put in practise, neither could he be contented
otherwise, then either by getting againe
the siluer pin, or by her bondage. The chast woman
being driuen to this pinche, fled to S. Bridgit,
as to a cittie of refuge; As the holy virgin was
musing with her selfe what to doe in this matter,
behold one brought home fish taken out of the
neighbour riuer, & they vnbowelling the fishes,
the siluer pin was found in one of their bellies,
so bringing the pin with her, she went to the assembly,
where the matter was to be determined,
where she did show the pin, and it being knowne
by many that saw it, to be the selfe same he cast in

to the sea, she freed the vertuous womā from her
cruell tyrants handes, who afterwardes acknowledging
his fault, and guiltines, submitted himselfe
to S. Bridgits pleasure, who hauing wrought
this great miracle, returned backe againe to her
monastery.
               4. It fell out that the King called together an
assembly of his subiectes, to make abroade and
fayre high waye in a deep and impassible marsh,
through which a great riuer ranne. The people
meeting by their family, and kindreds, they diuided
the worke, allotting to euery family his
own share of that laborious taske, that part wher
the riuer ran was most difficult, and fell to one of
the families, who being potent & strong forced
S. Bridgits kinsefolkes being weaker, to change
with them. They in this their distresse, falling
prostrate before the Saint, bemoned their wrong
to her: To whome she answeared, Departe in
peace, it is the will of God, that the riuer passe
from that place, where you are put to such heauy
workes, to the other which they haue made
choice of. The next morning, when the multitude
rose to begin the work, the riuer was found
to haue left its ancient channel, where S. Bridgits
family was constrayned to worke, & to be transferred

into the part of the potent, and proude
men, who so vniustly oppressed the weaker company:
in proofe whereof, the auncient channell
where the riuer tooke its course in former tymes,
appeares drye without any waters to this
very day.
            
            
               Of many miraculous cures, wrought by the merits, and
intercession of the Saint.
CHAP. VII.
               THE sacred virgin hauing deliuered many
leapers, cripples, & obsessed persons, from
their infirmities, there came two leapers with teares
in their eyes, beging the cure of their disease.
Then the Saint praying, and blessing water, she
commanded them to washe one another in that
water. One being washed by his companion, became
cleane: to whome the Saint said, wash now
your fellow; who seeing himself cleane, and boasting
of his health, wold not touch the others vlcers;
which pride of his God did chastice, for immediatly
after he said. I feele sparkles of fire vpon
my shoulders, and instantly all his body
(his companion being cleansed) was couered ouer
with leaprosy.
               
                  
2. A certaine woman comming of deuotion,
to visit S. Bridgit, brought her daughter with
her, who was dumbe. S. Bridgit seeing the yong
mayden, said vnto her. Are you content to be a
virgin? (but not knowing that she was dumbe)
The maid answeared incontinently, I will willingly
do, what you will commaund me, & so dedicating
her virginity to God, she to her dying
day remayned most eloquent. A blind virgin named
Daria, spoake to S. Bridgit saying. Blesse
mine eyes, to the end that I may see the world according
vnto my desire: her eyes being opened
without delay, she sayd, shut mine eyes againe,
for the more that one is absent from the world,
so much the nearer, is that party to God; then
S. Bridgit shut her eies as she requested.
               3. One of Saint Bridgits, virgins burnt in the
concupiscence of a certaine man, to whome she
promised to steale forth in the night: after Saint
Bridgit betooke her to her rest, the virgin rose according
to her promise; being inflamed with the
fire of sēsuality, & likwise vexed with the tormēt
of conscience, she knew not what to do, but fearing
God, and S. Bridgit, prayd her earnestly,
that she would vouchsafe to helpe and assist her
being indistresse. At last she resolued with her

selfe to make a fire, putting her selfe therinto, so
by that meanes, with fire she quenched fire, and
with payne, ouercame payne; which S. Bridgit
knewe by diuine reuelation, yet neuertheles kept
it secret, to see the euent and issue of the virgins
combat. The next morning the virgin acknowledgd
her sin to Saint Bridgit, who sayd to her:
because in fighting couragiously this night, thou
hast burnt thy selfe, the fire of forincation shall
neuer annoye thee in this life, nor the fire of hel
burne thee in the next; then the holy virgin did
heale her feete, so that no marke of the burning
did appeare in them.
               4. Neither ought we to omit that great miracle,
which this blessed Saint wrought in imitation
of our Sauiour, by opening the eyes of a mā
who was blind frō his natiuity. A certaine Queen
that had no children, by the holy Virgins intercession
obtayned issue. And as Almighty God
for her sake and merits, did help others in their
necessityes, so did he not fayle to assist her selfe
in her wantes: for vpon a certaine time the holy
virgin being in great necessity, besought God to
help her to some honny, and what she sought for,
she found it in great plenty, vpon the pauement
of her house.
            
            
               
               How the holy Virgin for the relief of the poore, wrought
many admirable signes.
CHAP. VIII.
               SAINT Bridgit said to a certaine virgin who
begged almes of her; I heare that there are
many afflicted with sicknes in your country, take
therfore my girdle, and with it, steaped in water,
you shal in the name of our Sauiour Iesus Christ
deliuer them of their infirmityes, and they will
giue you both meate & cloathes: who taking the
girdle, as the Saint commaunded, she cured diseases,
getting therby great gaynes, and becomming
very rich, she her selfe afterwardes, dealt
great almes to the needy. Another time she cō
                  uerted
water into good bere to giue to leapers,
who called to her for it. In like manner did she
for the comfort of a needy person, conuert a stone
into salt. She likewise deuided one garment
betwene two poore men, and by diuine vertue,
each part became an entire garment.
               2. Among the many stupendious miracles
she wrought, this is not to be accoūted the least,
nor the least to be admired. To three leapers who
besought her to bestow some charity of them,

she gaue a siluer vessell; and fearing it should
be an occasion of debate, or discord amongst
them, if they deuided it themselues, she spoke to
the gold-smith to deuide it equally amongst thē.
But he making his excuse, that he could not deuide
it into three equal partes, the most holy virgin
her selfe tooke it into her hand, and stroke it
against a stone, and soe deuided it iust into three
equall parcells: in so much that afterwardes being
put in scales to be weighed, neither part did
ouerweigh the other, not so much as one drāme,
so equall were the deuisions, and so the leapers
departed away ioyfull with their shares, & without
cause either of enuy, or any iniury.
               3. According to the example of holy Iob,
she neuer permitted the poore to departe from
her with empty handes, for she gaue them very
pretious, and rich garmentes, which a holy Bishop
named Conleath, vsed to weare in saying the
diuine mysteries of the Masse, vpon the higher
feastes of our Lord, and the Apostles. Now when
the time came, that the venerable Prelate should
according to his wonted manner, vse the aforesaid
episcopall robes, the holy virgin, who had
giuen them to Christ in his needy members, receaued
other such robes fully resembling the former,

as well in the weauing, or texture, as in
colour, which were brought her in a waggon of
two horses, euen at the same houre that she liberally
gaue the others to the poore.
               4. So large and liberall was her charity to
the poore, that none euer had a repulse at her
handes, as it is cleare and euident by this ensuing
narration. For one time being abroad in the
feildes feeding of her flocke, one who was well
acquainted with the tendernes of her hart, and
largenes of her hand, came to her seauen times in
one day begging of almes, and euery time she
gaue him a weather; and when euening approaching
she droue home the sheep, yet being tould
ouer twice or thrice, the flocke was found entire,
and complete, not one being missing to the great
wonder of those who knew what chaunced. It is
also recorded of her, that after prayer made for
that intent, she got miraculously a summe of money,
with which she ransommed a guilty person,
whome the King appointed to be put to death.
            
            
               
               How the holy virgin, declared the innocency of Bishop
Broon Saint Patrickes disciple, by making a yong
suckling to speake, and of other no lesse remarkable
miracles.
CHAP. IX.
               A Certayne malitious woman, without regard
of conscience or feare of God, slandered
most wickedly a venerable Bishop of Saint
Patrickes disciples named Broon, by fathering vpon
him a child, which she had gotten by another.
The Bishop standing vpō denial of the fact
S. Bridgit calling the woman sayd, Who is the father
of your child? She answered, Bishop Broon;
With that S. Bridgit signed the womans mouth
with the figure of Christs banner, and instantly
her head swelled vp with a great tumour, after
she blessed the young infants tongue, saying to
him; Who is your Father? The child made answeare,
Bishop Broon is not my Father, but that
vilde and deformed man, who sitteth last among
the people: then all the assembly rendring many
thankes, and prayses to God, constrained the
lewed woman to do pennance for her folly.
               2. There was a certaine man named Linguidinus,
                  
who was indued with such admirable
strength, and surpassing vigour of body, that he
himselfe alone could do so much worke as twelue
men, and who moreouer was so great a deuourer
of meate, as to eate at once so much, as might
well serue twelue men, for as in working he did
counteruaile twelue men; so likewise in eating
did he match that number. This man came to
S. Bridgit, beseeching her to obtaine of God,
that he would vouchsafe to temper, and bridle
the immoderate appetite of his deuouring, and
rauenous stomack, without diminishing or mayning
the strength of his body. The holy Virgin
gaue him her blessing, and offered vp her prayers
to God in behalfe of his iust petition, which
he obtayned by her merits, and intercession, for
neuer after did he take more, then was able to
satisfy one man, being neuertheles able to performe
so much worke as he was before, when he
did eate most of all.
               3. The sacred virgin sent for many workemen,
and reapers to cut downe her corne, & hauing
agreed with them for their pay, and appointed
a day when they should come to performe
their worke, it hapned that the day appointed,
proued very rayny, in so much that the cloudes

powred forth showers in great aboundance ouer
all the prouince, excepting on S. Bridgits feilds,
which were not wet at all, the rayne falling
thicke vpon euery side, so that where all the workemen
in the country were constrayned to giue
ouer their worke, by reason of the wet, & moisty
season, S. Bridgits workemen continued from
morning without intermission or impediment,
cutting downe of her corne, not without the admiration
of all who saw, and heard of that vnusuall
miracle.
               4. Another miracle no lesse stupendious,
wherin the Reader may contēplate the purity of
her hart, the perfctiō of her soule, the eminency
of her merits, and the prerogatiue of her vertues
we are to recount, which was this. At what time
this sacred virgin fed her flocke in a wide & open
playne, farre from any shelter, showres of rayne
fell downe so thicke, that she was wet to the skin,
who comming home with her cloathes all full of
water, she saw a Sunne beame pearcing in thorough
a chinke, that illuminated the roome, and
taking it for a pearch (the quickenes of her eyes
being hindered, or somewhat blunted) she cast
thereon her wet mantle, or vpper garmente,
whereupon it hung being supported by it, as well

as by a beame, or post, to the great astonishment
of all the neighbours, who could not sufficiently
admire the merits, and vertues of this
holy virgin.
            
            
               Of S. Bridgits happy departure out of this life, and
how she knew thereof by diuine reuelation, and of
some miracles wrought after her death by her
intercession and merits.
CHAP. X.
               THE sacred virgin hauing run out the course
of her mortall dayes, in the exercise of all
kind of sanctimony, and innocency of life, the
time of the resolution of her terrene tabernacle
drew neere at hand, whose deposition, as her selfe
knew by reuelation, and foretould to one of her
virgins, was not farre off. The holy virgin gaue
vp her soule, to her heauenly spouse about the
yeare of our redemption 518. Her venerable
body, was placed in a sumptuous monument of
gould, and siluer, adorned with iewells, and
pretious stones, and was first interred in her
owne monasterie at Kildare, together with the
the sacred body of the holy Bishop Conleath; afterwardes
it was translated (whereof we haue an

authentical record) to the citty of Dune in Vlster,
where it lyes together with the venerable bodies
of S. Patricke, and S. Columbe, the other two
glorious patrons of Ireland. At Kildare and other
places, many miracles haue been wrought by the
merits of Saint Bridgit, we will content our selues
with the relation of some few, fearing to cloy
the Reader with to much tediousnes.
               2. The ouerseer of Saint Bridgits great and
famous monastery, sent workemen, and stonehewers
to prouide a mill stone, they neither reflecting
vpon the difficulty of the way, nor yet regarding
that there was no meanes of getting
downe the stone, went vp to the topp of a most
high and craggy mountayne, where they hewed
out a great stone forming it into a mill stone, the
Ouerseer came with oxen and horses to carry
it away, but seeing it impossible with oxen and
horses to go where it was, in regard of the steepe
and craggy ascent, all begūne to despaire of euer
getting it downe, and so were ready to departe.
But the prudent Ouerseer said; Not so, but
let vs in the name of God, and S. Bridgit (to
whome nothing is impossible) rowle it downe,
and so conceauing a firme faith of the holie virgins
asistance, they cast it downe: and loe tho

stone rowling amongst the rocky, & stony cragges,
trunled downe without any detriment from
the mountaine, and thence was carried to the
mill. To which mill a certaine pagan sent his
corne by an ignorāt & simple man to be groūd:
when the corne was laid betweene the stones,
the aforesaid stone being the vppermost, stood irremoueable,
neither could the violent current of
the great riuer, nor yet the paynfull industry of
men, whele it about: at last, knowing that the
corne belonged to a pagan Magitian, and therefore
S. Bridgits mill, would not grinde it, they
remoued and put it away, powring other graine
insteede therof, and then the stone without any
impediment, kept its ordinary, & wonted course
in grinding.
               3. It hapned within a while after, that the
mill by some chaunce or other tooke fire, which
consumed the howse and the other stone to,
that was ioyned to this, but as for this stone, that
was particulerly dedicated to S. Bridgit, the fire
did not presume to touch, neither was it branded
with any signe, or marke of burning, which
made them to bring the stone away, and to place
it neare to S. Bridgits church doore, where many
diseased meeting, by the only touch of this

stone, were deliuered from their maladies. Here
our author by occasion of this insueing miracle,
enlargeth himself in describing the magnificence
of Saint Bridgits church, the sumptuousnes of
the oratories, the curiosity of anticke workes,
and variety of curious portratures, with many
other remarkable particulers, worthy the reading,
which we to continue our intended course
of breuity, do wittingly passe ouer, and will content
our selues with the bare & succinct relation
of the miracle it selfe, which was this.
               4. The gate of Saint Bridgits oratory, thorough
which she, and her holy virgins passed,
when they went to receaue the delicious viand
of our Sauiours sacred and pure body being broken
downe, & made wider, the carpenters setting
the former doore vpon the hinges which was
found, was lesse by a fourth part, or quarter:
wherupon they resolued, either to add another
peece to the ould doore, or to make another al
of new; and as they were debating the busines,
the principall worke maister sayd. Wee ought
this next night to watch and pray at S. Bridgits
monument, to the end that she may direct vs
in the morning, what is best to be done in this
matter: so passing al the night ouer at her shrine,

and rysing the next morning after, saying some
prayers, setting the ould doore vpon the hinges,
it fitted all the gate so iust, that it nether wanted,
nor yet exceeded any thing in conuenient bignes:
and in this manner was the doore by the
merits of Saint Bridgit, extended to an equall &
commensuratiue proportion with the gate of the
church. Who can expresse (sayth our author
here) the admirable beauty of this Church, or
how can we declare the marueiles of this Citty?
Or who may recount the innumerable thronges,
and infinit multitudes of people flocking thither
from all countryes? Some come to delight them
selues with plentifull diuersity of banquets, some
to solace themselues with variety of pleasant
showes, and spectacles, others to obtayne the
cure of their diseases, and others with rich, and
great donaryes to solemnise Saint Bridgits natalitiall
feast, which falleth vpon the first of February,
vpon which day in the yeare of Christ
518. as we haue touched aboue in the first paragraffe
of this present chapter, the holy virgin
passed from the miseries of this mortal life, to the
immortall ioyes of paradise. Whither God of
his infinit grace conduct vs all to him, to his all
immaculate mother, and to the two glorious

patrones of Ireland, Saint Patricke, and Saint
Bridgit, be all honour, glory and prayse, world
without end. Amen.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            THE LIFE
OF THE GLORIOVS
ABBOT
S. COLVMBE
THE GREAT.
PATRON OF IRELAND,
AND APOSTLE OF THE PICTS.
Abridged out of the Latin: written by S. Adamnanus.
            
               The first booke of S. COLVMBS propheticall
Reuelations.
               
                  Of S. Columbs Parents, Nauigation into Brittany,
and of his prophecy touching S. Fintenus.
CHAP. I.
                  
                     SAINT Columbe the Great, was borne of
noble and illustrious parents, his Father
was named the sonne of Fergusus,
and his Mother Aethnea. The second
yeare after the warre of Culedreiune, and the two

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
and forty of his age, he passed ouer into Britanny,
being desirous for the loue of Christ, to goe
thither in pilgrimage. From his youth he was
trained vp in Christian discipline, and in the study
of wisedome: his integrity of body, and purity
of soule, he kept alwayes vnblemished; and
though he liued on earth, yet his conuersation
was in heauen. His countenance was sweet, and
angelicall, his talke cleane, and chast, his carriage
holy, and saint-like, his wit quicke, and excellent,
and his councell graue and mature, no
part of his tyme, not so much as the space of one
houre, did he euer mispend; for he was alwayes
imployed, eyther in prayer, in writting, in reading,
or in some good exercise: His abstinēce was
so great, and his watchinges so longe, in which he
exercised himselfe day and night without intermission,
that they went beyond the course of humane
ability, and yet in the midst of all these austerityes,
he alwayes showed a cheerefull countenance,
representing thereby the Saint like ioy of
his hart.
                  2. S. Fintenus, who after became so famous
ouer all the Churches of Ireland, conceaued in
his younger yeares an earnest desire of forsaking
Ireland, and visiting our Saint Columbe. Being inflamed

with this desire, he went to a certaine
friend of his, a very wise, and venerable man, named
Columbus, to take his aduice in the matter,
who liked well of his holy resolution; thither at
the same tyme came two of S. Columbes monkes,
who being demanded touching their iourney,
answerd: We are newly come out of Brittany,
and this day from the monastery of the Oakenfield
Roboretum is your holy father S. Colomb wel,
and in good health, sayth Columb. With that they
sheding teares aboundantly replyed: truly our
father and Patron is well; for a few dayes past he
departed to Christ. Vpon knowledge whereof
Fintenus, Columbus, and the rest that were present,
falling downe prostrate vpon the ground, wept
bitrerly. Fintenus demanded further of them,
saying: whome did he ordaine his successour?
they made answere, his disciple Bathaneus, with
that Columbus asked Fintenus what he ment to do,
who answered: I will with Gods grace repaire ouer
to the wise and holy man Bathaneus, and will
take him for my Abbot: then taking his leaue
of Columbus, he imbarked himselfe without delay
for the Ile of Hoy, where he was intertained with
great charity, as an vnknowne guest.
                  3. The next day after his arriuall, he made

it knowne to Bathaneus, that he had a desire to
confer with him, who presently sent for him.
Fintenus being brought to Bathaneus his presence,
fell downe vpon his knees, but the Saint made
him rise, and sit downe with him. Then did
Fintenus recount to the saint his name, countrey,
kindred, conuersation, & what had moued him
to vndertake that paineful nauigation; and lastly
closed vp his discourse with an humble request
in behalfe of his admittance. Bathaneus vnderstanding
all, sayd: My child I am bound to render
many thankes to God for your arriuall, but
know this for certaine, that you cannot be a
monke of ours. Fintenus hearing this, became
very heauy and sadd, saying. Perchance I am vnworthy
to be your monke. To whome the old
Senior replyed: It is not as you say; for albeit I
had rather detaine you with me, then otherwise,
yet can I not prophane the commandement of
my patron S. Columbe, by whose mouth the holy
Ghost hath prophecyed of you in manner following,
saying to me: O Bathaneus, you must listen
to these my wordes with great attention; for presently
after my wished, and long desired departure out of
this life to Christ, a certaine brother named Fintenus,
will come to you out of Ireland, and begge earnestly to

be receaued of you among the other monkes, but it is
not preordained for him in the prescience of God, that
he become a monke to be subiect, for he is preelected for
the Abbot of monkes, and for a captaine to leade many
soules to heauen, doe not therefore detaine the foresaid
man with you in our Ile, but send him backe againe
into Ireland, that he may build a monastery in Leynster,
on the bancke of the sea, where feding a flocke of
Christs sheep, he may conduct innumerable soules to the
ioyes of paradise. The young Saint hearing this,
and powring out aboundance of tears with thāks
giuing to God, sayd: Be it done to me according
to the propheticall, & marueilous prescience of
S. Columbe: so taking S. Bathaneus his benediction,
he returned backe into Ireland.
                  4. About that tyme, that the holy man was
founding by diuine inspiration the monastery of
Diarmag, in the midle region of Ireland, he purposed
to visit the holy company that liued in S.
Kiaranus monastery at Cluayre. They vnderstanding
of his approach, went all forth in company
of their Abbot Alitherus to meet him, and
lead him honorably (singing of Psalmes & Hymnes)
to the Church. At the same tyme a certaine
despicable familiar youth came behind the Saint,
and hiding himselfe so much as he could, he

thought to touch at vnawares the Saint, and
without his feeling the hem of his exteriour garment;
but what the Saint could not see with his
corporall eyes, he saw with his interiour, and
mentall eyes: for making a stand, he put his
hand behind him, & so taking hold of the youth
by the necke, he placed him in presence of all the
people. Then all that were there present, sayd:
Dismisse him, dismisse him, why doe you detaine
that vnhappy boy? The Saint breathing out
from his pure breast these propheticall wordes,
sayd. Giue ouer now, brethren, giue ouer. And
then turning to the youth, that trembled, and,
quaked for feare, he sayd: O child open your mouth,
and put out your tongue. The youth did accordingly:
then the Saint extending his holy hand, and
blessing his tongue, diligently pronounced this
prophecy of him: Albeit this youth seemeth to you
vilde, and despiceable, let none therefore contemne
him; for from henceforth he wil not only displease you,
but he will proue very pleasing to you: in vertue, and
holy conuersation he will dayly goe forward, and from
hence forth his wisedome and prudence will more and
more increase, and in this our congregation he shall become
a worthy member, and his tongue shalbe indued
by God, both with wholesome doctrine, and eloquence.
                     
This youth was Ereneus, who afterwards was so
famous, and well knowne throughout all the
Churches of Ireland.
               
               
                  How S. Columbe foresaw the danger, and comming of
S. Chamnechus, and Columbanus: the victory of
King Aldan, and other remarkable thinges.
CHAP II.
                  THE saint being in his monastery of Hoy,
one day that the seas were very rough, and
the windes blew boisterously, commanded the
monkes to make ready the guest-roome, and to
draw water for some that were to come. One of
the Brothers asked, who can haue a prosperous
nauigation such a day as this, though the passage
be neuer so short? The saint answered: God will
prepare a calme amidst this tempest for a Saint, and
for one of his elect, that shall come to vs before euening.
And loe the expected ship wherin S. Chamnechus
was, arriued according to the saints prophecye.
Another tyme likewise the saint being
in his owne great Church, he brooke forth after
a smiling manner into these wordes: Columbanus
sayling towards vs, is in danger amidst the swelling
waues, the Abbot fitting in the foredecke, eleuateth his

handes to heauen, and blesseth the fearefull, and swelling
sea, whome our Lord doth terrify, not that the
shipp shall suffer shipwracke, but to excite him to pray
more feruently, and so to come safe to vs.
                  
                  2. Of Cormarus that holy man, who so often
sought for a wildernes in the sea, S. Columbe prophecyed
in this manner. This Cormarus hoping
to find a desert, set out this day from that region that
lyeth beyond the riuer Moda, and is called Ircos, yet
shall he not find what he desires, for no other fault of
his, but that he brought with him in his company a mōk
belonging to a Religious Abbot without his leaue. Another
tyme the Saint commanded his seruant to
ring the bell in hast, to call the Monkes to the
Church, where falling vpon his knees, he sayd:
Now let vs offer our prayers very earnestly for this
people, and King Alban, for at this present they begin
to fight a battaile. Within a little while going out
of the oratory, and casting his eyes towards heauen,
he sayd: Now the ennemyes are put to flight, for
the victory is granted to King Aldan. Before the
beginning of the foresayd warre, the Saint questioned
with King Aldan, touching his successour,
who answeared, that he knew not which of
his three sonnes should raigne after him. The
saint consequently prophecied in this manner:

                     None of these three shalbe your successour, for they shall
be all slaine by their ennemyes, now if you haue any
younger children send for them, and he whom our Lord
hath elected to be King, will runne suddainly into my
lappe. They being called, Euchodius ran vnto
the Saint, who kissing him sayd to his father.
This is he that shall suruiue, and shalbe King after
you, and his children shal raigne after him. Al which
fell out to be true according to the Saints prophecy.
                  3. Domnaldus the sonne of Aydo, being yet
but a child, was by his Nurses brought to S. Columbe,
who asked them; Whose sonne is this you
haue brought me? They tould him, he was Dō
                        naldus
whome they brought, to the end he might
be inriched with his blessing; whome when the
Saint had blessed, he presently adioyned. This
child shall ouerliue all his brethren, and shall become a
famous King, neyther shal he euer be deliuered into
the handes of his ennemyes, but shall in his old age dye
a quiet & peacecible death in his own house. Al which
was fullfilled according to the Saints prophecy.
At the same tyme, and in the same place, he
went to visit Scandalanus the sonne of Colmanus,
being then detayned prisonner by King Aydus,
whom when the Saint had blessed, he sayd: Sonne

be not heauy, but rather reioyce, and be of good comfort,
King Aydus, whose captiue you are, will depart
this life before you, and after your banishment for a
little tyme, you shalbe King in your owne country for
thirty yeares, then shal you againe be chased out of
your kingdome, and shall liue in exile for a few dayes,
which dayes being expired, the people will proclaime
you King againe, ouer whome you shall beare rule for
three shorte tymes. All this was accomplished in
forme and manner, as the Saint had prophecyed;
for after thirty yeares reigne, he was driuen out
of the kingdome for a certaine space, being after
recalled by the people, he reigned not three years
as he thought, but three months only, and then
dyed without delay. Two country men brought
their sonnes to the Saint in the Ile of Hoy, to the
one, he told his sonne should dye the same week,
and to the other, that his sonne should liue to see
his nephewes, and that he should after a good
old age, be buryed in the same Iland.
                  4. One of the Saints Monkes named Berachius,
being to sayle to the Iland of Ethica, came
to the Saint to craue his blessing, to whome the
Saint sayd: Beware my sonne, you hould not your direct
course of Ethica, by sayling along the wide seas,
but rather take your course winding about the little Iles,

fearing that otherwyse you should not escape by
reason of the terrour of a monstruous prodigie. Berachus
receauing the Saints blessing departed, and
so getting into the ship, regarding but little the
Saintes admonition, he sayled directly through
the broad seas, & loe he and they that were with
him, saw a mighty huge Whale, like to a bigge
mountaine to rise vp ouer the waters, whose sight
strucke a great terrour into their mindes, whereupon
the marriners strucke downe their sayle,
and turning backe againe, hardly could they escape
that danger arising from the tempestuous
agitation of the VVhale, the they called to mind
the Saints propheticall prediction, not without
admiration. Bathaneus being to passe the same
morning to the prementioned Ile, the Saint admonished
him of the Whale, to whome Bathaneus
answered: I, and the beast are vnder Godes
power, then the Saint sayd: Goe in peace, thy faith
in Christ will preserue thee from this danger. So Bathaneus
tooke the Saints benediction, & launced
out from the hauen, & after sayling forth a good
space into the sea, he and his companions saw the
VVhale, which put them all in great feare, only
Bathaneus without any terrour lifting vp his
handes, blessed the seas & the VVhale, and loe in

the selfe same moment, the VVhale sunke downe
vnder the waues, and neuer after appeared to
them. The saint prophecyed of a certaine wicked
man, who had committed fratricide, & likewise
incest with his owne mother, that he should
be slaine by his ennemyes, which happened true
within few daies.
               
               
                  How S. Columbe saw a citty in Italy to be strucken
with thunder: and admonished Cailtanus, and
two other Monkes of their emminent death.
CHAP. III.
                  AS one of the Saints Monks named Lugbeus,
came vpon a tyme to the saint, he
could not looke vpon his face, being couered
ouer with a marueilous rednes, whereat conceauing
great feare, he ran away; whome the saint
called backe, asking him what was the cause of
his running away? he answeared, because I was
in great feare. And within a little while dealing
with the saint more confidently, he made bould
to aske of the saint, whether any fearefull vision
had beene manifested to him, the saint then answeared:
A terrible vengeance hath beene now exercised
in a remote part of the world. VVhat vengeance

was it? Or in what country did it happen? The
Saint replyed. A sulphurous flame was powred downe
at this houre vpon a citty of the Romane dominion,
within the marches of Italy, whereby three thousand
men besides women and children, were almost consumed,
and before this present yeare be expired, there wil come
marchants out of france, who will tell you the same
newes. At a placed called Camprio-Regionis, Lugbeus
found a french pilot, of whome he learned al
the Saint had foretould him.
                  2. Vpon a certaine very colde winter daye,
the saint sorrowed much, and wept exceedingly.
His familiar seruant Diarmitius, asked him the
cause of his sorrow, who receaued this answere:
O my little child, I do not sorrow at this present
without cause, seeing how Laifranus toyleth my
Monkes, already weary in the building of a great
house, which disgusteth me much. A wonder to
be spoken, in the selfe same moment Laifranus liuing
in the monastery of the Oken-field, being
forced in a manner by coaction, and inflamed
as it were with fire interiourly, commanded the
Monkes to cease from the worke, & some recreation
of meate to be prepared, & gaue them leaue
to rest, not only for that day, but also so long as
the hard season coutinued. The saint hearing in

spirit these comfortable words spoken by Laifranus,
forbere to weep, & reioyced exceedingly, &
tould the brethren there present, al what passed,
and withall gaue his benediction to Laifranus.
                  
                  3. As the saint sat one day vpon the top of
an high mountaine, hanging ouer the monastery,
turning to his familiar seruant Diarmitius, he
sayd: I marueile what it is, that stayes a shippe comming
out of Ireland, which carryeth in it a wise man,
who for a certaine sinne whereinto he hath falne, doth
bitter pennance. Within a little while, the familiar
Brother looking towardes the South, he saw the
sayles of the shippe approaching to the hauen,
and showed it to the Saint, who sayd: Rise in hast
and let vs go meet the proselite, whose true pennance
Christ hath regarded. Fechnaus comming a shoare,
fell downe prostrate, and weeping bitterly, vpon
his knees, he confessed his sinnes in presence of
all the company. The Saint out of compassion,
weeping with him, sayd: Rise my sonne, and be of
good cheare, for your sinnes are forgiuen you, because
it is written: A contrite and humble hart, God wil not
despise: who afterwardes being very louingly intertained
of the Saint, he sent him to Bathaneus
liuing at a place called Lungefield. Another tyme
the Saint sent two monkes for one of his Monks

named Cailtanus, biding him to repaire in al hast
to him. Cailtanus vnderstanding of the Saintes
pleasure came speedily in company with the Mō
                     kes
that went for him. VVhen the Saint saw Cailtanus,
he spoke to him in manner following. O
Cailtanus, you haue done very well in hastning to me
so obediently, rest you a little. Louing you as a friend I
inuited you to come, that you might finish the course
of your mortall life heere with me in true obedience;
for before this weeke come to an end, you shall render
your soule in peace to God. Then Cailtanus with
thankes to God kissed the saint, and to receauing
his benediction, went to the guest roome, the
night following he sickned, and according the
saints word, departed the selfe same weeke to a
better life.
                  4. On a certayne Sunday some cryed from
the further side of the often mentioned sea. The
Saint hearing the cry, sayd to the brethren: Goe
in all hast, and bring the pilgrimes that come frō
a farre Country: they went as the saint appointed
them, and brought them to his presence, whom
when he had saluted, he began to question with
them concerning their iourney: they tould him,
they came to seiourne with him for that yeare, to
whome the saint replyed: You may not liue with

me a yeare as you desire, vnlesse you tye your selues to
the obseruance of the monasticall vowes. The eldest
made answere: Truely we had no such intention
hetherto, notwithstanding we will embrace your
counsell inspired by God, as we beleeue. To be
short, they followed the Saint deuoutly into the
oratory, and there on their knees obliged themselues
to the monasticall vowes. Then the saint
conuerting his speach to the brothers there present,
sayd: These two proselites exhibiting thē
                     selues
a liuing hoste to God, and accomplishing
in a few dayes the course of Christian perfection,
shall yield vp their soules to Christ before this
present month run to an end; and so it fell out;
for both of them fell sicke one after another, and
departed to a better life, within the tearme prophecyed
and perfixed by the saint.
               
               
                  How S. Columbe foretould the baptisme of a certain
Pagan: knew by diuine reuelation the death of two
Irish noble men: and by prayer obtained the life
of Diarmitius his familiar seruant.
CHAP. IIII.
                  WHILST the saint for the space of some
few dayes remayned in Ireland, being

at a place bordering on the sea, he struck the
earth with his staffe, saying to the Monkes that
were with him. Behould my little children, a
certaine Gentil, who al his life tyme followed the
good instincts, and propensions of nature, shall
this day be baptized, dye, and be buryed in this
place: and loe within the space as it were of an
houre, a shippe strucke into the same hauen, in
whose foredecke sate an ancient Pagan named
Geone, whome two young men lifted vp between
them & brought him to the saints presence: the
old man ēbraced presently the Christiā doctrin,
the saint preached to him by an interpreter,
at whose handes he receaued the grace of regeneration.
Immediatly after the receipt of holy baptisme,
he gaue vp his ghost, and was buryed in
the same place by the Saints companions.
                  2. During the Saints aboade in the foresayd
region, he went one Sunday to a neighbour monastery
named Trioint, and seeing the same day a
certaine Priest celebrating the holy misteryes of
the Eucharist, whome the Monkes made choise
of for that purpose, for that they deemed him a
man of a very holy and religious life, he suddainly
pronounced this fearefull sentence: Cleane and
vncleane thinges, are now mingled togeather, to wit,

the cleane misteryes of the sacred oblation, handled
by an vncleane man, who hideth in his conscience
some enormious sinne: the party of whō
he had spoken in this kind, confessed his sinne
before all the company, which with great astonishement
admired in the Saint this stupendious
knowledge, penetrating euen to the secrets of
mens harts.
                  3. Another time the Saint being in the Iland
of Hoy, he called to him two of his Monkes
named Lugbeus, and Silnanus, and sayd to them:
sayle ouer into the Ile of Malea, and neere the sea
banke seeke out the theefe Ertus, who lurketh
there, expecting in the night tyme to get ouer to
the little Ile, where our sea-calues breed, to steale
some away, and bring them home to his house.
They did accordingly, and found the theefe in
the place premonstrated, whome they brought
to the saint, as he had commanded. The saint
seeing him, sayd: Wherefore dost thou trespasse against
the diuine commandement, in stealing away other
mens goods so often? when thou art driuen to any
necessity, come to vs, and we will releeue thy wantes.
And with this he appointed that some weathers
should be kild, and giuen to the miserable theef,
that he might not return home to his house with

empty handes. Within a short tyme the saint
knew by reuelation that the theeues death drew
neere: he sent him therefore a fat Cow, & seauen
measures of corne which were spent at his funerailles.
In like manner the saint foresaw and foretould
the death of a Scottish poet named Coronanus.
                  
                  4. It happened another tyme in the same
Iland of Hoy, as the saint was at his booke reading,
that he cast out deep and sorrowfull sighes:
Lugbeus who was present, began to demande the
cause of his suddaine griefe; the Saint made this
answere: In Scotland two noble men of the bloud royal
haue kild one another, at a place not farre distant from
the Monastery of Cellarois, in the Prouince of the
Magdeni, and the eight day hence, there will come one
out of Ireland, who wil report the truth of al this. The
man whose comming the Saint foresaw, came on
the presaged day, and among many other newes,
reported that Colmancanus, and Romanus had slaine
one another. After this, Lugbeus the souldier of
Christ, getting the Saint at his leasure, sayd to
him: I beseech you let me know how & in what
manner these propheticall reuelations are manifested
to you, whether you know them by an intuition
of your eyes, or by the help of your ears,

or after some strange manner vnknowne of to other
men. The Saint answered: I cannot acquaint
you with any thing touching this subtile matter you inquire
after, vnlesse you first take an othe on your knees
neuer to speake of this obscure sacrament all the dayes
of my life. Lugbeus swore as the saint would haue
him: then the saint spoke as followeth: There are
some, albeit they be but few in number, that by Godes
speciall grace clearely contemplate with one single aspect,
and in one momēt the compasse of the whole world
the heauens, the sea, and land, by reason of the marueilous
dilatation of their mind. Though the saint seemeth
to report this of others, for the auoidance
of all vaine glory, and selfe esteeme, yet that
he meant it of himself indirectly, is cleare to any
that hath perused the vessell of election S. Paul
in his 2. to the Corinthians. For he discoursing
of visions and rapts happening to himself, wrote
not, I know of my selfe, but I know such a man
that he was rapt into paradise, which though he
seeme to recount of another, yet none can doubt
but he spoke of himselfe.
                  5. It fell out another tyme, that one of the
brothers came to the place where the faint was
writting, and sayd to him: I beseech you blesse
this Iron I hould in my hand: the saint stretched

out his hand holding the pen, & blessed the Iron
according to the brothers request, in the meane
tyme, he held his face towards the book he wrot:
the brother being gone away, the saint asked.
What Iron he had blessed for the Brother. Diarmitius
his familiar tender, answered. A knife
wherewith Beeues are killed: then the saint replyed:
I trust firmely in our Lord, that this weapon
I haue blessed, will neuer do hurt to man, nor beast:
The truth of which sentence of the Saint, was
showen in effect the selfe same houre. For the
brother going out of the monastery with an intent
to kill a Cow, endeauoured thrice therunto,
and yet could not so much as pierce her skinne.
Another tyme the Saints faythfull tender Diarmitius
sickened euen to death, the Saint came to
visit him in that extremity, and standing by the
beds side, prayed after this manner: I beseech thee
O Lord be fauourable to me, and let not the soule of my
pious tender, be takē out of this mortal life before I end
the course of my dayes. After praying thus, he held
his peace for a little space, then opening his sacred
mouth, he sayd: This my louing child shal not
only escape the danger of this present infirmity, but
shall moreouer liue for many yeares after my death:
Diarmitius was deliuered incontinently of his disease,

and suruiued the Saint many a longe yeare.
               
               
                  How S. Columbe discouered a Bishop that would not
haue himselfe knowne: how he foretould the comming
of a Crane out of Ireland: and how by the
presents that were offered to him to be blessed,
he knew the sinnes of the owners.
CHAP. V.
                  THERE came out of the Prouince of the
Numinenses, a certaine proselit to visit the
saint, this man being a Bishop, dissembled al that
he could his degree and estate, yet could he not
keep it hidden from the saints al-piercing knowledge.
For the proselit being to consecrate the
next sunday our Sauiours holy body, the saint
sayd to him: Since you are a Bishop breake this dominicall
bread after the manner, and with the same solē
                        nity
a Bishop ought to breake it, now we know ful wel
that you are a Bishop; why did you conceale your selfe
from vs, by occasion wherof we did not demean our selues
towards you, with that respect & veneration your
place and calling requires. The humble harted pilgrim
hearing him speake in this kind, glorifyed
Christ in his holy seruant Columbe. Another time
the venerable Abbot sent his vncle Ernanus to gouerne

the monastery of Humba, of whome at his
departure he pronounced this prophecy: This
my friend, whome I now send away, I neuer hope to see
him liuing againe in this world. Within a few dayes
Ernanus fell sicke, and would haue himselfe caryed
backe to the saint, who was very glad thereof,
and went forth to meet him. Ernanus though he
were very weake and sickly, yet would he needes
go on his feet, and loe in the way he gaue vp his
ghost suddainly, before the saint could haue a
sight of him.
                  2. The saint tould a certaine Peasant that
came to his monastery: Loe the barbarous ennemies
sacke and spoile all the Prouince you inhabit. VVhich
dolefull newes made the poore fellow fall into
pittiful lamentatiōs for his wife, & children. The
saint seeing him drowned in sorrow, & anguish,
sayd to him: your wife and family, haue escaped
to the mountaines, but you goods and cattle, the
ennemy hath taken away: the man going home
found all to be true as the saint had tould him.
A certaine valiant, and strong man named Gorens,
would faine learne of the saint what kind of
death himselfe should dy of. The saint told him:
You shall not be slaine in the field, nor drowned
in the sea, but the companion of your way whom

you lest distrust or suspect, shall be the cause of
your death; within some years after the foresayd
Gorens, seeing men fighting, & at mortal debate,
ran in haste to separate them, in the meane tyme
by some chance or other he let his knife fall carelessely,
which wounded him in the knee, of
which wounde, after the sickenesse of some
moneths, he dyed: and so the prophecy of the
Saint was fullfilled.
                  3. Another tyme likewise, the saint being
in the often mentioned Iland of Hoy, he called
one of the monkes to him, and commanded him
as followeth: The third day next ensuing, you shall
goe to the Weast part of this Ile, and shall expect the
comming of a certaine Crane from the North part of
Ireland, which Crane being driuen by the force of the
blustering windes through the spacious Regions of the
ayre, all weary and turmoyld, shal arriue there after
the ninth houre, and hauing all her forces and vigour
consumed, she will fall downe on the shoare before you;
forget not to take her vp mercifully, and to bring her
to the next house, where you shall entertaine her liberally,
and feed her carefully for three dayes, by which
tyme her strength shall be well repayred, and her selfe
being vnwilling to soiourne with vs any longer, will
returne backe to Scotland her sweet country, where she

was borne, and my motiue of commending her so seriously
to your care is, because she is of one country with
vs. The brother obeyed willingly, and the third
day at the place and tyme appointed, expected
the arriuall of the new guest, whome he tooke vp
of the shoare, and brought her weake, and faint
to the lodging, where he fed her carefully: to
whome after his comming to the monastery in
the euening the Saint sayd: Gods blessing haue you
my child for tending so carefully the strange guest, who
will make no long delay in her pilgrimage, but will returne
back to her natiue soyle after three dayes abode.
What the saint pronounced the euent showed to
be true: for the Crane after three dayes charitable
entertaynement, winded her selfe gently vp
into the ayre in presence of her officious ministre,
and after kept her course directly towardes
Ireland.
                  
                  4. On a certaine tyme many presents were
layd in the street that leadeth to the Saints monastery
to be blessed of him as he passed by, wher
poynting at the guift of a rich man, and naming
the party, he sayd. The mercy of God accompanieth
the bestower of this guift, giuen for the reliefe
of the poore: after he poynted likwise at the
present of a wise, but couetous man, saying: I can

in no wise taste of this guift, vnlesse the giuer do
pennance for his auarice, which word being published
among the people, Columbus the sonne of
Aidus came in haste, and falling on his knees did
pennance, and promised euer after to abiure couetousnes,
and withall to amend his life, and to
become more liberall. The rich and liberall man
named Brendanus, hearing in like manner what
the Saint spoke of him, came likewise, and fell
downe at his feet, beseching him to pray for him;
Brendanus being rebuked for some offences, promised
amendement from that tyme forwardes, &
so it came to passe, that both of them amended
their faults.
                  The end of the first Booke.
               
            
            
               
               THE II. BOOKE
OF SAINT COLVMBES
MIRACLES.
               
                  How S. Columbe, conuerted water into wine: how
corne sowen in Iune by his appointment, was ripe in
the beginning of August: And of a soueraigne
remedy he prouided against the infection of
a pestiferous cloud.
CHAP I.
                  
                     WHILST the holy Saint liued in Ireland
with S. Findbarrus, to be trayned
vp in the study of holy Scriptures, it
happened one day, that no wine could
be found for the sacrificall mystery. The holy
young man being then a Deacon, takinge the
cruet, went to the fountaine for water, and by
inuocating the name of our B. Sauiour, who at
the marriage feast of Cana, conuerted cold water
into good wine, merited to worke the same stupendious
signe: all who knew of it rendred many
thankes to God, but the holy young man declining
all selfe esteeme, ascribed the operation of

that great signe, to the holy Bishop Vinnian. And
as by this admirable miracle, our Sauiour made
this the beginning of the many miracles, which
himselfe wrought, so did he by it giue the first
manifestation of the sanctity of his Blessed seruant
S. Columbe. Hard by the monastery of the
Oaken-field, was a very fruitfull apple-tree, but
so bitter, that no good came of it: the Saint
knowing so much, went forth in the haruest to
the place, where the tree was loaden with fruit,
and eleuating his sacred hand blessed it, saying:
In the name of Almighty God, O bitter tree, let al this
bitternes depart from thee: and thy apples, that hitherto
haue beene most sowre, let them now become most
sweet, and pleasant to the tast. And without delay
the apples suddenly became marueilous delightfull
to all those who tasted of them.
                  2. The holy Saint sent some of his Monks to
fetch out of the fields of a certaine countryman,
some rods, and twigges for the building of a cell,
they brought their boate well loaden, and withal
signifyed to the Saint, that the farmer conceaued
great griefe at the matter, in regard of the losse
he sustayned thereby. Then the Saint sayd; Fearing
the man should be scandalized at vs, let there be
nine measures of barley carryed to him, and let him

sow them in his fields, euen at this present tyme. The
corne being sent, and deliuered with the former
errand, the man receaued it gratefully, but sayd;
How can corne grow against the nature of this
country, being sowen after Midsommer? To
whome his wife answered. Do as the Saint hath
commanded, to whome our Lord will graunt
what thing soeuer he shall demand. The country
man out of obedience to the Saint, fell a
ploughing the land, and sowing the corne: which
in the midst of Iune, grew so fast, and ripened so
soone, that to the great astonishment of all the
Neighbours, he cut it downe in the beginning
of August.
                  3. Another time the Saint saw a thicke, &
misty cloud to come from the South, which whē
he perceaued, he sayd to a Monke of his named
Syluanus, that sat with him: This cloud will proue
very noysome, both to men and beasts; for flying away
hence, it will extend it selfe ouer a part of Ireland, &
showre downe towards the euening a contagious rayne,
that will ingender in men, and in the duggs of beasts
pestilent vlceres, and with these pestilent soares, men
will sicken euen to death, but we ought of compassion
to prouide some remedy against their disease: Descend
therefore with me, O Syluanus, & make your selfe ready

to crosse the seas; for men and beasts shall recouer
with Gods grace their health, if the water, wherein
you shal steepe holy bread of my blessing, shalbe sprinkled
on them. In which Syluanus obeying the Saint
promptly, and hauing by Gods fauour a prosperous
passage, came spedily to the prementioned
part of the country, where he found all the people
strucke downe with that contagious disease:
and first of all, sixe men, that dwelled in a house
bordering vpon the sea, being sprinkled with the
water, wherein the bread was steeped, recouered
their health the selfe same day, the report
of which suddaine cure being blowen ouer al the
region consumed with that pestilent sicknes, inuited
all the diseased people to hasten to S. Columbs
Legate, who according to the Saints commandement,
cast the water, on them, wherein
the holy bread was steaped, and both men and
beasts, were deliuered of their infirmityes without
delay.
               
               
                  
                  How S. Columbe saw in spirit the holy virgin Mugina
inuocating his ayde, and cured her. Of the cure
of many infirmityes, and production of a fountaine
out of a rocke.
CHAP. II.
                  ANOTHER tyme the Saint called vpon a
Brother named Lugaidus, and spoke to
him in this manner. Put your selfe in readines to
passe spedily into Ireland; for I must send vnto
the monastery of Chilnocherum. For this last
night the holy Virgin Maugina, comming after
masse out of the Oratary, by chance stumbled,
and broke her huckle bone into two parts; she
by inuocating often vpon my name, hopeth by
my intercession, to receaue comfort from God▪
                     Lugaidus being ready to depart, the saint gaue
him a boxe made of Pine, with a certain hollowed
thing within it, and sayd: This benediction, whē you
arriue where Maugina is, you shal steep it in water, &
the water you shal wil be to powred on her huckle bone,
and with that the broken bone will be ioyned togeather
againe, and the virgin shal receaue her health, & I wil
write in the couer of this boxe, the number of three and
twenty yeares that she shall liue in this world after the

cure of her hurt. Lugaidus left nothing vnperformed,
that the Saint gaue him in charge to do, &
so the holy virgin recouered her health, & liued
out the number of three and twenty years in the
exercise of good workes, according to the Saintes
prophecy.
                  2. The venerable Prelate, as we haue learned
by the tradition of them that knew it, cured
the languors of many sicke persons, during the
little tyme he made aboade in the place called in
latin Dorsum Cetae, whither he went to be present
at the meeting of Kinges, for with the touch, either
of his holy hand, hemme of his garment, or
with salt, bread, water, or any thing els blessed
by him, did he restore mē to their perfect health.
A woman that had an inflammation in her eye,
vsed a Petrasalis, which the Saint had blessed. It fell out after some dayes, that the house wherein
the Petrasalis was, tooke fire, al the house was cō
                     sumed
into ashes, excepting the pearch, wheron
the Petrasalis hung, and a part of the wall that
sustayned it. A yong man, that carryed about
him a leafe written by S. Columbes holy hand,
was drowned in a riuer: his body after twenty
dayes being extracted out of the waters, the leafe
was found as drye, and vncorrupted, as if it had

beene lockt vp close in a casket.
                  3. As the Saint was one time trauailing, the
parents of a young infant, brought the child to
the Saint to be christned, and in regard no water
could be found in the adioyning places, the saint
declined to a rocke hardby, where after praying a
little vpon his knees, he blessed the rocke, out of
which gushed a streame of water, wherin he baptized
the young suckling, of whome also he prophecyed,
that in his youth he would loose the raines to
lust, and sensuality, but afterwardes that he should
giue himselfe to the study of christian perfection, and
should dye in a good ould age. All which fell out to
be true. The Saint being in Pictland, he heard
great report of a pagan fountaine, which the foolish
people being blinded by the Diuell, held in
great veneration; but whosoeuer tasted of the water,
or washed their handes or feet in it, became
by diabolicall fascination (God permitting it)
blind, leaprous, or weake with some infirmity.
The saint came to the fountaine, wherat the Magitians
whome he often confounded and ouercame,
were very glad, hoping that he should receaue
some mischance. The saint first inuocating
vpon the name of Christ, washed his handes &
feet, and after blessing the water, drunke of it,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
which from that day forwardes, bred no hurt or
annoy to any, and which is more admirable, by
vertue of the Saints benediction, the water of
that fountaine became a soueraigne remedy, for
the cure of many diseases.
               
               
                  How S. Columbe did with his prayers, allaye tempest.
And how S. Cahinnechus did the same: and
of other miracles wrought by S. Columbe.
CHAP. III.
                  VPON a certaine tyme, the Saint was in
danger at sea, for the ship was soare shaken
with huge waues, the raging violence of the blustering
windes beating vpon it, the Saint in that
distresse helped them what he could in pumping
out the water, whereupon the marriners sayd,
What you do now, auailes vs but litle in this extremity,
it is more fitting for you to pray for vs,
being ready almost to be cast away. With that the
Saint began to power out before God a sweet and
feruent prayer. O great wonder! No sooner did
the Saint, standing in the foredecke of the ship,
addresse his handes in prayer to the Omnipotēt,
but that the tempest of the ayre, and boyling of
the sea ceased, whereupon followed a most serene

and pleasant calme, they who were in the shippe
being strucken with admiration, glorifyed God
in his blessed seruant.
                  2. Another tyme the Saint being in great
danger, by occasion of a fearefull and vehement
tempest, his companions cryed to him to pray
for them, but he made answere: That belongeth
not to me to doe; for it is the holy Abbot Cahinnechus
turne to pray for you this day. Cahinnechus
being then in his own monastery called Cowfield,
heard the foresayd speach of S. Columbe by reuelation
of the holy Ghost; for when he had begun
after the ninth houre to sit downe to dinner, he
arose quickly from the table, and hauing one
shooe on, & leauing the other for hast, he ranne
to the Church, saying all the way, It is not tyme
for vs now to dine, when S. Columbs ship is in
imminent danger at sea, who calleth often vpon
the name of Cahinnechus, desiring him to pray
for him, and his companions: hauing spoken
these words, Cahinnechus entred the oratory and
prayed a little vpon his knees, and loe our Lord
heard incontinently his prayer; for the tempest
ceased, and the sea became calme. S. Columbe
seeing in spirit S. Cahinnechus his preparation,
and promptnes in running to the Church, he

pronounced out of his pure breast, this marueilous
saying. Now I know, O Cahinnechus, that God
hath heard your prayer, for your hasty running to the
church with one of your shoes only, auayles vs much.
                  
                  3. Bathaneus and other holy men came to
the Saint, entreating him to obtayne the next
day from God a prosperous wind for them, being
to passe to contrary places. The Saint answered:
Bathaneus shal haue in the morning a prosperous
wind, vntill he arriue at the hauen of Lungefield:
which God granted him according to the Saints
wordes. Then at nine of the clocke the Saint
sent for Columbanus the Priest, bidding him to
make himselfe ready, and telling him that the
south wind that fauoured Bathaneus, should turn
to the north, so Columbanus ēbarked himselfe for
Ireland. This stupendious miracle was wrought
by vertue of the saints prayers, because as it is
written: All things are possible to him that beleeueth.
After Columbanus his departure, S. Columbe pronounced
this prophecy of him: The holy man
Columbanus, shall neuer more see me in this life. So
it fell out, for S. Columbe departed to our Lord
the selfe same yeare.
                  4. A certaine young man named Columbanus,
brought a vessell full of milke to the place

where the saint was, requesting him to blesse it,
as he was accustomed. As the Saint made the victorious
signe of the Crosse in the ayre, the vessell
began to shake, the couer fell to the ground,
& the most part of the milke was shed; the youth
layd downe the vessell, with the little milke that
was left vpon the ground, & fell humbly on his
knees, to whome the Saint sayd: Rise vp Columban,
for you haue been negligent in performing of your
duty, this day, because you did not chase away with
the signe of the crosse the Diuell, that lurcked in the
bottome of the empty vessell, before you powred in the
milke, the vertue of which sacred signe, he being vnable
to sustaine, he is now fled away. Then the Saint
blessed the little milke, that was left, and loe the
vessell that was almost empty, vnder the benediction
of his sacred hand, became brimfull.
               
               
                  How by vertue of S. Columbes benediction, fiue
Cowes increased to the number of 105. How the Saint
foresaw the death, & damnation of a certaine man:
and of other no lesse remarkeable miracles.
CHAP. IIII.
                  THe Saint hauing lodged one night at the
house of one Columbanus, a very poore and

dy man, in the morning he questioned with him
concerning the quantity, and quality of his substance.
The poore man answered: I haue fiue
Cowes, which if you vouchsafe to blesse, I doubt
not, but they will increase to a greater number.
The saint commanded him to bring them to his
presence, where blessing them, he sayd: You shal
by Gods grace haue a hundred and fiue cowes, and this
benediction shal remaine to your children, & nephewes.
Which prophetical prediction fel out to be most
true, the cowes being multiplyed to the foresaid
nūber, & how many soeuer exceeded that number,
perished by seuerall mischances, excepting
those he spent in maintenance of his family, or
gaue by way of almes.
                  2. The saint loued intirely the foresayd mā
for many kindnesses, and pious offices he had
done him. A certaine wicked man descending of
the blood royall, persecuted Columbanus the saints
deare friend, and robbed his house three seuerall
tymes, and tooke away all his goodes: the third
tyme it was his fortune to meet with the saint,
who rebuked him for his wickednes, and persuaded
him to restore the goodes vniustly taken:
but he regarding nothing the saints prayers, yea
rather laughing and scoffing at him, the saint

followed him euen to the sea side, and entred into
the salt water vp to the knees, & in that place
offered his prayers most feruently to Christ, who
glorifyeth his elect that glorify him; hauing
made an end of his prayer, he returned to the
dry shoare, where sitting downe with his companions,
he pronounced these fearefull wordes:
This miserable wretch, who hath this day misprised
Christ in his seruants, shall neuer returne to the hauē,
whence he departed, nor yet arriue to any other, but
shallbe drowned in the midst of the Ocean waues, togeather
with his wicked complices. Which dreadful,
though iust prophecy of the saint, was fully accomplished
in the presence of them all.
                  3. The glorious saint commended a banished
noble man of Pictland, to the care of a certaine
wealthy man, entreating him for his respect
to entertaine him as a friend for the space of
some monthes. The cruell man, notwithstanding
the saints intreaty and commendations, put
the noble mā to death within a few dayes, which
grieuous sinne when it came to the saints hearing,
he spoke in this manner▪ 
                     That vnhappy man
hath not lyed to me but to God, his name shalbe blotted
out of the booke of life. This I say now in sommer but,
hefore he tast in Autumne of porke, that hath been fed

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
with accornes, he shall dye suddainly, and be buryed
in hell. The cursed wretch laughed to scorne the
Saints propheticall threatning: the haruest season
being now come, the wicked man commanded a
hogge fatted with accornes, and kirnelles of nuts
to be killed, and ordained that a peece thereof
should be rosted, so that by tasting of it he might
frustrate, and make voyde the oth of the Saints
prophecy. The flesh being rosted, the wretch
stretched out his hand to take a morsell of it, but
before he could put it into his mouth, he fell
downe dead, exhaling out his wicked soule to be
buryed in hel, they who heard, and saw this prodigious
effect of Gods iustice, honoured Christ
in his holy prophet.
                  4. During the Saints abode in Pictland, he
preached by an interpreter to a certaine country
man, who imbraced the Christian religiō. Within
a few dayes, one of the countreymens sonnes
fell sicke to death, whereupon the Magitians began
to deride the man, to extoll the power of
their owne God, and to hit him in the teeth with
the weaknes of the God of the Christians. When
these thinges were made knowne to the Saint, being
inflamed thereat with the zeale of Gods honour,
he went together with his companions to

the house, where the comfortlesse parents, celebrated
the doleful funeralles of their dead sonne.
The Saint seeing them drowned in sorrow, animated
them with comfortable speaches, & after
went himselfe all alone into the place, where the
dead corps lay, where falling prostrate on his
knees, and bathing his face in teares, he offered
his prayers to Christ, afterwardes he rose vp, &
conuerting him to the dead, he sayd: In the name
of our Lord Iesus, returne to life, and stand vpon thy
feet. With that venerable voice of Gods true seruant,
the soule returned to the body, and the
dead man opened his eyes, whome the Apostolicall
saint tooke by the hand, raysing him vpon
his feet, and so brought him forth in his company,
and restored him liuing to his parents: then
did the people giue a great shout, because sorrow
was conuerted into ioy, and the God of the Christians
was glorifyed.
               
               
                  
                  Of the cure of Brochan the Magitian. And how the
Saint sayled securely, notwithstanding the tempest
raysed by the Magitian: as also how he opened
the gates, which the King shut against him.
CHAP V.
                  AT the same tyme the venerable Prelate
made earnest suite to Brochan the Magitian,
for the release of an Irish maydē-slaue, but he
would not yeild to the saints mercifull request,
wherefore the Saint spoke to him as followeth.
Know, O Brochan, that vnles you dismisse, and forsake
this strange captiue, that before I depart this prouince,
you shall dye. This he sayd before King
Brudeus, and so departed towards the riuer Neyse,
out of which he tooke a white stone, saying to
his companions: Keepe this stone, by which God wil
worke many cures of diseased persons in that pagan
people. Hauing spoken this, he added: Now Brochan
is smitten greuously; for an Angel sent frō heauen
striking him cruelly, broke the glasse, out of which he
drunke into many peeces, and left him euen ready to
dy, let vs expect heere two messingers sent vs from the
King, for to relieue in hast Brochan being at the point
of death; now Brochan is willing to dismisse the mayd

slaue. As the Saint was yet talking, loe the Kings
messengers came, who reported all what happened
in manner and forme as the Saint foresaw
them: they added further, that the King, and his
Nobles sent vs to you, Vt subuenias nutritio eius
Brochano mox morituro, to help his nurse Brochā,
being ready to dye. With that the Saint sent two
of his companions to the King with the stone,
which he had blessed, saying: If Brochanus promise
to release the captiue, and after shall drinke of
the water, wherein this stone shalbe dipped, he shall
recouer his health, but if he doe not set the woman at
liberty, he shall dye without delay. Brochanus dismissed
the woman free, and dranke of the water
wherein the stone was steeped, and so was restored
perfectly to the health of his body.
                  2. After these thinges had passed in this
kind, Brochanus sayd to the glorious Saint. Tell
me, O Columbe, when do you intend to sayle. The
Saint answered: I purpose with Gods grace, to go to
sea within these three dayes. But you shal not quoth
Brochanus, for I can cause a contrary wind, and
besides, I can induce a darke, and obscure mist.
To whome the Saint answered: The power of God
ouer-ruleth all, in whose name all our actions are directed.
The Saint went the same day to the Riuer

                     Neyse, whither he was attended vpon by a great
company. The Magitians began to reioyce at the
spreading abroad of the thicke mist, and boisterous
contrary wind. The holy Saint seeing the
elements to be stirred vp against him, called to
our Sauiour for his help; then ascending the ship
he caused the sayles to be hoysed vp, which being
done in sight of all the company, the ship sayled
extreame swiftly against the wind, and within a
little space the contrary winds, to the great astonishment
of all, turned to serue the saint in his
voyage, so that hauing a pleasant gayle of wind
all day, the saint came towardes euening to the
wished hauen.
                  3. When the saint went first to King Brudeus
court, the King being puffed vp with pride, &
arrogancy, caused the gates of his Pallace to be
shut against him. Gods true seruant Columbe vnderstanding
therof, came to the gates, and first
in drawing the figure of Christs victorious signe
or crosse vpon the doores, and then after pulling
them with his handes, loe they opened of themselues,
and so the saint, and his holy family got
in. The King perceauing what had passed, went
forth to meet the holy man, and euer after had
him in great veneration. Another tyme being

in Ireland, he went to visit the Monkes liuing in
the monastery of the Holy-field, the monkes conducted
the Saint to the church doore, where the
keyes could not be found, the Saint sayd: Our
Lord is able to open the doores of his house for his seruants.
And loe suddainly the leaues of the doore
opened wide, and so the Saint entered not without
admiration of all the company.
                  4. Another time a very poore and needy
man came to the Saint, bemoning himselfe that
he had nothing wherewith to sustaine his wife &
children: Goe (sayd he) and cut in the next woode a
longe pole, and bring it vnto me in haste. Which he
brought without delay, and sharpened it with
his owne handes, forming it into a sharp poynted
spit, and blessing it likewise he deliuered it to
the poore man, saying: Keepe this spit, for so long
tyme as you inioy it, your house shall neuer want copious
prouision of venision. The poore man reioyced
not a little thereat, and returned home to his
house, then bringing the spit with him, he fixed
it in a place where wild beasts haunted, and comming
the next morning to see it, he found a great
stagge pierced therewith. Euery day he found a
stagge, Roe, or some other wilde beast stucke on
the spit, by meanes whereof he got such store of

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
that he was glad to sell great quantity
thereof to his neighbours; at last the man being
seduced by his wiues councell, cut the spit in
peeces, and burnt it, whereupon he fell into his
former want, and misery.
               
               
                  How S. Columbe succoured a woman in trauaill:
how he reconciled a marryed couple: and foresaw the
danger, Cormarus was in.
CHAP. VI.
                  THE Saint being in the often mentioned Iland
of Hoy, he interrupted suddenly the
studdy of holy reading, and after a smilling mā
                     ner,
sayd: I must now hasten to pray in behalfe of a
poore kinswoman of myne, who existing in Ireland, calleth
often on the name of Columbe, hoping confidently
by his intercessiō to be deliuered from the bitter paines,
and griping conuulsions of child-birth wherewith
she is cruelly tormented. After making an end of
this speech, the B. Prelate of tender pitty to his
poore distressed kinswomā, ranne to the church,
& falling ō his knees, directed his feruēt prayers
to our sweet Sauiour for the ease of the womans
distresse. After finishing his prayer, he went out
of the Oratory, saying: Our Lord Iesus who daigned

to be borne of a woman, hath beene fauourable
and propitious to this woman, whome he
hath eased of her anguishes; for she is safely
deliuered of a sonne. At the selfe same houre, the
saint prophecied in this kind, the afflicted womā
recouered her health, as it was after reported by
some that came out of Scotland.
                  2. When the holy man liued in the Iland
Rechrea, a certaine Peasant came to him, complaining
that his wife would not lye in bed with
him. The Saint hearing therof, sent for the woman,
and spoke to her as followeth. Wherfore woman
dost thou striue to put away thyne owne flesh, since
our Lord sayth: They shall be two in one flesh? The
woman made answere: All thinges you please to
commande me, how painefull soeuer they be, I
am willing to performe, this only excepted, that
you will not compell me to lie in bed with Lugneus
(so her husband was called) I doe not refuse to
take on me the care of all the house: or if you wil
haue it so, I am content to crosse the seas, & liue
in a Monastery of holy virgins. What you propoūd
(replyed the saint) cannot be lawfully done, as long
as your husband liues. And added further: This day
will we three, your husband, your selfe, and I, fast &
pray, for the happy successe of this affaire. So they

all three condescended with one accord to fast &
pray. The night following, the Saint offered his
prayer deuoutly for them: the next morning he
called for the woman, saying: Tell vs, o woman,
whether this day you be of the same mind you were
yesterday, of going to liue in a monastery of women? I
know your prayers haue beene heard, for whome
I hated yesterday, I loue most tenderly this day,
my hart I know (by what meanes I know not) is
wholy changed in me. From that day forwards
to her last gaspe, her soule was linked with indissoluble
affection to her husband, so that she neuer
after refused to discharge the behoofes of a
wife.
                  3. The holy man Cormacus, of whome we
spoke in the first booke, laboured the second
tyme to find a wildernes in the Ocean, whome S.
Columbe commended to the King of the Orcades
in presence of King Brudeus, with whome the
Saint was at that tyme, and requested King Brudeus
to do the same. This the Saint did, because
he knew by reuelation, that Cormacus after a long
and painefull nauigation, should be driuen to the
Orcades, and so he was, and for respect of the former
commendation, he escaped the danger of
death. As some of the Saints Monks fell in talke

of Cormarus, saying it was not knowne, what issue
good or bad his nauigation had. The saint ouerheard
them talking in this manner, and sayd:
Cormacus of whome you speake now, you shall see this
very day. And so within one houres space, Cormacus
arriued to the great ioy and admiration of
all the company.
                  4. The third tyme that the sayd venerable
man Cormacus, attempted to find out a wildernes
in the sea, he fell into great dangers; for being
driuen by a strong south-wind that blew for fourteene
dayes without intermission, he sayled into
the North seas, beyond the course and limits of
human nauigation, and in these vnknowne seas,
there arose most fearefull, and vnsupportable affrightments,
certaine vnseene and terrible beasts
assailed the shippe furiously, & were euen ready
and like to pierce it through. With the sight of
these and other monsters, Cormacus and the Mariners
were so amated, & amazed, that with tears
trickling downe their face, they addressed their
prayers to God, who alone is the most sure and
soueraigne refuge in all distresse. At the same
tyme, S. Columbe was present in spirit with Cormacus,
he caused therefore a signe to be made for
to call the Monkes to the Oratory, where prophecying

after his wonted manner, he sayd: Deere
brethren, pray most earnestly for Cormacus who now
sustaineth monstruous affrightments neuer seene before,
we ought therefore to conceaue a tender compassion on
our deare commembers, being in such manifest danger,
and to pray to God for their comfort and safety.
After speaking this & much more in this kind,
he fell downe prostrate on his knees before the
Altar, and with a pensiue hart and doleful voice,
besought the Omnipotent moderator of windes,
and waues for them: After prayer, he rose vp, &
refrayning teares he ioyfully sayd: Let vs reioyce
with our deere brethren, for God hath conuerted the
south wind into a Northren gale, that wil deliuer them
out of all danger, and bring them safe hither. And
incontinently the south-wind ceased, and the
north began to blow. After many dayes Cormacus
arriued safe, & gladded all the company with
his presence. By this the Reader may coniecture,
how great the holy Abbot was in Gods eyes, who
could by inuocating on Christs name, command
the blustring windes, and swelling billowes. Let
this much suffice touching the miracls the Saint
wrought in this present life. Let the Reader further
know, that we haue omitted many more to
auoyd tediousnes.
               
            
            
               
               THE III BOOKE
OF S. COLVMBES
ANGELICAL APPARITIONS.
               
                  Of the apparition made to S. Columbes mother before
his birth. Of the visions S. Bredan, and S.
Finnian had touching him: And how according to a
vision he had, he ordayned Aydan King.
CHAP. I.
                  
                     IN the first booke, we haue treated
succinctly of S. Columbes admirable
reuelations. In the seconde, we haue
discoursed of his stupēdious miracles.
In this third booke, we meane to set downe the
Angelicall visions that appeared to him, or to others
of him. One day betwixt the conception,
and natiuity of the Saint, an Angell appeared to
his mother, who brought her a wounderful rich
robe, and tooke it away presently: she being very
pensiue thereat, sayd to the Angell appearing
in the likenes of a very graue & venerable man.

                     Why do you so soone withdraw this delightful mantle?
Because, answeared he, that it appertaines to me
whome you cannot long detaine with you▪ with
that the woman saw the robe to be drawen longer
and longer from her, and to stretch so out in
bredth, as to surpasse the latitude of the fields, &
with its ouerlarge dimensions, to couer mountaines
and forests: and heard moreouer such a
voice as this, directed to her. VVoman, be not agrieued,
for you shall beare your husband so happy a
sonne, who as one of the Prophets of God, shall be rā
                        ked
among them, and is predestinated by God, to be
the captaine to conduct infinit soules to heauen. VVith
which voyce, the woman awaked. Another night
the childs foster-father, a Priest of a very Religious
life, comming after masse out of the church,
found all the house illustrated with an immense
splendour. For he saw a globe of fire standing on
the holy infants face, at which strange sight he
trembled, and was strucken with astonishment;
at last he vnderstood thereby, the copious effusion
of the grace of the holy Ghost, on the sweet
suckling.
                  2. VVhen the saint had beene excommunicated
by a certaine synod, for light and pardonable
causes, as it was euidēt in the end, he came

to the foresayd Synod, whome when S. Brendan
the founder of the monastery of Birra, saw comming
a farre of, he rose vp in haste, and embraced
him. For which being reprehēded by some of
the ancientest of the assembly, who asked him:
Why do not you feare to rise to honour an excō
                     municated
person, and to embrace him? He answered:
Had you knowne the thinges our Lord
hath vouchafed to manifest to me touching this
his faythfull seruant, you would neuer haue excommunicated
him, whome our Lord doth not
only not excommunicate, but doth alwayes magnify
him more and more. And added further:
I saw a firy and brightsome piller going before
this man of God, whome you contemne, and
the Angels accompanying him along the fields.
I dare not therefore to contemne this man,
whome I see preordayned by God, to be the Captaine
of many that shall attaine to the immortall
life of glory. These things being sayd by him, al
the assembly honoured the Saint very much. As
S. Finnian the Saints master, saw him one day approaching
to the place where himselfe resided,
he sayd to some that were present: Loe you see
S. Columbe comming, who hath merited to haue
an Angell for the companion of his iourney. About

the same tyme the Saint, with twelue of his
disciples sayled into Brittany.
                  3. Whilest the Saint liued in the Iland of
Himbria, he fell into an extasis, wherein he saw an
Angell of our Lord sent to him, who held in his
hand the booke contayning the ceremonyes of
the enstalling of Kinges, which he offered to the
Saint, commanding him to read it: but when he
would not ordayne Aydanus King as it was commended
and commanded in the booke, in regard
he loued Iogenan, Aydans younger brother better,
the Angell suddainly stretching out his hand,
strucke the Saint with a whip (whose blew print,
or whaile, remayned on his side all the dayes of
his life) and added further: Know for certaine,
that I am sent to you, to cause you according as
is set downe in the booke, to ordayne Aydanus
King, and if you doe not not obey, I will strike
you againe. The Saint thereupon obeyed the iniunction
of our Lord,Commeneus Albus in libro quem scrip
                           •
                        it 
                           〈◊〉
                         S. Columbe. and for that end, embarked
himselfe for Hoy, where he crowned Aydanus
King, who came thither about that tyme; of
whome & of his posterity, the Saint prophecied
in manner following, as recordeth Commeneus Albus.
I beleeue without all question, O King Aydan,
that none of your ennemyes shal be able to make head against

you, vntill you vse some fraud, and vniust deportement
towards me and my posterity: commend you
this seriously to your sonnes, and let them do the same
to their sonnes, and nephewes; fearing otherwise that
the scepter of the kingdome should be wrested out of
their handes. For at what tyme soeuer they shal work
any harme to me, or to my kinsmen in Ireland, the
scourge I haue sustayned for your sake, shalbe turned
on them by the hand of our Lord, and they will leese
the harts of men, and their ennemyes shall insult ouer
them. This prophecy hath beene fullfilled in our
dayes by Belleroth, Daniel, Breco, Aydans nephew,
who without any iust cause wasted, and destroyed
O Doainails country.
               
               
                  How the Saint saw the soule of one of his Monkes to be
saued. How with a word he killed a wicked man.
How he fought with the Diuels, & chased them
away by help of the Angels.
CHAP. II.
                  ONE of the Saints monkes, a Britton by
byrth, a man much giuen to the exercise
of good workes, fell sicke to death, and dyed.
The Saint saw the Angells, and Diuells fighting
about the possession of his soule. At last the Angells

preuayled, and conducted the soule to the
ioyes of Paradise. All this the saint tould one of
his Monkes, charging him not to reueale it all
the dayes of his life. Whilest the Saint liued in
Leinster to be trayned vp in wisedom, & learning,
it fortuned that a wicked man, a cruell persecutor
of the good, pursued in a certain place a yong
Damsell who fled from him: she by chance espyed
her brother an old man, who was master to
S. Columbe, to whome she made all haste possible
for rescue. The old man called on S. Columbe, to
the end that they might both iointly defend her
from the cruell persecutors hands; who came no
sooner to the place, but in their eyes he slue her
without regarding them any whit: whereat the
good old monke was so grieued and strucke with
anguish, that turning to S. Columbe he sayd: How
long, o holy youth Columbe, will God the iust
iudge suffer this wickednesse ioyned with our
dishonour, to passe vnpunished? The Saint pronounced
this iust, though dreadfull sentence against
the flagitious murderer: The selfe same houre
that the maydens soule shal ascend vp to heauen, his
soule shall descend downe to hell. And loe without
delay, the wicked man fell downe dead. The report
of this fearefull and suddaine vltion, was

blowen ouer many Churches of Scotland, to the
great honour and veneration of the holy Deacon.
                  2. A certaine pilgrime came to seiourne with
the Saint in the Ile of Hoy for some monethes, to
whome the Saint sayd: This day a certaine cleargie
man of your prouince, whose name I know not, is now
a carrying betweene the Angels to heauen. The brother
hearing this, began to muse with himselfe,
and to call to mind the mans name, so after a litle
while, he sayd to the saint: I know a seruant of
Christ named Diarmitius, who built him a little
monastery in the selfe same territory, wherein I
kept my residence. It is the selfe same party you
name, answered the Saint, whome the celestiall spirits
bring to the ioyes of Paradise. Neyther is it negligently
to be obserued, how that the glorious
Saint kept from the notice of men, many secrets
that were reuealed to him, and this for two reasons,
as himselfe signifyed to a few of his monks.
First to auoyde ostentation, and selfe esteeme:
secondly to auoyd the molestation that the multitudes
would put him in, inquiring after seuerall
affaires, and matters.
                  3. Another tyme the saint sought in the
woodes, a solitary place vnfrequented by men, &

commodious for the exercise of holy prayer; whē
he began to pray, suddenly he saw an vgly and
deformed army of Diuells, to fight against him
with Iron spits, who intended, as the Saint knew
by the inward illustration of the holy Ghost, to
assaile his monastery, & to kill with their pointed
stakes, many of his monkes. But he albeit all
alone, tooke S. Pauls armour, and fought couragiously
against the whole host of his infernal aduersaries:
and so the conflict continued for the
most part of the day, neither could they ouercome
him, nor yet he driue them out of his Ile, vntill
the Angells came to his helpe, whose terrour
made the Diuels depart. After their departure,
the saint prophecyed, how they would inuade
the monasteryes of Ethica, and inflict pestilent
diseases on the inhabitants, wherof many would
dye. Within two dayes likewise the saint foretould,
how Bathaneus by the help of prayers and
fasts, preserued his monastery from their inuasion,
in so much, that none dyed but one.
                  4. In the middle region of Ireland, liued a
certaine Smith, a man much addicted to almes
deeds, and other good workes: when this vertuous
Artizan came to the finall period of his mortall
life, the Saint spoke to a few that were about

him in this manner. The Smith did not labour in
vaine, who with the labour of his handes, hath purchased
euerlasting rewardes, his soule is now carryed
by the Angels, to the ioyes of the heauenly Country.
Another tyme did he see the soule of a poore, but
very holy woman, comming in company of the
Angells to meete her husbands soule at his decease,
and this he made knowne to one of his
Monkes named Genereus, a Saxon by birth.
               
               
                  How S. Columbe knowing by reuelation of the death
of S. Brendan and S. Columbanus, the Bishop
sayd masse in honour of them, and how a certaine
Monke, saw him conuersing with the Angels.
CHAP II.
                  
                     ANother tyme likewise, whilest the saint
siued in the Ile of Hoy, in the morning very
earely, he called vpon his familiar tender Diarmitius,
and sayd to him: Let the sacred misteryes
of the Eucharist be made ready in all haste; for
this day is the deposition of S. Brendan. Why (quoth
Diarmitius) doe you command such solemnityes
of masses to be made ready this day, seeing none
came out of Ireland that might bring vs newes
of that holy mans death? Goe, sayd the Saint, and

obey my word, for this last night I saw the heauens open,
and quires of Angels descending downe to meet S.
Brendans soule, with whose bright and incomparable
splendour, the compasse of al the world was enlightned
and illustrated.
                  2. Another day also, as the monkes put themselues
in a readinesse for the seueral works of the
monastery, the saint cōmanded them to rest that
day, & to make ready the furniture of the sacred
oblation, and their portions to be encreased as
on Sunday. For sayd he, albeit I be altogether vnworthy,
yet must I this day celebrate the sacred
mysteryes of the Eucharist, in honour of that
soule which this night hath been carryed among
the holy quires of Angells, to the interminable
ioyes of Paradise. These things being spoken, the
Religious obeyed very promptly, and all thinges
for the celebrating of the diuine seruice were prepared.
After they went with their holy Abbot
to the Church, where after singing part of the
office, they came to the Hymne where mention
is made of S. Martin. The Saint sayd to the singers:
This day you must sing of Columbanus the Bishoppe.
Then all the Monkes who were present,
vnderstood Columbanus the Bishop of Leynster
S. Columbs deare friend, to be translated to a better

life. Within a few dayes, there came out of
Leynster, who reported that he departed the self
same night, that his death was reuealed to the
Saint.
                  3. Another tyme, when the Saint sate writing
in his cell, his face was suddenly altered, &
he pronounced this voyce from his pure breast:
Helpe, helpe: two brothers who stood at the doore,
to wit, Colgus and Lugneus, demanded the cause of
that suddaine voice? To whome the venerable
Abbot made this answeare: I commanded an Angel
of our Lord, who stood with you, to succour one of the
brothers falling downe from the toppe of a great house
that is now building in the monastery of the Oakenfield.
The Saint added further: Very admirable,
and scarce ineffable is the quicknesse of the angelicall
motion; for that heauen-dweller, who flew away from
vs when yonder man began to fall, as it were in the
shutting of an eye, preuented him before he touched the
earth, neither could the party that fell, feele ane bruse
or payne. O how stupendious is this most swift,
and oportune subuention, that could so speedily
be performed, such spaces of sea and land lying
in the way?
                  4. The Saint on a tyme, called all the company
togeather, and straightly charged them in

this manner. I meane to go out all alone to the western
field of this Ile, let none therfore presume to follow me.
They all obeyed excepting one brother, who
went another way, and hid himselfe on the top
of a little hillocke, whence he might espy the
cause of the Saints solitary retyre, whom the prementioned
brother saw standing on a little hill
with his hands and eyes cast towardes heauen: &
lo suddenly a strange thing appeared, for the holy
Angels the inhabitants of the heauenly citty,
being all white, flow downe, and enuironed the
Saint as he prayed, and after some conference
with him, that heauenly squadron returned soon
againe to their heauenly mansions. The Saint
likewise after that angelicall meeting returned to
the monastery, and calling all the company together
againe, not without a seuere reprehension,
he began to examine which of them had trespassed
against his commandement. The guilty
party being not able to conceale what he had
done, fell prostrate before the saint, acknowledging
his fault, & begging pardon very humbly.
The saint brought him aside, & with great commination
charged him not to reueale the matter
all the dayes of his life. By this we may wel coniecture,
the many apparitions, and angelic all visitations,

the glorious saint had at other tymes,
especially in the lōg winter nights, which for the
most part he spent all alone, without taking any
rest.
               
               
                  How S. Brendanus saw a fiery piller, ascending fro
S. Columbes head as he sayd masse: how for three
entire dayes he enioyed heauenly visions, and of
other miracles in this kind.
CHAP. IIII.
                  FOVRE holy founders of monasteryes,
whose names were Congellus, Cahinnechus,
Brendanus, and Cormacus, comming out of Ireland
to visit the Saint, found him in the Ile Himba:
these holy men with one accord, did choose,
that S. Columbe should confecrate the holy mysteryes
of the Eucharist in their presence; who
yeelding to their pious desire, entred the church
at once with them, and whilest the masses were
celebrating, S. Brendan saw a very brightsome
globe of fire shinning ouer the head of S. Columbe
all the while he consecrated the sacred oblation,
and ascending like a piller of fire, vntill he
had made an end of the most holy mysteryes.
                  2. Another tyme in the sayd Ile of Himba,
                     
the grace of the holy Ghost so copiously descēded
on him, that remayning the space of three entire
dayes lockt vp in his cell, he was so replenished
during that tyme with diuine light, that he did
neyther eate, or permitted any to come at him,
In the night two beames of immense brightnes,
issued out at the chinckes of the doore, and holes
of the locke: he was likewise heard to sing, most
sweet and ineffable verses; many secrets that were
hidden from the knowledge of men, since the
beginning of the world, were manifested to him;
the eyes of his most pure hart, pierced into the
difficultyes of the most obscure and abstruse passages
of holy scriptures: and he complained of
the absence of Batthaneus his disciple, who had
he been present during those three dayes, should
haue described touching the forepassed, or future
ages, many misteries vnknowne to other
men.
                  3. A Monke named Virgnous, a man feruent
in the loue of God, entred the Church one night
all alone, & sat him downe to pray in one of the
oratories. Within the space as it were of an houre
S. Columbe likewise entred the sayd holy house,
together with him, & a golden light descending
frō heauen, was seen to replenish al the house: &

as none can contemplate the meridiā sunne with
stedfast and vndaseled eyes, so could not Virgnous
sustaine that heauenly splendour that blunted
the quicknesse of his eyes, where with he was
so astonished and terrifyed, that no strength remayned
in him. The next morning, the Saint
called on Virgnous, speaking these comfortable
wordes to him: O my little child, you haue pleased
almighty God much yesternight by casting your eyes on
the earth; for had you not done so, your eyes had beene
blinded with the lustre of that diuine light: beware you
neuer bring this diuine visitation to the knowledge of
men during my life. Another brother named Colgus,
cōming that night by chance to the Church
doore, saw the same glistering light▪ whome the
saint admonished the next day, not to speake of
it to any, all his life tyme.
                  4. Another tyme the saint charged one of
his disciples named Brochanus: Beware my sonne,
you approach not this night to my cell, as you are wont.
Who notwithstanding the saints forbidding,
went to the doore, and looked in at the key-hole,
thinking with himselfe, as it fell out, that the
saint had within some heauenly vision; for at that
tyme the saints little lodging was replenished
with diuine light, which the disobedient young

man being not able to sustaine, fled way in haste▪
The next day, the Saint called Brochanus aside▪
and he reprehended him with great seuerity,
speaking to him in this manner: My sonne, you
haue sinned before God, this last night, in thinking it
possible to conceale your crafty prying, for if the holy
Ghost did not, yet I behould you comming & returning
from the doore of our lodging: had not I then offered
my prayers in your behalfe, you would eyther haue fallen
downe dead before the doore, or els your eyes had
fallne out of your head: and know this, that in your
owne country of Ireland, for liuing lasciuiously, you
shall sustaine shame and reproach all the dayes of your
life, yet I haue obtayned from our Lord, that in regard
your are our disciple, that you shall do bitter pennance
before your death, and obtaine mercy. All which
happened to him afterwardes, according to the
Saints prophecy.
                  
               
               
                  How S. Columbes life was prolonged by the prayers
of many Churches: How he foresaw his death, and
reuealed the tyme to Diarmitius his familiar
tender.
CHAP. V.
                  
                     THE glorions Abbot being in Hoy, a marueilous

sweetnesse & pleasantnesse appeared on
his countenance, and casting his eyes to heauenwardes,
he was wholy replenished with ioy: but
within a little space, the sweetnes of his face, was
conuerted into heauines, & his ioy into sorrow;
which when two of his monkes, named Lugneus,
and Pilu▪ 
                     saw and perceaued, they obtained of
him not without great intreaty, and a faythfull
promise of neuer reuealing it in his life tyme, the
cause of that sad, & strange alteration, to whom
he spoke in this manner: Loe to this present day;
there are runne out, thrice ten years of my peregrination
in Brittany: in the meane tyme these many dayes
I haue deuoutly begged of God, that he would be pleased
in the end of this 30. years to finish my earthly pilgrimage,
and to call me to his heauenly mansion, & this
was the cause of my ioy; for I saw the Angels sent frō
the throne of glory, to meet my soule after its departure
out of my body: & loe being now suddenly stayd, they
stand on the rocke at further side of our sea, & would
come in hast for my soule, but they are not permitted to
approach neerer; for what our Lord hath graunted, he
hath now suddēly altered, hearing the prayers of many
churches for me: who haue obtained a thing against my
will, that foure yeares more may be added to the tearm
of my mortall pilgrimage: this sorrowfull delay, is the

cause of my present griefe, which foure years, when they
shall come to an end, I shall without any precedent
sicknesse of body, passe to the euerlasting ioyes of Paradise.
                  2. The tearme of the prementioned years,
now drawing on, the true Prophet, and very
noble Abbot, being loaden with yeares, went
forth in a waggon one day to visit the Brothers,
that were at worke, to whome he sayd: I conceaued
an earnest desire to go to our Sauiour (who granted
it me, if my selfe would) on Easter day, which we haue
lately celebrated, but because I would not haue the ioy
of that festiuity conuerted into heauinesse, I chose rather
to diferre my departure out of this world a little
longer. With this the Monkes fell into great heauinesse,
whome their pious Father begon to animate
with very comfortable words, and sweete
exhortations as much as he could. Then cōuerting
his face to the Orient, he blessed the Iland
with all the inhabitants. From that tyme forwards,
the Iland was neuer molested with the annoy
of vipers: within a few dayes after, whilest
the masses were a celebrating, as the Saint eleuated
vp his gracious countenance, it was suddenly
dyed with a most delectable and liuely rednes;
for at that houre, he saw the Angell of our Lord

flitting vp and downe in the Oratory, and in regard
the admirable aspect of an Angel instilleth
ioy into the harts of the elect, the Saint therfore
here abounded with ioy: and when some that
were present enquired after the cause of his ioy,
he answered: Loe an Angell of our Lord, sent to require
a certaine depositum very deere to God, came into
the Church, and after looking downe ouer vs, and
blessing vs, departed. None of them that were present,
vnderstood what depositum was that the
Angell came for. But our holy Patron called his
owne soule which God committed to his charge
by the name of depositum, which he rendred
vp within six dayes after.
                  3. On the next Saturday, the holy Abbot,
and his faythfull tender Diarmitius, went out to
blesse a Barne, where the Saint seeing two heaps
of grayne, sayd: I congratulate much with my monkes,
for if I must needs depart; this yeare, they haue
sufficient prouision. Diarmitius hearing this sentence,
became very heauy: you constristate vs so
often this yeare, because you speake so often of
your departure: to whome he sayd. I will acquaint
you with a secret touching my death, so that you promise
faythfully not to disclose it before I dye. Diarmitius
gaue him his faithfull word and promise.

Then the glorious Saint added: This day in the
sacred volumes, is called Sabbaoth, that is interprettd
rest, and truly this day is a Sabbaoth to me, because it
is the last of my laborious life, wherein after the paines
of my trauailes, I sabbaoth, and this next ensuing
midnight of the venerable Sunday, I shall be gathered
to the holy Fathers; for now our Lord Iesus vouchsafeth
to inuite me, to whome I shal depart at night,
as himselfe hath reuealed to me. After this he returned
backe towardes the Monastery; In the way
he ascended a little mountaine ouerlooking the
monastery, & standing on the top of the hill, &
eleuating his handes, he blessed his monastery,
saying: The Kinges not only of Scotland with their
subiects, but euen the Kinges of foraine nations with
their vassalls, will honor much this place, though it be
now narrow and despiseable: and the Saints of other
Churches, will giue no small veneration to it.
               
               
                  How S. Columbe approching to the houre of his
death, made a mysticall diuision of the Psalme Inquirentes
Dominum: Lastly of his death, buriall,
and some visions of his happy passage.
CHAP. VI.
                  AFTER he had bestowed his sacred benediction,

he returned to his monastery, and sate
him downe to write the Psalter, and comming to
that verse of the 33. Psalme: Inquirentes Dominum
non minuentur omni bono. They that seeke after our
Lord, shall not be diminished of any good. Here must
I pause in the end of this page. Let Bathaneus
write what followeth: The last verse which the
Saint wrote, befitteth him very much, since he
shall neuer be depriued of the interminable riches
of heauen, and the subsequent verse: Come
childrē heare me, I wil teach you the feare of our Lord,
becommeth his successor Bathaneus, as being his
successor, not only in the office of teaching, but
also in the charge in writing. After the Saint had
giuen a stoppe to his pen at the foresayd verse, he
entred into the Church, to heare sundayes euening
masse, which being done, he came backe
to his cell, and sate in his bed, where he had insteed
of a bed, a bare stone, and another stone in
lieu of a bolster; sitting in that place he bequeathed
to his ghostly children, these his last precepts
in the hearing only of Diarmitius. I commend
to you my children, these my last wordes:
conserue true and vnfained charity and peace among
you, and if you obserue this, according to
the example of the Saints, God the comforter

of the good, will help you: and I being with him
will intercede for you, and he will affoarde you,
both what you all want in this life, and likewise
the ioyes which are prepared for them that
keepe his Commandements.
                  2. After finishing these sacred documents,
the glorious Saint held his peace: at midnight
when the bell rung to matines, he rose, & going
sooner then any of the company to the Church,
he fell downe on his knees before the Altar. Diarmitius
following slowly after, saw all the church
illustrated with Angelicall splendour, which
at his approach disappeared; entring in therfore
into the Church, he called oft to the Saint with
a weeping voice, saying: O father, where are you?
And so groping vp and downe in the darke, he
found him lying prostrate before the Altar. Diarmitius
sate him downe by the Saint, and laid his
head in his sacred lappe, in the meane tyme the
Monkes came, who seeing their holy Father ready
to dye, began to lament: euen at the very instant
of the separation of his soule, as we heard
from some who were eye-witnesses, he looked about
him with a viuacious and pleasant countenance,
contemplating the holy Angells that
came to fetch him. Then Diarmitius tooke vpp

his holy hand to blesse his mōks: the Saint himselfe
did what he coule to moue his hand to giue
them his blessing, with the motion thereof since
he could not performe it with the voice of his
mouth: after this his sacred benediction giuen
in this kind, the Saint yeilded vp suddenly his
happy soule. The Angelicall sight left such a
cheerefullnesse remayning in his countenance,
that it seemed rather the sweete aspect of one cast
in a pleasant slumber, then the ghostly sight of a
dead corse. Heere we will relate some visions,
which certaine holy men had at that very houre
of the Saints happy passage. In a certaine Irish
monastery, there liued a very holy and venerable
seruant of Christ, named Lugildius, who was
both wise and iust: this holy monke not without
great sorrow, related to a deere companion of
his, a man of no lesse holy conuersation, a certaine
vision he had: This last midnight S. Columbe,
the piller of many Churches, departed to
the immortall ioyes of heauen, and I saw in spirit,
all the Ile of Hoy where I neuer was in person,
illustrated with celestiall and angelicall brightnesse,
& al the spaciousnes of the ayre was to the
skyes, enlightned with the splendour of Angels.
Angels were sent that descended to conduct his

holy soule to euerlasting rest. I heard likewise
most sweet hymnes and harmonious canticles,
that resounded melodiously at the same tyme:
this angelicall manifestation Virgnous learnt frō
the mouth of the foresayd holy old man.
                  3. Another ancient and religious seruant
of Christs, and a holy monke named Ferrelus,
related to me Adamnanus, with no small protestation
and asseueration of the truth thereof, this
ensuing vision. That night of S. Columbes happy
passage out of this life, I, and others with me
being fishing in the fishy riuer Fende, we saw all
the region of the ayre suddenly illustrated: being
much moued with the suddennesse of the miracle,
we conuerted our eyes to the East, and loe
there appeared as it were a great fiery piller, that
ascending to heauen wards, seemed to illuminate
all the world, as a summers day, or meridian
Sunne: and when that pillar had penetrated the
heauens, then darkenesse ensued as after the Sun
set, neither did the vision appeare to vs alone,
for many other fishers that were vp and downe
about the riuer, beheld it: these visiōs appearing
at the very houre of our Patrons departur, make
remonstrance of the glory he inioyeth before
God. Now let vs returne thether, from whence

we haue digressed.
                  4. The matins office being ended, his holy
body was carryed back with sweet symphony of
psalmes to his little lodging: his obsequies were
solemnized with no lesse honour then deuotion,
for the space of three dayes, and three nights;
which time being spent in the diuine prayses, the
body of our glorious Patron, wrapped in cleane
syndons, was interred in a decent tombe, with
great veneration. Heere we thinke not amisse to
tell what the Saint had prophecied touching the
foresayd three dayes of his exequies. On a tyme
one of the Monkes after a simple manner, sayd
to the venerable Abbot: It is thought, that all
the people of these prouinces will sayle hether
to this Iland of Hoy, to celebrate your funeralls.
My sonne, answeared the Saint, it shall not
be as you say; for the vulgar sort, shall not be
able by any meanes to come to my obsequies,
only my owne familiar monkes shal accomplish
my funerall rights and duties. Which propheticall
prenunciation, the diuine Omnipotence,
put in executiō; for during the three dayes of his
holy funeralls, so boisterous a wind blew, that it
was not possible for any to go to sea: but immediatly
after the Saints sepulture, the wind ceased

and the sea became calme; such then was the end
of our glorious Patrons life, such were the happy
beginning of his merits, who is admitted into
the society of the glorious Patriarkes, of the holy
Apostles, of the sacred Martyrs, and immaculate
Virgins, by the fauour of our sweet Sauiour Iesus.
To whome togeather with the Father, and
the holy Ghost, be all praise, honour, vertue &
glory, world without end, Amen.
               
            
            Finis vitae Sancti Columbae.
         
      
      
         
            Nos infrascripti legimus has Sanctorum nostrorum
vitas, scilicet PATRICIj, BRIGIDAE,
& COLVMBAE á quodam ex nostris Patribus
Anglicé redditas, in quibus nihil moribus aut fidei
Catholicae contrarium inuenimus.
            
                Datum
Louanij 29. Augusti, 1625.
               
               
                  
                     Fr. Thomas Strange Diffinitor, & Commissarius prouinciae
Hiberniae, nec non Sacrae Theologiae lector.
                     Fr. Robertus Chamberlinus Sacrae Theologiae lector in Collegio
Sancti Anthonij a Padua, Louanij.
                     Fr. Ioannes Barnew allus S. Theologiae lector in Collegio
Sancti Anthonij de Padua, Louanij.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Licentia Reuerendissimi Domini, Domini PAVLI
BOVDOT, Episcopi Audomarensis.
            NOs PAVLVS BOVDOT Dei,
& Apostolicae sedis gratia Episcopus Audomarensis,
has vitas Sanctorum PATRICIj,
BRIGIDAE, & COLVMBAE, à quodam Patre
Franciscano Collegij Sancti Antonij a Padua Louanij
in linguam Anglicanam versas, typis mandari
ac diuulgari permittimus: cum ex Patrum
Lectorum praefati Collegij fide digno testimonio
habeamus, nihil in ijs aut fidei orthodoxae, aut
probis moribus aduersari.
            
               Actum Audomaropoli
in Palatio nostro episcopali 10. Octobris 1625.
               
            
         
         
            
            Licentia Reuerendissimi Patris nostri Fratris Iosephi
Bergaigne, super Prouincias Belgicas Commissarij
Generalis, & totius Ordinis Seraphici
diffinitoris Generalis.
            VISA censura & approbatione Venerandi
admodum Patris Viceprouincialis Hiberniae,
& Patrum Lectorum sacrae Theologiae nostri
Collegij S. Antonij A Padua permittimus,
vt Typis mandentur hae vitae SS. Patricij, Brigidae,
& Columbae, obseruatis ijs quae statuta generalia
nostri ordinis circa excussionem librorum obseruari
praecipiunt. 
            
               Datum in nostro conuentu
Dunkercano, 16. Augusti, 1625.
               
               Fr. Iosephus Bergaigne, Commissarius
& Diffinitor generalis.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  Faults escaped in the Printing.
                  
                     Page
                     Faults
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 4.
                     Century reade
                     Centuryes
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Sabellius
                     Sabellicus
                  
                  
                     Pag. 7.
                     Saint Soruan
                     Seruan
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Marcia
                     Mercia
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Saint Pumold
                     Saint Rumold
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Saint Hiniclin
                     Himelin
                  
                  
                     Pag. 8.
                     S. Patrick your glorious Abbot
                     S. particke your glorious Bishop
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Derlanus
                     Declanus
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Itarus
                     Ybarus
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Riaranus
                     Kiaranus
                  
                  
                     Pag. 9.
                     of their sensuall
                     of their sensually schoole
                  
                  
                     Pag. 12.
                     now to declare
                     now to decline from the triall
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     foule wracking
                     soule wracking
                  
                  
                     Pag. 8.
                     Vbique for Englād
                     Brittany
                  
                  
                     Pag. 13.
                     Sergerius
                     Sergecius
                  
                  
                     Pag. 16.
                     Dichum
                     Dichu
                  
                  
                     Pag. 30.
                     Mal
                     Mel
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Brine mouth
                     Boyne-mouth
                  
                  
                     Pag. 31.
                     nephew
                     neophit
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Coibre
                     Coyrbre
                  
                  
                     Pag. 42.
                     & vbique for Ardmuch
                     Ardmach
                  
                  
                     Pag. 44.
                     1400.
                     14000.
                  
                  
                     Pag. 46.
                     Ormand
                     Ormond
                  
                  
                     Pag. 47.
                     Prosnach
                     Broisneau
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Frianus
                     Triamus
                  
                  
                     Pag. 49.
                     nephueus
                     nephewes
                  
                  
                     Pag. 53.
                     Connendus
                     Connedus
                  
                  
                     Pag. 57.
                     & vbique Bangor
                     Benchor
                  
                  
                     Pag. 69.
                     Coruallus
                     Cearuallus
                  
                  
                     Pag. 70.
                     Vlbia
                     Vlidia
                  
                  
                     Pag. 72.
                     Micheus
                     Mocheus
                  
                  
                     Pag. 74.
                     Volchanusa
                     Volchan
                  
                  
                     
                        Pag. 75.
                     Reuternus
                     Kertennus
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Ciocher
                     Clochor
                  
                  
                     Pag. 81.
                     plane
                     playne
                  
                  
                     Pag. 92.
                     free resembling
                     fire resembling
                  
                  
                     Pag. 98.
                     & alibi for English
                     Brittish
                  
                  
                     Pag. 100.
                     fiue hundred
                     fiue thousand
                  
                  
                     Pag. 103.
                     entertainement
                     enterment
                  
                  
                     Pag. 105.
                     Ardmuchians
                     Ardmachians
                  
                  
                     Pag. 106.
                     Caulune
                     Caucune
                  
                  
                     Pag. 108.
                     greeuily
                     grieuously
                  
                  
                     Pag. 110.
                     Machella
                     Machillas
                  
                  
                     Pag. 112.
                     then the sayd Saint dealt.
                     then the Saint sayd deale
                  
                  
                     Pag. 125.
                     impassible
                     vnpassable
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     family
                     families
                  
                  
                     Pag. 137.
                     trunled
                     tumbled
                  
                  
                     Pag. 145.
                     Cluayre
                     Cluayne
                  
                  
                     Pag. 148.
                     Cormarus
                     Cormacus
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Ircos
                     Irros
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Alban
                     Aldan
                  
                  
                     Pag. 192.
                     it appertaines to me
                     it appertaines to one
                  
                  
                     Pag. 201.
                     ane
                     any
                  
                  
                     Pag. 203.
                     being all white
                     being all in white,
                  
                  
                     Pag. 206.
                     prying, for if the holy Ghost did not, yet I behould
                     prying, from the Holy Ghost, did not I behould you
                  
                  
                     Pag. 213.
                     coule
                     could
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     ghostly
                     gastly
                  
                  
                     Pag. ibid.
                     Lugildius
                     Lugudius
                  
                  
                     Pag. 214.
                     Ferrelus
                     Ferreolus
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   