
      
         
            
            
            A dialoge deſcribing the originall ground of theſe Lutheran faccions, and many of their abuſes, Compyled by ſyr William Barlowe chanon, late byſhop of Bathe.
            Anno. 1553.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ A preface of this booke, to the reader.
            
               IN this preſente Treatyce folowyng (gentle reder) is not onlye vttered and diſcloſed the beaſtlye begynnynge of Luthers furious faction, in Saxony, with the ſedicious Sciſmes of the ſacramentaries, Swynglius, Oecolampadius, and other of Swycerlande: but alſo verye playnlye here is ſhewed theyr monſtruous maners and mutabilitie, theyr cankered contencions, and horrible ipocriſy, their deuely ſhe deuyſes, and bytter blaſphemye, with infinite lyke reliques of that raylynge relygion, wherby the chriſtian reader

ſhall ryghte well perceaue, what fylthy frute buddeth out of this frantike fraternitie, and ſynfull Synagoge of Sathan, infernallye inuented, to ſeduce ſymple ſoules. Neyther canne there be a more open marke, to publyſhe the peſtiferous practiſes of theſe peruerſe preachers, and wycked generation, than here is moſt lyuely and truelye ſet fourth to the worlde, by the auctor hereof, who had euident experience of theyr maners, faſhion, and order of all ſtates of them, beynge longe time by his owne confeſſion, in theyr companye, and conuerſaunte with them, euen with thoſe whiche were of the hygheſt reputation both for ſobrenes of lyfe, & fame of literature, whoſe doynges & doctryne to muche myſlyked

him, that for no hatred to them, nor yet fauour to other, but euē for the diſcharge of his owne cō
               ſcience, inſtruction, and information of ſuche as be catholike, he thoughte it neceſſary playnelye to ſhewe the veritie thereof, to the ende that ſuche as nowe be addict to their horrible and hay nous hereſies, when they ſhall perceaue and ſe in theyr life and learnynge, theyr crafty and colourable iugglynge, lewde lyuynge, and deuelyſhe diſagreynge of a muſter of monſtruous maried monkes, and falſe fleſhlye freers, ſhal by goddes grace both forſake theyr faſhions, deteſte theyr doctryne, and leaue theyr learnynge, whiche boke & dyalogue, beyng for this intent and godlye purpoſe longe agoo ſet forth and printed, it hath ben

thought good for diuerſe conſideracions (the prynte beynge nowe worne out) yet efteſones at this preſent to be reuiued, & communicate to the catholyke readers, wherfore good reader callynge to remembraunce the olde wyttie ſayinge: Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, Happy is he whom other mens perylles or daungers do make circumſpect or ware: Folow thou the counſell of S. John: who in the. iiii chapter of his canonicall epiſtle ſayth as foloweth: Nolite credere omni ſpiritui, ſed probate ſpiritus ſiex deo ſint. That is to ſaye, Geue not credyt to euery ſpirite, but do you proue yf they be of God.
            Farewell in God.
         
         
            
            ¶ A preface of the auctoure to the readers.
            ¶ Grace from God the father, and from oure lorde Jeſu Chryſt, with the aſſyſtence of the holy gooſte.
            
               WHere as I conſyder (O Chryſten readers) the daū
               ger of wrytynge in the peryllous ſeaſon of theſe latter dayes, largelye depaynted by Saint Paule, euen as it proueth now in dede, that certayn perſons depart from the fayth, and geue hede to deſceatefull ſpyrytes and deuelyſh doctrine through ſimulation of falſe wordes,

 bi whoſe meanes it is come ſo to paſſe, that a lyttle faulte is not onelye taken to the worſte, but what ſo euer is well done, ſpoken, or wrytten, is oftymes interpreted amyſſe: no marueyl though I ſo vnlearned greatly abaſhe to put my ſelfe in ieopardy of theſe rauyſhing wolues, & pytyles ſoule murtherers, whiche byte with theyr teeth, and preache peace with theyr tongues, ſeynge that famous clerkes of pregnaunte wyttes, of excellente erudition, and ſinguler vertue, haue ſo litle auayled in wrytynge agaynſt them: not that theſe new teachers of auncyente hereſyes, & late auctors of olde inueterate ſcyſmes, are ſo profounde in knoweledge of Scriptures, eyther ſo inuycte of reaſonable argumentes, that

they haue not ben many tymes ouercome, as they be dayly van quyſhed, but becauſe of theyr ſhameles pertinacite, where as they be proſtrate and lye grouelynge vpon the grounde, deſtitute of reaſon, voyde of good argumentes, and wythoute any ſence of trueth, then ſtrogle they to woorey men with wordes of conuycyous maledictions and ſedicyous ſlaunders, not afrayd to deſpyce theyr ſouerayns withowte regarde of theyr power, contemnynge all auctoritie, contrarye to the doctryne of Saint Peter, ſaying: Be ye ſubiecte to euery manne for our lordes ſake, vnto ye king as cheife, and vnto the gouernours as to thoſe that are ſent by hym for the ponyſhmente of the euyll & rewarde of the well

doers: for ſo is the wyl of God, that doyng wel ye maye ſtoppe the mouthes of folyſhe and ignoraunt people, as free and not as a colour hauynge the lybertye of malyce, but as ye ſeruauntes of God. Notwithſtandyng in theyr ſolempne prefacyes, and paynted tytles of theyr errours, they begynne wyth dulcet ſalutations, of gloſinge perſwaſyons, vnder the pretence of a godly zeale, oftymes repetynge the word of God, the goſpell of Chryſte, hys promyſes, hys charyte. &c. whereby they wold perſwade to rude people, that whatſoeuer theye wryte or teache, are the ſame thynges be they neuer ſo contrary, euen as the comen ſorte of vngracyous wretches do, whych in tellyng lyes & reporte of ſlaūders,

will call into theyr recorde the trouth of God, the holy enange lyſtes, the bleſſed ſacramentes, and all the miſteries of oure beleef: not for any faythfull reuerence towarde them, but to the entent that they myght be better beleued in theyr falſehod.
            Many thynges whyche are put forth vnder the tytle of the worde of God, is not his true worde in effecte, no more thā all thoſe whiche beare the name of Chriſten men, be not al chryſten men in trouth & dede. Man lyueth not onely by breade ſayth ſcripture, but in euery worde yt commeth oute of the mouth of god. Mark here chriſtē reders the worde that procedeth oute of the mouth of God, to y• which we oughte nother to adde, nor to take any thynge awaye from

it. Arrius, Pelagius, Maniche us, wyth ſuche other, whome the moore parte of theſe ſectes confeſſe to be heretykes, dylygently layde the worde of God for theym, but not owte of hys mouth: for they applyed it by wronge interpretations to the ſettyng for the of theyr hereſyes, and not to the glory of God. Saynt Pauie heled ſyck folke, and draue the wycked ſpyryts from them that were poſſeſſed through goddes worde in the name of Jeſu, whoſe doyng the chyldren of Sceue aſſayde to counterfete with lyke wordes: to whom the ſpyrit aunſwered: I knowe Jeſu and Paule, but what are ye? and ſo greuouſly aſſawtynge them, he preuayled agaynſt theyr preſumpſion. The aged Prophet of Bethell,

by whoſe deſceate the manne of God ſent out of Juda to Jeroboham was ſlayne: alleged the worde of God. The falſe Prophete Sedechias with his cō
               pany .iiii. C. in nomber, falſelye promyſed kynge Achab vyctorye to his deſtruction, layenge for theyr auctorytye the worde of God. Ananias reſyſted the true Prophete Jeremye, propheſyenge to the captyne Iſrahelytes lybertie and ſone delyueraunce of theyr bondage, cauſynge them to truſte in his leaſynge, whiche he ſayde was the worde of God. And generallye all other falſe Prophetes boſted them ſelues to be ſente of God, & came to prech his truth, whome he neuer dyd ſende, as he wytneſſethe with his owne mouthe in diuers places of the

byble. Furthermore all ſuche as occupye inchauntmentes, cō
               iurers, & wytches, in theyr buſynes wyth manye ceremonies rehearſe the word of God. Alſo our ſauyour Chriſte ſayth that manye ſhall come in his name, ſaying: I am Chryſte, and they ſhall deſceaue many, but howe? ſurely in perſwading that their doctryne is Goddes word, and that they be hys meſſengers, hys annoynted ſonnes and ſpecyall prophetes, So dyd Symon Magus delude the people of Samary, affermyng that he was Chriſte. Lykewyſe Machomette named hym ſelfe the great prophete of God. And all other heretykes commenlye in fortefyenge theyr abhomynable hereſyes, alledge the worde of God and euangelike veryte,

accordyng as Martyn Luther with the whole rable of hys adherents do dayly practyſe. But what auayleth it to reſyte the worde of God, yf we interprete it by a falſe peruerted ſence?
            What auauntage is it to ſaye Lord Lorde, and do not as he cōmaūdeth vs? He that ſaith I know God, and obſeruethe not hys commaundementes, is a lyer, and there is no truthe in hym. The Pharyſeys Dyſcyples ſayd to Chriſte: Mayſter, we knowe that thou art a true ſpeaker, & thou teacheſt y• waye of God in truthe, yet thoughte they nothynge ſo in theyr hartes. What thynge is more eaſy for theſe new teachers, than in blaſynge theyr auctorytye, to ſaye that theyr doctryne is the trewe worde of God, and that

they haue hys ſpyryte: where as they admyt no interpretacion of ſcripture but theyr owne, in ſo muche that they reiecte parte of the bible becauſe it ſerueth not to theyr purpoſe.
            Concerninge the determinatiō of generall councelles, and auctorytye of auncyent doctours of the churche, they vtterly contemne, excepte in fewe thynges whereoute they gather ſentences, whyche falſelye depraued and otherwhile chaunged clene contrarye to the auctoures intent, they make to ſerue in coulourynge theyr hereſye. Howe ſhall wee then knowe whether they be the ryghte preachers, & theyr doctryn the word of god or noo? Trewlye Chryſte geueth vs a rule infallyble, ſayenge: By theyr fruytes ye ſhall

knowe theym. A good tree can brynge forthe no euyll fruyte, nor a badde tree canne brynge forthe no good frute. And they whiche here the worde of God with an earneſt and good hart, they holde it faſte, bryngynge forth fruyte in patience. Alſo Saint James deſcrybyng the expedient condition of chriſten prechers, and heuenly learning ſayth: who that among you is wyſe endued with connynge, lette hym ſhewe hys good workes out of a good conuerſation wyth ſoftenes of wyſedome. If ye haue ſower hatred and varyaunce amonge you in youre harte, wyll not ye reioyce, and be lyars agaynſt the truth? for thys is not the wyſdome comminge from aboue, but earthly, beſtial and deuelyſh. Where as

is enmyte & contention, there is inconſtancy and all noughty doyng. The wiſdom that deſcē
               deth from God is fyrſte chaſte, and ſo peaſeable, mylde, treatable, full of mercy, and good frutes, wythout any myſdemynge or dyſſymulatyon. Nowe to compare theſe fruites vnto the actes of theſe Lutheran factyons, ye ſhall fynde a farre difference. Wherefore ſeyng that by longe experyence I haue perceaued the faſhion, manner, and order of all ſtates among them, and was no ſmall whyle conuerſaunt wyth thoſe whiche are of hyeſt reputation, both for theyr ſobernes of lyfe, and fame of lyterature: I haue thought it neceſſary for the dyſcharge of my conſcience, and information of other, playnlye to ſhewe the verytie

as I haue knowen, wyth out hatred of them or fauoure of any other perſons: which to performe I haue here compiled thys lytle proceſſe folowynge, vnder the forme of a breife dyaloge. Wherein though ye ſhall rede ſome thynges ſo ſtraunge for the enormities of them, that diuers men, namelye the fauourers of theſe ſectes, wyll iudge them vnlykelye of trueth, and halfe impoſſyble to be vſed among reſonable people endued wyth any wyſdom or learning: yet are they matter in dede, accordynge as ye ſhall ſee vnfaynedlye declared. And be ye full aſſured that I reherſe not by a greate parte all the abuſes manyfeſtlye knowen by thē, nor ſo many as I could ſhew: whiche god wyllyng hereafter in proces

of tyme maye be dyſcloſed more largelye. A greate occaſion why that many be ſo feruēt in fauorynge this Lutherane doctryne, is the vayne prayſes of much people commyng from thence, reportyng that there is ſo good order, ſuche charitable liberalitie, and euangelyke conuerſation, whiche is all to gether falſe. And dyuers of ſuche tydyng cariers, leſt they might ſeme ignoraunte in a fewe thinges, they frame theym ſelues wythoute ſhame, to lye in manye. It is harde for a renagate frere, a faytheleſſe apoſtata, a forlorne coopeman, a marchaun tes prētyce, or an embaſſatours hoſtler, hauynge lytle learning, leſſe dyſcreſyon, ſmall deuocyon, and ſcant a curteſy of wyſedome: to make true reporte in

ſuch matters. And yet are ther of them which make thē ſelues full buſy, and are as redy to tell that they knowe not as yt that they know, accordynge as they feale theyr affeccions deſpoſed whome they couet to pleaſe: by whiche meanes they attayne hye cōmendations, made much of, & ar called prety wyſe men & proper perſōs, wt many goodes bleſſynges vpon theyr hartes. Suche is the maddenes of the worlde and folyſh appetytes of people, preferring their corrupt affections before ryghte iudgement and teſtymonye of theyr conſcyence. Truthe it is that the Germayns of old antiquite haue deſerued ſpecyall lawde for theyr playnes in worde and dede voyd of diſſimulation, and for theyr homelye famylyaryte

wythout acception of p
                  •
               rſons, in whiche vnto this daye, they excel other nacions: wherof the originall cauſe manye falſlye do aſcrybe to thys Lutheran doctryne, beynge doubtleſſe meru
                  •
                louſely decayd throughe it, ſo yt true playneſſe was not wonte to be ſo ſcace there among ſcant good liuers, as fraudes begyn now to be plenty among theyr newe Goſpellers. Wherefore (Chriſten reders) I exhort you all percialite ſet a parte, to fyxe youre ſelfe vppon the lyuynge worde of God whiche may ſaue your ſoules, and walke dyrectlye after it, bowynge nether on the one ſyde nor on the other. I meane not that fleſhly worde nor theyr Goſpell whiche ſaye: ye haue no fre wyll, youre good deedes ſhall not ſaue you, nor

your yldedes ſhall not dampne you, the ſacramētes of ye church be nothing of neceſſite, ye nede not to be confeſſed to a preeſte, ye are not bownde to obey the lawes of ye church. &c. but that true worde of god & verye goſpell of our Sauyour Chriſte, of whoſe fyrſte ſermon the antetheme was thys: Doo ye pennaunce for ye kyngdome of God is at hande. And at hys laſte farewell from his Diſciples he affyrmed the ſame, ſaying that in his name it behoued penaūce to be preached in remyſſyon of ſynnes: whiche maner of preachynge the apoſties after his aſſention obſerued, contynuallye exhortynge the people vnto penaūce, and to the drede of God, whiche is the begynnynge of wyſedome, the inſeparable companion 
of penaunce, and neceſſaty introduction to fayth. The worde of God bryngeth for the penance, accordyng as we rede in the actes of the apoſtles .iii. ye at ſaynt Peters preaching thei were compuncte in hearte, and offred them ſelfe to pennaunce. This vnfayned pennaunce leadeth men to faythe, and is the entre to the goſpel, Mar. i. Do ye pennaunce ſayth Chriſt, and beleue the goſpell. Which beleif can not be attayned wythoute the dreade of God. For it is the fulnes of ſcyence, whereby we come downe firſt to know oure ſelf, & ſo aſcende to ye knowlege of God by his word, whereoute through hearynge fayth taketh her effect. The maieſtie of goddes worde is of that nature, to proſtrate the preſumpcyon of

mannes wyſedome & affyaunce in our ſelues, exylyng thaffections of carnall liberte, & mouing vs wyth a readynes of minde & certayne trimbling feare to ſay with ſaynt Paule, Lorde what wylleſt thou vs to doo? Thys reuerent drede had Cornelius Centurio, whan the ioyful meſſenger of God appeared vnto hym, to whō with feare abaſhed he ſayd: Lorde who art thou? in whoſe commendation it is written there. Actes .x. that he was a deuout man and dreding god. Likewiſe. Luk. iij. y• ſhepe herdes, whan y• aungell of glad tidinges appeared to them, and y• brightues of God ſhone roūd about thē: hauyng thys drede, were aſtonnyed in them ſelues, to whom the aungell ſpake: Be not afrayd, 
                  •
               o I ſhew you great

ioye that ſhall be to all people, for there is borne a Sauyoure which is Chriſte oure lorde. In Exodo it is wrytten .xiiii. y• people feared God, and ſo beleued hym & hys ſeruaunt Moyſes. And they that drede god, ſayth the wyſemanne, ſhall not be vnfaythfull to hys worde. Alſoo Saynt John rehearſeth in his Apocalypſe ſayinge: I ſawe an aungell flyenge by the myddes of heuen, hauing ye euerlaſtinge Goſpell, that he ſhoulde preach to the dwellers vppon yearthe, & to euery nacion, & trybe, and tonge, and people, ſaying wyth a greate voyce: Feare ye God But now cometh the aungell of Sathan wyth his ydle iuſtifycations and vayne promyſes, cleane contrarye perſwading yt we nede no workes of penaūce

nor ſatyſfaction for our ſynnes. lyth Chryſte hath ſatyſfyed for vs all ready, onely to beleue is ynoughe, wythdrawynge people from the godly drede. How be it leaſte his diſceate ſhulde be eaſelye perceaued: he tranſfygureth hym ſelfe into a trewe angelles lykenes, ſometime tea chynge vertuouſe maners, brotherlye charyty, the example of Chriſtes actes & oure nedefull accomplyſhment of thē, wherin he wolde ſeme to profyte a few, to the intente he myght begyle many. And dyuers of hys Diſciples counterfeytyng the apoſtles faſhyon: other whyles alledge ſcryptures in theyr right ſences, with the ſame deuoute ſynceryte that Sathanne hym ſelfe dyd in temptynge Chryſte when he ſayd to him: God hath

commaunded his aungelles. &c whiche was the very ſcrypture truelye recyted, all though to a wronge purpoſe. But where as he in his owne perſon coulde not ouercome Chriſt our head: he ceaſſeth not to ſupplante vs hys Chriſten members by hys falſe Diſciples, and is lyke ſtyll to preuayle (oure merytes deſeruing ye wrath of god) excepte he of hys infinyte goodnes and gracyous pytie, voucheſafe to reconcyle vs agayne vnto hys fauour, and be oure protectour: whoſe mercy is the onely ſtaye that we be not all conſumed.
            Therefore lette vs drawe nere with confydence to the throne of grace, ye we may gette mercy and fynde grace to helpe vs at nede, contynuallye hauynge in oure remembraunce the voyce

of the aungel ſayinge: Feare ye God, and geue hym honoure, for the hour of iudgement commeth. And worſhyp ye hym that made heauen and yearth, the ſea, and fountaynes of waters, to whome be prayſe for euer wythout ende. Amen.
             Fare ye well.
         
      
      
         
            
            Nicholas. Wyllyam.
            
               
                  NOw welcom good brother frōparties of beyonde the ſea. We haue ſore longed for your ſafe retourne, hopynge to heare ſome newes from oure Euangelyke brotherne of Germanye, and in what maner the Goſpell doeth proſper there and go forward. 
            
            
               W.
                Syr I thanke you for your welcommynge. Howbeit concerynge your deſyre, to be certyfied of them whom ye call euangelyke bretherne: I aſſure you vnfaynynglye that I lyke theyr maner euerye daye worſe & worſe. 
            
            
               N.
                What haue ye ſo ſodenly changed your mynd, and begynne nowe to fall from the Goſpell forſakyng Goddes

worde? 
            
            
               W.
                Truelye I haue chaunged my mynde from exrours and wronge opinions, but neuer entendynge to renye Goddes worde or Chriſtes goſpell: whereof as farre as I can perceaue they be deſtitute and muche wyde. 
            
            
               N.
                To proue yt it were impoſſible, ſeyng ye can not denye but that they haue Chryſtes Goſpell in theyr vulgar ſpeche imprēted, fre for euery body to loke vpon, with contynuall exercyſe of euangelyke preachynge of Goddes worde. 
            
            
               W.
                In verye dede they haue the exteriour letter, with ſome outwarde apparaunce of zeale towarde it. But for all that as towchynge an euangelyke lyfe or a chriſten conuerſation, with faythfull fruytes behoueable to the ſame: they be neuer a deale

nerer in effecte than were the Jewes, whyche woulde haue made Chriſte theyr kynge, not for anye ſyncere loue that they had to folowe hym in vertuous lyuinge, or for reuerence of hys godly worde, but onelye in that they thought he would haue ſatiſfied their carnall appetytes, and ſeditious affections: wherof to be auctoure he was afterwarde wrongfully ſuſpect, euē as we ſee now a dayes hys goſpell euyll ſpoken vpon thorowe the ſclaunderouſe be haue oure, & wycked demeanour of them, whom in contempt of good people, ye call euangelike & Chriſtē brethren, auauncynge them ſelues to be onelye the trewe folowers and obſeruers of Chriſtes goſpell, where as theyr lyuinge manifeſtly repugneth. So that

after my iudgemente the cheife captaynes of them may be lykened to Theudas & Judas. Act. v. which vnder a colour of Meſſias comynge the very ſauiour and redemer from all bondage, whoſe offyce wrongfully vſurpynge by falſe promyſes of lybertye, peruerted much people of the Jewes for to folowe thē, to theyr vtter vndoyng and finall deſtruction. 
            
            
               N.
                Theſe ſedytious perſonnes to applye vnto Martyn Luther, and his folowers, is both agaynſte the treuth & witnes of your owne conſcience yf ye duely examyne it. For it is playne that thys Theudas and Judas, of a preſumptious affection and vnquyetnes of mynde, wythoute auctorytie of Goddes worde or preferremente of hys honoure,

ſedycyouſly moued the people to folow thē & not God: where as Martyn Luther with ſuch other euangelike preachers, auaunce not preſumptuouſelye them ſelues but god onely, nother perſwade the people to folowe them but Chriſte: whoſe Goſpell longe ſeaſon obſcured by mennes tradicions, they labour to bryng vnto lyght, and to reſtore the captyued conſcyences of ignoraunte folke vnto the fredome of Goddes word, whereof muche people nowe a dayes are no leſſe deſyrous than the Jewes were of theyr delyueraunce of bodely captyuyte. 
            
            
               W.
                To aunſwere you in this point, I doubt nothing but this Theudas and Judas pretended to the people (whom they fynallye diſceaued) ye auctorite

of God, & that they were ſpeciallye ſent of him for their deliueraunce, ſhewing ſome coloured apparence vnto ye ſame: Lyke as Martyn Luther in y• begynnynge pretended a meruelouſe zele & tender affection towarde the blynd ignoraunce of people, for to reduce theym vnto ye clearenes of knowlege, ſhewyng ſuch a feruent ſpyrit, that he was iudged to be ſyngulerlye choſen of God now in theſe latter dayes, for a dew reformation of the hole worlde.
               But conſyder to what open myſcheife hys ſecrete malignite braſte for the at laſt, and how many thouſandes by occaſion of his doctryne haue peryſhed and dayly periſhe both in body and ſowle: whereof to haue a further declaration, yf ye wyll

here me with patience, I ſhall ſo deſcribe vnto you the faſhion of hym and of hys adherentes, that ye may euydently know yt they are no Diſciples of Chriſt, but of Antychryſte, no trewe doctours but falſe dyſceauers, no Apoſtles but apoſtatas, and patrons of peruerſitie, 
            
            
               N.
                Now I beſeche you thē to procede on youre purpoſe, declarynge it at length: and I ſhall gladly geue you the hearynge with out interruption, truſting verely that all parcialitie ſet aparte, ye wyll ſhewe the verye trueth, accordynge as ye haue perfitly knowen by experience. And thus doynge ye may ſetle many mennes hartes at reſt in this troubelous ſeaſon, ſo ſore encombred with contencions and ſondrye opynions of learned

men, that they can not tell what partye they maye beſte leane vnto. 
            
            
               W.
                Syr fyrſte of al I proteſt here, that I entend to ſpeake no further thanne I haue perceaued amonge them my ſelfe, or elles perfytelye enformed by credable perſonnes, of whoſe certification I ought to haue no myſtruſt. Wherfore for to god vnto my purpoſe, ye ſhall vnderſtande that thys Martyne Luther cheyfe Captayne of newe heretikes, & bringer forth of olde hereſyes, was a freere Auguſtyne in the citie of Wittenberge, vnder ye dominion of Frederike duke of Saxony. Whyche duke opteyned a pardon fro Rome for the buylding of a certayne college there within his owne pallace, wherof Martin Luther was a great

ſetter forwarde, vntyll the tyme that thyther came a Jubelye from the Pope, dyſanullyng the dukes pardon among other for a ſeaſon: wherwith Martyn Luther not a litle offended, endeuoured hym ſelfe to preach agaynſt it. And ſone after he putte for the in prynt a treatyſe De indulgentijs, inueynge agaynſt the graunt of pardons how be it ſo cloſely, that he was ſuppoſed not to haue condemned the auctoritie but only the abuſe, whiche to ſaye the truth was to farre oute of frame in that prouiuce. And alſo he toke in hande to preache the playne textes of ſcrypture, dyſcloſing the blyndnes of the world, and detectyng the fautes of al eſtates, both hyghe and lowe, ſpyrytuall and temporall, vnder

ſuche moderation that he was taken for a prophete of God amonge them, and grew in eſtimation of ye people dayly more and more. Notwithſtandynge he pretended to take no parte with any ſeete other faction of Heretikes, as Wicklyf, Hus, Berengarius, and ſuche other whom he vtterly condemned, dyſſalowynge the Boemes, becauſe they ſeparated them ſelues from the church of Rome, conſtantly affyrmyng the pope to be Chriſtes vicarye. Thus he playd the wolfe in a lambes ſkynne a whyle ſecretly, tyl his frutes gaue euidence & openly bewrayd what he was in effect For ſhortly after he altered his mynde, & reuoked that he had ſpoken before, wyſſhing all his bookes that were emprynted

to be burned & vtterly deſtroyed. Then beganne he ſtoutly to fortefy his fayned fayth voyde of good workes, perſwadynge lybertie and aſſuraunce of ſaluacion to the defacinge of charitable deedes and ſuppreſſion of the drede of God. Then preached he pleaſaunte thynges to hys audyence, howe no manne was bounde to confeſſe hym vnto a preiſt, nether to obſerue the preſcription of prelates aboute faſtynges and exception of meate and dryncke, and that no perſon neded to payne hym ſelf wyth woorkes of ſatyſfactyon, whyles Chryſte hadde payd ynoughe for vs all. Alſo how conſtitutions of Popes and Byſſhoppes bynde vs nothynge.
               Then all his Sermones were agaynſte the cleargye, callynge

the Pope Antichriſt, and his folowers Dyſciples of Sathans Synagoge, in whoſe defiaunce he made a booke intytuled, De captiuitate Babilonica, ful of conuycyous furyes, and ragynge blaſphemye agaynſt the bleſſed Sacramentes, preferrynge his owne iudgement aboue the holy doctours of the churche. And where as he hadde wytneſſed before, that Micklyfe, Hus, Berengarius, & ſuche other were heretikes: than he ſayde that they were godlye men and ſaintes, callyng their condempners Antechriſtes and limmes of the Deuyll. Furthermore to bring kynges, princes, and temporall Gouernoures in contempte of theyr ſubiectes: he ſpared nother by preachyng nor teaching to rayle agaynſt them, ſomtime

preuely where he durſt not diſcouer his malyce for feare of diſpleaſure, and ſometyme apartelye there as he thoughte hymſelfe in no daunger of thē on whome he rayled: as wytneſſe the letters of conſpyracie whyche he craftelye forged to deſtroye the Duke George of Saxonye.
               Alſo the outragious treatyſe that he wrote agaynſt the kinges hyghenes both in latyn & Duch, ſo ſhameles and ſedicyouſelye, that it is not onely condemned of good men, but alſo abhorred of his owne adheren tes. Yet all thys whyle he forbare the comons & vplandy ſhe people, and encouraged them to note other mens vyces, rather than to amend theyr own fawtes, alledgyng oftentymes

vnto them, tyranny of prynces oppreſſion of the clergy, wyth other manyfolde miſeries and wretched calamities, whyche he ſayd they were wrongfully compelled to ſuffer. Whereby within ſmall proceſſe of tyme, they toke ſuche a ſtomake, that the drede of God and man ſet aſyde, they aroſe vppe wyth open ſedicyon in dyuers parties of Germanye aboue the noumber of an hundred thouſande perſannes, in ſuch a furious faſſhion, that euerye man almooſte ſtoode in feare of hys lyfe. Wherfore M. Luther perceyuynge no ſmall ieoperdye toward him throughe their inſurrection, becauſe the occaſion of it was layd to his charge as it was in deede: immediatly to ſhyfte hym ſelfe from ſuſpicion

and daungerous diſpleaſure of the prynces & great men he wrote haſtelye a boke voyde of all Chryſten charitie and naturall compaſſion, agaynſte the ſayde commons or vpiandy ſhe people, ſo extremely yt it would abhorre an he then hart to here or reade it, enforcynge euerye man wythoute anye reſpecte of pytie, to kyll and ſlee theym as houndes: of whome were myſerablye ſlayne in one place and another, aboue .iii. ſcore thouſand perſons, y• reſydue beynge nowe a lyfe in farre greater miſery & calamytie than euer they were afore. After thys fell a diſſention betwene M. Luther and Carolſtadius, aboute the Sacramente of the aultar. For Carolſtadius denyeth in it the bodelye preſence of Chriſte, affyrmynge

that when he ſpake theſe words: Hoc eſt corpus meū
                   he meant them of his owne corporall bodye and not of the Sacramente: where as M. Luther holdeth the contrarye, all be it he beganne to fall frome it, as his owne wrytinge teſtyfyeth, had he not ben preuēted by this Carolſtadius, whome the wicked arrogauncy of his ſtomake could not ſuffer to be auctoure of ſo hye an hereſye, where of he coueted hym ſelfe to haue ben father. Thys varyaunce endurynge betwyxte them: dyuers forſoke M. Luther and leaned to Carolſtadius ſyde, & manye malycyous letters fraudulētly forged, were conueyed frome the one to the other, with calummous prechinges, ye and when they met together, more ready

wyth fyſtes than with pacient arguments to trye their cauſe hadde they not bene ſondered. Notwithſtanding through fauour of the duke and other valyaunt frendes, M. Luther ſo preuayled agaynſt him that he was excommunicate: & beyng a man of auncyent age, an olde preiſt newly maried, and ſome tyme archedeaken of Myttenberge, was fayne to leaue hys younge wyfe, and auoyde the domynyon of Saxony. After that he had wandred through dyuers cities and townes ſwadynge his opynion with odyous reporte, to the miniſhynge of M. Luthers fame: at laſte he cam to Scirich in Switzer lande, where he founde one accordynge to hys execrable appetyte, named Swynglyus,

which was there an exceading ſetter forth of M. Luthers doctryn. To whom as ſone as he had diſcloſed his deteſtable hereſye agaynſt the bleſſed ſacrament, he gladly accepted hym, and in denyinge the corporall preſence of Chriſt, agreed both in one, ſauynge in this poynte they differed: where as Carol ſtadius ſayd that our ſaueour Chryſt ſpekyng theſe wordes: Hoc eſt corpus meum, meaned his corporall preſence there ſyttynge with his diſciples at the table & not in forme of bread: Swinglius affyrmed that they were not to be vnderſtanded lytterallye, but by a figure of interpretation, ſo that eſt was taken for ſignificat, and theſe wordes of Chryſte, thys is my bodye, were as muche to ſaye, as this

ſygnifyeth my body. Of thys matter he wrote ſondry epiſtles to dyuers of his famylyar frendes, gloryouſlye reioycing that he hadde founde oute the longe vnknowen true the, of ſo hyghe a myſterye: not by the occaſyon of Carolstadius (as he boaſted) but through his own diligent readynge of Scripture, & ſpecyally of Saynt Auguſtyns workes, whoe in verye dede is cleane contrary to his horryble hereſy. Neuertheleſſe many of M. Luthers adherentes aſſented vnto hym, amonge whome the cheif was Oecolampadius: whiche beynge a ſeculer preiſte of .xl. yeares of age, entred the religion of ſaint Brygyttes order in the prouince of Bauarye, and for hereſies that he hadde vttered both by preachyng and

wrytyng, ſtandinge in daunger of the Dukes attachiamente, he ranne awaye pryuylye wyth a nonne of the place, whome ſone after he forſoke, and gat him for refuge to a Lutheran Prynce named Fraunces de Sychken, a noble perſonnage by byrthe, but a cruell tyraunte of behaueoure, a greate murtherer, a common ſpoiler of marchaunts and a rouere of hyghe wayes, whyche maynteyned hym and one Hutten a Knyghte of the newe Goſpel, geuen holy to miſcheife, tyll at the leaſt for fear of diſpleaſure of other prynces, he was driuen to put them away. Oecolampadius came then to Baſyl, and there he founde manye fauourers of M. Luthers faction: by whoſe ayde he was promoted to be curate of a paryſhe

churche. Where he handled hys matters with ſuch cloked hypocriſye, that he wanne many mennes hartes, craftely ſowynge ſedicious diſturbaūce betwixte the temporalte & the ſpiritualtye, in ſuch wyſe that the hole cytye was oftentimes in parell of inſurrection, and in daunger to be deſtroyed.
               But thoughe he approued the oppynyon of Swinglius with preferrement aboue Carolſtadius: yet conceiued he another pryuate vnderſtandynge, ſayinge, yt 
                  Hoc est corpus meum, oughte thus to be interpreted: this is a fygure or a repreſentacyon of my bodye, allegyng Tertulliane, Chriſoſtome & ſaynt Auſten for hys auctoritye, whom he vnderſtandeth a myſſe, and recyteth falſely, ſometyme addynge

more to theyr wordes, ſometyme takynge away from theyr ſentences. In thys ſpace Martyn Luther wrote a conuycyous boke agaynſt Carolſtadius, and he an aunſwere to the ſame of lyke ſpyryte, and ſemblable charyte, ſo y• Swinglius and his company whiles other menne wondred at theyr madneſſe, laughed them bothe to ſcorne. Carolſtadius perceyuing that he was not ſo highly eſtemed as he reckened to haue bene, alſoo longynge verye ſoore for the companye of hys yonge wyfe: at laſte he made meanes to be reconciled again to Martyn Luther and hys churche, which was graunted hym vpon condycyon that he ſhoulde reuoke his opinion of y• ſacrament, wherto he agreed

albeit he helde not longe touche with them. But as ſone as he had recouered his wyfe agayn, he gat him out of y• waye, into a vilage, & there kept a comune tauerne, beſely vttryng his olde hereſyes. and dayly contryuynge newe. Thus in Germany muche vnquietnes encreaſed and trouble oute of meaſure, with intollerable varyaunce betwene ſeculer people and the clergye: many dyf famed lybelles & ſlaunderous wrytynges euerye where diſperpled abroade. And wher as was but one faction before, onlye of the Lutheranes: than ſprang there vp another, whiche be called Oecolampadians or Swynglianes, out of whom yſſued alſo the third faction named Anabaptiſtes, conteyning

aboue .xl. ſeetes of dyuers hereſyes and ſonderye opinions 
            
            
               N.
                In good fayth ye tell here a ſhrewde tale by theym. And yf it be true as ye reherſe, I lyke theyr manners a great deale worſe than I dyd. But ſpecially I meruayle that they be deuyded into ſo manye factions & ſondrye ſectes ſeynge they pretende to profeſſe the onely doctryne of Chryſt, whiche nouryſſheth no ſuch cōtencyous dyuerſitie: for he is the God of peace & not of diſſenciō 
               
            
            
               W.
                I enſure you there be in Germany .iii. C. ſectes aboue y• nomber that I haue named, of whoſe varyable opinyons, I cowlde partelye make reherſall yf I had conueniente oportunyte. 
            
            
               N.
                Nowe I praye you for the ſatyſfyenge of my

conſcience and of dyuers other whiche peraduēture haue ben deſceaued and broughte to errours, by the fayned report of them, which wold dylate their hereſyes vndernethe the coulour of vertuouſe lyuyng, boldelye affyrmynge in reproch of our catholike beleue yt amonge them is perfyte peace, concord, true loue and charitie, frely admyniſtred to euery one in neceſſyte wythout reſpect of perſons. But fyrſt I wold that ye declared ſomewhat of the .iii. principall factions. 
            
            
               W.
                The fyrſte as I haue ſhewed you are called Lutherans, becauſe they folow Luthers doctrine. The ſeconde lykewyſe are called Oecolampadyanes or Swynglyans, and are as one wyth the Lutheranes in raylynge

agaynſt the cleargy, and in contempnyng the authorite of the churche, but in the ſacrament of the aultar they be gretely repugnaunt: and ſo farre at varyaunce, that they haue made large volumes full of outragious furies one againſt another, in ſuche vncharitable maner that it excedeth the blaſ phemouſe contencyons of all heretykes and infydeles that euer were before our daies. ye theyr hatefull ennemyte is ſo malycyous, that yf anye of the Oecolampadyanes reſorte amonge the Lutheranes: they ſhalbe excommunicated as hethen perſonnes, and fynd very ſmall charyte, whiche they call loue after the newe interpretatyon. And in lyke maner y• Lutheranes ſhall fynde as lyttle

fauour amonge the Oecolampadyanes. The thyrde faction be called Anabaptyſts, becauſe they are twyſe Chryſtened, and wyll admyt none as theyr faythfull brethren except they be rebaptyzed agayne. They ſuffre not theyr chyldren to be Chryſtened vntyll they be of greate age, and haue manye ſtraunge opynyons. They affyrme that it is impoſſyble for Kynges, prynces, iuſtices, and other gouernours of ye comon weale, to be Chriſtē men. They obſtynately hold that it is vnlawfull for a iudge to requyre any othe of a Chriſtē mā. They ſaye that chryſten men oughte to make no prouyſyon nor reſiſtence agaynſte theyr enemies but frelye ſuffer thē to do their wyll. Alſo they ſhewe holy perfection 

outwardly, obſeruynge vygyles, faſtynges, wyth contynuall readynge of ſcrypture, redye to helpe theyr nedy brothren, vſynge theyr goodes in commone. And they diſprayſe much the lyuyng of the Lutheranes & Oecolampadians, ſayenge as I haue hard them my ſelfe report, that they be worſe than the cleargye, whom they call Papiſtes, for becauſe they haue the Goſpel in theyr monthes and frame theyr lyues nothynge thereafter, ſhewynge none amendment of their 
                     •
                  ewd conuerſation, but continue ſtyll in vycyous exceſſes after the common rate of myſbeleuers. And therefore they be in greuous hatred and ſuffre muche perſecution of the other, as excommunication, exyle, empryſonment,

& oftentymes cruell execution of death: inſomoche that it is enacted throughoute Suytzerland among ye Oecolampadyanes, and in dyuers other places, that whoſoeuer is founde of the Anabaptyſtes faction, he ſhall be throwen quycke into the water, & there drowned. 
            
            
               N.
                Iſe well than sayenge and doynge are not al one. For I am enformed that Martyn Luther hath wryten extremely agaynſt the perſecution of Prelates, affyrmynge it to be agaynſte the ſpyryte of God to perſecute or to put to death for vnbeleife or errours conſyderynge that faith (as he doth ſaye) is a gyfte of god, & no man maye haue it of hym ſelfe. Alſo becauſe Chryſte neuer compelled anye man to beleue

in hym, cōmaundynge the wedes to be ſuffered amonge the corne, vntyll the herueſt cō
                  meth 
            
            
               W.
                No fayle he wrote ſo at the begynninge, but after warde experience taught hym the contrarye. For if ſo be that he & the Oecolampadians had permitted theyr clientes to do what they luſted without any reſtraynte: they had ben quite oute of auctorite ere this tyme a daye. Apon which conſideration it was forfended in all cyties and iuriſdictiones of the Lutherans, that no man ſhuld bye or ſell other receaue anye booke or treatyſe compyled by the Oecolampadyanes. And they in lyke maner made actes to ſuppreſſe the Anabaptyſtes, fearyng leaſt theyr ſectes ſhuld vaynquyſh theyr faccyon.

               
            
            
               N.
                Yf the Anabaptiſts haue ſo many ſectes as ye recyte, I praye you to declare ſome of them. 
            
            
               W.
                At your inſtaunce I ſhall gladly. There be ſome whyche holde opynyon that al deuylles & damned ſoules ſhal be ſaued at the daye of dome.
               Some of them perſwade that the Serpent which dyſceaued Eue was Chriſt. Some of thē graunt to euerye man and woman two ſoules. Some affyrme lecherye to be no ſynne, & y• one maye vſe another mannes wyfe withoute offence. Some take vpon them to be ſooth ſay ers and Prophetes of wonder full thynges to come, and haue propheſyed the daye of iudgement to be at hande: ſome with in three monethes, ſome with in one monneth, ſome wythin

vi. dayes. Some of them both men and women at theyr congregatyons for a myſterye▪ ſhewe them ſelues naked, affyrmynge that they be in the ſtate of innocencye. Alſo ſome holde that no man ought to be puniſſhed, or ſuffre execucyon for any cryme or treſpace be it neuer ſo horryble, whereof I wyl ſhew you an example done mater in dede. In Switzerland a lytle frō ſaynt Gal, at a place named Cella Abbatis, one of theſe Anabaptiſtes ſlewe his owne brother, & ſmote of hys heade. When he was demaūded why he dydde ſo, this was his aunſwer: It was the wyll of the father that I ſhould do it, and ſo he eſcaped wythoute punyſſhemente. For thoughe they be gredy in reprouing other mēs

fawtes, makynge haynous exclamations agaynſt them: yet ponder they full lytle the correctyon of theyr owne enormityes, callynge them infyrmytyes and weaknes of the fleſhe be they neuer ſo abhomynable 
            
            
               N,
                Well yet me thynketh by youre ſayinge here before, that many of them leade a more cō
                  mēdable lyfe in face of ye world than the common ſort of ye Lutheranes or Oecolampadians, 
            
            
               W.
                ye verelye vnto the outwarde oſtentation. But there cometh greater inconuenience by theym whiche haue ſuche a ſhadowe of holy lyuynge, than by the other. And there is nothynge more peryllous in ſedu cynge the ſymple, than a paynted pretence of an holye lyfe, where as they ſwerue ones frō
                  
the ryght fayth and catholyke beleife. Whiche is eaſye to be proued by euydente examples as well of the olde heretiques, as of oure new Captaynes of the moſte hye hereſies. And to ſhew you the trueth as I haue expertely founde, ſome I haue knowen ſo angelyke of conuerſation, yt I coulde haue founde in my harte to commytte my ſoule wholy into theyr dyrection: whom afterwarde I haue perfytelye perceyued to be auctours of ſuch deteſtable heresies, that it wold make a chriſtē hart to tremble for to here thē ones named. And to tell you of one amonge manye. I was aquaynted with a certayn perſonne of the Oecolampadians in ye citie of Argentyne, whiche led a lyfe inculpable amonge

his neighbours, and was reputed of vertuous conuerſation, exercyſynge hym ſelf contynually in charytable workes, and vnderſtode freſhelye the ſcryptures in his mother tonge, for he was ignoraunte of Latyne. Afterwarde he fell into ſo abhominable hereſie, that he denied openly the new teſtament ſayinge that Chriſt was a falſe Prophete, and all his apoſtles diſceuers, acceptynge no part of the olde Teſtament, but the fyue bookes of Moyſes. The cheif preachers and lerned mē of the cytye came vnto hym for to reforme hym by waye of dyſputatyon, and to brynge hym from his erroure, requyrynge hym to ſhewe what ground of Scripture, or what occaſiō moued hym to take ſo peryllous

opynyon. To whome he anſwered coldly with ſoft wordes & demure countenaunce, how he woulde nether diſpute nor argue with theym, ſayinge that it was his beleif & was aſſured of God with witneſſe of his cō
                  ſcience to be trewe. Apon this incōtinent he was enpryſoned and at laſte brought before the lordes of the towne, whiche in lyke manner exhorted hym to reuoke his hereſyes, manacynge hym with feare of terrible death, if he would not chaū
                  ge hys erronious mynde. He anſwered that he was redy to ſuffre whatſoeuer death God had ordeyned hym vnto, and woulde nether for fear, nor for fauour go from hys opynyon. Wherefore after a ſufficient delyberation, ſeynge he woulde

tourne by no meanes, ſentence was geuen that he ſhoulde be burned. 
            
            
               N.
                In good faythe well worthy: but was he burned in deede? 
            
            
               W.
                No. For when he ſhoulde haue gone to the place of execution, accordynge to the vſaunce of the countrye, he was firſt brought before the towne howſe, and there his artycles recyted. He was aſked whether they were the very ſame which he hadde affyrmed before them. He aunſwered ye. Howbeit nowe (he ſayd) God hath opened my ignoraunce, & I acknowlege me ſlaunderouſely to haue erred, aſkynge you all forgyuenes. I beleue perfytely that Jeſus Chryſt is my ſauyour, and am redy in his fayth to ſuffre thys deth prepared for me. The lordes

then where as they had giuen ſentence that he ſhuld haue ben burned, for a more eaſye deth, they aſſigned him to be be hedyd, whereof he thanked thē, and went towarde the place of iuſtyce, patiently takynge hys death with great repentaunce. 
            
            
               N.
                This may be a good admoniſſhment that men ſhoulde not be ſo wauerynge in fayth, as to geue credence in all thinges to any perſone for ye onely pretence of exterioure holines, in as muche as the deuyll can tranſfygure hym ſelfe into an angels lykenes, and a falſe peruerter take vppon hym the offyce of a trewe Apoſtle. Moreouer I conſider by your cōmunicacyon, and playne experyence here rehearſed, that yf the frowarde ſturdynes of vnruly

people were not reſtrayned by lawes, prohibitions, & ſharpe punyſhmentes, euery common weale woulde be ſone ſubuerted, and the whole world come to noughte. 
            
            
               W.
                As for that ye may take example not farre hens at the county of Emdone in East Fryſelande, where the earle, ruler of the county, fyrſte receyuyng Martyn Luthers doctryne, & afterwarde Oecolampadius opynion? ſuffered his people to read all maner of Bookes, and to be of what ſo euer ſecte or opynion they would without any reſtraynt. Shortelye after one of theyr cheife preachers whiche hadde bene a freer obſeruante, a man of ſubtyle learnynge, and pleaſaunt ſpeache, hyghlye eſtemed among the people: beganne to

preache in openne audience agaynſt the bleſſed trinitie, ſayenge that there was but one perſon, one God, and that our Sauyour Chriſte was a creature as we are, a pure man, and not God, but hauynge goddes ſpyryte. This cauſed not a lyttle dyſcorde betwene the preachers and the people, for many of the country leaned vnto him takynge his parte ſo ſtronglye that the earle was fayne to banyſhe hym oute of hys domynion, all be it hys peſtyferous ſede remayned ſtyl. Then cam thither doctour Baltazar, and after hym Carolſtadius, bryngynge in the faction of ye Anabaptiſtes, to y• augmentinge of greater confuſiō. For wher as ſome chriſtened theyr chyldren theyr next neyghbours wolde

not, one condemnyng another with dedly hatred. The meane 
                     •
                  eaſon a certayne ſkynner of Denmarke in the Dukedome of Holſatye, where Martyne Luthers doctryne was onely in ſtrength, preched Oecolampadius opinion with ſo craftye argumentes, that Martynes fame began to decreace. Wherfore doctoure Pomerane was ſent from Wyttenberge to dyſpute agaynſt hym, and in concluſion obtayned the vyctorye throughe partiall fauoure (as ſome reported) of the duke and Lordes of the cytyes of Homburghe and Breame: whyche immediatly commaunded that no man ſhulde be ſo hardye to contrarye or ſwerue from the doctryne of Martyn Luther, vnder payne of banyſſhynge,

and other punyſſhement. Thē two prechers of Breame were ſent to Emdone to dyſwade ye earle & his people from Oecolampadius opinion, and from the confuſe dyuerſyte of other ſectes, alſo to reduce theym agayne vnto Martyn Luthers wayes. The earle with his coū
                  cell at theyr perſwaſyons alienated theyr mindes frō Oecolampadius, ſtreytely charging all thoſe preachers whiche had ſuſteyned his faction, or anye other, ſauynge Martyn Luthers, to departe oute of hys countrye by a certayne daye apoynted. Then was it a wonder to ſe what murmuration, grudge, and rumoure of ſedycion was amonge the people, not withoute lykelyhed of fallynge together by the eares, &

inſurrection agaynſte theyr prynce, had not he ſought prouydent meanes to pacyfy thē. This cōtinued no longe ſpace but letters came from Argentyne, Baſyle, zyricke, Bearne, and from many perſons of notable erudition, after theyr eſtemynge, alſo from the prynce of Heſſe, aduertiſyng the earle wyth ſeryous exhortation, to call home agayne ye preachers of Oecolampadius factiō, and reprehendyng his ſodayn mutabylytie from theyr inſtitute, ſo apparente by manyfeſt coniectures to preuayle aboue the other. At whoſe importune requeſtes and ſubtyle inſtygacyons, he chaunged yet agayne hys purpoſe, and gaue the Oecolampadian preachers licence to returne into theyr olde places,

and lybertie to preache as they were before accuſtomed: commaunding ſilence vnto the other, or elles auoydaunce of his countrye. Lo thus may ye ſe what varyable inconſtancye and ſondry mutations of condemned hereſyes hath enſued with euident confuſion, where as people be deuided from the v
                     •
                  itye of the chriſten church, & contemne to walke after the wholſome decrees of catholike fathers, wreſtynge the ryght ſence of ſcryptures vnto theyr crooked ymaginacyons. And ſpecyallye where the brydle of ſenſualite is ſet at large, to the ſturdye frowardnes of ſedicyous ſubiectes, ſometime by the effeminat tēdernes of princes, ſo negligētly regarded, y• afterwarde theyr fearfull rygour is

ſcant able to redreſſe it: which hath bene ye lamentable dekay of the Boemes, and is now the ruynous myſcheife of the hye Almaynes, not vnlykely to be the deſolation of chriſtendome yf remedy be not founde in ſeaſon. 
            
            
               N.
                Sauynge your pacyence me thought ye declared here y• the Land graue of Heſſe is a fauourer of Swinglius & Oecolampadius, who wyth his people as I vnderſtande admytteth Martyn Luthers wayes and none other. 
            
            
               W.
                I wyll not denye but he maynteyneth ſtyl Martyn Luthers doctryne, albeit ſynce the dyſputation was before hym, he hath fauoured ſo greatlye the opynion of Oecolampadius and Swinglius, y• were it not as I deme for feare of diſpleasynge

hys confederate coſyne the duke of Saxony, and frentyke perturbation of Martyn Luther, he wolde haue ſuſtayned it openlye ere this tyme. Wytneſſe the gloryous comendation vnto their faces whiles they were preſent, and ſynguler preferremēt of thē amonge hys famylyer counſellers, alſo hys beneuolent lyberalytie at theyr departyng wyth letters afterward betwyxe thē farſed full of paynted prayſes ī theyr abſence. 
            
            
               N.
                I beſeche you when and vnder what maner was thys dyſputation. 
            
            
               W.
                In the yere of our Lord. 1528. the prince of Heſſe in his cheife cyte of Marburge cauſed there to be aſſembled Martin Luther, Melancton, Oecolāpadius, Swinglius, Capito, Butzer

wyth many other of y• moſt famous clerkes of the Lutheranes and Oecolampadianes (the Anabaptiſtes onely excluded) where dyuers artycles were doubtfully proponed to y• nomber of .xv. whyche before tyme hadde bene diſcuſſed and clerely determyned in general counſelles of the vnyuerſall church. And when they had by longe proceſſe vnfrutefully diſputed aboute the iuſtificacion of fayth without good works: of baptyſme, and other queſtyons vpon which they had written whole bokes: yet in y• ende were they driuen to the old determinatiō of the churche, ſaue leaſt theyr wrytynges ſhoulde ſeme in vayne, & theyr aſſemblynge to be ydie, they founde out ſome contrariety of ſo ſlender

importancye, that mē may playnlye iudge in them, other inuyncyble arrogance diſdaynynge to be reformed, or elles obſtynate malyce, ſekyng for y• nones to impugne the trewth. Concerninge the ſacrament of the altare wherin reſted ye princypall matter of theyr diſputation, they greately varyed and coulde by no meanes agree.
               Howe be it they concluded at laſte, that eche parte holdyng them contente with theyr beleife, ſhould departe in louynge frendſhyppe, without any odyous wrytinge frō thence forth one agaynſt another. 
            
            
               N.
                whether of them obtayned the vyctory? 
            
            
               W.
                They deuyded it betwene theym whyle they were preſente. But ſone after theyr departyng, the Lutheranes 
 aſcribed it to Martyn Luther, and contrarye the Oecolompadianes vnto Oecolampadius and Swynglyus.
            
            
               N.
                Uſe they ſuch crafty conueyaunce in promotyng theyr Goſpell? 
            
            
               W.
                ye hardely, and that without any ſhame when they be detected of it, inforſyng men agaynſt their wylles to be fautours of theyr hereſyes. Dyd not No
                     •
                  iomagus gather certayne ſentences out of Eraſmus workes, which falſely depraued, he coupled vnto Martyn Luthers aſſertions, and cauſed them to be imprynted: blaſyng abrode that Eraſmus and Luther were of one opynion, to the ſlaunderous hynderaunce of his profytable ſtudye? of whome after muche other detraction, he was not

aſhamed to craue ſubſedye in his beggarly indygence. Alſo Butzer playd a lyke pageante with Pomeran in tranſlating his Pſalter out of latyne into the Almayne tonge. For wher he aſpyed any occaſion to treat of the bleſſed Sacramente: he plucked out Pomerans ſentē
                  ces, and graffed in his own after no compendyous faſhyon: which as ſone as they were en prynted, the fame noyſed ouer all yt Pomerane (vnknowynge to hym) was one with the Oecolampadianes, whyche afterwarde he apartely deteſted in dyuers epyſtles, dyſcoueryng the falſe hod of Butzer. Suche ſubtyll dryftes I may tell you among them is daylye not vnpractiſed. 
            
            
               N.
                Well, ye haue here reherſed many thinges agaynſt

them, wherein yf I and ſuche other wold geue credēce vnto your ſayinges wythoute ſurmyſe of percialite, we ſhuld ſone turne oure affection from theyr learnynge. But ſeyng ye haue bene a fauourer of them, and per aduenture bothe ſpoken and wrytten as largely as the rankeſt of them all whome ye nowe call heretykes: fayne woulde I wyt what mocioned you to take it in hande ſo earneſtlye, and now to ſhyft your ſelfe from it ſo lyghtelye.
            
            
               W.
                To ſhew you the truthe withoute diſſimulation howe I was entyced vnto theyr faction, the verye begynnynge was this. I had redde certayn treatyſes of Martyn Luther, of the iuſtifycacion onelye by fayth wythoute good deedes,

how man had no free wyl, how oure good workes auayled vs nothynge to be ſaued, nother oure yll deedes ſhoulde cauſe vs to be damned, and many other articles whiche he falſely preſumed to ground vpon ſcripture. Alſo I dylygentlye noted howe he deſcrybed the abuſes of Popes, Cardinalles, byſhoppes, preiſtes, and relygious perſonnes, declarynge howe the preſent dekay of the church, farre differed from the perfectyon of the Apoſtles and holy fathers, at the fyrſt begin nynge: wherin he made no lye though in other thīges he ſpared the truthe. Furthermore geuyng eare to the pleſaūt rumoures of his reformations, highly cōmended amōg new fā
                  gled people: it ſet myne harte

ſo on fyre, y• I could not reſt vntyll I had bene there with thē. After that I had ſene Martin Luther, Pomerane, Melancton, & heard theyr prechinges, perceyuyng theyr order there in Saxonye: I went into hye Almayne, vnto the Oecolampadians, & remaynynge there amonge theym, was oftentymes conuerſaunt with ye Anabaptiſtes. In the meane ſpace I ſawe many wonderfull alterations, as deſtroyenge of monaſteryes, pluckynge downe of churches, caſtynge out of ymages, breakynge of aultars, and caryeng the conſecrate ſtones to the buyldynge of theyr bulwarkes, alſo maryages of preſtes, monkes, freers, nonnes, contempte of holy dayes, anullynge of vygyles, faſtynge of

the lent, and embrynge dayes clene reiecte with other laudable ordynaunces inſtytute by the churche. Al places of ſcripture where mencyon is made of Antichriſt, falſe prophetes, mayſters of lyes, & ſuch other▪ they violently applyed vnto y• clergye, namynge theym ſelfe chryſten bretherne, dyſcyples of Chriſte, and apoſtles of hys Goſpell. In denyenge purgatorye and auctorite of y• pope, yf they founde in auncyent auctours as much as a corrupte tytle of a pyſtle ſownynge any thynge to theyr purpoſe, all be it the Epyſtle ſelfe made whole agaynſt it: yet wold they take it as the worde of god and ſure reuelation of the ſpyryte. Contrarye wyſe, yfanye alledged Auſten, Hierome, Cypryane,

or Chryſoſtome agaynſte them they wolde admytte theyr ſentences for none auctoryte, ſayenge they were men, & all men were lyers. In like maner concernynge the ſacrament of the aultare, where they redde in doctours of the ſpyrytuall eatynge and ghoſtelye beynge: they onelye accepted that, and vnder the coloure therof they woulde exclude the corporall eatynge and bodelye preſence of Chriſt, to the eſtablyſſhinge of theyr blaſphemous errors: whiche they ſhadowed vnder the couerte of hypocryſye and perſuaſions of peruerted ſcriptures, in ſuche wyſe that openlye ſeyng I could not perceiue them, vntyll it pleaſed God of his ineſt
                     •
                  mable goodnes to brynge me oute of the lande of

darckenes and region of deth, vnto the clerenes of his knowledge & lyuyng lyght of truth. I can not excuſe me but amōg the wycked I endeuored my ſelfe to haue doone euyll: but God ſo mercyfullye preuented me, that it came to ſmall effecte in doynge anye harme. If I haue bene occaſion of any mannes fall or cauſe of ſlaunder, I am ſorye for it and aſke forgeuenes. Notwythſtandynge I neuer defended any opinion obſtinately, nether deſpiſed the admonycyon of any vertuous perſon: that I haue erred was through ignoraunce, and of no malicious pertynacite. Where ye be in perplexitie of credence geuyng vnto my words, I am ſure if that I ſpake accordynge to your appetite, ye would put

no dyffydence in me whether I ſaid the verite or lyed: for it is a playne caſe amonge the fauourers of theſe newe ſectes. that they wyl refuſe no forged tales makyng aught for theyr ſyde, be they neuer ſo fals. And ſeyng ye beleued me in errour: ye oughte not to myſtruſte me nowe in my faythfull reuocacion, voluntarye, and not coacted. 
            
            
               N.
                Clearely many men preſuppoſe that other ye be deluded by y• flatteryng perſwaſyon of ſome worldlye perſons or elles vtterly geuen into a reprobate mynde, throughe gredye deſyre of yearthly promotion and appetyte of ydle lyuynge. 
            
            
               W.
                It is not in my power to ſtoppe y• wronge ſurmyſe, or myſſe reporte agaynſt me, now enemy vnto theyr errours

whyles they abuſe the ſame to y• frendes of theyr hereſyes: namely where as Sathan is looſed at large, and the lyenge goſte the ſpyryte of vntrueth, walketh at lyberty vnreſtreyned. Woulde God they were as preſt to remoue y• balk out of their owne eyes, as they be prōpte to aſpye a lytle mote in other mens. They crye oute ſore vpon the worldelye wyſedome and carnall prudence of other perſons, callyng them tyrauntes and mynyſters of Antechriſt, wher as I cā perceiue none more gredy of carnall policies and fleſhely ayde of tyrā
                  tes than they be. Were he neuer ſo cruell a creature, or myſcheuous fende that is tourned to theyr factions, they receaue hym for an euangelyke dyſcyple,

his malycyous mynde nothynge mynyſſhed, althoughe percaſe his doyng of miſcheife is reſtrayned by pouertye or ſome other myſerable impediment agaynſt his wyll. And yf any body ſpeke ought agaynſt ſuch peruerſe penitentes, forth with they alege the vnpitious fierſnes of ſaynt Paule before hys conuerſion, the ſinnes of Mary Magdalene and her penaūce, alſo ye example of Chriſte receyuing publicanes and ſynners, and how the angelles of heauen ioye more vpon one penitēt ſinner. &c. Lu. xv. I pray you what a ghoſtelye patrone was Hutten theyr furious chā
                  pyon, a man not onelye ouerwhelmed wyth hereſyes, but alſo ſtuffed full of all vnhappynes, whoſe horryble ende was

accordyng to hys myſcheuous lyfe. For after that he had bene plaged with ye frenche pockes, and was healed of them ſeuen ſondrye tymes: he myſcrably dyed of them in an yle of Swicherlād in extreme pouerte abhorred of all people, hys vyle carcas eaten with ſoores, more ſtynkynge then anye caryon, ſo that vnneth any bodye myght abide the lothſome ſtaunche of it. Moreouer I beſeche you with what chriſten ſpyryt dyd Fraunces of Syckhym defend thē, a ſubuerter of peace, a burner of poore mennes houſes, & a troubler of all Germany, vp pon whom the vengeaunce of God dyd lyghte, and was ſodenly ſlayne in a Caſtell beſyde Crutzynacke to the infamye of hys aūceters and diſheritaūce

of his chyldren. I paſſe ouer the captaynes of the vplandiſh people and theyr inſurrection, partely touched before. 
            
            
               N.
                Ye wot wel ynough that Martyn Luther dyd wryt agaynſt them, condemnyng theyr ſedicious enterpryſe. 
            
            
               W.
                So dyd he indede when it was to late voyde of remedye. But as long as they were in any lykly hod to preuayle, he rather ſupported thē. What heuenly wyſdome dyd the monſtruouſe fygures ſygnify, where M. Luther was portred wyth a boke in his hand, & by hym Hutten his protect our in complete harnes holdyng a drawen ſword, with certayn texts vnderneth prouokynge ſedicion. And as for ydlenes, I ſawe no manne more fauty in it than them ſelues:

except ye account that for profitable buſynes when they be nether ydle nor well occupied. Are there not a great infinyte nomber amonge them, y• can lay ſharpely to other mennes charges the cōmaūdemēt of God genen to Adam: In ſwete of thy face thou ſhalt eat thy bread, & dylygently repete y• labourous workyng of ſaynt Paule and other Diſciples of Chriſte, which lyue delycately in ydlenes? And ſuppoſe ye y• a man may not fynde manye of them whiche haue theyr ſuſtentation vpon the ſpoyle of churches, robbery of moneſtaryes, and extorcion of innocent people. 
            
            
               N.
                Thoughe ſome of thē be of ſuche diſpoſicion: yet ought not ye to condemne the hole nomber of the good for a

ſmall ſomme of the euyl. 
            
            
               W.
                Why do ye then diſpiſe the vni uerſall churche, becauſe ſome of them be noughte. 
            
            
               N.
                Mary for becauſe the more ſomme of the euyll, ſu
                     •
                   mountethe the leſſe nomber of the good. 
            
            
               W
                And thynke you that it maye not be better verefyed among the new goſpellers, of ye which the beſt is ſtarke nought? Not wythſtandynge ſome I haue knowē of excellent lyterature, which for theyr ſober conuerſacion and temperate lyuyng, yf they hadde bene as ſeryous in furtherynge the fayth as they were in ſettynge forth of hereſyes, were worthy to be pillers of Chriſtes church. But I pon der not ſo greatly the outward holynes of hypocrytes, conſyderyng that Arrius, Maniche

us, Pellagius, & other execrable here tykes euen as they be equall wyth them in hereſyes, ſo were they not infer yours to them in ſuche hypocryſy. How many here in Englond within this .C. yeare haue ridde them ſelues out of this mortall lyfe, wyth a deſperate death hated both to God & man, ſome drow ninge thē ſelues, ſome cuttyng theyr owne throtes, and many hangyng them ſelues, whyche in theyr lyfe tyme haue ben reputed for well dyſpoſed, vertuous, & charitable folke aboue the comon ſorte of chriſten people, & paraduenture ſome here in London of our olde aquayntaunce. In whome is fulfylled the ſayinge of Samuell: Man marketh thoſe thinges that be open to the eye, but God conſidereth

the ſecretnes of ye hart, to the verefyenge of Chryſtes worde in the goſpell. Luk. 17. That which is hyghly auaunced of men, is abhominable in the ſyghte of God. Neuertheleſſe yf ye go to the vttermoſt
                     •
                   I could appoynt ye to many of the church, whiche accomplyſh the perfection of liuing vnfaynedly, where of theſe men afore ſayd haue but a barren pretēce or a dombe ſimilitude. And as for the worſt multitude of preſtes, monkes, chanons, freers, and other relygious perſons▪ I dare compare theym wyth the common ſorte generally of theſe new factions, althoughe ye put a part theyr fayth & obedience to ye church, which I reken no ſmall mater. 
            
            
               N.
                So god help me then dare I geue

the verdyt with out any queſt, that they be ſtarke noughte all the manye of them. And to beginne fyrſt of all at the freers, ye ſe what a raſ
                     •
                  all rable ronneth aboute the country with boſomed ſermons, preach ynge fables and olde wyues tales, in ſtede of the worde of God, whiche ar redy mates to aſſociate vnthryftes in all myſcheif, to the ſlaunder of chriſten religion. And to ſpeke of monkes, chanons, with other religious poſſeſſioners, I praye you what a ghoſtly lyfe lead they▪ geuen holye to ſlouthfull ydlenes, and belyioy, in eatyng and drynkinge, withoute ſtudye of Scripture or endeuerment of any vertuouſe excerciſe. They syng in theyr quieres wyth as great deuotion, as hunters do

at the halowynge of a foxe, hauyng delyte in yellyng of their voyces, and crying of organs, but no ſwetenes of ſpyrytuall melodye. Alſo ſeculer preiſtes euen as bad as the beſt, ſhall ye not fynde them at tauernes & dyſhoneſt houſes, drynkyng & gowſynge tyll they be as dronken as apes, nothynge abaſhed to ſwere blaſphemous othes & to vſe fylthye communication. And ſuch as be curats hauing charge of mennes ſowles, are there not many of thē blynder than betels, deſtitute of neceſſary doctryne with good liuing, whereby they myghte edyfye theyr paryſſhons. It were to tedyons a proceſſe to rehearſe their wretchednes ſo farre out of order, whyche all the worlde perceyueth & ſpeaketh agaynſt

it, and yet can be none amendement. 
            
            
               W.
                If theyr wretchednes of lyuyng as ye ſay be manyfeſt to all the worlde: it ſhall not be ſo nedefull for you to declare anye further thereof, as it wyll be expedyente for me to tell of theſe newe goſpellers whoſe erronyous wyckednes is knowen to very few here in this region. And ſurely to improue the vniuerſall churche as euell, becauſe many of them be lewde: it were no leſſe madnes then to ſette at nought the old teſtamēt, becauſe the more parte of the children of Iſraell were euill, other to diſpyſe the Goſpell becauſe all theſe newe factions which falſely preſume to be folowers of it, are heretikes. Among whō ye ſhall fynde 
                     •
                  enegate freers that haue caſte

of theyr habytes, and forſaken theyr relygion, whiche haue maryed wyues, and ſone after ſcape away from them, leauing theym in carefull deſolatyon, ye ſome one ma
                     •
                  ieng .ii. or .iii. wyues in dyuers countreys, whome they haue dyſceyued by craftye entycementes, makynge them beleue with theyr gorgeous apparayle that they be cōe of noble & ryche frēdes. And of theſe are there manye which walk ouer ſōdry prouinces, with gloſinge ſpeache and ſwete tales, ſpienge out vnſtable people y• wyll be waueryng with euery winde, and ſuch as theyr ſtomackes ſerue them to contemne faſtynges and prayers, deſyrous of carnall lybertie, and can rayle agaynſte the cleargy, caring for no iuriſdiction,

 and when ſuche vnlawfull meanes fayl, geue themſelues to thefte, robbyng of churches and ſedycyous dyſturbaunce, whereby ſome of them are promoted to the galows, & ſhamefull marter dome of felons.
               Lykewyſe apoſtata monkes & chanons peruerted vnto theyr ſectes, ſome bring with thē as much ſubſtaunce of the ſpoyle of theyr places, that they purchaſe therwith fayre landes & yearely rentes. Alſo prieſtes y• haue made cheueſaūre of theyr benefices for .ii. or .iii. C. poundes, at whoſe commyng it is a worlde to heare howe God is magnyfyed for theyr delyueraunce frome the tyrannye (as they call it) of Antychriſte, and what brotherlye chere is made with feruēt reioyce 
                     •
                   ye ſuffraūce

of Chriſtes croſſe, namelye yf they haue ſtore of monye. And ſoone after they are prouyded of fayre wyues in ſafegarde of theyr chaſtite, and to augment theyr perfection, wherby ſome of theym chaunce to be ſo vexed with deuylles, that theyr Goſpell is not able to charme them, and are fayne to runne awaye in libertye of the lorde, ere that theyr wyues be made faſte in the bondes of our lady. Beſyde theſe howe manye in Germany haue annuall penſions of cyties and townes for tearme of lyfe, bownde to no maner of ſeruice, whoſe chāge of ſtate is to no renuyng of ſpiritual conuerſation, but rather an vnſacyat luſte of fleſhly fredome, euidētly tryed by theyr vycious behaueoure, ydle lyuyng,

& diſguyſed apparell.
            
            
               N.
                Ye maye ſpeake manye thynges for your pleaſure, but ye knowe righte wel y• chriſten relygion ſtandeth not in outewarde rayment, nor I can not ſe but as good a ſoule maye be vnder a ſeculer wede, as in a relygious veſture. The ſtraunge diuerſitie of habytes is not cō
                  maunded of God, nother ſcripture aſcribeth any holines vnto thē. 
            
            
               W.
                In good fayth I ſpeke of truth & not of pleaſure for it is to me muche diſpleaſure to ſe thē ſuche as I ſe thē, not in theyr diſguiſed clothing onlye, full farre vnſemelye for them, if they were eyther ſuch as they were before, or ſuch as they nowe call theym ſelfe, but ouer that in euery kynde of all dyſordered lyuyng: whyche ye

let paſſe as thoughe I had foū
                  den no faut but with theyr clothynge. And agaynſte that ye ſeme to ſet at nought the habytes and faſhions of religiouſe people, callyng them ſtraunge dyuerſities & thinges nought worth, becauſe they be not commaunded of god, nor that ſcripture aſcrybeth no holynes in them. But as for ſtrangnes of apparell, relygyouſe men vſe none. But theyr apparell was at the fyrſt deuyſed by ſuch as they that now hate religiō, do not yet denye for holye bleſſed men. And now they cannot be ſtraunge, when they contynue ſtyll euery order his olde faſhion, and that all the world hath loked vppon them, and among a thouſand freers none go better appareled then an other.
               
                  But now vnto the other ſyde, theſe that runne away frō thē vnto theſe Lutherans, they go I ſay dyſguyſed ſtrangelye frō that they were before, in gaye iagged cotes, and cut and ſcotched hoſen, verye ſyghtly forſo the, but yet not very ſemelye for ſuch folke as they were and ſhoulde be. And thys apparell change they dayly, from faſhiō to faſhion, euery day worſe thē other, their new fangled foly & theyr wantō pryde neuer cōtēt nor ſatiſfyed. And where ye ſet at nought al ſtraunge diuer ſytie of habytes, in whyche ye meane I wote well not onelye religiouſe mennes apparell, but alſo the garmentes worne in diuine ſeruyce, for therein I knowe youre mynde of olde▪ I ſaye theſe gere were well ordered

by good men, & not without the good help of God. And ye can not fynde that they be dyſalowed of God, but rather approued, in as muche as he in the old teſtament appointed vnto y• preiſtes and mynyſters a ſeuerall dyſtynction of apparayle from the common peple, ſpecyally in theyr miniſtraciōs. Alſo it appeareth by the ſtorye of the prophete Heliſeus, whōe the chyldren of Bethel mocked and wondred vpon, yt he was not clothed after theyr comen faſhion. And verely I holde it more conueniēt for relygyouſe perſons to were yt habytes by theyr fore fathers inſtitute, than to be arayed after the ruf fyane inuencion, of many Goſpellers in Germany. 
            
            
               N.
                All theſe are but blynde reaſons of

your owne fantaſy, nothing to the purpoſe. The orygynall in ſtitution of relygyous habytes began vpon certayne conſyderations. As thus: when holy fathers lyued in wyldernes, they made theyr garmentes after a faſhion that myghte beſt defend the ſharpe ſtormes and yll wethers. And ſome yt gaue themſelues to bodely labour, contryued theyr clothes to be ſhapen in a moſt hanſome maner to worke in. Alſo ſome of them wyllyng to exchew ſuperfluytie of veſture, deuyſed them habytes mooſte apte for warmth & ſparynge of clothe. But now theſe conſyderatiōs faylyng: to were the habytes of them, & not to folowe theyr example, me thynketh it mere hypocryſy. 
            
            
               W.
                Then maye

I ſay to you agayne after the ſame forme of argumentation. The fyrſte inuentours of thys newe dyſguyſed apparel, were hethen people, vnthriftes, fooles, and myſlyuynge perſons: nowe ye that be accoūted good Chriſten people vſe the ſame, where as ye ought not folowe theyr lewdenes, therfore ye be &c. Notwithſtāding I demaū ded ones of a certayn cōpanion of theſe ſectes which had bene of a ſtrayt religion before, why his garmentes were nowe ſo 
                     •
                  umptuouſe, all to poū
                  
                     •
                  ed with gardes and iagges lyke a rutter of the launce knyghtes. He anſwered to me that he dyd it in contempt of hypocriſy. Why quoth I, doth not God hate pryde the mother of hypocriſy, as well as hypocryſye it ſelfe▪ wherto

he made no dyrect anſwer agayne, but in excuſynge hys faut, he ſayde yt God pryncypally accepted the mekenes of the hart, and inward chriſtē maners, which I beleue were ſo inward in hym, that ſeldome he ſhewed any of thē outwardly. 
            
            
               N.
                I graūted before that ther were ſome light perſons. But what ſay you to the prouiſion of pore people there, ſuche as are aged or impotent, & that beggers be not ſuffred to craue at mennes dores, nor to loyter ydellye as they do here, but a
                     •
                   ſet a worke. I tell you ſome men thynk yf our ſturdy monkes, chanons, & freers, labored for theyr lyuing as we lay people do, that it wold be a meryer world thā now is. 
            
            
               W.
                What a mery tyme it wold be here in

thys lande I am vncertayne, but I am ſure that in Germany among theſe newe factions is yet but a ſory worlde & lyke to be worſe, ye ſaye there be no loytryng beggers, and that is trew, for few or none reſorteth thyther becauſe they can haue none almes nor releife, excepte they wil do intollerable ſeruice for ſo ſlender wages, yt yf they be not of ſober dyet, and longe exercyſed wyth laboure, it is not poſſyble for them to awaye with it. But what is theyr labour? marye pluckyng downe of churches and monaſteryes, and buyldyng of bulwarkes & walles to inſtrēgth theyr townes agaynſt them which couet to reforme them. And here is a doute to be moued, when ſuche buſynes is ended, howe ſhall

they be then ſet a worke, conſiderynge that in other occupacions a fewer nomber than be al readye were able to ſuffyſe ye people, & ſo they fynde it there already. 
            
            
               N.
                God wyll prouyde otherwyſe for them than mannes ymaginacion can comprehend. 
            
            
               W.
                If their wayes lyked hym I wot wel he wold. But ſythe it is no pleaſure to hym to ſe them leue the faythe, and fall to hereſyes, pull down churches, and buylde vp bulwarkes agaynſt god in defence of theyr abhominable errours: I verely thynk that the wrath of God wyll worke them vengeaunce, and ſende ſuche men muche miſery, and abate theyr bulwarkes to the grounde, as he abated the prowde towre of Babylon, when he confounded

the buylders into as many tō
                  ges as ye deuyl hath cōfounded ye bylders of theſe bulwarks in to many ſhameful ſectes. 
            
            
               N
                Wel I truſt better. And which of vs is begyled the ende ſhall ſhew. But this here I ſay that as yet hytherto, where as ye ſpake of theyr intollerable labour: I am certyfied that they come from it as ioyouſlye as it were from a recreation. 
            
            
               W.
                I blame theym neuer a deale, thoughe they be gladde when theyr taſke is at an ende. 
            
            
               N
               Nay I meane when theyr hā
                  des be full of blaynes and blyſters, wyth achynge armes, theyr ſhulders black and blew, by reaſon of heuye burthens: that then they reioyce in ſufferaunce. 
            
            
               W.
                They yt ſo haue certified you, I pray you write

vnto theym agayne, and praye them to certifie you alſo howe manye worketh wyth an euyll wyll for the onelye lacke of lyuynge, and howe many runne fro their worke & rather chuſe to go ſteale & be hanged to, rather thē to come to ſo paynfull worcke agayne. And by that tyme that they haue certyfyed you of theſe two ſortes: they ſhall I warrant you certifie of the thyrde tother ſort that are ſo gladde of ſuche labour, not fully ſo many as ye rekē now. And yet I thinke verelye that ſome ſuch are there to. And I would muche meruayle elles. 
            
            
               N.
                Whye ſo? 
            
            
               W.
                For I haue knowen ere thys where mē haue bē ſore hurt in frayes, yt they whiche haue ben ſoreſte wounded haue moſt reioyced,

not in hys harmes but in the prayſings of other. 
            
            
               N.
                Who be they yt ſhulde prayſe ſo theſe labourynge folke. 
            
            
               W.
                Euen ſuche of theyr owne ſectes as wyi not labour thē ſelues, whi chear redier to encorage other mē vnto ſuffraunce of deth for theyr opinions, than to ieoparde them ſelfe the leſt typpe of their eare. But now to your obiection, that ye wuld preſtes monkes, and freers ſhulde laboure as other temporall men do: I holde it expediente that many of them ſhulde be better occupied than they are. Howe beit I haue hard in Germanye greuous complayntes & murmurations of hande crafty mē and artyfycers agaynſte relygyous perſons, whyche haue made them ſelfes worldly, and

learned their occupations. For through theyr augmentation, the profytable gaynes of occupations was mynyſſhed, and the welth of theyr lyuynge decayde, ſo that many were compelled to ſeeke aduentures in ſtraunge prouinces for defaute of worke at home. Alſo I haue knowen in the citie of Colen, & in other places of the low countrey, that religious perſonnes in theyr cloyſters fyndyng thē ſelues with labour of theyr hā
                  des, as ſpynnyng, weyuynge, & makynge of lynnen cloth, haue bene haynouſly cōplayned vpō to the lordes and rulers, yt thei toke away the auauntage and lyuyng from the pore comons & citezens: wherfore they haue bene reſtrayned from takynge of temporall peoples worke.
               
                  
               
            
            
               N.
                By this rekeninge, ſeldome is a chaūge for ye better. But yet howe ſaye ye to theyr prouyſyon for poore impotente people? 
            
            
               W.
                After my mynde they neuer went about an acte that pretended a more Godly purpoſe, or a feruenter zele of charytable cōpaſſion. whiche ordinaunce if it had a progreſſe of continuaunce, as it had a lykelyhode at the begynnynge: were to be alowed and practyſed of all Chryſten nations.
               But euery occaſion wyſely pondered with due circumſtaūces, it wyll make thoſe yt be ſage to ſtay at it, & other like matters, takyng auyſement before, leaſt thei enterpriſe further thē thei be able to bryng vnto a lawdable ende. It is ye very properte of comō people, namely of theſe

Almaynes, that what ſo euer they be perſwaded vnto, agreable to theyr affections, they ſhal be ready in a ſodeyn gyere to accomplyſh: regardyng nother daunger, nor commodite, though ſone after they repent theym. And lyke as the people of Iſrahell brought the iewelles of theyr wyues & chyldern to the makynge of the golden calfe: ſo dyd they brynge their iewelles, beades, rynges, outches, with mony both gold and ſyluer, to the common hutches ſo haboundantly for this prouiſion, yt men doubted in ſome place, whether they had poore folke ſufficiente to conſume ſo excedynge heapes of ryches.
               But this dout was ſone made a playn caſe: for within a whyle after, the ardente heat of theyr

lyberall deuocion waxed cold. And becauſe they contynued not ſtyll in bryngynge in theyr oblations: the hutches and coffers were emptye ere men wyſt it. Then whyles it was compaſſed what waye myghte be beſte taken for the preſeruation of this ordynaunce, leaſte it ſhuld decaye, to theyr confuſyon that began it: ſome gaue counſell that it ſhoulde be neceſſarye to depryue the clergy of theyr goodes, and to dyſtribute theyr poſſeſſions, landes, and rentes among lay people. And to throwe downe all monaſteries & churches, makyng coyne of croſſes, chaleſſes, and other ſacred iewels, for y• ſuſtē
                  tation of the poore as they alleged. This aduyſe with hole aſſent of certayne prynces and

comonteys was approued, affyrmynge that yf ſo infynyte ryches were ones in theyr handes, the reuenewes of greate men ſhuld be ſo enlarged, that they ſhoulde nede to rayſe no taxes nor lones of the commons, but rather ceaſe frome all importable exactions.
               In lyke maner by the ſame polycy the comons mighte grow vnto ſuch welthye ſubſtaunce: that beggers and nedy people fewe or none ſhoulde be founde among them, whiche ought to be called a golden worlde, or a tyme of felicite. 
            
            
               N.
                And cam it not ſo to paſſe in concluſion? 
            
            
               W.
                No, nor neuer ſhall I make you aſſuraunce, for the goodes ar waſted, & no mā can tell howe: ye at this houre the prynces and lordes of y• cytyes

are more hungry to pyll & pole, then euer they were. The commons alſo in leſſe welth, endutyng more greuous oppreſſion then euer they dyd, wyth no fewer myſerable perſons then they had before, all thynges at out of meaſure ſcarce, eche complaynynge to other of theyr calamities infortunate withoute remedy of redreſſe or hope of a better chaunge. 
            
            
               N.
                Oure lorde forbyd yt it ſhuld chaunce ſo here. 
            
            
               W.
                yet lacke there not in Englond that wyſhe ful hartely after ſuche a ruffelyng chaunge, the more parte ſuche as hope to wyn, and haue nothynge to leſe, and yet ſome ſo mad that haue of theyr owne, and whyche happely myght repent it fyrſt of all. I let paſſe my lord cardinals acte in pullynge

down & ſuppreſſīg of religious places, our lord aſſoile his ſoule. I wyll wreſtle with no ſoules: he knoweth by this tyme whyther he dyd well or euyll. But thys dare I be bolde to ſaye, that the countreis where they ſtode, fynde ſuche lacke of them: that they would he had let them ſtand. And thinke you then that there wold be no lack founden, if ye remanaunt were ſo ſerued to? Iwene men wold ſo ſore myſſe theym that many which ſpeke agaynſt thē, wolde ſone laboure his owne handes to ſet them vp agayne. 
            
            
               N.
                In good fayth youre wordes make me ſo amaſed, that I can not tell what I may ſay to the matter: I ſe the lyuynge of the cleargy is farre wyde from the doctrine of chriſt, & example of

the apoſtles, & the Lutherans by your ſaying be inworſe caſe, both deſtitute of catholik fayth & good chriſten maners, wythout anye better lykelyhode excepte by the meanes of a generall reformation. 
            
            
               W.
                Who ſhoulde be the auctours of this reformation? 
            
            
               N.
                The pope & other chriſten princes. 
            
            
               W.
                I put caſe that manye of theim be as wyde oute of the ryghte waye as the other. 
            
            
               N.
                That can ye tell partely concernyng thys Popes holyneſſe, for ye were latelye at Rome. 
            
            
               W.
                In very dede I heard pyteouſly of it by other mens reporte, but I ſawe it not: & peraduenture I ſawe the leſſe, becauſe I taryed ſo lytell whyle there.
               Notwithſtanding it fortuned me to talke with an Italyan,

and in oure communication I ſpake as I had harde, that the pope and the emperour entended a reformation. Why ſayde he they haue begonne already. I aſked himwhere. Se ye not quod he that they haue deſtroyed Lombardye, Italye, Naples, & alſo enpouered Fraūce, to the ruynous decay of chriſtē
                  dome? Beware ſayde I what ye ſpeake. Yes quod he, for I meane no dyſhonoure to theyr hyghnes, for they perfourme the wyll and commaundement of God, as they of Syrya, and Babylone dyd, in deſtroying y• euyll chyldren of Iſrahell, to thintent the good myght proſpere in theyr places. Mary qd I, that is clene contrary here, for the good be deſtroyed, and the euyll are encreaſed, ſo that

ueuer in Italye were ſeene ſo manye vagaboundes, theues, hores and harlottes, as are in this preſent tyme. Well ſayde he, yf the good be rather deſtroyed, as ye allege, and the euyll are ſtyll reſerued: it is a token that they haue eſcaped wyth an eaſy ſcorge, the dredeful vengeaunce of God, which remayneth for theſe yt be left behynd. Howebeit, ye rede in ſtories of the byble, that the ſinfull world was fyrſt deſtroyed before that ryghteous Noe was poſſeſſioner of the frutfull yerth, bleſſed of God, and the abomynable cities of Sodom and Gomor vterly ſubuerted, erevertuous Loth aſcended the mounte of hys refuge. Alſo the reprobate people of Iſrahell were wholy extincte, ere euer theyr

elect chyldren entred the lande of promis. Wherfore conſtrue ye as ye pleaſe, I feare me that the reformation of the worlde ſhall be wyth the ſword of vengeaunce vppon the people for theyr iniquitie, conſyderyng y• obduratiō of their hartes, and harde necked ſtubburnes, not moued at the wōderful tokens whyche dayly pronoſticate the wrathe of God to be at hande. With this he ſhranke awaye, & woulde tarye no longer. 
            
            
               N.
                Peraduenture he was afrayd to wade further in the truthe. But beleue me yf ye wyl, wher he ſpake of the deſtroyinge of euyll people: I wene yf Luthe ranes be ſuch as ye make them it were the redyeſte waye for a reformation to kyll vp theym quyte. 
            
            
               W.
                I woulde rather

wyſſh them amended, if it may be. And as for kyllynge theym in ſome place, it were no greate maiſtry. But thē in ſome other places where wold ye fynd the people to do the execution?
            
            
               N.
                We ſhulde lacke none in Englande I warrante you, for there be manye of the cleargye that woulde be full glad of it, & marchauntes ſome, thoughe many be on theyr ſyde. Alſo ye myght haue a great ſort of the cōmons, and many courtyers, though ſome of euery ſorte fauoure Luthers wayes & ſome great mennes ſeruaūtes beare men in hande that theyr ſouereins ſupport ſuch matters ſpecially in tauerns, marchaunts howſes, & other places, where they make thē ſelues no ſmall fooles, when wyſe mē be forth

a dores. 
            
            
               W.
                ye vnderſtande not what ye ſaye. 
            
            
               N.
                Howe ſo? 
            
            
               W.
                For yf we wyll putte awaye all Lutheranes and all ſuche open hereſyes, we muſte fyrſte putte awaye many other ſynnes, whiche haue broughte thoſe hereſyes in. For trow ye that hereſyes the mooſt terryble plage of God, commeth not through ſynne of the peple, prouokynge his yre and indignation, whereby he ſendeth amonge them falſe prophetes, & erronious teachers, preaching matters accordynge to theyr waywarde appetytes. 
            
            
               N.
                yet preſtes and clarkes are the bryngers vp of hereſyes, and the cheif mainteiners of them, by occaſyon of Popes, Cardynalles, byſhops, and other prelates of the cleargye. 
            
            
               W.
                I

wyll neyther excuſe nor accuſe neither them nor other. But I feare me yt as for other ſynnes the cleargy and the lay to, ſhall not nede to ſtriue therfore, but maye well agree together, and parte the ſtake betwene them. And as for hereſyes, thoughe ſome of the cleargy commenly begyn them: yet yf we loke on olde cronycles, wyth experiēce of our own tyme, we ſhall well fynde that there hath not lacked ſome great temporal prynces, nor a great nōber of lewde laye people, to ſet them forth, & ſupport them. Was not the origynall grounde and cauſe of M. Luthers hereſy, to do pleaſure to hys Prynce, and to purchaſe fauour amonge the people. In lyke maner, Oecolampadius, zwynglius, Pharellus,

and other mo folowed the ſame trace. When princes & comonties ar firſt bent vpō affectiō agaynſt ye church, or conceyue any ſtraūge purpoſe cōtrary to Scrypture: then immediately they fynde at hand ſuche lerned perſons that can endeuoure theyr braynes in approuynge theyr luſtes, makynge y• whiche is vnlawefull, lawfull, which ſay that good is euell, & euell is good, callynge lyghte darcknes, and darknes lyght. 
            
            
               N.
                We ſhal finde thē among whiche prech ſuche thinges as ye cal hereſye for no ſuch cauſe, but preache it bold elye before great audience, where they for theyr preachyng be brought in great daūger. 
            
            
               W.
                Thoughe they do fall in harme, yet haue they hope to wynne theyr fauour,

or els why are they ſo deſyrous to haue ſo many ley mē preſent at their examinatiōs? 
            
            
               N.
                They make of it a reaſonable cauſe for .ii. cōſideratiōs. One is to thintent they might not be wrongefullye oppreſſed in corners: another is, becauſe they would that people ſhulde bear witnes of their conſtancy in confeſſynge the trouthe for Chriſtes ſake. 
            
            
               W.
                Theſe cō
                  ſyderations in theym, yf they were true as thei be falſe: were yet of ſmall efficacite, & againſt the euangelike perfection. As touchynge the fyrſte, God promyſeth yf hys ſeruauntes be wronged pryuelye, he wyll reuenge them opēly. And Chriſt in the goſpell exhortynge vs to ſuffraunce, byddeth his diſcyples to be ioyful in perſecution,

ſaying y• happy are ye when ye are belyed, euyll ſpoken vpon, and extremelye dealte withall for my names ſake. The other appearethe to be an excuſe of vaynglory, couetynge wordly prayſe, where as they perceiue that people fauourynge theyr parte wyll interprete to theyr commendation, what ſo euer they ſay, though it be agaynſte ſcripture, cōtrary to all verite. Saynte Peter wylleth vs to geue accounte of oure fayth to euery bodye, and that myldely with allowlynes. We haue no preſident of the appoſtles, that euer they diſdained to anſwer before the infidele iudges, tyll the vulgar multitude were by them, or that they requyred aſſyſtence of greate men to be recordes of theyr wordes. Wher

fore I meruel what conſcience theſe perſons haue, whiche are ſo importune to be examined in preſence of rude ſeculers, & ignoraunt people, when they anſwer ſo doubtfully, that the beſte learned can not well conſtrue theyr me anynge. And in Pryncypall articles, wherevpon dependeth our ſaluacion or dampnation: ſome anſwere ſo nakedly with blynd ſhyftes, that they be able to brynge vnlearned people into erroure of things, wherof they neuer douted before, vſynge euer ouerthwart ſpeche, and quaylynge ſentences of double vnderſtandynge, wyth proteſtations of hypocryſye after thys faſhion: In good fayth I thynke there is a purgatorye, albeit I can not tell whether I may beleue

it or no. I ſuppoſe that confeſſyon made to a preiſte, and pylgrymages maye be well done, but I fynde them not in Scripture: I beleue in theſe words of chriſt, this is my bodye, but as concernyng his bodely preſence in forme of breade, to ſaye any thinge it is aboue my capacitie, and I dare not meddle with ſo dyffuſe maters. I rekē that I may beleue y• doctours of the church, yf they ſpeak not agaynſte the worde of god. &c. To vſe ſuch āvages in weyghtye cauſes, & to put in queſtion a freſſhe the caſes defyned by generall counſels, as thoughe we were vncertayne of our beleif, & new to begyn agayne: I repute it no ſpyryte of truthe, ſekynge goddes honoure and edification of theyr neighbour.

Nor I dout not but at the day of iudgement, they ſhal make a more ſeryous aunſwere. This conſideraciō is alſo as I haue ſayde very playnlye falſe. For whē theſe ſly ſhyftes fayle thē: they ſhew no conſtancy of their vnfaythfull doctryne, but falſely forſwere them ſelf and ſaye they neuer ſayde ſo, the hole audience deteſting theyr periury all ſaue onely theyr owne ſect, whiche as for periury pardon eche other. To ſpeke of manyfeſt myſliuers, and open tranſgreſſours, whom may we well exempte? conſyderynge howe prone and redy ye hole world is from the moſte to the leaſte, to declyne and fall vnto euyll.
               Our faythe whiche God hath geuen vs to buylde good workes vppon, is waxen barrayne

and fruteles. Charite likewiſe, wherin we ſhuld be tryed to be the very diſciples of Chriſte; is waxed cold through the exceſſe of iniquite. Amiable con
                     •
                  oro
                     •
                   with chriſten vnite, whervpon all vertue faſteneth her fundation, is fallen in ruyne, to the fre entreſſe of hatefull diſcenc
                     •
                  ō & lyberte of alvyces. In euery ſtate and degre, y• one barketh at the other, one obiecteth agaynſte another his ſaultes▪ eche of them farynge other to be cauſes of theyr myſeries, & yet neuer a one faſhioneth him ſelfe towarde any amendment for hys owne parte. 
            
            
               N.
                By my trouthe I deme the people would be good ynough, if they had good heades. 
            
            
               W.
                I deny not yt verely, but the better that the heades be, the better

were the body lyke to be, and y• euyll y• is in euyll heades deſcendeth down into euery part, and maketh all the bodye the worſe. And yet ſurely, if ye people be euyll: the ſynne of them cauſeth God ſometyme to ſend them heades of the ſame ſute; both popes, emperoures, kynges, cardynalles, byſſhoppes, preiſtes, and curates. For it is the ſynne of the people as Job teſtifieth, that cauſeth God to ſuffer hypocrytes ſometyme to raygne ouer them. Hypocrites he calleth them that repreſente the perſonages of theſe eſtates, whoſe partes they do playe for a countrnaunce, and do the contrarye in dede. And as far as I haue redde in the byble, all the while the people of Israell were good, obeying

goddes lawes, and ſought his honour: God gaue them gracious gouernoures, vertuous prieſtes, and trewe Prophets. But as ſone as they ſwarued, & fel vnto ydolatry: he ſent thē for theyr punyſhmente vngracious princes, vycyous prelates, and falſe prophetes, ſo that no difference was betwene the people, & the preſtes, nor y• people could not ymagyn ſo outragious abominations, but princes and preſtes bothe were redy to fortefye them in theyr vnhappynes. 
            
            
               N.
                yet yf ye remember well the ſtoryes of the byble, ye ſhall fynde y• the trāſgreſſiō of goddes lawes amōge the people, redounded fyrſt frō y• heades, by theyr pernicious occaſion. And as towchynge falſe prophetes and yll preſtes:

God him ſelfe greuouſly complayneth vpon them, ſhewing how the people are ſeduced by them, to the pollutynge of hys name, and violation of his lawes. Whoſe enmious wickednes, Ezechiell, Hieremye, with diuers other prophets, declare at length. Dyd not the Belial preiſtes, Ophni & Phines, by theyr peſtylent example, and le cherours lyuynge, corrupt manye one, vpon whome God takynge vengeaunce, they loſte theyr lyues in battayl, and the arke of God, wherof they had the cure, takē by the Philiſteis, xxx. thouſande fyghtyng men of the Iſrahelyte people were ſlayne in one daye. Likewiſe y• chyldren of Samuell whiche were iudges of y• people, not en ſuynge theyr fathers ſteppes,

but ſet vpon couetouſnes toke rewardes, and peruerted iugemente, by whoſe occaſyon the people were moued to aſke a kynge vnto theyr deſolation.
               Moreouer the ſtorye of kynge Saule is playn, for whoſe pryuate diſobedience, ye hole lande of Iſraell ſmarted full 
                     •
                  ore.
               Kyng Dauid thoughe he was a bleſſed mā, yet brought vnto folye for to nomber his people, they were fayne to ſuffer moſt wofull plages for his offence. Manye other lyke places I could gather out of ye olde teſtament were it not to eſchew tediouſnes, ſpeciallye of Hieroboam, whom ye ſcripture teſtyfyeth expreſly, that he cauſed y• people of Iſraell to ſynne. Beſyde all this, go to the very experyence, & ye ſhall fynde that

whereſoeuer the heade or gouernour of an howſe is good, the hole howſholde comenlye ſhall be good alſo. And contrary wyſe, yf they be badde, the other ſhall be as euyll, ſo that I may conclude in verefyenge myne opynion, that the yll conuerſation of ſubiectes procedeth oute of y• euyll example of theyr heades. 
            
            
               W.
                To begyn where as ye leaue. I graunte y• the vertuous exāple of ye head auayleth much to the good order of the members, & the greater that the auctoritie is, the more ſtrength it hath in example, eyther to profyte or to noy, conſyderynge that among pryuate perſons, the goodneſſe of ſome one, enduceth many other to vertue, & contrary the lewdnes of another, bryngeth manye

to vyce & vngraciouſnes. But yet cā not ye cōclude vpon this, that ye euylnes of the people cometh firſt by the example of the heades, but rather as I haue ſpoken before, becauſe y• people be euyll thē ſelues, therfore God fendeth them according, yl heades, & gouernours. For ye muſt conſyder that god hath not made the people for y• ſenſuall pleaſure of Prynces, gouernours, or prelates, but hath ordeyned them to y• weal and commodite of the people. Ye haue in Exodus the thyrde chapter, that when the people of Iſrahell were in miſerable thraldome vnder kynge Pharo: they cryed to god for remedye, and God prouyded them Moyſes to be theyr deliuerer, to whome in gyuing his offyce

he ſayde: The clamoure of the chyldren of Iſrael is come vnto me, and I haue ſene theyr af flictions, how they are oppreſſed of the Egyptians: therfore approche, and I ſhall ſende the to deliuer my people ye, god loued the people ſo entyerly, that of theym he choſe Byſſhoppes, preiſtes, and deacons, to offer ſpeciall ſacrifices for the clenſynge of theyr ſynnes, and to be as meanes betwene hym & thē. Note of whom alſo toke the noble & wyſe men, & made of thē princes, captauīs and gouernours, for theyr polytyke conſeruation. Agreable to this, the ſtories of Judicum make mencion, that the people of Iſraell, longe ſeaſon after Joſues death obſeruyng goddes lawes, and fulfyllynge hys

commaundementes proſpered in peace, and hadde gratious gouernours. But whē they fel to ſynne & ydolatry: God gaue them into ſubiection of theyr enemyes, and were compelled whether they wolde or not, to ſerue he then prynces, and miſcreaunt idolaters, yet notwith ſtandynge, in middes of theyr myſeryes, where as with a repentaūt hart they cried to god for ſocour, and beſoughte hym of mercy: he rayſed vp among thē ſelues certayne captaynes at ſondry times, as Othoniel, Ayoth, Gedeō, Sampſon, and diuers other, whyche delyuered them from all bondage, reſtoryng thē agayne to theyr libertie. And where as ye allege the chyldren of Helye to haue bene cauſe of the takynge of

the arke and ſlawghter of the people: I beleue verely that y• people were thē miſcheuouſly mynded, as they be nowe a dayes, whiche perceyuynge yt the i
                     •
                  . preiſtes yt bare y• arke wherby they hoped of victory, were ſlayne: they ſurmyſed that the vengeaūce for the prieſtes ſynnes was cauſe whye the arke was takē, and ſo moche people deſtroyed, & vnder this blynde audacitie, they remayned ſtyll impenitent, not acknowleging to God theyr owne offences & ydolatry: whiche appeareth by the returne agayn of the arke, where aboue the nomber of. 
                     •
                  . thouſande perſons were plaged with ſodeyne deth. Alſo, it maye be verefyed by y• wordes of Samuell, exhortyng the peple to retourne vnto god with

harte vnfayned, and to caſte oute all ſtraunge Goddes, preparynge theyr hartes to y• ſeruyce of god onelye. For when they hadde faſted, and done pe naunce, not imputing the fawt to other but to thē ſelfs, ſaying all we good lorde haue ſynned agaynſt the: god deliuered thē from theyr ennemies. In lyke maner, y• miſorder of Samuels ſonnes, was not ſo greatly the occaſion whye the people were moued to aſke a kynge for to raygn ouer them, as was their owne diffidence toward gods prouiſion, obſtynate diſobedience, and vnquyete appetyte of ydolatrye, couetynge to be lyke other heathen nations: which is to be perceiued by the anſwere of god vnto Samuell thus ſaying: Heare y• peoples

voyce in all thynges that they ſpeke vnto the, they haue not caſt the of, but me, leaſt I ſhuld reygne ouer thē. They do euē accordyng to all theyr workes whyche they dyd in the daye yt I brought them out of Egypt hytherto. As they haue forſaken me, & ſerued falſe Goddes, thus do they alſo to the. When Samuell hadde ſhewed vnto theym the dyſpleaſure of God, wyth the manyfolde myſeries and calamities whiche they ſhoulde ſuffer by the chaunge: yet woulde they not here hym, but ſayd, that nedes they wold haue a kynge ouer them, as other people had. Furthermore ye affyrme y• the people of Iſraell were punyſhed for the diſobedient tranſgreſſion of kynge Saule. But all thinges conſydered

it is to be thoughte rather that their wylful frowardnes agaynſt God was partely occaſion of his fall, to thentent the ſentence of God ſpoken by ye prophet myghte be verefied. For yf he had bene an vpryght prynce, & had obſerued goddes commaundement: they ſhulde haue bene in ſuch felycitie that they would haue iudged theyr petition lawefull in demaundyng a kyng contrary to goddes pleaſure. And I doubt not but god gaue them a kynge of diſpoſition lyke to theyr demeanoure, ſo y• when he tranſgreſſed gods precepte in dede, they dyd the ſame, at the laſt in wyl & conſent, wherby they de ſerued to be punyſſhed wyth hym. For God neuer taketh vē geaunce vpon anye people but

onely for theyre ſynne, whythe after dyuers admonyciōs why les they wyll not amende, euē as he gyueth to the good people gracyous heades and prynces, furtheryng them in his fauour to theyr cōfort: ſo ſendeth he to the euyll wycked heades & rulers, prouoking his wrath to theyr deſolaciō. And no meruell, thoughe Saull fared the worſe for hys people, wher as Moyſes the moſt faythfull ſeruaunte of god was partely by their frowardnes debarred frō the pleaſaunt lande of beheſt. As for kyng dauyd, it is playn that god dyſpleaſed wyth the chyldern of Iſrahell for theyr ſynne: permytted Sathā to in cyte hym for to nōber hys people, wherfore they were bothe punyſſhed. And though ſcrypture

expreſſely ſay th
                     •
                   that Hieroboā cauſed ye peple to ſynne: yet were thei as much fauty as he, ſaue yt becauſe they cōmytted theyre ydolatry vnder his ſupportacyon, he bare ye name as pryncypall auctor: as we ſe ye captayns of hoſtes in warre tyme, thoughe ſome of them do ſometyme as lytell or leſſe, thā many a poore ſouldyer in hys armye, whoſe acte is nothynge ſpoken of, yet all the fame and honour of the vyctory redowndeth euer vnto them, whych is apartely proued by the oracyō of king Abya Roboams ſone, laynge to the people charge that they forſoke god & made them goldē calues, expu
                     •
                  ſyng the preſtes & deakons of goddes ordynaunce, and inſtytutynge other after the order of

hethē ydolaters. Wherto agreeth in defence of mine opinion, the generall confeſſyon of the people with theyr vnyuerſall ſubmiſſiō in knowlege of theyr treſpaces, recited in ſondry places of ſcripture after thys forme: we haue ſynned with our forefathers, we haue done wickedly, & haue cōmitted iniquite, all we haue tranſgreſſed thy commaundementes. And ſurelye as the worlde is nowe crokedlye enclyned to malyce: yf God ſent heades and Prynces accordyng to thedeuelyſhe appetites of much people, ye welth of this region wold be ſone ſubuerted, & euery ſtate brought to confuſion, albeit they other wyſe coloure it, and make as though they ment none harme but rather much deuotion, & yt
                  
the vnlearned would haue the Scripture in theyr handes, for none other cauſe but onely to preache ſecretly to them ſelf for lacke of good preachers abroade. But then in dede it appereth that they preach to thē ſelfe and theyr neyghbours to, many an horryble hereſye, and abuſe the ſcripture to the colorable defence of the ſame. And then are they alſo to, all Tyndals bokes, whiche for the manyfolde mortall hereſyes conteyned within the ſame, openlye condempned and forbyddē, they are I ſaye yet vnto thoſe bokes ſo ſore affectionate, that neyther the condempnation of them by the clergy, nor the forbydding of them by the kinges hyghnes, with his open proclamations vpon greate paynes,

nor the daūger of open ſhame, nor parell of paynfull deth, can caſt thē out of ſome fond folkes handes, and that folke of euery ſorte. Howe thynke ye then theſe folke wold haue bene ſtomaked, & how many mo wold haue bluſtred, out with them, yf the mayntenaūce of the prynces and the ſtates of ye realme (whych our lorde defende) had bene vppon theyre ſyde. And where about wolde they then haue gone? aboute no great good ye maye be ſure. Se ye not the vyllayne beggers and valyaūt vagaboundes, whom god plageth with pouer te, and myſerye for theyr abom ynable lyuyng, dyſpoſed to no goodnes, howe hartely they wyſſhe for a ruffelynge daye. Beholde euery ſtate all moſte in euery

chryſtē realme, as huſband mē, artyfycers, marchaunts, courtyers, with all other degrees as well ſpyrituall as temporal, & I fere me that ye ſhall ſaye, but if god of his goodnes amēde vs the ſoner, there ſhall come to paſſe amonge vs the ferefull iugemēt of god ſpoken by the prophete Oſee, to the people of Iſrahell and inhabyters of the lande: There is no truthe, no mercye, nor ſcyence of god in the yerth. Curſynge & lyenge, manſlaughter, theft, and aduowtrye hathe ouer flowen, & bloode hathe towched bloode: for the which the yerth ſhall wayle, and euery inhabyter in it ſhall be feebled. And this as I haue ſayde not one contrey fawty, & another fawtles, one eſtate fowle and deformed
 and another pure & clene, the ſpyrytualtie ſynful, and the temporaltie ſet all on vertue, the heades & rulers culpable, & the people oute of blame, nor yt any eſtate maye laye the hole weight of Goddes wrath vnto the other, and therof diſcharge them ſelfe, but eche of theym is cauſe both of theyr own harme and other folkes to. And the people are nothynge leſſe fawtye, prouokynge the wrathe of God, than theyr heades or gouernours, nor one ſtate partyculerlye cauſe of anothers calamytie. But all we together haue ſynned, & haue deſerued the vengeaūce of God, whiche hangeth before our eyes, redy to fall ere we be aware. 
            
            
               N.
                In this poynt ye haue ryghte well ſatiſfyed my mynde: but

what remedye now of reconciliacion agayne to God? 
            
            
               W.
                Forſoothe I knowe none but onely penaunce, I ſaye not repentyng onely as Luther and Tyndall, and theſe new folkes call it, whiche wolde begyle vs & make vs wene that we nede no more but onely repente, and do no penaunce at all, tellynge vs that Chriſtes paſſion ſhall ſtand in ſtede of al our penaunce, though we do neuer ſo euyl and lyue neuer ſo longe. With this falſe doctryne they dryue many a ſoule to the deuyll, makynge theym neglygente, and take lyttell care or ſorowe for theyr ſynne, and ſo muche the more recheleſſe in fallynge to ſynne agayne. But I ſpeake of pennaunce, as it implieth both repētaūce of our ſynnes paſt, & the

y• ſacrament of penaunce, wyth 
                     •
                  are & ſorow and bodely payn, & afflyccy on taken for our ſyn, wyth prayer, almouſe, & other good workes to purchaſe the more grace, & yt we ſhuld with recourſe to confeſſyon & the ſacrament of penaūce, dylgently prepare our ſelues in folowing the exāple▪ of the Nyniuytes: whyche at the preachynge of the prophete Jonas, repented wyth erneſt purpoſe of amendynge theyr lyues, and dyd penaunce in deede, in faſtynge and prayer, humblynge theyre 
                     •
                  owles frome the moſte to the leaſt vnto the mercy of god.
            
            
               N.
                wolde our lorde that we had ſuch a prophete ſent amōg vs, to exhorte vs vnto penaūce as the prophete Jonas was to theym. 
            
            
               W.
                That were lyke

to the requeſt of the ryche glut tone in hell, of whom the goſpel telleth, which deſyred that Lazare myghte be ſente to warne hys brethern: to whom it was anſwered, that hauynge Moyſes & the prophetes, they ſhuld gyue credence to theym. wher fore ſeynge that we haue holy ſcrypture which expreſſeth the rightwyſn̄es of god, declaring howe our forefathers were punyſſhed for theyr ſynnes: yf we refuſe to be warned by theyre admonycyon, truely we wolde be as neglygent to amende, yf Jonas rayſed frō death to lyfe ſhulde preache vnto vs. For we haue ſaynt John baptiſt a greater prohete than Jonas was, cryēg to al ſinners: Do ye worthy frutes of penaunce: of whom Chriſt wytneſſeth that

there is none greater than he amonge the chyldrē of womē. Alſo oure ſaueour Chriſt hym ſelf, of whom ſaynt John̄ teſtyfyed that he was vnworthy to loſe his ſhoe latchet: preached penaunce ſayinge: Do ye pennaunce, the kyngedome of heauen is at hande. And in another place of the Goſpell, he ſayth: yf ye do not penaunce ye ſhall all peryſhe. And Saynte Peter his vy
                     •
                  ar here in earth, vpon whom, and whoſe faythfull confeſſion, he promyſed to bylde his churche: preached likewyſe in his fyrſte Sermone ſayinge: Do ye penaūce, and be conuerted to God, that youre ſynnes maye be done awaye. Alſo ſaynt Paule the choſē veſſell of God, preached fyrſte of al to them of Damaſco, that they

ſhuld be penitent and turne to god, perfourming the due workes of penaunce. Cōfyrmynge the ſame, when Chriſt appered vnto the .ii. diſciples iorneinge to Emaus: he ſayd y• after his death and reſurrection, it behoued penaunce to be preached in his name, and remiſſion of ſinnes: for why the cauſe of his comynge was not to call ryghteous folk, but ſinners vnto penaunce. And the aungelles of heauen reioyced not ſo greatly in nynty & nyne iuſte perſons, as vpon one ſynner doyng penaūce. As concernyng the olde teſtamente, God him ſelfe promyſeth in dyuers places, that aſynner ſhall be forgyuen hys ſynnes, whenſoeuer he wyl do penāce. wherfore ſeig we haue ſo euident exhortatiōs of ſcripture

mouynge vs to penaunce▪ and manyfolde warnynges to correct our lyues through the the pacyent ſuffraunce of god: happy are we yet, if now atlaſt ere that it be to late, we coulde faythfully ſaye wyth Job perfourming y• dede: lord we haue hard y• wyth our eares, & therfore we reprehēd our ſelfs & do penaūce. 
            
            
               N.
                yet wote I not well what ye call penaunce.
            
            
               W.
                I haue ones told you, & yet I tell you agayn, I call penaūce a chaūge of our lyfe in caſtyng of y• ſynfull old man with his dedes, and doynge on anew man of vertuous conuerſacyon, whiche by fayth, hope, and charyte, and the good workes y• come of them, as prayer almouſe, ſorow for his ſynne, and payne gladly taken and

ſuſteyned for the ſame, is renewed in to the knowledge & fauoure of god, accordynge to his ymage that made him.
            
            
               N.
                how ſhuld laye mē come to this knowlege when y• goſpell is lockyd fro them. 
            
            
               W.
                The goſpell of Chriſte whiche is goddes worde, is free, and can not be boūde nor kepte frō any Chriſten man. 
            
            
               N.
                By ſaynt Marye for all that laye people maye not be ſuffred to haue the newe teſtament in englyſſhe, whyche I call the goſpell. 
            
            
               W.
               O ye meane Tyndals Goſpell. 
            
            
               N.
                In dede though Tyndall was the trāſlatour, it is the worde of God and the verye ſame teſtament whyche ye haue in latyn of the euangelyſtes puttynge forth. 
            
            
               W.
                yetlerned mē and good

men haue founden ſuche fawtes in his corrupt tranſlation: that it is for the ſame well and lawfully forbiden. 
            
            
               N.
                if they be good men as ye ſaye ye haue founde it fauty: I ſhould reken thē better a great deale, which wold amend it. 
            
            
               W.
                Though it were amended, & ſufficiently corrected: yet wyll I not ſaye yt it is expediente for laye people to haue it, conſidering the time as it is nowe. 
            
            
               N.
                Whye, ye ſayd yt the goſpell maye not be kept frō chriſtē men. 
            
            
               W.
                No more it maye, thoughe it be reſtrayned from the laye people in theyr vulgare tonge. For ye worde of God, whiche is the worde of fayth, as Scripture ſayth, is nere the in thy mouth & in thy harte, to thintent thou mayſte do it. 
            
            
               N.
                Than I

pray you where ſaynte Paule ſayth that fayth cometh by herynge, and herynge cometh by the worde of God: how can we haue it without preachynge or information of it, by readynge of ſcrypture. 
            
            
               W.
                Outwarde preaching, and lyterall redyng of ſcripture, are neceſſary meanes to attayne vnto the knowlege of the ſpyrite. 
            
            
               N.
                Wherfore then is the Goſpell wythholden from the laye people?
            
            
               W.
                I ſayd they be two thynges neceſſarye, but I ſayde not that both twayne be to euerye man neceſſary. But it is neceſſarye that euery man haue the tone or the tother, and ſo haue they: for they haue the worde of God preched & expouned vn to them. 
            
            
               N.
                ye as ye preiſtes lyſte with falſe gloſes. 
            
            
               W.
               
                  Wyth the ſame gloſes that the olde holy doctours & ſayntes haue made, other maner of mē thā Luther & Tyndale, which now corrupt the trewth wyth theyr falſe gloſes. 
            
            
               N.
                But why ſhould not ye comē people haue the ſcrypture them ſelf in theyr own mother tong? 
            
            
               W
               Becauſe of theyr abuſe & makyng of theyr owne gloſes, & many alſo for theyr vnworthynes, accordynge to Chriſtes cō
                  maundement forbiddynge to caſt perles before ſwyne, or to gyue holy thynges to dogges. Dyd not ſaynt Paul forbidde women to ſpeake the worde of god in congregacyons, for the auoydyng of abuſe and dyſorder? Alſo dyd not he and Bar nabas forſake preachyng to the iewes, becauſe of theyr vnworthynes? 
            
            
               
               N.
                That is not a lyke caſe: for the text is playn yt the iewes wylfully reſiſted the worde of god, and wolde not receyue it. But theſe people are ſo deſyrous, that they putte theym ſelfes in no ſmall ieopardye many tymes for the hauyng of it. 
            
            
               W.
                I graunt there be ſome which of a good mynd are deſirous to haue the goſpell in theyr mother tōge, for ye erudyciō & cōfort of theyr ſoules. But they that be ſuche good folk may be wel & ſufficiently fed wt ye goſpell punched, & ſo wyll they rather cheſe to be, than to haue the ſcrypture ronne in euery raſſhe bodyes hande, ye wold abuſe it to their owne harme and other mēnes to. For well ye wot many ther be, and as it appeareth in Almayne

where they haue the ſcripture tranſlated alreadye, the more part, and farre the greater multitude, are not leſſe vnworthye in receyuinge it, then were the Jewes in the wylfull reſiſtaunce of Chriſtes goſpell: whiche couet it onely for the libertie to be free from the exercyſe of penaunce, and doyng of good workes, to rayle and ieſt of other mennes fawtes, wyth out any correctiō of their owne ſynfull lyues, nothyng conformable to the vertue of the goſpell, whereof to bable manye wordes they are not dombe.
               Marke it there ſubſtauncially in cities and townes where ye ſe the people moſt ryfeſt & moſt buſye to prate of the Goſpell whether they be or not, as gret vſurers, diſceiuers of theyre

neyboures, blaſphemous ſwerers, euyll ſpekers, and geuen to all vyces as depely as euer they were. This I am ſure of and dare boldely affirme, that ſythe the tyme of this new contencious lernyng, the drede of God is greatlye quenched, and charitable compaſſion ſore abated. Shall ye not ſe there a cock brayned courtier yt hath no more fayth than a Turke, & leſſe chriſten maners thā a Pagane, with lordelye coūtenaūce & knauyſhe conditions, whiche takyng ye name of god ī vayne, ſhall vnreuerently alledge the goſpell with ſcoffyng and ſcornynge in reprehenſyon of the clargye: where as hys owne 
                     •
                  ewd lyuynge is ſo vnthryfty, that ye can not aſpy one good pyont in hym, except it be vpon

his hoſen, nor a nynche of honeſty beſyde his apparayle nor ſcantly therone neyther, beyng al to hacked and iagged, wyth dowble weapen redy to fyght, and ſyngle wyt, buſy to brawle and chyde, more lyke a furious tormentour of Herode, than apacyēt dyſciple of Chriſt. Shal ye not alſo ſe there a marchaūt perauēture made a gentyll mā by promocion, ere euer that he had a good yemās condicyōs: whych gettynge hys chefe ſubſtaunce as many do there by vſury, falſe dyſceyte of trewe people, and other wrongfull wayes, wyll take vpon hym to preache the Goſpell agaynſte the auaryce of relygious perſones, how they hauyng theyr bare neceſſary foode, ought to parte ye reſydue of theyr gooddes

with pore people: where as he hym ſelfe hath thouſandes lyenge by hym in ſtore vnoccupyed, and wyll nother help his poore neyghbour nor ſcarcely gyue a galy halpeny to a nedy creature in extreme neceſſyte: And at theyr belly feſtig days, amonge ſuch of theyr affynyte, which are not ſo wyſe nor well lerned as they wolde be ſene, yf it chaunce them to haue in companye ſome ſymple prieſte, it is a wonder to here, how heis appoſed, & after that theyr ſpyrites be a lytell kyndled in glotony, howe they laſſhe out the Goſpell. Than begynneth one or a nother with his poty carye formalyte and holy daye granyte, to moue ſome ſubtyle queſtyō ſayng: mayſter perſon howe ſay ye to ſuche a texte of

Paul? And if the prieſt be ignoraunt for lacke of lernynge, or maketh not an anſwere ſatyſfyenge his mynde: he is mocked and ieſted vpon with ſcornefull deryſyon. Then begyn they to canuaſſe the ſcrypture amonge them, wyth fyllynge the cuppes & 
                     •
                  oly gentyl chere. And by yt tyme they haue eatē more than ynoughe, and haue dronken to much: they be redy to wade forth in ye depe myſteryes of ſcrypture, wyllynge to be teachers of thinges wherof they vnderſtand not what thei ſpeake, nor what they affyrme. Then are they full armed to talke of abſtynence, and ſobre dyet of the apoſtles: their table beynge furnyſſhed with ſumptuous dyſſhes, and exquyſyte deyntyes. And where as their

cupbordes be reallye garnyſſhed with coſtely plate, and the tables full of cuppes and peces of ſyluer and golde: than make they exclamacyōs agaiſt the rych iewellys of churches, as croſſes and chalyſes, ſaynge that better it were to make money of them and to be dyſtributed vnto pore people, than they ſhulde peryſſhe for lacke of ſocoure. Lykewiſe when they be ſeruyd at theyr ſolempnityes, with counterfeyted curteſyes, in bowynge the kne, & valyng the bonette, hauynge ſewers and karuers after a moſte ſtately maner of ſeruyce, wherin yf the offycers fayle neuer ſo lytell though it be but the ſettynge of a ſawcer amyſſe they ſhall be rebukyd: yet theyr peuyſh pacyence can not breake

the honeſte ceremonyes of the churche to be lawdably done, callynge theym folyſſhe fantaſyes & inuencions of ydyotes And though ſome of theſe new Goſpellers occupie trewelie and iuſtly with their neighbours in face of the worlde, behauynge them ſelfes charytably: yet are they very few in cō
                  paryſon of the other, whyche be raylers & geſters, vycyous lyuers & fals hypocrytes with out any conſcyence. 
            
            
               N.
                As for hypocrytes I thynke ye myght fynde ſoner amonge relygyous perſons. 
            
            
               W.
                wyll ye beleue me. I haue walked a great parte through oute all the prouynces of cryſtendome, and haue ſene and marcked the ſtate of relygyous perſons of dyuers orders: yet ſawe I

neuer amonge them ſuche coloured hypocriſye, ſo fleſſhely lybertye abuſed, vnder ye pretence of fayned holynes, as amonge many of theſe late inuented faccyons. And I certyfye you that ye maye fynde mo diuers ſectes of erronyous opynyons among them in one cytie beyond ye ſea: than be ſon drie orders of religious people in all Englande. 
            
            
               N.
                Suppoſe ye ye goſpell to be in faute of this? 
            
            
               W.
                Naye, but the abuſe of the people hauyng it in theyr vulgare language: for whome it were better to receyue it by the mynyſtracyon of faythfull preachers, than vnworthely to take it them ſelfs. we haue in the Goſpell yt oure ſauyour Chriſt fedynge the nō
                  ber of .v. thouſand men beſyde

women and chyldren, fyrſt gyuyng thankes to his father, he bleſſed the breade, brake it, & gaue it to hys dyſcyples, and they dyſtrybuted it to the company, and ſo they dyd eate and were ſacyate. 
            
            
               N.
                Syr accordyng to thys ye people ſhuld holde them very well content, yf ſo be they had faythfull prechers to mynyſter the word of god vnto thē. But I put cauſe they haue none, or elles that theyr peachers be ſuche as the prophete cōplayneth on, which preache ye vyſyō of theyr hart) & not of ye mouth of god: ſeking alſo theyr owne worldly proffyte, and not the goſtly confort of theyr cures. 
            
            
               W.
                I beleue yt god hath not lefte his church deſtytute of faythfull preachers, wyth the whych he hath

promyſed to be continually preſent vnto the worldes ende. How be it the fewer that they be, the more fawte is to be imputed vnto the people, becauſe they aſke not worthely of god trewe preachers. For the goſpell ſheweth that the people came fyrſt to Chryſt, and he per ceyuyng thē was moued wyth compaſſyon vppon theym, becawſe they were as ſheepe hauynge no hearde, and ſo feadynge theyr ſowles ſpyrytually, afterwarde he dyd 
                     •
                  epaſte theyre bodyes wyth corporall foode, wherfore yf they in lyke maner approche vnto Chr
                     •
                  ſte (in whoſe name what ſo euer is deſyred of the father ſhall be graūted) he wyll alſo here gracyouſly theyr petycyon: for the hande of god is not abreuyate

nowe, nor his power other wyſe mynyſſ
                     •
                  ed than it was at that tyme. 
            
            
               N.
                yet am not I ſo ſatyſfyed wyth all the reaſons yt ye haue made, but I thynke ſtyll that it were lawfull for laye people to haue the new teſtament in Englyſſhe: & perauenture wyth alytell leyſer I could lay ſuche ſcrypture for it, that ſcant ye ſhulde be able to obiecte any contradyccyon. 
            
            
               W.
                ye ſhall haue leyſer ynowgh. But in the meane tyme this ye muſt conſyder, yt our queſtion is not whether it be lawfull to let them haue it: but whether it be vnlawfull to kepe them from it, and whether of the twayn is more mete and more expedyent, ſpecyally for the tyme that nowe is, the people beyng dyſpoſed as they

now be, and after ſuche enſample as we ſee before oure eyes, with ſuche fruyte as we fynde growē therof in Almayne allredy, and in many places euen here at home alſo. But if euer the tyme come, as I praye god it may, in whyche the people ſhall be ſo good and ſo godly dyſpoſed that an englyſſhe byble ſhould do good itheyr handes: yet might Tyndals tranſlacyon in no wyſe be ſuffered. 
            
            
               N.
                well I ſhall bethynke me tyll we mete agayne, and then wyll I be ſo bolde alſo to take Tyndals parte in defence of hys tranſlacyon and other bokes which he hath put forth in englyſſhe, allegyng the beſt that I can for theyr alowance: to thentent I maye ſee what ſtronge reaſons ye can brynge

to confute them. 
            
            
               W.
                Ther wyth am I ryghte well pleaſed, and I truſt with goddes help to anſwer you ſo effectuouſly, that ye ſhall not count the tyme paſſed in vayne 
            
            
               N.
                Than fare ye well tyll another ſeaſon. 
            
            
               W.
                Oure lorde be wyth you.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Prynted at London in Paules Churcheyard by John Cawood. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
            
         
      
   