
      
         
            
            
            A DISCOVERY
OF THE ERRORS
OF THE ENGLISH
ANABAPTISTS.
            As alſo an Admonition to all ſuch
as are led by the like ſpirit of error.
            Wherein is ſet downe all their ſeuerall and maine points of error, which they hold.
            With a full anſwer to euery one of them ſeuerally,
wherein the truth is manifeſted.
            By Edmond leſſop who ſometime walked
in the ſaid errors with them.
            
               PSAL. 40. 1.
               I waited patiently vpon the Lord, and he inclined vnto me, and
heard my crie.
               He brought me alſo out of the horrible pit, and mirie clay, and
hath ſet my feete upon the rocke, and ordereth my goings.
               And he hath put in my mouth a new ſong of praiſe vnto our God:
many ſhall ſee it, and feare, and truſt in the Lord.
               Therefore haue I not hid thy righteouſnes within my heart, but
haue declared thy truth and thy ſaluation, and haue not concealed
thy mercie and thy truth from the great congregation.
               
                  ver. 10.
            
            LONDON, Printed by W. Iones for Robert Bird, and are to be ſold at
his ſhop in Cheapſide at the ſigne of the Bible. 1623.
         
         
            
            Their principall points which are handled
in this Booke: viz.
            
               1 That God did predeſtinate all men to be ſaued, vpon condition
that they repent and beleeuè the Goſpell.
               2 That God did not elect before all time, to grace and life,
any particular perſons; but in time he doth elect qualities, as
faith and obedience; and then finding theſe qualities in men,
he doth elect their perſons for the qualities ſake.
               3 That all men haue free will in themſelues, as well
to repent of their ſinnes, to beleeue the Goſpell and obtaine
ſaluation, as they haue to remaine in hardneſſe of heart and
vnbeliefe, and in the eſtate of damnation.
               4 That the ſtedfaſtneſſe of mans iuſtification and ſaluation
doth depend vpon his owne will, in continuing in the act of beleeuing
and works of righteouſneſſe; and that ſuch as haue
faith in Chriſt Ieſus, regenerate perſons hauing their names
written in the book of life, may fall away from all, may become
vnregenerate, and haue their names raſed out of the booke
of life againe, and periſh: and that God doth alter and change
his purpoſe and promiſe, and come to hate and reiect ſuch as he
hath formerly loued and iuſtified.
               5 That there is no Originall ſinne, but that all children of
all maner of people in the world, as well heathens, Infidels,
Idolaters, worſhippers of Diuels, all kind of blaſphemers, fornicators,
& vncleane perſons whatſoeuer, (as of the faithfull)
are free from all pollution of ſinne, both in the conception and
birth; and dying before they commit actuall ſinnes, are ſaued.
               6 That none ought to be baptized but ſuch men and women
of yeares onely, as haue attained to true repentance and iuſtifying
faith, being both in the account of the Church and in
the ſight of God regenerate perſons: and that the baptiſme of
children vſed, is no baptiſme at all, but is the marke of the
Beaſt ſpoken of in Reuelat. 13.
               7 That the Church of England is a falſe and Antichriſtian
Church, and ought to be ſeparated from.
               As alſo a touch of the errors of the Familiſts.
               8 And that a King or Magiſtrate cannot be a true Chriſtian,
except he giue ouer his kingly office or Magiſtracie.
            
         
         
            
            AN
ADVERTISEMENT
to the Chriſtian Reader.
            
               WHereas Beloued, there hath
riſen and ſprung vp from amongſt
vs, many dangerous
and erronious opinions, in theſe
our laſt dayes, about the ſubiect
of Religion, let it not therefore
ſeeme ſtrange vnto you, being
the Spirit of God, did not onely
foreſee, but alſo foretold of the
ſame, long before they did appeare,
euery one being diuided into ſundry and ſeuerall factions,
all pretending to worſhip the true and euerliuing God in
ſpirit and in truth, ſpeaking peace vnto themſelues, when as
the moſt of them do yet lie wallowing in the puddle of iniquity,
and cradle of ſecuritie, being not purged in heart: all which
doe riſe two ſundry wayes, being branches of one ſtocke, deriued
from one principall head, (namely) the ſpirit of error: The
firſt is, in that they contemne, or ſo little, or lightly eſteeme
that meanes, which by Gods prouidence is affoorded vnto vs
vnder our peaceable dread Soueraigne Lord the King. Secondly,
they being ſelfe conceited, or as Saint Paul ſpeakes,
aduancing themſelues in thoſe things they neuer ſaw, raſhly
puft vp with carnall mindes, ſuppoſing they know ſome thing
more then others, vnderualuing all, and ouerualuing themſelues;
the conceit whereof cauſeth them to fall to Schiſme,
and ſeperate from all others, when as indeed and in truth they
being examined, by the word and Spirit of God, it will appeare

to the godly wiſe, that as yet moſt of them know nothing aright,
or as they ought to know, if euer they expect the ſaluation
of their ſoules. For if they were but poſſeſſed with the
true knowledge an liue of God in Chriſt, and ſo were of a
ſound mind, at Saint Paul exhorts all to be, it would rather
cauſe humiliation, then exaltation, which would truly teach
euery one how to d
                  •
               meane & carry himſelfe, about ſo weighty
a ſubiect. The neglect hereof doth bring them into a labyrinth
of errors, following after a forme of godlineſſe, through the
wiſdome and knowledge of the braine onely, without the power
thereof, contenting themſelues in the out ſide of religion, bleſſing
themſelues in what they can doe, and meaſuring the loue
of God to themſelues by their owne doings, as of old, their
predeceſſors, the Scribes and Phariſes did: following ſhadows
inſteed of ſubſtances, dreaming of a kind of felicitie in this
forme and in that, ſeeking peace and reſt to their ſoules,
where it is not to be found; which condition of theirs, I cannot
but condole, deſiring with the Prophet, That my head were
water, and mine eyes a fountaine or well of teares, that
I might weepe day and night for their miſery. And in
ſpeciall for them, who are neere and deere vnto me, in the
bonds of nature. For poore ſoules, they couer their ſpirituall
miſery, with Adams fig tree leaues, or with the ſpiders web,
ſtriuing for an outward ſeparation in the fleſh, when alas it is
much to be feared, that with many of them there is litle or
no care at all for a ſeparation of the ſoule from ſin: challenging
and aſſuming vnto themſelues ſoundnes of religion, and
aſſurance of Gods loue, euer meaſuring themſelues by themſelues,
and not by that eternall wiſdome, which is Iuſtified of
her children, being blinded through ſelfe-loue, not willing to
iudge themſelues, and ſo become low in their owne eyes, that
God might be all in all, but contrariwiſe iudging and condemning
all, but themſelues, after this maner doe they follow
the viſion of their owne hearts, deceiuing and being deceiued,
running and flitting from one opinion vnto another, being vnſtable
in all their wayes. Which practiſe of theirs may well be
compared vnto certaine flies, feeding on the backe of a gald

horſe, which is euer flitting or remouing from one place to
another, vntill at laſt they come to ſucke ſo much venome
therefrom, whereby they burſt aſunder: ſo likewiſe doe all
ſuch perſons, who haue not their hearts eſtabliſhed with true
ſauing grace, but with ſundry meates (that is to ſay) with
ſundry ſtrange and different opinions, (I call them ſtrange,
becauſe they were neuer heard of in all the Scriptures, as hereafter
ſhall appeare,) running from one forme of religion vnto
another, vntill at laſt they come to ſucke and feed vpon that
poyſonable hereſie of the Familiſts, who are not worthy to haue
ſo much as the name or title of religion giuen vnto them, it
being not onely the laſt ſtraine or faction they commonly run
into, but alſo deſtroying and damnable, whereby the word of
God is by them blaſphemed, and the way of life and truth
euill ſpoken of, to the great diſhonour of the great and mightie
Ichouah, who will one day breake and teare them in peeces
(as with a rod of iron) when none ſhall be able to deliuer them,
as a iuſt recompence of reward for all ſuch as take pleaſure
therein. So then beloued brethren, friends or kindred, of what
ſex or condition ſoeuer, whether yong or old, rich or poore, be
exhorted and forewarned hereby, not giuing the leaſt heed
vnto any lying ſpirits, vnder what pretence ſoeuer they haue,
may, can or will preſent themſelues vnto you; but (on the contrary)
labour by the grace and power you haue, or ſhall receiue
of the Lord, to reſiſt and auoid them, euen as our Lord and
Maſter did that archſpirit and enemie of all mankind, knowing
that if the leaſt way be giuen, you will be in danger to be
inthralled and inſnared by their deceiuings. And although
ſome of them be more defectiue and more dangerous to infect
the ſoules of men then others be, as moſt certaine there are,
for there are degrees as well in difference of ſpirits, as of nature
and naturall parts, yet (I ſay) they which may conceiue
haue moſt ſoundneſſe in their opinion, it will be found vpon
due and iuſt triall, not to be that which they would ſeeme both
vnto themſelues and others to be, which hereafter will appeare.
Of theſe things, my beloued, I can in ſome meaſure
beſt aduertiſe you, being through want of the true ſauing

knowledge and vnderstanding of God and his truth, caught
and intangled by ſome of them, wandring vp and downe amongſt
the drie hils and mountaines, conceiuing comfort,
when alas I was far from it; and the farther I wandred vp
and downe in that Egyptian darkneſſe, the more intricate labyrinth
of error and darkneſſe my ſoule was plunged into; like
vnto a blind man who hauing not his perfect ſight, goes on in
darkneſſe, vntill at laſt he falls into a pit of deſtruction, for
want of a guide to conduct and leade him; and eſpecially when
I walked with the Anabaptiſts, which way and practiſe of
theirs, ſhall euidently appeare to euery honeſt, true and ſanctified
heart, not onely to ouerturne and race the foundation
of all Chriſtian religion, but alſo (in as much as in them lieth)
to deſtroy the faith of Ieſus Chriſt: all which time, though
ſtrangely deluded, yet was I kept by the power and prouidence
of God from being ſeduced and led into that deſtroying and irrecouerable
way of death before mentioned, namely, the Familiſts
though very nigh vnto it, hauing one foote entred therein,
whiles I walked with the people aforeſaid, vntill at laſt
the Lord in his appointed time was pleaſed to giue me a true
ſight of the miſery wherein I was plunged; one meanes whereof
being the rod of correction, which God had laid vpon me, it
draue me the more ſeriouſly to examine things, and to conſider
with my ſelfe, whether the cauſe (for which I ſuffered)
would any whit auaile me vnto ſaluation, or whether it would
miniſter comfort vnto me in that great and teerible day of
the Lord. So vpon a more ſerious ſuruay of thoſe poſitions I
then maintained, I found them all too light, yea ſo light, as
they were not able to ſtand againſt thoſe truths which the holy
Scriptures teach and maintaine: whereupon immediatly I reiected
my former receiued opinions, as erronious and wicked;
ſo that I may ſay (and that truly) with that holy man Dauid,
It was good for me that I was corrected and chaſtiſed,
for till then I went aſtray. Yet notwithſtanding, though I
was cleane eſcaped therefrom, within a ſhort time after, I was
ſo far from hauing or enioying true peace and comfort, that
in ſtead thereof, my poore diſtreſſed ſoule was accompanied

with nothing but ſtrange feares, terrors and guiltineſſe of conſcience,
crying out againſt me for nothing but vengeance; the
miſery whereof was ſuch, as cauſed me to lament the time
wherein I was borne, not regarding wife, children, or any
friends whatſoeuer that came to viſit me. The miſery wherein
I was, did depriue me of being ſenſible of the leaſt ioy, either in
heauen or on earth, being altogether benummed therewith,
compaſſed and ſet about with many ſtrange and fearfull apparitions
of temptations; the primary and firſt cauſe thereof, was
that originall guilt which I drew from the loines of my firſt
parents, being the very ſeed and ſpawne of all my actuall tranſgreſſions;
and ſo being confounded & vtterly loſt, yea oft times
in deſpaire, fearing there was mo mercie with God for me, my
ſins being ſo heauy a burden vpon my ſoule; then (euen then)
when I was in greateſt deſpaire, God by his Spirit was pleaſed
to worke in me a contrite and broken heart, whereby it was
turned from being a ſtubburne and ſtonie, by diſſoluing 
                  〈◊〉
                into
a heart of fleſh, as ſoft as water; and therein (through 
                  〈◊〉
                infinite
loue and goodneſſe) did by a more ſpeciall work 
                  〈◊〉
                his
Spirit, write his euerlaſting couenant of loue and mercy 
                  ••
               ich
it ſo much ſued, ſought and longed for, with full aſſur
                  ••••
                of
the remiſſion of all my ſins, whereby I ſtand ſealed 
                  〈◊〉
                the
day of my redemption is accompliſhed in the ſecond reſurrection;
that as certaine as my Red
                  •
               emer liueth and cannot die, ſo
certaine I am that one day I ſhall enioy that glorious inheritance,
purchaſed through the merits of Ieſus Chriſt; which
happie and bleſſed eſtate, my ſoule could not enioy, whiles it
ſtucke faſt in the quick ſands of Anabaptiſtry, being euen
welnigh ſmothered and ouerwhelmed in error and darkneſſe,
vntill the Lord was pleaſed to open the eyes of my vnderſtanding,
by hearing the word and doctrine of truth, which is maintained
by and in the Church of England, as namely the doctrine
of repentance, free iuſtification by faith, Gods eternall
predeſtination and election from the foundation of the world,
that no man hath free will or power to obtaine his owne ſaluation,
and that originall ſin to be in all the poſteritie of Adam,
euer ſince we fell from that happie & bleſſed eſtate which once

we had in him, with many other excellent truths; all which
is ſuch a certaine and ſure foundation that whoſoeuer can attaine
to walke in the power thereof, the gates of hell ſhall neuer
ouercome nor deſtroy him: yet notwithſtanding all theſe truths
there maintained, I dare not attribute ſo great a work as this
vnto any mortall man whatſoeuer, any otherwiſe, then his miniſtery
to be the ordinary meanes thereof, but deſire to giue
the praiſe (both now and for euer) onely to God, vnto whom
it is due, he being the principall and chiefe worker therein, by
the powerfull minſtration of his holy Spirit, that ſo he may be
all in all vnto all. And thus in all humilitie of ſoule, I humbly
take my leaue, proceeding vnto that which followeth, beſeeching
God (euen the God of all peace, grace, mercie and loue) to
confirme, direct and informe all our hearts by his holy Spirit,
whereby we may not only come to vnderſtand the truth thereof,
but alſo to practiſe the ſame in our liues and conuerſations,
to the praiſe of the glorie of his grace, vntill we come to be
ſafe ariued at the promiſed Ieruſalem, which is the hauen or
port of eternall reſt, therein ſhall all teares be wiped from our
eyes, and ſo enioy the preſence of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus
Chriſt, the Prince of our ſaluation; to whom with the Father
and the holy Spirit, be all praiſe, honour and glorie giuen of his
Saints for euermore. Amen.
            
               Yours in all Chriſtian dutie,
Edmond Ieſſop.
            
         
      
      
         
            
A DISCOVERIE OF THE ERRORS OF THE ANABAPTISTS.
         
            Their firſt point. That God did predeſtinate all men to be ſaued, vpon
condition that they repent, and beleeue the Goſpell.
            
            We anſwer.
            
               GOD did not predeſtinate all men to be
ſaued, nor any man vpon any condition,
either of repentance, faith, or whatſoeuer
elſe was to be expected or could be foreſeene
in them.
            But his predeſtination was in this ſort:
            Firſt, God (before he created any thing) ſaw and foreknew
what would be the nature & euent of all things;
how though he made as excellent creatures as could be
created, yet there would be weakneſſe and folly found
in them; becauſe to be abſolutely perfect and vnchangeable,
is proper only to God the Creator. So that
it was impoſſible God ſhould make his creature equall
with himſelfe, to will all things that be good perfectly
and vnchangeably, and to do all things that ſuch a will
can deſire; for then he muſt be God, able to create,

which is impoſſible, becauſe there can be but one God,
which is the firſt beginner and Lord of all creatures.
This one God foreſeeing (I ſay) what would become
of the beſt creatures he could make; how though he
ſhould require nothing at their hands but that which
they might eaſily obſerue (and it was meet and very requiſite
they ſhould acknowledge a dutie to him their
firſt beginner and Lord, in whoſe goodneſſe and power
their life and ſafetie did depend,) yet they would neglect
the ſame, and fall from him: he therefore of his
meere goodnes (hauing great reſpect vnto his creature
which he had reſolued to make; and being exceeding
willing, not for any thing he could foreſee in them, but
for his owne good pleaſure & glorie ſake, to ſaue and
glorifie of the ſame,Prou. 8. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. conſulting with himſelfe and with
his eternall Wiſedome which way and how he might
bring his deſire to paſſe) did determine, by election, in
and through the ſame his eternall Wiſedome, his euerlaſting
and onely Sonne, which was before the depths
euer with him as his counſeller and hearts delight, to
ſuſtaine of the one ſort, I meane the Angels, and to redeeme
of the other ſort, I meane mankind, ſuch a compleat
ſufficient companie of both,Reuel. 5. 9. as himſelfe pleaſed,
to be at his right hand, to behold his glorie, to miniſter
before him, & to partake of his pleaſures for euermore.
And becauſe there was no way elſe, but by redemption
to ſaue mankind, by reaſon the firſt man being once
fallen, all the reſt then in his loines, who were to come
of him by generation, fell together with him; and that
there was not any one in heauen or in earth, that was
able to vndoe the workes of the diuell, and to deliuer
thoſe his elect from his ſeruitude and bondage, but
onely the ſame his eternall Wiſedom, the Word whereby
he made the world; therefore as he had choſen them
in him, ſo did he decree to ſend him into the world,
and in a wonderfull maner to take mans nature and
fleſh on him, that therein he might accompliſh his purpoſe,

and bring his counſell and deſire to paſſe, in ſubduing
his and their enemie, and purchaſing redemption
for them by his death and reſurrection. And as he
did determine before the world was,Rom. 8. 29▪ 30. to ſend him; ſo did
he predeſtinate them (whom he had choſen in him and
foreknew) to be conformed to his image, that he might
be the firſt borne among many brethren; the reſt he reſolued
to leaue,Prou. 1. 31. and to reward them with the fruite of
their owne wayes.
            Thus God foreſaw all things, thus did he by his wiſedome
find out a way to ſuſtaine and reſtore of his creatures,
this was his decree, and in this ſort did he predeſtinate.
God did not, neither is he euer ſaid in Scripture
to predeſtinate any to do euill, nor to preordaine any
to condemnation, but vpon the foreſight of their folly
and wickedneſſe, as the cauſe and ground thereof: and
ſo the ſaluation of man is freely and onely in God, in
Chriſt; and the condemnation of man is meerly and
truly of himſelfe, without any ſecret reſeruation whatſoeuer:
as it is written,Hoſea 13. 9. 
               O Iſrael, deſtruction is of thy ſelfe,
but thy ſaluation is of God.
            
         
         
            Their ſecond point. That God did not elect before all time, to grace and life,
any particular perſons; but in time he doth elect qualities, as
faith and obedience, and then finding theſe qualities in men,
he doth elect their perſons for the qualities ſake.
            
            Anſw.
            TO affirme that God did not elect in Chriſt, before
all time, ſome particular perſons to grace, holineſſe
& life eternal, is to denie Gods free & vndeſerued loue;
and to ſay, that God doth elect qualities, is ſenſleſſe; and
to teach, that God doth elect perſons for qualities ſake,
is very erroneous and Antichriſtian.
            We ſay therefore, that Gods election is after this maner:
Firſt, before men or qualities of any ſort were, God

of his meere loue did elect and chuſe in Chriſt, out of
the whole poſteritie and race of mankind, which he
foreſaw, and were before him, as if they had actually
been, a ſeed, a remnant, to be his people, to be his heritage,
to be holy and without blame before him in loue,
as Saint Paul doth teſtifie,Epheſ. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6. ſaying, Bleſſed be the God and
Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who hath bleſſed vs with all
ſpirituall bleſſings in heauenly things in Chriſt,
               1 Pet. 1. 2. 
               according as
he hath choſen vs in him before the foundation of the world,
               Rom 9. 11, 12, 13.
               that we ſhould be holy and without blame before him in loue;
hauing predeſtinated vs vnto the adoption of children by Ieſus
Chriſt to himſelfe, according to the good pleaſure of his owne
will, to the praiſe of the glorie of his grace. Whence it is euident,
that God did chuſe a people to himſelfe, euen before
the foundation of the world, not for qualities ſake,
which then were not, but for his owne good pleaſure
ſake, and to the end that they ſhould be in time qualified
with ſpirituall and heauenly gifts, holy affections,
blameleſſe life and holy conuerſation, euen as he did
predeſtinate them alſo before the world vnto the adoption
of children by Ieſus Chriſt, which was to be actually
fulfilled in time, that ſo all might be to the praiſe
of the glorie of his grace.
            And for further proofe, that election is before qualities
of faith and obedience, and not of qualities, but of
perſons to be qualified; ſee what Chriſt himſelfe ſaith,
(foretelling of the great abhomination of deſolation, &
dayes of the tribulation of Antichriſt, which ſhould
come into the world, whereby the truth ſhould be caſt
to the ground, and the Saints of the moſt High conſumed)
But for the elects ſake thoſe dayes ſhall be ſhortned:
               Math. 24. 22.
Meaning by the elect, not qualities, nor perſons qualified,
but perſons to be qualified, not then being, nor
to be till many hundred yeares after, euen till theſe
our times, as experience hath proued. For thoſe dayes
of deſolation were not then begun, neither did that
Man of ſinne riſe vp till neare foure hundred yeares after;

and thoſe elect were to be in the dayes of his conſumption,Dan. 9. 27.
when his dayes of deſolation ſhould begin
to grow ſhort, as the text ſheweth, which time is now
at laſt come into the world. And although his time of
deſolation hath been long, and that his dayes of tyrannie
are not yet fully ended, yet neuertheleſſe both it
and they, are now well waſted and ſhortned, according
to the word of the Lord, and his Goſpel ſhineth in ſtead
thereof, not only in other kingdomes and parts abroad,
but chiefly in this our Land, bleſſed be his name therefore;
which had it not been, had Antichriſt with his
dayes of deſolation continued ſtill in the full ſtrength
and height they were,Reu. 19. 11, 12, 13. had not he that ſitteth on the
white horſe, whoſe name is called the Word of God, taken
his owne cauſe in hand,2. Theſſal. 2. 8. and with the ſpirit of his
mouth conſumed and cut ſhort (as he daily doth) thoſe
abhominable dayes of the Man of ſin, queſtionleſſe, no
fleſh ſhould now in theſe laſt times haue bin ſaued, but
all had bin ouerwhelmed with his deceit,Math. 24. as it is writtē,
And except thoſe dayes ſhould be ſhortned,
               ver. 22. 
               there ſhould no fleſh
be ſaued; but for the elects ſake thoſe dayes ſhall be ſhortned:
nay they are ſhortned,Rom. 8. 30. the light of the Goſpel ſhineth, &
the elect are thereby daily called, ſanctified and ſaued.
            Hence it is euident, that election is before calling and
iuſtification (euen as predeſtination is,Epheſ 1. 4.) ſeeing God
doth count and call them his elect, ſo long before they
are in being; and that election is to thoſe bleſſed ends,
whereof the Goſpell is the onely meanes.Rom. 1. 16.
            
            And for further confirmation of this point, Saint Paul
declareth, that all the ſeed which God did couenant
with Abraham,
               Rom. 9. 7. to call in Iſaac, ſaying, In Iſaac ſhall thy
ſeed by called, yea Iſaac himſelfe and Iacob likewiſe, were
choſen of God in Chriſt, and knowne of him, before
either Chriſt or one thouſand part of that ſeede were
borne; being onely promiſed of God to Abraham, as a
ſeed and generation ſpirituall, not of Iſaac and his naturall
ofſpring onely, but of the Gentiles alſo, and were

to be deriued in a ſpirituall maner of that one ſeed the
Meſſias promiſed, in which Abraham beleeued, though
he were not to come into the world for many hundred
yeares after; in reſpect whereof God ſaid vnto him, I
haue made thee a father of many nations.
               Rom. 4▪ 17. This ſeed of Abraham,
Saint Paul calleth the children of promiſe,
               Rom. 9. 8. becauſe
they are all borne by promiſe,Gal. 3. 29. and 4. 28. as was Iſaac, being of that
one ſeed which is Chriſt, and part of that ſmall remnant
which he had reſerued in him before the foundation of
the world, but for whoſe ſake we had not continued till
now, but had been made like Sodome long before this
day. And that this ſeed and children of Abraham were▪
choſen of God in Chriſt before they were borne, Saint
Paul further proueth it by the words ſpoken to Rebecca
concerning Iacob,
               Rom. 9. 10, 11. ſaying, And not onely this, but when
Rebecca alſo was conceiued by one, euen by our father Iſaac;
for the children being not yet borne, nor hauing done good or
euil, that the purpoſe of God according to election might ſtand,
not of works, but by reaſon of him that calleth, it was ſaid vnto
her, The elder ſhall ſerue the yonger; as it is witten: Iacob
haue I loued,
               ver. 12. 
               and Eſaw haue I hated. By this word of promiſe
concerning Iacob, Saint Paul proueth more fully
(I ſay) that which in ſubſtance he had declared before
by the word of promiſe, as touching Iſaac, and as concerning
the ſeed which God did promiſe Abraham to
call in Iſaac; namely that the purpoſe of God according
to election,Epheſ. 1. 3. his free loue in chuſing vs firſt in Chriſt, is
the true ground and principall cauſe of all ſpirituall
bleſſings in heauenly things, which in time we come
to enjoy in him. For doubtleſſe there was no cauſe in
Iacob more then in Eſaw, why God ſhould haue this reſpect
vnto him more then to Eſaw; the ſeed of euill was
ſowne in him alſo,Rom. 5. 12, 14, 18. and their natures were both corrupt,
euen from their conception, yea from Adam, in whoſe
loines both they and their parents were when he tranſgreſſed.
And as the tree or plant, which for want of
ſtrength being yong & tender, cannot yeeld forth fruit,

whereby it nature may be ſhewen,Pſal. 51▪ 5. yet (being in nature
euill) the ſubſtance and root of euill is therein,ver. 7. and ſo
as without a replantation and coniunction with ſome
tree or plant of better nature, it can bring forth no other
but euill fruit: ſo Iacob as well as Eſaw, his nature
being alſo corrupt and euill,Iohn 3. 6. had not God intercepted
him,Iob 14. 4. and (as he had choſen him before in Chriſt) ſo by
a new birth or replantation changed his nature, his
heart I meane, he would haue brought forth no other
but euill fruit alſo (as well as his brother Eſaw) euen to
his laſt houre, and ſo haue periſhed together. Thus
much ſhall ſerue for the truth of Gods election.
         
         
            Their third point is: That all men haue free will in themſelues, as well
to repent of their ſinnes, to beleeue the Goſpell and obtaine
ſaluation, as they haue to remaine in hardneſſe of heart and
vnbeliefe, and in the eſtate of damnation.
            
            Anſw.
            TO teach that all or that any men haue as free will
in themſelues to repent, to beleeue the Goſpell,
and obtaine ſaluation, as they haue to remaine in the
contraries, is very erroneous and Antichriſtian.
            But the truth is this.
            That as we haue all ſinned in and from our father
Adam,
               Rom. 3. 9. & 5. 12, 14, 18. and are excluded from the glorie of God and
from the ioy of his preſence;Philip. 2. 13. ſo haue we all loſt and are
depriued of all poſſibilitie in will or power of nature
to act any thing either inward or outward,Rom. 9. 16. as touching
the law,Deut. 29. 4. or as concerning the Goſpell, whereby to recouer
our ſelues againe,Ioh. 6. 44, 65. & 15. 16. or euer to obtaine that which we
haue loſt.Ier. 10. 23. So that notwithſtanding the Goſpell be preached
to all,2. Cor. 3. 5. and that euery one is inuited to the feaſt
thereof,Math. 22. 5, 14. and that there is not any other way or meanes
whereby we may poſſibly recouer and liue;Luk. 14. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. yet the moſt
part of ye world do vtterly refuſe to come, ſo much as to

the outward acceptation thereof: and thoſe that doe
come, who being enlightned by the holy Ghoſt, do aſſent
vnto the truth of the Goſpell, and ſo come in vnto
the outward profeſſion thereof, yet for all this (ſuch
is the euill heart of man) if God ſhould not vouchſafe
(according to his eternall purpoſe and promiſe) to call
in a more ſpeciall maner them whom he foreknew,Rom 8. 28, 29. & 1 16. and
had predeſtinated to be conformed to the image of his
Sonne,1. Cor. 1. 24. 26. to call them (I ſay) by a more ſpeciall gift and
power of the holy Ghoſt,Luk 4. 18. firſt to repentance, in turning
their hearts from all the delight and pleaſure they had
taken in ſinne and in the vanities of the fleſh and this
world,Eſay 61. 1. into a wonderfull great ſorrow of heart, mourning
and weeping for the ſame,Ezek 36. 27. cauſing them alſo with
many teares to lament the time that euer they tooke
pleaſure therein;Math. 15. 24. and falling downe at the feete of God,
with humble hearts confeſſe vnto him thoſe their ſins
and follies, deſiring vnſpeakably & reſtleſly, mercie and
forgiueneſſe at his hands, loue and reconciliation with
him;Ezek. 11. 19. thus taking firſt away their hard and ſtony hearts,
and giuing them hearts of fleſh,Ier. 32 39. ſoft and tender hearts;
and then (in the ſecond place) to write (not with inke
and pen,2. Cor. 3. 3, 4. but with the ſpeciall finger of his holy Spirit,
not in tables of ſtone, but in theſe the fleſhly tables of
their hearts) theſe their repentant hearts, his couenant
of mercie and loue, aſſuring them that their ſinnes be
forgiuen, and that he is reconciled with them, and they
with him in Ieſus Chriſt,Gal. 3. 26, 27. whom now they haue put on
by faith. If God ſhould not haue vouchſafed (I ſay)
thus to call them whom he had predeſtinated, thus to
iuſtifie them and cloathe them, (but that he is faithfull
and cannot lie, keeping his couenant for euer, as touching
that ſeed which he did promiſe to call in Iſaac) they
would and ſhould haue periſhed with the reſt, notwithſtanding
any free will or power they haue in nature
(more then they) to attaine to theſe things.Obiect.
            
            But peraduenture ſome impudent perſon will obiect,

that if God doth call and ſanctifie ſome in ſuch a
ſpeciall maner, by more ſpeciall gifts of the Spirit, then
he doth affoord to others; then his not affoording the
ſame vnto them, is the cauſe of their miſerie.
            To anſwer them,Anſw. put the caſe that there were two
yong men, that hauing receiued at their parents hands
their portions, haue through riot and leudneſſe ſpent
all, and brought themſelues into ſo great pouertie and
debt, as that they haue no way or meanes whereby (poſſibly)
they can recouer and raiſe themſelues againe, but
are both like to liue in miſerie to their dying dayes: tell
me, haue they not been (themſelues) the authors of this
their owne ruine and decay? and is not this miſery iuſt
vpon? I ſuppoſe (as little grace as thou haſt) thou wilt
anſwer, Yea. But admit there were a man of great ſubſtance,
who ſhould out of his owne bountie, freely, and
of his owne accord deliuer one of theſe yong men out
of his miſerie, pay his debts, and reſtore him to his former
eſtate againe; Is this rich man, by his free bountie
to the one, become now the cauſe of the others miſery?
doeſt thou dare to affirme it?Mat, 20. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Muſt thine eye needs now
be euil, becauſe he is bountiful? Is it not lawful for him
to beſtow his owne where and on whom he pleaſeth?
Or doeſt thou meane,Obiect. that his not doing the like for
the other, is the cauſe of his continuall miſerie. To
anſwer thee,Anſw. did hee not bring himſelfe into it? and
was it not of it ſelfe, continuall and iuſt by thine owne
confeſſion? How then may the thing that neuer was
done, be the cauſe of that which is in being? Can the
effect be before the cauſe? I haue heard that the cauſe
is before the effect, but I neuer heard that the effect is
or can be before the cauſe. But if I ſhould admit of
thine opinion, that all men haue free will in themſelues,
to chuſe, as they haue to refuſe grace offered; to
ſee what the iſſue thereof will be, let me aske thee, what
is the reaſon then, that but ſome men do chuſe grace? is
it becauſe they haue a better, and more inclinable will

in them by nature then their fellowes? If there be no
ſpeciall gift of grace to moue them, it muſt be ſome
ſpeciall gift or qualitie of nature. For ſuch a ſpeciall
differing effect, muſt haue a ſpeciall differing cauſe. Or
wilt thou ſay, it is by the operation or ſecret motion of
ſome planet (as ſome heatheniſhly conceiue:) if ſo, yet
it is in ſome ſort naturall. The effects we ſpeake of, are
the baptiſme of repentance, & the purification of faith,
called in Scripture, the baptiſme or birth of water and
of the holy Ghoſt, which are the parts of our regeneration:
now can any gifts or qualities of nature, or operations
of planets, produce or cauſe ſuch effects as theſe?
Nay doubleſſe; for cauſes are always greater then effects;
and greater things then theſe, are not to be found in the
natures of men or planets, but in God, who by the ſpeciall
power and vertue of his holy Spirit, doth cauſe
theſe great effects,Ioh. 3. 5. doth worke and produce this new
and heauenly birth;Iam. 1, 17, 18. and therefore the perſons thus
qualified, are ſaid in Scripture to be borne of God, 1. Ioh.
3. 9. If thou ſaiſt, that God put this difference in the
will of man by creation; then thou makeſt God the author
and cauſe of ſinne, which thou wouldeſt ſeeme to
auoid, by excluding his ſpeciall gifts of the Spirit, fearing
as if it led thee to it; whereas it is but thy groſſe
apprehenſion that makes thee feare; and by this meanes
thou runneſt thy ſelfe out of breath, thou knoweſt not
whither. So then to conclude this point with Saint
Pauls words,Rom. 9. 16. 
               It is not in him that willeth, nor in him that
runneth, but in God that ſheweth mercie.
            
         
         
            Their fourth point is: That the ſtedfaſtneſſe of mans iuſtification and ſaluation
doth depend vpon his owne will, in continuing in the act of beleeuing
and works of righteouſneſſe; and that ſuch as haue
faith in Chriſt Ieſus, regenerate perſons hauing their names
written in the book of life, may fall away from all, may become
vnregenerate, and haue their names raſed out of the booke

of life againe, and periſh: and that God doth alter and change
his purpoſe and promiſe, and come to hate and reiect ſuch as he
hath formerly loued and iuſtified.
            
            Anſw.
            TO teach that the ſtedfaſtnes of mans iuſtification &
ſaluation, doth depend vpon his owne will, in continuing
in the act of beleeuing and works of righteouſnes;
and that ſuch as haue faith in Chriſt, regenerate
perſons, hauing their names written in the book of life,
may fall away from all, become vnregenerate, and haue
their names raſed out of the booke of life, and periſh;
and y• God doth alter his purpoſe & promiſe of mercie
and loue, and come to hate and reiect ſuch as he hath
formerly loued and iuſtified: to teach all this (I ſay) is
to denie the very foundation, and to make God vnfaithfull,
and is one of the maine errors of the Antichriſtian
Church of Rome.
            But the doctrine of the Church of God is this:
That ſuch as to whom God hath giuen true repentance,
and faith in Chriſt whereby they are iuſtified
from their ſinnes, and haue their hearts ſanctified, ſuch
as haue their parts in the firſt reſurrection,Reuel. 13. 8. whoſe names
were written in the booke of life from the foundation
of the world, ſhall neuer fall away from this eſtate, nor
from any part thereof; becauſe they ſtand not, neither
are kept by the ſtrength of their owne will,1. Pet. 1. 5. act of faith,
or works of righteouſnes,Rom. 5. 10. but by the power & ſtrength
of God, in and through the vertue and life of Chriſt
their head.Epheſ. 1. 4, 5, 6. For as God the Father did of himſelfe, firſt
chuſe them in Chriſt his Sonne,Rom. 8. 29. 30. and predeſtinate them
vnto the adoption of children, and to be conformed to
the image of his Sonne, euen from the foundation of
the world; and as he alſo in time calleth them to repentance,
iuſtifieth them, & purifieth their hearts by faith,
through grace in Chriſt,Acts 15. 9. & 10. 43. and by the Spirit of his Son,
which he ſendeth forth into their hearts,Rom. 8. 15, 16. doth adopt

them to be his children,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 29. and conforme them to the image
and likeneſſe of his Sonne, both in reſpect of his
death, and alſo in regard of his reſurrection, dying to
ſinne, and riſing to holineſſe and newneſſe of life; from
minding earthly things,Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. to ſet their affections on things
that are aboue, where Chriſt ſitteth at his right hand:
ſo (I ſay) it is God which in and through his Son, doth
keepe and defend them, as it is written, Who are kept
by the power of God through faith vnto ſaluation.
               1. Pet. 1. 5. Yea he is
the rock of their ſaluation,Pſal. 62. 2, 6, 7. and ſtrong tower of defence;
he is their watch-man,Eſay 40. 11. which doth neither ſlumber nor
ſleep;Pſal. 23. 1. their ſhepherd that feedeth them, as the Pſalmiſt
ſpeaketh;Ioh. 15 1, 2. he is the husband-man, that did not only ingraft
and plant them in his Sonne the true vine, and
cauſe them to beare fruite in him, but euery branch
that beareth fruit in him, he purgeth, that it may beare
more fruit;Ioh. 10. 29. & 17. 6. 10, 12▪
                he gaue them his Sonne, and his Son them,
and the Sonne reiecteth none that come vnto him, but
taketh them into his protection,& 10. 14. 4. like the good ſhepherd,
and they heare his voice, and he knoweth them,
and they follow him, and he wil giue them eternal life,
& they ſhall not periſh,ver. 28, 29, 30. for none are able to pluck them
out of his hands; and the Father that gaue them him, is
greater then all, and no man is able to plucke them
out of his Fathers hands. Nay if Satan ſhould deſire to
ſift them,Luk 22. 31. and that their faith (through the violence of
temptation) ſhould ſeeme to faile, as touching their act
of beleeuing, and that their fruit (by meanes thereof)
ſhould not appeare, (for ſo it may ſometimes befall
them, as it did the Apoſtle Peter) yet notwithſtanding,
the Lord their rocke,Pſal. 62. 7. 2. Pet. 2. 4. 5, 6. the foundation and chiefe corner
ſtone, whereon theſe liuely ſtones are built, ſuſtaineth
and vpholdeth them; the vertue and ſtrength of
him,Ioh. 15. 5. the true vine, in which they are ingraffed, the Son
in whom they haue beleeued (he hauing alſo prayed
the Father,Luk. 22. 32. that their faith faile not) ſhall raiſe them vp▪
refreſh them, and make them to flouriſh again, as well

in regard of their faith, as fruites; and being thus conuerted
and raiſed vp, ſhal be able thenceforth to ſtrengthen
their brethren. And in theſe reſpects & conſiderations,
Chriſt faith to Peter,
               Math. 16. 18. 
               Vpon this rocke will I build my
Church, and the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt it. For
as at the firſt they were not iuſtified from their ſinnes
by their owne act of beleeuing, though their act of beleeuing
were neceſſary vnto their iuſtification; nor yet
by their works of righteouſnes which followed, though
they were alſo neceſſary for the proofe and manifeſtation
of their faith; but by the free grace of God in Ieſus
Chriſt, miniſtred vnto them by his word and Spirit,
which their act of faith onely (in their hearts) doth entertaine:
ſo neither doe they ſtand, or are vpholden, by
their act of beleeuing, though it be neceſſary alſo, for
their continuall comfort, that they ſhould be euermore
exerciſed, as in the word and promiſe of God, ſo in the
act of beleeuing, going on ſtill from ſtrength to
ſtrength, drawing nearer and nearer vnto God, in the
full aſſurance of faith, vntill at laſt they come to ſee his
face, and enioy his preſence, in the promiſed Ieruſalem,
where is all fulneſſe of ioy,Pſal. 16. 11. and at whoſe right hand
there are pleaſures for euermore, (as aſſuredly one day
they ſhall;) not yet by their works of righteouſneſſe,
though it be likewiſe neceſſary, that they ſhould be alwayes
walking in, and working the works of righteouſnes:
but the ſtedfaſtneſſe and certaintie of their eſtates
in Chriſt, their life, ſaluation, and glorie euerlaſting, dependeth
on the ſtedfaſtneſſe, certaintie and vnchangeableneſſe
of Gods purpoſe, promiſe, loue, and on the
loue and life of Chriſt their head, which was once dead,
but is now aliue, and liueth ſtill for euermore. And ſo
ſure and certaine as God purpoſeth, and it cometh to
paſſe,Ioh. 13. 1. as he promiſeth and faileth not, loueth once,
and loueth to the end; ſo ſure as Chriſt which loueth
them liueth, ſhall they abide in him, liue by him, and
not die for euer;Ioh. 6. 56, 57. as it is written, He that eateth my fleſh

and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. As the
liuing Father hath ſent me, and I liue by the Father, ſo he that
eateth me, euen he ſhall liue by me. For he is the bread of
life;Ioh. 6. 47. and euery one that beleeueth in him, doth (in a ſpirituall
maner) eate of him, and ſo liueth by him, and ſhal
haue euerlaſting life. For as Saint Paul reaſoneth, If
when we were enemies,
               Rom. 5. 8, 9, 10. 
               we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Sonne; much more being reconciled, ſhall we be ſaued by
his life. So that he that is once iuſtified by the blood of
Chriſt, and reconciled to God through faith in him, his
eſtate is certain and permanent: and though the mountaines
ſhall depart, and the hils be moued, yet ſhall not
the kindneſſe and loue of God in Chriſt depart, nor the
couenant of peace towards them in him, be euer remoued
from them, as the Prophet teſtifieth. Nay what ſhall
or can poſſibly ſeparate them from the loue of Chriſt,
or frō the loue of God the Father towards them in him?
Shall tribulation,
               Rom. 8. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. 
               or diſtreſſe, or perſecution, or famine, or nakednes,
or perill, or ſword? As it is written, For thy ſake are
we killed all the day long, and are counted as ſheepe for the
ſlaughter. Nay ſaith Saint Paul, In all theſe things we are
more then conquerours through him that loued vs. For I am
perſwaded (ſaith he) that neither death nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things preſent, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, ſhall be
able to ſeparate vs from the loue of God, which is in Chriſt
Ieſus our Lord.
            
            Thus, as God did predeſtinate, call, iuſtifie and ſanctifie
them; ſo it is he that keepeth & defendeth them;
and the ſtedfaſtnes of their eſtates in him, doth depend
vpon the ſtedfaſtnes and immutabilitie of his purpoſe,
promiſe, loue, and on the loue and life of Chriſt; and
all is free, without any reſpect of will, faith, or works of
ours, in him and of him; to whom be all power and glorie,
praiſe and thankſgiuing for euer. Amen.
            But ſome will obiect and ſay, What then meaneth
the Scriptures,Obiect. which ſo often ſpeake of falling away

from righteouſneſſe, from faith; from Chriſt, from God;
as where it ſaith,Ezek. 18. 24. 
               But when the righteous man turneth away
from his righteouſnes, and committeth iniquitie, and dieth
in them; for the iniquities that he hath done, ſhall be die.
And againe it is ſaid, that he which taketh the plough by the
hand and looketh behind him, is not meete for the kingdome
of God. And againe, When a ſoule ſpirit is caſt out of a man,
and he walking in drie places, findeth no rest, but returneth
to the houſe from whence he came out; and finding it ſwept
and garniſhed, entreth therein with ſeuen more worſe then
himſelfe; and the end of that man ſhall be worſe then the beginning.
And again, ſome are ſaid to beleeue for a time,
to be offended when tribulation cometh. And ſome
branches are ſaid to be taken away from the vine. Others
to withdraw themſelues, and to depart away from the
liuing God: to be made partakers of the holy Ghoſt,
and to taſte of the good word of God and of the powers
of the world to come, and to fall away, not to be renewed
againe by repentance. That a man may be ſanctified
by the blood of the teſtament, and afterwards
tread vnder foote the Son of God, and count the ſame
blood as an vnholy thing, and deſpight the Spirit of
grace. Some to be cleane eſcaped from the filthineſſe
of the world, and after this to be entangled againe,
whoſe end alſo is worſe then the beginning, likened
vnto the dog that returneth to his owne vomit, and
to the ſow that is waſhed, and turneth to wallow in the
mire againe: And ſome that do make ſhipwrack of faith
and a good conſcience; with diuers other ſayings to this
purpoſe. Alſo theſe doubtfull ſpeeches: He that endureth
to the end. If ye hold faſt vnto the end: Whoſe houſe ye are
if ye continue. He that ouercometh and keepeth my words vnto
the end. And againe: Let them be blotted out of the booke
of the liuing. I will take away his part out of the booke of life,
and out of the holy Citie. Theſe Scriptures ſeeme to contradict
all that is ſaid before, and to proue that there is
no eſtate to be attained vnto, but may be fallen from,

loſt and vndone againe.
            Theſe Scriptures may ſeeme (with men not inſtructed
of God) to contradict all what haue been mentioned
before,Anſw. and to proue a falling away from all grace
whatſoeuer; but with ſuch as God hath been pleaſed
to inſtruct, it is otherwiſe: and although not only your
ſects, but the Antichriſtian Church of Rome, the Arminians
and others, doe conceiue and teach from theſe
Scriptures, that there is no eſtate to be attained vnto in
this life, but men may fall therefrom and periſh: and
becauſe you will not admit (as it were too groſſe yee
ſhould) of contradiction in Scriptures, wreſt & wring
all the former Scriptures which doe cleerly proue the
contrary, either to make for this your erronious conceit,
or elſe (at leaſt) not to oppoſe the ſame; yet I ſay
neuertheleſſe, the truth is, that ye are deceiued, not only
in this, but in the other of your points, being (moſt
of them) of the ſame nature, but all tending to the
wrong marke.
            It is true, theſe Scriptures do plainly ſhew, that men
may attaine to many excellent graces and gifts of the
holy Ghoſt; they may receiue the word with ioy, take
the plough by the hand, be enlightned, beleeue and
be baptized; they may be branches in the vine; they
may haue a foule ſpirit caſt out of them, and be ſwept
and garniſhed; they may taſte of the heauenly gift, and
be made partakers of the holy Ghoſt, and taſte of the
good word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come; they may be in ſome reſpects ſanctified by the
blood of the teſtament, and be cleane eſcaped from the
pollutions of the world; they may haue a kind of righteouſnes,
and be in ſome ſort termed righteous men;
they may haue faith to caſt out diuels, and doe many
great works: all this they may attaine vnto, and yet
come ſhort of the chiefe things, fall away from all, loſe
all, and Chriſt may (notwithſtanding all theſe things)
iuſtly and truly ſay vnto them (in the day of account)

               Depart from me ye workers of iniquitie, I neuer knew ye.
            
            And it is as true, that there be greater and more ſpeciall
things then all theſe, which whoſoeuer can attain,
ſhall as certainly abide in Chriſt and be ſaued, as Chriſt
abideth in the Father and liueth. But the greateſt difficultie
lieth in this, to diſtinguiſh theſe things rightly
aſunder, according to the meaning of the Scriptures,
that ſo their true difference being diſcerned of vs, we
may not only auoide the great confuſion, which the
want thereof hath cauſed in the mindes of many, and
the ſundry errors, they through their ignorance haue
fallen into, but may be brought to examine and proue
our ſelues by the rule thereof, whether our eſtates be
yet ſuch as will abide the triall in the day of account, or
no. If we find that they be, we haue then great cauſe of
comfort: if not, then haue we great reaſon to feare, and
with all ſpeed to humble our ſoules before God, and
earneſtly 
                  •
               o deſire him, that he would be pleaſed to
forme his ſonne Chriſt in vs, and to conforme vs vnto
his image, which is the eſtate that will giue vs boldnes
in the day of his appearing.
            Now that we may rightly vnderſtand theſe things,
and diſcerne their true difference, let vs obſerue, that
as the Goſpel hath two ſeuerall operations in the hearts
and conſciences of men,2. Cor. 2. 15, 16 (to ſome it is the ſauour of life
vnto life, and to others the ſauour of death vnto death, not
of it ſelfe, but through the wickednes of mens hearts:)
ſo likewiſe there is a two-fold adminiſtration thereof,
the one generall, common to all, the other ſpeciall, peculiar
to a few: that which is generall and common, is
a publique declaration, that ſuch a thing there is,
whereby all men in general haue this benefit, (namely)
y• whereas after Adam had ſinned, before the promiſe was
made, that the ſeed of the woman ſhould bruiſe the Serpents
head, there was no time nor place for repentance to any,
nor remiſſion of ſins vpon any ground to be expected;
now ſince that time, by vertue of the promiſe, all ſinne

i
                  •
                made pardonable, there is time and place for repentance
to all, and remiſſion of ſinnes thereupon granted;
ſo that whoſoeuer ſhall come, and with ſorrow of heart
confeſſe his ſinnes vnto God, and humbly deſire mercie
and forgiueneſſe at his hands,Rom. 16. 15. 16. ſhall receiue it; and thus
far the Goſpell is preached to all,Col. 1. 23. euen to euery creature
vnder heauen,
               Mark. 10. 15. as Saint Paul ſpeaketh: ſo that there is not,
nor hath been a nation or people,Math, 28. 19. in any time or part of
the world, that can truly ſay, we haue not heard it; for
(as it is written) their ſound went forth throughout all the
earth,
               Pſal. 19. 
               and their words vnto the ends of the world; and ſo all
are left without excuſe, becauſe God hath not left himſelfe
without witneſſe. But the maner and meaſure of
Gods declaration of his Goſpell, hath been diuers: he
declared it vnto the nations of the Gentiles in former
times, yea and at this preſent doth in diuers parts of
the world,Rom. 10. 18. onely by the workes which he hath created,
and benefits that he daily giueth them,Rom. 1. 20. as the heauens
and firmament,Act. 14. 16, 17. day and night, Sunne and raine, and in
that he giueth them fruitfull ſeaſons, filling their hearts
with food and gladneſſe, with many other bleſſings; all
which do (in their maner and kind) preach and declare
vnto them, that God is good and gracious to mankind,
and hath ſome ſpeciall reſpect vnto him, and doe alſo
call vpon them daily to ſeeke him that made all, and giueth
all thoſe good things vnto them, and proueth
vnto them,Act. 17. 27. that if they had ſought, they might haue
found, in him, yet greater things, which ſome of them
(doubles) haue attained vnto, & the reſt by this means
are left without excuſe. He ſhewed it to the nation
of the Hebrewes, not onely by his works and benefits,
which they (eſpecially had in great abundance,) but
in another more excellent maner, and in a far greater
meaſure,Heb. 1. 1. 2. as namely by the teſtimonies of the Fathers,
and by the miniſterie of Moſes and the Prophets,2. Pet. 1. 19. 10, 21. who
receiued it from God, and ſpake as they were moued
by the holy Ghoſt;Heb. 4. 1. 2. he ſtretched forth his hand all the
day long vnto that people, preaching his Goſpell (the

word of faith vnto them; ſo as that they of all other, had
leaſt reaſon to ſay in their hearts, Who ſhall aſcend into
heauen for vs,
               Rom. 10, 7, 8, ver. 6. 
               to fetch it vs? or who ſhall go downe into the
deepe to bring it vs, that we may heare it and doe it? but the
word was nigh enough vnto them, euen in their mouthes and
in their hearts,  and if the Gentiles were left without
excuſe, much more they.
            And now he hath ſpoken and declared it vnto vs in
theſe laſt times by his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt,Heb 1. 2. that Seed
which was promiſed to Adam, to Abraham, was ſpoken
of by Moſes,
               Rom. 2. 14. foretold by the Prophets, in whom, by
whom, and through whom, all bleſſings, all hope, all
grace, and life is granted, is purchaſed, is to be attained,
by him (I ſay) and by his holy Apoſtles, in the power
and gifts of the holy Ghoſt, he hath declared vnto vs
all things cleerly, many whereof being ſuch as in all other
former ages were not knowne: ſo that the earth
floweth with the knowledge of the Goſpell in theſe
dayes, aboue all thoſe other times paſt, and many haue
been enlightned through the preaching of it, by the
Spirit, and haue beleeued and giuen their aſſents vnto
the truth of it; many haue taſted of the heauenly gift,
and haue been made partakers of the holy Ghoſt, haue
taſted of the good word of God, and of the powers of
the world to come; many are able to preach and diſcourſe
thereof in great and excellent meaſure; and if
the Hebrewes could at no time (truly ſay, we haue not
heard it) nor yet thoſe Gentiles that had not the Law,
to wit, thoſe Scriptures and ordinances of the Law,
which the Hebrewes had: what can we then ſay, who
haue not only had all the meanes and light which thoſe
Gentiles & Hebrews had, but alſo the plaine reuelation
of the Goſpell, according as it was foretold to be in
theſe laſt times, confirmed by the death & reſurrection
of Ieſus Chriſt, and left recorded vnto vs by his holy Apoſtles
in full meaſure; how can it be (I ſay) therefore,
but that the things which we haue heard and beleeued,
will be vnto vs the ſauour of death vnto death in a fuller

and larger meaſure, then vnto any of them, ſeeing
we haue receiued a greater & larger meaſure of knowledge,
if we obey not the Goſpell, if we attaine not vnto
the ſpeciall grace and benefits thereof: for as the
Lord himſelfe teſtifieth, He that knoweth his maſters will,
and doth it not,
               Luk 12. 47. 
               ſhall be beaten with many ſtripes.
            
            But ſome will ſay, we haue not onely knowledge of
his will, but obedience alſo, we are not like vnto thoſe
ſtrange fornicators and idolaters of the Gentiles, nor
as the cruell, vnbeleeuing Hebrewes, which killed the
Prophets, and murdered the Lord of glorie; neither are
we of the common ſinners of the world, though we
haue been ſo heretofore; nay the power of the holy
Ghoſt, by the preaching of the word of God, hath altered
vs, the foule ſpirit is now caſt out by a ſtronger
then he, we are now cleane eſcaped from the filthineſſe
of the world, our liues and actions are reformed, we apply
our ſelues now to the hearing of the word, we conferre
thereof, and reade it oft, we pray alſo oft, we receiue
the Sacraments oft, we inſtruct our children and
our ſeruants in the principles of Chriſtian religion, we
keep the Sabbath, we diſtribute of our goods to the
poore, we neglect no dutie which we conceiue we
ought to performe; ſo that we are waſhed and ſanctified
by the blood of the teſtament.
            I confeſſe, thou haſt here a kind of obedience, and
doeſt (in part) thy maſters will, and art ſo far forth ſanctified
by the blood of the teſtament, for by it, all graces
and gifts of the Spirit are purchaſed, and thou couldeſt
neuer haue attained to theſe things but by vertue
of it; yet I ſay, notwithſtanding all this, the chiefe thing
may be wanting in thee; for if this be to do thy maſters
will, according to our Sauiours meaning, then (doubtleſſe)
the Scribes and Phariſes did his will as wel as thee;
they made cleane the outſide of the cup and platter,
they had ſuch a kind of beliefe,Math. 23. 24, 24 25, 26, 27, 28. and were as ſtrict in all
outward obſeruations as all this, and yet their inſides

were foule, their hearts were full of rancor and malice;
and ſo may it be with thee for all this. Here is a faire
blade indeede, but where is the fruit? Doeſt thou not
know that except thy righteouſnes exceed the righteouſnes
of the Scribes and Phariſes,Mat. 5. 20. thou ſhalt in no
wiſe enter into the kingdome of God? Herod heard Iohn
gladly, and did many things willingly; and Iudas no
doubt was faire in the leafe, but his heart was euer corrupt,
as the Euangeliſt teſtifieth,Ioh. 12. 6. ſaying, This he ſpake,
not that he had care of the poore, but that he was couetous,
and carried the bag.
               Luk. 6. 43. How thinkeſt thou, can an euill tree
bring forth good fruit?Iam. 3. 11. 12. or can one and the ſame fountaine,
bring forth ſweet waters, and bitter? Or can a
ſtincking polluted fountaine, bring forth ſweet waters?
The heart of man is the tree or fountaine, from whence
either good or euill commeth, as Chriſt himſelfe teſtifieth;
A good man out of the good treaſure of the heart,
               Luk. 6. 44.
               bringeth forth that which is good; and an euill man out of the
euill treaſure of his heart,
               ver. 45. 
               bringeth forth that which is euill.
If thy heart be euill and vncleane, how canſt thou then
bring forth from thence any good fruit?Acts. 8, 13. Grant thou art
ſanctified outwardly,Ioh. 6. 66. thou haſt belieued and art baptized,
thou heareſt the word with ioy,Mat. 13. 20. thou art all as before
is ſpoken, yet if in heart thou beeſt hard and vnrepentant,
proud, puft vp, couetous, vnmercifull, one
that loueſt thy ſelfe and this preſent euill world, enuious
to others, cruell, what will all thy beliefe and righteouſnes
auaile thee? Nay, admit thou hadſt all faith,
ſo as thou couldeſt moue mountaines, and that thou
ſhouldſt giue all thy goods to the poore, and thy bodie
to be burned, and that no man could tax thy heart by
any euill fruit that yet appeared, nor thy ſelfe perceiue
thine owne heart to be euill;Iam. 1. 8. yet if thou haſt not that
faith which worketh by loue,Gal. 5. 6. that loue with her naturall
properties, which the Apoſtle deſcribeth, ſaying,
Loue ſuffereth long,
               1. Cor. 13. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 
               and is kind, it enuieth not, it vaunteth
not it ſelfe, it is not puffed vp, it behaueth not it ſelfe vnſeemly,

it ſeeketh not her own, it is not eaſily prouoked, it thinketh none
euill, it reioyceth not in iniquite, but it reioyceth in the truth;
It beareth all things, it belieueth all things, it hopeth all things,
it endureth all things. I ſay if thou haſt not that faith
which bringeth forth theſe effects, thou art nothing,
thou art but as a ſounding braſſe, and as a tinckling
Cimball, notwithſtanding all thy gifts of knowledge,
faith, propheſie, righteouſnes, or whatſoeuer, and ſhalt
be found to be, but either as the high waies ſide, or as
the ſtony ground,Mat. 13. 4. 5. 6. 7. or thornie ground mentioned in the
Goſpell, which indured not, which neuer came to bring
forth goodfruit, neither in the greateſt, nor leaſt meaſure,
(like vnto the good ground deſcribed after,ver 8.) and
thy end will be like that earth, which notwithſtanding
the raine commeth oft vpon it, bringeth forth nothing
but thornes and briars, and is therefore neere vnto curſing;
and as the tree,Heb. 6. 8. which though it haue had much
dreſſing,Mark. 11. 13. 14. yet becauſe it bringeth not forth goodfruit,
is hewen downe and caſt into the fire. Conſider therefore
what neede there is, that we ſhould dilligently enquire
into theſe things, and ſee the difference betweene
theſe two eſtates, and that our care and ſtudy, might, and
dayly ſhould be to learne the beſt.
            Now touching the ſpeciall adminiſtration of the
Goſpell, and thoſe gifts of the Spirit, which are perticuliar
to afew, euen Gods elect onely.
            The ſpeciall adminiſtration of the Goſpell is this,Luk. 4. 18.
namely a particular application,Act. 10. 36. 37. & Act. 26. 18. or preaching the word
of promiſe,Mat. 3. 11. the glad tidings of peace, the forgiueneſſe
of ſins to the ſoule of a ſinner,Eſa. 40. 20. whereby he is truly poſſeſt
of the grace & loue of God in Ieſus Chriſt through
faith in him, and of the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes; And
this is neuer done but by a ſpeciall gift and power of
the holy Ghoſt. Now the courſe which God doth take
to effect and bring this thing to paſſe, is this; when and
after ſuch time, as God by the generall adminiſtration of
his Goſpell, hath made knowne, and by a common gift

of the Spirit, hath cauſed them to beleeue, and aſſent
vnto, the ſumme, or neceſſary parts thereof, as namely,
that repentance and remiſſion of ſins is granted to ſinners,
and ſaluation to all that can attaine thereto: then
doth he by a ſpecial & more effectuall gift of the Spirit,
work vpon the hearts of his elect, whom he fore knew,
and had predeſtinate, calling them to repentance (that
is to ſay) turning them from all their ſinnes, and from
the wayes of all the fleſhly, and ſinfull pleaſures, wherein
their ſoules had formerly delighted, into a great feare
& ſorrow for the ſame, and with many teares to lament
the time that euer they tooke pleaſure therein; and
falling downe before him, with humble and contrite
hearts, confeſſe their ſins vnto him, deſiring in an vnſpeakable
maner, mercy and forgiueneſſe at his hands,
peace, loue, and reconciliation with him; which till
they obtaine, they can take no reſt, they haue no ioy,
they cannot be ſatiſfied, none of all their former delights
will afford them now any comfort; they ſtand
aloofe looking ſtrangely vpon them, like friends in aduerſitie,
finding them now no fit companions for them;
Nay, there is not any thing, that will, or can relieue
their poore diſtreſſed ſoules,2. Cor. 1. 21. 22. or giue them their deſired
content,Eph. 1. 13. but onely the loue of God in Ieſus Chriſt, ſealed
in their hearts by his holy Spirit of promiſe. Theſe
are thoſe poore which the Scriptures ſpeake of, vnto
whom Chriſt was ſent to preach good tidings, the bruiſed
and broken in heart,Math. 11. 28. them that labour ſore, and are
heauie laden, the ſicke, the loſt, the dead, which Chriſt
came to binde vp, to heale, to ſeeke out, to quicken
and raiſe to life; theſe I ſay, and none but theſe, are
they whom the Prophet ſpeaketh of, teſtifying of the
Sauiour, and of the ſpeciall adminiſtration of the Goſpell
of peace: ſaying,Eſa. 61. 1. 2. 3. 
               The Spirit of the Lord is vpon me,
and he hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the poore,
he hath ſent me to binde vp the broken hearted,
               Luk. 4. 18. 19. 
               to proclaime
liberty to the captiues, and the opening of the priſon to them

that are bound, to proclaime the acceptable yeare of the Lord,
and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that
mourne, to appoint vnto them that mourne in Sion, to giue vnto
them, beauty for aſhes, the oyle of ioy for mourning, the garment
of praiſe for the ſpirit of heauineſſe, that they might be
called, Trees of righteouſnes, the plantation of the Lord, that
he may be glorifiea.
               Luk. 7. 22. And theſe are the poore, of whom
Chriſt himſelfe ſpeaketh,Mat. 11. 5. ſaying, And the poore haue the
Goſpell preached vnto them; or receiue the Goſpell, as ſome
tranſlations haue it; for the word doth import ſuch a
preaching, as doth imply a receiuing of it, in the heart
of him to whom it is ſo preached, as alſo doth the words
of Eſay before mentioned. And although all haue it
preached vnto them in the former generall maner,
yet none haue it preached vnto them in this ſpeciall
peculiar ſort, but theſe poore repentant perſons onely,
who alone are capable of the receit thereof, by faith vnto
Iuſtification; (& this is that effect of the holy Ghoſt
in the heart of man,Mat. 21. 26.) which the Scriptures call, The baptiſme
of Iohn,
               Mark. 1. 4. 
               the baptiſme of water, the baptiſme of repentance,
the birth of water,
               Ioh 3. 5. 
               the baptiſme which Iohn preached,
the preparation of the Goſpell of peace,
               Eph. 6. 15. 
               repentance; which is,
the beginning of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt,Heb. 6. 1. the firſt
principall of the doctrine of Chriſt,Ioh. 3. 5. the beginning and
firſt part of regeneration, as the Scripture declareth it;
the labour and trauell in the birth, but not the full perfection
of the new birth,Mat. 11. 28. onely the ſoule of the ſinner
trauelleth readie to be deliuered; this is the ſecond
effect of the holy Ghoſt, but the firſt peculiar. Then
doth God in the third place, reach forth his hand, and
taketh hold of this poore labouring ſoule, and by another
ſpeciall effect, and power of the holy Ghoſt, doth
deliuer him, and bring him forth, waſheth him & cleanſeth
him from his bloud, wherein he lay polluted, his
ſinnes which cried out ſo iuſtly againſt him, and lay ſo
heauy vpon him, eaſeth him of all, and writeth in his
heart of fleſh,2 Cor. 3. 3. his contrite repentant heart, his couenant

of mercie and loue, which it ſo much deſired, aſſuring
it,Ier. 31. 34. that he is now reconciled with him, and that his ſins
are cleane forgiuen and forgotten,Heb. 10. 17. neuer to be reckoned
or remembred more;Ier. 31. 38, 39. 40. and that he hath loued him,
and doth loue him in Ieſus Chriſt, and will neuer put
him out of fauour, ſo long as Chriſt remains in fauour.
            This is the ſpecial adminiſtration of the word, and that
gift of the Spirit, whereby Chriſt is formed in the heart
of the poore repentant ſinner through faith, by which
he is iuſtified from all his ſinnes, and his heart ſanctified,
and is the ſecond part and finiſhing of the new
birth; and theſe are alwayes together in the act of iuſtification,
the word, the Spirit, and faith; ſo that a ſinner
cannot be ſaid to be actually iuſtified, till the couenant
of remiſſion of ſinnes, which God hath made to the repentant
ſinner, be applied by the Spirit to his broken
heart, and that he beleeueth in his heart that his ſinnes
be forgiuen, and that God loueth him in Ieſus Chriſt:
and this adminiſtation of the word, gift of the Spirit
and faith, are expreſſed in Scripture, and diſtinguiſhed
from all other adminiſtrations, of the word, gifts of the
Spirit, and kinds of faith whatſoeuer, by ſeuerall diſtinct
names.
            
               As firſt, this adminiſtration of the word is called in
Scripture, The glad tidings of peace and good things, good
tidings, the binding vp of the broken heart, libertie to the
captiues, The opening of the priſon to them that are bound,
Comfort to the mourners, The reuiuing of the ſpirits of the
humble and contrite, The couenant of the remiſſion of ſinnes,
The couenant of life and peace, The kingdome of God; Eaſe,
Reſt to the ſoule. The word of his grace, The word preaching
peace by Ieſus Chriſt, The word of reconciliation, &c.
            And it is ſo called in regard of the great and ſpeciall
benefit it bringeth, & doth adminiſter vnto the ſoule of
the repētant ſinner, by the applicatiō of the Spirit. And
for that it is directed of God, and appointed to be preached
to ſuch, and to no 
                  〈◊〉
                For though the Goſpell

be preached to all, in a generall conſideration (as before
is ſhewed,) yet (as it is here intended) it belongeth to
none, nor is to be preached to any but the repentant
only. And repentance, though it be a part of the Goſpel,
as it is ſometimes in a generall maner propoſed, yea
the beginning and firſt principle thereof, and a peculiar
gift of the Spirit, as before alſo is noted; yet (as it is
intended in theſe ſeuerall Scriptures) repentance is no
part, but onely the preparation thereunto, or the making
ready the heart of a ſinner for the ſame; in which
conſideration, Iohn the Baptiſt, and our Sauiour both
preached,Math. 3. 2. ſaying, Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand:
where they make repentance to be one thing,Math. 4. 17. and the
kingdome of God (the glad tidings of the Goſpel) another;
& require repentance in the firſt place, as a thing
neceſſary to be effected in them, before they could receiue
by faith the glad tidings of the Goſpell, the kingdome
of God, which was at hand to follow after, and to
be preached vnto them thereupon. Which order was
alſo obſerued by the Prophets before; as Dauid, To day
(ſaith he) if you will heare his voice, harden not your hearts,
&c. leſt ye enter not into his reſt. In which words he declareth
plainly to the people, that if they would beleeue
the promiſe of entrance into reſt, and ſo by faith
enter thereinto, they ſhould vnharden their hearts, that
is to ſay repent, otherwiſe there was no poſſibilitie of
beleeuing, of entrance.
            And ſecondly, as the ſpeciall adminiſtration of the
word, which is ſo peculiar to the repentant, is diſtinguiſhed
from all other common adminiſtrations; ſo is
the Spirit, or rather the effect of the Spirit, by which
this glad tidings of peace is applied vnto, and written
in the heart of the repentant,Mat. 3. 11. ſet forth and diſtinguiſhed
alſo in Scripture from other gifts of the Spirit,Ioh 3 5. by peculiar
and diſtinct names:Tit. 3. 5. as, The baptiſme of the holy Ghoſt,
The birth of the Spirit,
               Rom. 8. 5. 
               The renewing of the holy Ghoſt, The
Spirit of Chriſt;
               Gal. 4. 6. 
               The Spirit of the Sonne, which crieth Abba,

Father;
               Rom 8 15. 
               the Spirit of adoption, the Spirit of life, the Spirit
of truth,
               Rom. 8. 2. 
               the Comforter, the anointing of the holy Ghoſt, and
ſuch like.Iob. 16. 13. And it is ſo called in regard of the ſpeciall
effects it worketh in the hearts of the repentant,Ioh. 16. 7.
beyond thoſe that are common to others,1 Ioh. as faith, righteouſneſſe,
peace,Rom. 14. ioy in the holy Ghoſt, and other vnſpeakable
comforts and treaſures of life.
            And thirdly, as the word and Spirit, ſo the faith
which the Spirit cauſeth in the heart of the repentant
(by the application of the ſame word of God, and the
teſtification of his loue vnto it) is alſo expreſt and diſtinguiſhed
from all other kinds of faith, by ſpeciall diſtinct
names:Tit. 11. as, The faith of Gods elect, The faith of Chriſt, The
faith of Ieſus Chriſt,
               Iam. 2. 1. 
               The effectuall faith, The faith of the
Sonne of God,
               Philip. 1. 9. 
               The faith of the Saints, Their moſt holy faith,
Their precious faith,
               Gal. 3. 22. 
               The faith which iuſtifieth, The faith
which ſanctifieth the heart,
               Iude 3. 
               The faith of Abraham, The faith
which worketh by loue,
               Iude 20. 2. Pet. 1. 1. 
               &c. And it is ſo called, in regard of
the ſpecial grace,Rom. 5. 1. mercie & loue of God in Ieſus Chriſt,
which is ſhed abroad and ſealed (by the Spirit) in the
heart of him that poſſeſſeth it;Act. 15. 9. and alſo in reſpect of
the excellent fruite it doth produce and cauſe to come
forth of the ſame heart,Rom. 4. 16. which is now truly ſanctified by
it,Gal. 5. 6. and in which (Chriſt being now formed) dwelleth:
as, mortification to ſinne and to this preſent world; loue
to God, and to Chriſt the Lord, who hath ſo truly loued
them; loue to the truth, loue to the children of
God, loue to all men: which fruite we will alſo ſearch
for the true nature of, and enquire how the Scriptures
doe ſeuer it from all outward appearances and ſhewes
which come neare vnto it, hauing the forme thereof,
but is not the ſame in truth and power.
            Like as the trees that are planted by the riuer ſide,Pſal. 1. 3.
do bring forth their fruit in due ſeaſon; and as the good
ground, which hauing receiued the ſeed that is ſowne
therein,Math. 13. 23. bringeth forth fruit, a hundred, ſixtie, and thirtie
fold;Heb. 6 7. and as the earth which drinking in the raine

that cometh oft vpon it, bringeth forth herbs, meet for
him by whom it is dreſſed: ſo do theſe righteous trees
and branches of the Lords owne planting,Eſay 61. 3. his good
ground and earth, which he hath thus dreſſed and watered,
bring foorth fruite meete for him their Lord, the
good husband-man, that hath planted & dreſſed them.
Firſt, as they haue receiued mercie at the hands of God
by faith, and are aſſuredly perſwaded in their hearts of
the forgiueneſſe of their ſinnes: ſo doe they now perfectly
and truly, euen from their very hearts, hate all ſin,
yea and the garment that is defiled therewith,Iude 23. and abſtaine
from all appearance of euill,1. Theſſ. 5. 22. mourning and lamenting
when at any time they do but think thereon;
and mortifying their members and affections of fleſh,
do reſtrain them frō their old accuſtomed wayes, remē
               bring
that they are waſhed and redeemed with a great
price, euen with the blood of the Lamb of God, that
they ſhould now be holy, as their heauenly Father is holy,
that hath choſen them. And though they finde the
law of their members to rebel and fight againſt the law
of their minds,Rom. 7. 23. enticing them night & day, with ſtrong
motions and perſwaſions to regard and giue entertainment
againe to their former luſts and pleaſures, yet they
remembring the day of their feare and great diſtreſſe,
ſigh and weepe in ſoule, to thinke that they ſhould yet
be conſtrained by the force of their owne fleſh & members
thereof to caſt but an eye, or once to thinke vpon
that which now their ſoules do loathe, and from which
they haue been ſo graciouſly deliuered. And therefore
remembring Lots wife, and the end of thoſe that hauing
taken the plough by the hand, looke behind them, by
whoſe examples their Lord hath forwarned them, dare
not preſume to turne aſide, and grieue the holy Spirit,
whereby they are ſealed vnto the day of redemption:
but if they ſhould (through the ſtrength of temptation
and their owne weakneſſe) fall, they go foorth and
weep bitterly, till they be reſtored by faith to ſtrength

againe; and neuer fall or looke behind them ſo, as to
giue entertainment in ſoule, to their old delights of ſin
againe, or to embrace this preſent world, or pleaſures
thereof as aforetime: nay, though they be hated, reuiled,
and ſcorned of all men, and made a gazing ſtocke
both to men and Angells, yet ſtill they go on their way
out of the camp following their Lord, and willingly
bearing his reproach, counting his rebukes, greater
riches then all the pleaſures of the Egypt of this world,
which is now crucified to them, and they to it. And ſo
in patience poſſeſſe they their ſoules, hauing an aſſured
hope, that though now they goe on their way
weeping, ſowing precious ſeed, yet there will come a
day wherein they ſhall returne with ioy,Pſal. 126. 5. 6, reape the fruit
of their labours, and bring their ſheaues with them.
            Secondly,Gal. 5. 24. as they doe hate ſin and mortifie the fleſh
with the affections and luſts thereof, and crucifie vnto
themſelues this preſent world and themſelues vnto it;
ſo doe they now, on the contrary part, loue God with
all their heart,1. Ioh. 4. 19. and with all their ſoule, and delight in
him and in his wayes:Eph. 1. 13. 14. and this their loue vnto him is
cauſed by that loue wherewith he firſt loued them,
which he hath ſhed forth and ſealed in their hearts by
his holy Spirit, and wherEof they are now aſſuredlie
perſwaded,1. Ioh. 4. 19. as it is written, Wee loue him, becauſe he loued
vs firſt. And as to be beloued of God, is a bleſſing beyond
all compariſon, a treaſure not to be vttered, ſo
their loue to him is a fruit, which no man is able to conceiue
the nature of, but they alone in whoſe hearts his
loue is firſt ſhed forth, and they certainly perſwaded
thereof.
            And as they loue God the Father, ſo doe they loue
Chriſt his Sonne, who hath redeemed them from the
thraldome of their ſinnes; and their loue to him is likewiſe
cauſed, by his loue which was firſt made knowne
to them,Rom. 5. 8. 9. 10. and is expreſt in this, that while they
were his enemies, he died for them, that they ſhould be

reconciled to God his Father,Rom. 8. 15. and be made the Sonnes
of God by adoption in him. And greater loue then this
hath no man, that one ſhould die for his enemies (and
ſpecially ſuch a one) to bring them to ſo great
honour, therefore their loue to him is alſo vnſpeakeable.
            And as they loue God the Father, and Chriſt the
Redeemer, ſo loue they the children of God who are
borne of him, and made partakers with them of his
grace and loue in Chriſt; As it is written, He that loueth
him that begetteth,
               1. Ioh. 5. 1. 
               loueth him alſo that is begotten of him.
And this their loue vnto the children of God, as it is not
now for naturall reſpects, though in that regard they alſo
loue them, but becauſe they are in grace and loue
with God, and do belong to Chriſt, whom they ſerue
and belong vnto: So their loue vnto them is heauenly
and ſpirituall, and ſuch as no man hath, nor can attaine
vnto,Ioh. 3. 5, vnleſſe he be borne from aboue of water and the
Spirit, as they are. For the children of this world who
are borne but of fleſh, as they know not the children of
God (that are borne & begotten of him) becauſe they
know not him that hath begotten them, nor Chriſt
whom they ſerue and follow: ſo neither doe, nor can
they loue them for his ſake, nor haue part and fellowſhip
with them in their ſpirituall and heauenly communion.
They pray together as children of one Father the
Lord of hoſts, and praiſe his name with one accord;
they ſuffer together as members of one bodie,1. Cor. 12. 26. 27 euen
that body whereof Chriſt is the head;Rom. 12. 15. 16. they weepe together,
and they reioyce together, and are of like affection
one towards another; and if any of them haue
this worlds goods,Luk. 16. 9. (called in Scripture the vnrighteous
Mammon, becauſe of the vnrighteous vſe which the
louers thereof doe applie them to,) they (according to
the commandement of their Lord, like vnto the vniuſt
Steward) make them friends therewith. If Chriſt hunger,
they feed him; If he thirſt, they giue him to drink;

If he be naked, they cloth him; If he be ſicke or in priſon,
they viſit him. And though he himſelfe be now
in heauen, & they cannot do it to him, neither needeth
he as touching his owne perſon, yet in ſo much as they
do it to his brethren the children of God, they doe it to
him, and he and his Father both, will be their friends in
time of neede, and will receiue them into euerlaſting
habitation. Yea though they haue not the plentie of
this worlds goods, but ſhall out of their pennury caſt
into this his treaſurie, the leaſt mite, or ſhall giue to eate,
to any of the ſeruants of God, and bretheren of Chriſt,
out of their ſcarſitie, the leaſt portion of bread or oyle, or
but a cup of cold water to drinke, becauſe they belong
to Chriſt, they ſhall not loſe their reward, but in the
day when he ſhall come in his glory, and all his holy
Angells with him. And when he ſhall ſit in the Throne
of his glory, and that all, of all nations ſhalbe gathered
before him & called to accompt, he will ſay vnto them,
Come yee bleſſed of my Father,
               Mat. 25. 34. 35 36. 
               inherit the kingdome prepared
for you, from the foundation of the world; for I was an hungry,
and yee fed me; I was a thriſt, and ye gaue me drinke; I
was naked, & ye clothed me, &c. And whereas on the other
ſide, he will ſay vnto all that haue not done any of theſe
things for his ſake.ver. 41. 
               Go ye curſed into euerlaſting fire, prepared
for the Diuell and his Angells; for I was a hungry, and
ye gaue me no meate; I was a thirſt and ye gaue me no drinke;
I was naked, and ye clothed me not, &c.
            
            For the loue that is ſhowed to the children of God,
the bretheren of Chriſt, becauſe they belong to him.
Of all the fruits and workes of righteouſnes, that can be
performed by man, to man, is of greateſt eſteeme with
God, and hath the promiſe of reward aboue them all,
not by reaſon of any worthines of deſert, that is therein,
but onely for his promiſe ſake, and becauſe it pleaſeth
him for his Sonne Chriſts ſake, ſo to accept of it and reward
it. And therefore for this eſpecially ſhall all men
be called to accompt in the day of iudgement, and

iudged according as they haue done, or haue not done
the ſame. And becauſe it is the chiefeſt fruit, whereby
the inward eſtate of the children of God is knowne and
diſcerned from the children of this world, in whom it is
not, but the contrary euills. Therefore doth the Lord
put vs in minde thereof afore hand, becauſe we ſhould
now in our life times before that day commeth, learne
to know the Lord, that we may alſo know the children
of God,1. Ioh. 3. 14. 5. 2. and loue them. Hereby we know that we are tranſlated
from Death to life, becauſe we loue the brethren. And
hereby we know that we loue the children of God, when we
loue God and keepe his Commaundements.
            
            And laſt of all this fruit of faith doth extend it ſelfe to
euery man elſe whatſoeuer, (onely ſuch excepted) as
doe hate God, and haue blaſphemed the holy Ghoſt,
whoſe ſinne ſhall neuer be forgiuen them, neither in
this world, nor in the world to come, who may not be
prayed for, but are to be held as execrable vnto the day
of the Lord. They loue (I ſay) all men as brethren, yea
euen their enemies, and knowing that they are both,
(as touching nature) deſcended of one ſtocke, and that
they themſelues were once far off, and ſtrangers from
the Common-wealth of Iſraell aſwell as they, and alſo
that God doth as freely inuite them, and call vpon them
to repent and belieue his Goſpell as he did them. And
becauſe no man can tell when, or to whom God will
giue repentance and remiſſion of ſinnes, therefore they
loue them as brethren, and do exhort and beſeech them
dayly that they would repent and turne vnto God, and
humbly confeſſe their ſinnes vnto him, and earneſtly
ſeeke and deſire grace & mercie at his hands, declaring
vnto them what great things he hath done for the redemption
of man, and what grace and loue (they for
their parts) haue already found, who were by ſin as far
ſpent as they. Though they hate theſe, yet do they loue
them, and pray vnto God for them with many teares.
If they hunger fhey feed them, If they thirſt they giue

them to drinke,Rom. 12. 20. If they want clothing, or harbor, or be
in any other kind of diſtreſſe, they (according to that
portion God hath giuen them,) miniſter vnto them. If
they curſe them, yet they bleſſe them, If they perſecute
and kill them,ver. 14. yet ſtill they loue them, and make
requeſt to God for them,Act 7. 60. that he would not lay their
ſinne to their charge,Mat. 5. 48. but forgiue them. This is the
perfection which the Scriptures ſpeake of,Ioh 7. 34. 35. the new
commandement,Reu. 7. 14. the garment waſht white in the bloud
of the Lambe,Mat. 5. 20. the righteouſnes of Saints, euen that
righteouſnes which exceedeth the righteouſnes of the
Scribes and Phariſes; yea, and the faire pretended righteouſnes
of all phariſaicall vnregenerate chriſtians, who
for a like kind of ſtricknes, in ſome ſuch outward obſeruations,
would faine be counted holy, though their
hearts were neuer ſanctified: This fruit, I ſay, doth far
ſurmount their blade alſo: This is the firſt reſurrection,
which the Spirit mentioneth,Reu. 20. 6. ſaying, Beſſed and holy is
he which hath part in the firſt Reſurrection, on ſuch the ſecond
death ſhall haue no power. Theſe are they that be riſen
with Chriſt,Col. 3 12. and ſeeke thoſe things that are aboue
where Chriſt ſitteth at the right hand of God, to whom
old things are paſt away,2. Cor. 5. 17. and all things are become new,
theſe are not of the world,Ioh. 17. 16. neither doe they loue the
world, nor the things of the world,1. Ioh. 2. 15. but the loue of God
the Father is in their hearts,Phil. 3. 20. and the loue of Chriſt, their
conuerſation is in heauen, and they minde heauenly
things: the Lord their God is now their portion, he is
their refuge in all times of neede, in all their diſtreſſes
they flie to him for ſuccour, and from his hands onely
do they expect reliefe; therefore to him onely do they
pray as to their God and Father, on his name they call,
and on no other, earely in the morning, and late in the
euening with broaken and contrite hearts, (the ſacrifice
which he neuer did deſpiſe) come they before him, and
humbling themſelues, their ſoules and bodies at his
ſooteſtoole, confeſſe vnto him their great weaknes, and

vnworthines, and knowing they haue no other God or
Father, in whom they may put their truſt, but him
alone: Therefore in ſure conſideration of his grace and
loue, being confounded in themſelues and aſhamed, as
touching their owne will and workes, and giuing all
praiſe and honour vnto his holy name, they do beſeech
him, (though they be not worthy the leaſt of his mercies)
that he would be pleaſed (notwithſtanding) to
extend his grace and loue vnto them, and poure forth
his holy Spirit, the ruler and gouernour of his kingdome
here on earth, into their hearts, to comfort, ſanctifie,
and guide them in his truh, that being guided
and ſanctified thereby, they may euermore doe his will,
obey his commandements, and walke before him here
on earth, euen as his holy Angells and ſeruants doe in
heauen. And acknowledging his goodnes towards
them, his prouidence, and care, in feeding and cloathing
them, and giuing them all other things which the
neceſſities of this their preſent life requires; do requeſt
him alſo, that he would dayly ſupply and continue the
ſame, with his continuall bleſſing thereon, receiuing
them alwayes with thankſgiuing, knowing that they
are all ſanctified by his word and prayer. And calling to
mind their manifold ſinnes and treſpaſſes, which they
in their fleſh and bodies of death doe dayly commit againſt
him, poure out their ſoules in teares before him,
bewailing their wretchednes and miſſerie herein, beſeeching
him for his Son Ieſus Chriſt his ſake, through
whom they haue now great confidence of his grace,
that he would not lay their ſinnes to their charge, but
forgiue them, hauing alſo a true teſtimonie in
their conſciences (which they likewiſe cleere before
him) that they are at peace with all men, and doe forgiue
euen their enemies; and ſo withall doe earneſtly
intreate him, that he would vouchſafe them his gracious
and Fatherly perfection to ſuſtaine and keep them,
that no temptation may at any time preuaile againſt

them, to leade, or any way to induce them to commit
euill in his ſight, but that they may by the power of his
grace and holy Spirit withſtand the ſame. And ſo repoſing
their truſt and whole affiance in him, they reſt
in peace, knowing alſo, and acknowledging that the
kingdome and the power, and the glory is his for euer
and euer Amen. Thus theſe iuſt and ſanctified ſeruants
of God, goe one from ſtrength to ſtrength, as the Prophet
ſpeaketh, and from faith to faith, neuer giuing
ouer, nor turning backe, nor falling away from the liuing
God, like thoſe that haue an euill heart and vnfaithfull,
but ſtill ſtep forward, drawing neerer and
neerer vnto God, with a true and good heart in the full
aſſurance of faith,Rom. 1. 17. vntill they come to ſee his face in the
promiſed Ieruſalem. For the iuſt doe liue by faith, as it
is written,Heb. 10. 37. 38. 39. 
               For yet a little while, and he that ſhall come will
come, and will not tarry. Now the iuſt ſhall liue by faith: But
if any draw backe, my Soule ſhall haue no pleaſure in them.
But ſaith the Apoſtle we are not of them, that draw backe
to perdition, but of them that follow faith, vnto the ſauing of
the Soule. In theſe words, he putteth a plaine difference,
& doth diſtinguiſh between them, whoſe hearts being
euill, and vnfaithfull, do turne backe to perdition, and
them whoſe hearts are true and iuſt, and who hauing
the full aſſurance of faith, doe perſeuere and continue
vnto the ſaluation of their ſoules. As if he ſhould haue
ſaid: There be ſome indeed (whoſe hearts were neuer
ſanctified by the faith of Gods elect, the faith of Abraham;
But onely by a generall kind of faith, their outward
parts, their houſe was a little Superficiallie ſwept,
which fall backe to deſtruction; (but we) meaning
himſelfe, and ſuch ſanctified ſoules with him, as himſelfe
was, we are not of that ſort, but of another, euen
of them which doe beleeue after another maner, who
haue the faith of Abraham, the faith of Gods elect, the
effectuall faith, the faith of Chriſt, the faith that worketh
by loue, the faith which maketh a ſinner iuſt, the

faith by which the iuſt doe liue, and are ſaued. Which
very thing Saint Iohn alſo cleereth, ſpeaking of the Antichriſts,
that were gone out from them. They went out
from vs (ſaith he) but they were not of vs;
               1. Ioh. 2. 19. 
               If they had bin
of vs, they would no doubt, haue continued with vs; But
they went out from vs, that it might be made manifeſt, that
they were not all of vs. In which words he proueth planly,
that if they had euer beene of the faithfull ſort,
(namely the ſanctified in heart) whereof Iohn was one,
they had neuer fallen back, but had (without all doubt)
continued, but by this their falling off, it was made
manifeſt (which was not ſo cleere before) that they
were neuer of them, what outward ſhewes ſoeuer they
made. The very ſame (againe) is manifeſt concerning
Iudas; for after he had plaid his treacherous part, that
he was diſcouered and burſt in peeces, the Spirit of God
taking notice of his former pretended charitie to the
poore, which he vttered in theſe words. Why was not
this oyntment ſold for three hundred pence,
               Ioh. 12. 5. 
               and giuen to the
poore; And of this euill couetuous and theuiſh heart at
the ſame time, he ſaith, This he ſpake,
               ver. 6. 
               not that he cared for
the poore, but becauſe he was a theefe, and had the bag, and
bare what was put therein. So that Iudas was neuer any of
the faithfull, his heart was neuer vpright from the beginning,
he belieued not in his heart vnto Iuſtification,
he had not the faith of the Saints, the faith that worketh
by loue, the faith of Chriſt, as Chriſt himſelfe teſtifieth
againſt him,Ioh. 6. ſaying, But there are ſome of you which belieueth
not, and Iudas was one of them, and the ſpeciall
man aimed at, as Saint Iohn in the next wordes noteth,
ſaying,ver. 64. 
               For Ieſus knew from the beginning, who they were
that belieued not,
               ver. 65. 
               and who ſhould betray him. And Ieſus ſaid
vnto them, therefore ſaid I vnto you, that no man can come
vnto me, except it be giuen him of my Father. Meaning by
comming vnto him, belieuing in him vnto iuſtification,
as he ſaid,Mat. 11. 28. 
               Come vnto me all ye that are weary and heauy
laden,
               Ioh. 6. 37. 
               &c. And againe, All that the Father giueth me,

commeth to me, and him that commeth to me I will in no wiſe
caſt out.
               ver. 66. Therefore the text ſaith. From that time many
of his Diſciples went backe, and walked no more with him.
And Iudas though he taried after them (yet a while) it
was but to make vp the full meaſure of his ſinnes; For
his heart was then as euill, if not worſe then theirs, as
Chriſt teſtifieth to his face, in the preſence and hearing
of the other Apoſtles, ſaying,ver. 70. 
               Haue I not choſen you
twelue, and one of you is a Diuell. This he ſpake of Iudas,
and though he be here ſaid among the reſt to be choſen,
it is to be vnderſtood but of his outward office, and
in reſpect of the common guifts of the Spirit which he
had receiued.
            And although this was the caſe of Iudas, and of his
fellow diſciples, who could not reliſh the words of eternall
life,ver. 53. 54. which Chriſt ſpake, ſaying, Except ye eate the
fleſh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his blood, ye haue no life
in you: and the caſe of thoſe Antichriſts, and of thoſe vnfaithfull
euill hearted draw-backs, as it hath been the
caſe of many thouſands more, and is ſtill at this day; yet
the caſe of Peter, of Iohn, and the reſt of the Apoſtles
was far otherwiſe, as is now alſo the caſe of all regenerate
true hearted Chriſtians; they beleeue to the ſauing
of the ſoule; they eate the fleſh of the Sonne of man,
and drinke his blood, ſpiritually by faith, and haue
eternall life abiding in them; they dwell in Chriſt, and
Chriſt in them; they are borne of God, and therefore
draw not backe, ſinne not to perdition, for the ſeed
whereby they are begotten remaineth in them, neither
can they ſo ſinne, becauſe they are borne of God; nay,
they are ſealed (by the holy Spirit of promiſe) vnto the
day of redemption; they ouercome the world, endure
and keepe his words and works vnto the end; they are
the liuely ſtones of Gods temple, built vpon the chiefe
corner ſtone, who are made a ſpiritual houſe, to offer vp
ſpirituall ſacrifices acceptable to God by Ieſus Chriſt;1. Pet. 2. 5. 6.
his Church,Math. 16. 18. againſt which, the gates of hell ſhall not

preuaile; they are the good ground ſpoken of, the good
trees, which cannot bring forth euill fruit, but good only;
the euill which they doe (at any time) is not their
fruit, becauſe it proceedeth not from their hearts, but
is done vnwillingly, through weakneſſe, for in their
hearts they ſerue the law of God.Rom. 7. 22. The Scriptures account
that to be a mans fruite, which cometh from his
heart, whether it be good or euill, becauſe thereby the
nature of the fountaine (which is the heart) is knowne,
as the nature of trees are by their fruite. So that the nature
of a good man (I meane that which is borne of the
Spirit, not his fleſhly nature) is now to bring foorth
good fruite only, as Chriſt teſtifieth, ſaying, A good man
out of the good treaſure of his heart,
               Luk. 6. 45. 
               bringeth foorth that
which is good.
               2. Cor. 13. 8. 
               We can do nothing againſt the truth, ſaith the
Apoſtle.Math. 7. 18. 
               A good tree cannot bring forth euill fruite.
            
            And whereas the Scriptures ſpeake ſo often after this
maner:Reu. 2. 25, 26. 
               If ye hold faſt vuto the end. If ye continue. Him that
ouercometh, and keepeth my words, and works to the end: then
are ye his houſe, then will he approue of ye, then ſhall
ye be ſaued. And on the contrary, He that looketh behind
him; He that endureth not; If any draw backe, or fall away,
&c. he is not meete for the kingdome of God; My ſoule ſhall
haue no pleaſure in him; There remaines no more ſacrifice for
ſin. The drift of the Spirit of God is to informe vs of
the different eſtates and conditions of Chriſtians; of
the danger of the one eſtate, and of the well being and
ſafetie of the other; that ſo we ſeeing the difference, and
being forewarned thereof, might not depend vpon that
which is ſo dangerous, but ſtriue vnto that, wherein
there is ſafetie.
            And where it ſaith of ſome,Pſal. 69. 28. 
               Let them be blotted out of
the booke of the liuing. I will put his name out of the booke of
life. The meaning is not, that God will put any mans
name out of the booke of life, that is written therein,
but his meaning is, that ſuch deſperate and wicked perſons,
as blaſpheme his truth and Spirit, ſhall be ſet down

as it were with a blot, curſed, vtterly excluded, and pronounced
againſt, for ſuch as there is no hope, or place
for repentance, as was Iudas and others of his companions,
of whom it was foreſaid:ver. 28. 
               Let them be blotted out of
the booke of the liuing; let them not be written with the righteous,
&c.
               ver. 26. 
               for they perſecue him whom thou haſt ſmitten, they
talke to the griefe of thoſe whom thou haſt choſen. So that
whereas men may ſeeme to haue a place among the
Saints in the Church of God, and to be in as good an
eſtate as they, by reaſon of ſome gifts of the Spirit,
which they may receiue, and ſome alteration the word
of God may worke in them; yet) being neuer ſanctified
in heart, by the faith of the Sonne of God) in time they
diſcouer themſelues to be in heart euill, and aduerſaries
to the truth, and ſuch as God doth by his word exclude
and pronouuce curſed children, twice dead, and pluckt
vp by the rootes,Iude 12. ſuch as neuer had nor ſhall haue their
names written with his people, in his records of life,
which before their diſcouerie might ſeeme both to
themſelues and to others, to haue; and therefore it is
ſaid,Luk. 8. 18. 
               And from him that hath not, ſhall be taken away, euen
that which he ſeemeth to haue; which ſeemeth alſo to be
an improper ſpeech: for how can that which a man
hath not, be ſaid to be taken from him. He had ſomething,
may ſome ſay; and it is true, he had heard and receiued
the word with ioy, but not in deepeneſſe of root,
not in a good heart, his heart was neuer ſanctified by
faith, like vnto his, that brought forth fruit, he was enlightned,
and had taſted of the good word of God, and
of the powers of the world to come; but he ſeemed and
made ſhew to haue more, he preſumed (no doubt) that
his name was written in the booke of life, which was
more then that he had receiued could warrant him.
This his pretended ſhew is now alſo taken from him,
and his name is (openly) by the iuſt ſentence of Gods
word, put out of all hope, of being, or euer to be written
in the book of life, and he is now (like the earth, which

bringeth forth nothing but briars and thornes) neere
vnto curſing;Heb. 6. 8. it is impoſſible he ſhould now be renewed.
For nothing is ſecret (ſaith the text) that ſhall not be
made manifeſt,
               Luk. 12. 2. 3. 
               nor any thing hid, that ſhall not be knowne, and
come to light;
               Luk. 8. 18. 
               Therefore (ſaith he) take heed how ye heare.
For whoſoeuer hath, to him ſhall be giuen, and he ſhall haue abundance;
and whoſoeuer hath not, from him ſhall be taken away,
euen that which he ſeemeth to haue.
            
            But what is the booke of life; for peraduenture it is a
ſecret to ſome? doubtleſſe, It is both Gods ſecret, and reuealed
decree or will, concerning ſuch as ſhal be ſaued;
by that which is reuealed, the ſecret is made knowne.
His ſecret decree, we haue in the firſt beginning of our
writing ſhewed, (which briefly is this:) That God (before
the world was) foreſeeing the fall of mankind, did
chuſe in Chriſt a certaine number of them to life and
ſaluation, which were all foreſeen and knowne of him,
and recorded by his decree, in the roule of Chriſt, before
they were; his reuealed will or decree, (which we
haue before alſo at large expreſt) is (briefly this) namely,
the ſpeciall promiſes and teſtimonies of life and ſaluation,
which are moſt fully and often recorded, 
                  •
               nd teſtified
in the Scriptures of God, to, and concerning ſuch
perſons, in ſuch maner qualified, as we haue before (according
to the Scriptures) deſcribed. So that euery man
ſo qualified, may ſee and know, through the Spirit of
God, in and by the ſame records, his name, to wit, his
perſon, ſoule and body, decreed and recorded of God
in Chriſt, euen from the foundation of the world, to be
for life and ſaluation. This is the booke of life of the
Lamb ſlaine,Reu. 17. 8. for in him it was and is done, and of this
decree there is no alteration.Reu. 13. 8. And whereas it ſeemeth
to ſome,Mal. 3. 6. that God doth alter his purpoſe, and change
his word, becauſe he ſometimes promiſeth bleſſings and
life to men, which (by reaſon they, on their parts, do not
that which he requireth) he performeth not; and likewiſe
threatneth iudgement, which by reaſon men repent,

he executeth not. The truth is, it doth but ſo ſeem
to ignorant men, who doe not rightly conceiue of the
power of God, nor vnderſtand the drift and ſcope of his
word. For God is not like vnto men, to purpoſe one
thing to day, and reſolue vpon another to morrow; but
whatſoeuer he hath decreed in his heart, ſhall ſurely
come to paſſe, though he ſometimes vſe to ſpeake after
the maner of men, becauſe he knoweth they are but
men whom he ſpeaketh vnto. He publiſheth his Goſpell
to all men in generall, and doth promiſe ſaluation
to all men that repent and beleeue, and he requireth
repentance and faith of all, yet (notwithſtanding) but
few do repent and beleeue, and ſo come to ſaluation;
doth God therefore alter his purpoſe, and change his
word? He alſo gaue a law to all men before, and required
obedience thereunto, promiſing life likewiſe to all
that obeyed it, but no man euer kept it, and liued thereby;
did God therefore alter his purpoſe and change his
word? nay, God did neuer purpoſe in his heart, nor
promiſe, that any man ſhould here (in the fleſh) keepe
his law and liue by it, though the Familiſts ſay he did;
neither was it giuen to that end, though they affirme
it was. For if it had bene ſo, God would neuer haue giuen
the other; nay he knew, ſuch was mans miſerable
condition by his fall, and the fiery ſharpnes of that law
againſt him, that it was ſo farre impoſſible for him to
keepe the ſame, and liue thereby, as that it vtterly ſlue
him, and kept him off. Therefore God hauing decreed
in his heart to ſaue ſome, was pleaſed to giue the other:
if he had not done ſo, but ſhould haue proceeded againſt
all, for the breach of the firſt, ſhould he haue
done any man wrong? nay, who dare ſay ſo? And is he
now vniuſt in publiſhing his Goſpell to all, becauſe he
ſaueth not all? or dareſt thou ſay, he altereth his purpoſe,
and changeth his word; nay, let God be true and
vnchangeable, and all men liers and moueable. Men
are as backward and vnwilling, and haue as little power

or ſtrength in themſelues to obey the Goſpell, as they
had to keepe the law; nay, ſuch is yet (naturally) the
pride and loftineſſe of mans heart (as lamentable experience
hath long proued,) that he rather deſireth to remaine
vnder the rule and command of the law, and ſo
ſeeke life by the works thereof, then to ſubiect his ſoule
to the rule and commandements of the Goſpell, (viz.)
to repent of his ſinnes from the bottome of his heart,
and ſeeke life by faith in the free grace of God in Ieſus
Chriſt, and follow Chriſt in the regeneration. But ſo it
is, I ſay, that before the world was, God did purpoſe and
decree in himſelfe, to ſaue (by the Goſpell of his Sonne
Ieſus Chriſt) a ſeed, a remnant, of the foreſeene fallen
poſteritie of mankind, which ſeed he reſerued from the
beginning, & cōprehended them in the promiſe, which
he firſt made to Adam,
               Gen. 3. 15. (ſaying) The ſeed of the woman ſhal
breake the Serpents head. Chriſt being the principall, and
they in him and of him, and ſeuereth them with him,
from the ſeed of the Serpent,ver. 15. in theſe words, And I will
put enmitie betweene thee and the woman, and betweene thy
ſeed and her ſeed. And afterwards againe, to Abraham
in theſe words,Gen. 12. 3. 
               In thy ſeed ſhall all nations of the earth be
bleſſed. Meaning by thy ſeed, Chriſt, and by the nations,
thoſe children which God made Abraham the father of:
as he ſaid,Gen. 17. 5. 
               I haue made thee a father of many nations; euen
they that were to haue the faith of Abraham, the ſeed
that were to beleeue in that one ſeed Chriſt. And again
in theſe words,Gen. 21. 12. 
               In Iſaac ſhall thy ſeed be called. By all which
it is euident, that as Chriſt was promiſed, and ſeuered
from the ſeed of the ſerpent; ſo all the ſeed (betweene
whom, and the ſeed of the ſerpent, there was to be enmitie)
were alſo promiſed, as Gods free people, meerly
giuen of him to life, and ſeuered by him alſo from them:
and as Iſaac was borne by promiſe, ſo are they. At this
time will I come (ſaith God) and Sara ſhall haue a ſonne.
               Gen. 18 10. So
Saint Paul ſaith,Gal. 4. 28. 
               Now we (brethren) as Iſaac was, are the
children of promiſe. And that theſe children of the promiſe

(onely) are the children of God, and counted for
the ſeed,Rom. 9. 8. the ſame Apoſtle alſo in another place witneſſeth,
in theſe words, They which are the children of the
fleſh, are not the children of God; but the children of the promiſe
are counted for the ſeed. And they are called the children
of God, becauſe alſo they are borne of God, and
adopted through the Spirit of his Son: and therefore
God is not aſhamed to be called their God,Gen. 17. 7. 8. (as he ſaid
to Abraham, I will he thy God, and the God of thy ſeed) For
be hath prepared for them a citie.
               Heb. 11. 16.
            
            Now this ſeed, as God foreknew them all, and had
choſen them in Chriſt frō the beginning, and predeſtinated
them to be conformed to his image and likeneſſe,
who are therefore ſaid to be written in the Lambs book
of life, from the foundation of the world. And as he ſeuered
them by promiſe from the ſeed of the Serpent:
ſo from time to time, hee calleth them, and
whom he calleth, hee iuſtifieth, and whom he iuſtifieth,
them alſo he glorifieth. He hath not done theſe
things to all. The ſeed of the Serpent neuer had any of
theſe priuiledges, God neuer choſe them in Chriſt, nor
predeſtinated them to be conformed to his image, neither
were they euer written in the Lambs booke of life
from the foundation of the world; neither did God euer
promiſe to call, iuſtifie, and glorifie them, or any of
them: therefore God neuer altered his purpoſe, nor
changed his word or promiſe, as ſome ignorantly imagine;
but there hath been euer enmitie betweene the
ſeed of the ſerpent and the ſeed of the woman, euen
from the dayes of Cain and Abel to this preſent, and
ſhall be to the end, according to the word of the Lord;
though they be inlightned, and taſte as much of the
good word of God, as either Cain or the Iewes did. God
vſeth threatnings (oft times) to bring that ſeed (which
he promiſed to call) to repentance, he giueth them repentance,
he promiſeth grace to the repentant, in a ſpeciall
particular maner, he giueth them faith alſo to receiue

it; he promiſeth likewiſe ſaluation (abſolutely)
to theſe beleeuers; he admoniſheth them, becauſe they
(of themſelues) are apt to fall, yea and would fall and
periſh, if they ſtood by their owne ſtrength, if God
did not ſuſtaine them, and had not ordered and diſpoſed
of all things for their ſafetie and wel being; he commandeth
them to watch and to pray, and he giueth
them his Spirit, which helpeth their infirmities, without
the which they know not what to aske, and it maketh
requeſt vnto God for them with ſighs and grones
which cannot be expreſt; not becauſe they may yet periſh,
but becauſe they ſhould not periſh, and for that
they are weake and apt to fall, and grieue the Spirit. He
alſo chaſteneth them, not for their hurt, nor in his
wrath, but that they ſhould not be condemned with
the world. And becauſe God hath appointed them to
be holy, and ſo, to ſaluation; therefore he hath appointed
all theſe things. For as he (before the world was)
purpoſed to ſaue them, ſo likewiſe did he determine
of the way and meanes whereby to ſaue them, and
the meanes is as certaine as his decree.
            And Gods promiſes concerning life eternal (to ſpeake
properly) are not vpon any conditions, though he doth
ſeeme ſo to propoſe them to the world, but they are
abſolutely free, without any condition of our parts. It
is true, God will ſaue none, but ſuch as repent and beleeue
his Goſpell, bring forth fruite, endure to the end,
&c. yet theſe are not conditions, for God giueth all
theſe things to his elect, as freely as he gaue Chriſt vnthem,
he conformeth them hereby to the image of
Chriſt; elſe, grace and ſaluation were of due debt, by deſert,
which to teach, is erroneous and Antichriſtian.
            And although God did elect men in Chriſt from the
foundation of the world, yet did not the Elect fall from
their Election in the fall of Adam, neither did Adam
himſelfe loſe his Election by his fall, (as they would infer
thereupon▪) for Gods Election was not of man,

conſidered in his innocencie, but of men, 
                  〈◊〉
                foreſeene
fallen; and therefore they are ſaid to be choſen in Chriſt,
who was to be a reconciler and mediator for ſinners, and
not for innocent perſons. So that the obiection of them,
which ſay, if the Elect cannot fall out of Gods fauour,
then did not all fall in Adam; If the elect cannot fall
from their election, then haue not all ſinned; is very
carnall and wicked, much like vnto that of the Saduces,
which ſaid, Whoſe wife ſhall ſhe be in the Reſurrection, who
like fooles, knew not that in the reſurrection, they neither
marry, nor giue in marraige: So they being ignorant
of the wiſedome and foreknowledge of God, giue
out, If the elect cannot fall from their election, then
haue not all ſinned: And are as bould, and thinke
themſelues aſwell armed hereby againſt the certainty
and continuance of Gods election, as the Saduces
thought themſelues againſt the reſurrection, when
they came in ſcorne thereof to poſe Chriſt. But I omit
their friuolous obiections, as not hauing any collour of
reaſon, becauſe alſo we ſhall haue occaſion to cleere
thoſe things hereafter.
            Thus as we haue ſaid, God firſt publiſheth his Goſpell,
and all doe enioy ſome benefit thereby, many are
inlightned by it, and are made partakers of ſome common
gifts of the Spirit, but few are made partakers of
thoſe which are ſpeciall, and peculiar. And this is the
order which God doth vſe for the calling, ſanctifying,
and ſauing of his elect: Firſt, after they are inlightned
to know his truth, he calleth them in a ſpeciall maner
to repentance; then in the ſecond place by a more excellent
gift of the Spirit, he iuſtifieth the repentant
ſoule from his ſinnes, and ſanctifieth his heart; and
then thirdly, they being now ingrafted into Chriſt
their head,Eſa. 61. 3. doe bring forth fruit in him, as before we
haue deſcribed. And theſe are the plantation of God,
the trees of righteouſnes which the Scriptures ſpeak of.
God is the husbandman,Ioh. 15. 2. and this is the maner of his

husbandry: And thus hath he ſeuered and diſtinguiſhed
his plants, from all carnal vnregenerate Chriſtians,
vnder what name or title ſoeuer they paſſe, or in what
outward eſtate or Church ſoeuer they liue. And bleſſed
is that man that hath part with them in thoſe ſpeciall
gifts and treaſures of life, for on ſuch the ſecond death
ſhall haue no power.
            Thus haue we proued that whoſoeuer, is borne
from aboue of water and the Spirit, Iuſtified by faith in
Chriſt, whoſe names are written in the booke of life frō
the foundation of the world, ſhall neuer fall away, nor
haue their names razed out of the booke of life againe.
And that God doth neuer alter his purpoſe or promiſe,
but that all his decrees and promiſes ſhall ſurely come to
paſſe.
         
         
            Their fift point. That there is no Originall ſinne, but that all children of
all maner of people in the world, as well heathens, Infidels,
Idolaters, worſhippers of Diuels, all kind of blaſphemers, fornicators,
& vncleane perſons whatſoeuer, (as of the faithfull)
are free from all pollution of ſinne, both in the conception and
birth; and dying before they commit actuall ſinnes, are ſaued.
            
            Anſw.
            THe truth is, (though to our ſhame and ſorrow it
may be ſpoken) that ſin hath taken hold of all the
whole poſterity of mankind, and all are corrupted by a
perpetuall ſeed of generation orignially from Adam, ſo
that euery child of man, that is borne of fleſh, as well of
the faithfull, as of the vnfaithfull, is by nature, the child
of pollution and wrath, and dying vnregenerate, perriſheth
from the glory of God, and from the ioy of his
preſence for euermore.
            This we neede not now to ſtand to argue (for beſides
the manifold teſtimonies of Gods word which teſtifie
againſt vs, long and lamentable experence hath ſufficiently
proued it,) and doth dayly proue it vnto vs; ſo
that we haue more need to mourne for our ſelues in regard

of the euill that is ſowne in our natures thereby,
and to weepe for our children alſo, which are bred and
borne of vs (as Chriſt charged the daughters of Ieruſalem
to doe for themſelues, and for their children) then
to ſtand to diſpute the points, or once to queſtion,
whether it be ſo or no. Neuertheles to ſtop the mouthes
of ſuch as doe deny it, we ſay, that when Adam ſinned,
all ſinned together with him, becauſe all mankind were
then in him; and therefore when God caſt Adam out of
Paridice, he caſt all his poſteritie out of Paracice with
him; and when God curſed the earth, he curſed it not
to his perſon alone, but all that were to come of him,
as well yong as old; which proueth, that as the curſe
and puniſhment for the ſinne; ſo the ſinne it ſelfe claue
vnto them, and continueth from generation to generation
in them; elſe the manifold miſſeries which were
vpon children (as well as vpon men of yeares) were
vniuſt. Why ſhould God ſhut them out of Paradice, and
not reſtore them thither againe, ſo ſoone as they were
borne, there to haue the ſame free liberty to eate of the
tree of life, as Adam had before he fell? why ſhould God
exact at their hands, firſt ſo ſoone as they haue any capacitie,
the perfect righteouſneſſe of the Law, vpon
paine of death (as ye confeſſe) if they had eaten with
Adam, of the tree of knowledge of good and euill? why
ſhould that fiery two edged ſword be ſet to keepe from
them alſo the way of the tree of life? and why are they
ſubiect to all the calamities that came vpon the earth,
by the ſin of Adam if they fell not with him? why
ſhould God conſume them all with their parents, in the
dayes of Noah, by the floud, ſome in the wombe, ſome
in the birth, and ſome newly borne, if they had beene
cleane from all pollutions of ſinne? would not God
haue ſpared them, and the world for their ſakes? And
why did God then deſtroy the cities of Sodome and
Gomorha, and not ſpare them as he promiſed Abraham
to doe, if he found ten righteous their? If children

be free from all pollution of ſinne, they are not vnrighteous
and wicked;1. Cor. 7. 14. and if they may be called holy, they
may be called righteous: Elſe were your children vncleane,
(ſaith Paul) but now are they holy. As alſo, if vnclean, then
polluted, as were the children of the Sodomites (doubtleſſe)
aboue all the cities of the world. And ſo did God
(the Iudge of all the world) doe right, in rooting out
that wicked generation, as he did alſo the other of the
old world. When Adam fell, he did not only commit a
fault, but by the ſame his fault, he not only brought
vpon himſelfe death and wrath, but fell into a gulfe of
pollution and wickedneſſe, both ſoule and bodie. Nay,
when he receiued grace, it did not rid and free him of
that naturall corruption, whereinto the whole man
was plunged, inſomuch as he could not increaſe and
multiply, but all the increaſe that came of him, muſt
neceſſarily be of the ſame nature that he was, both bodies
and ſpirits.Gen. 1. 2. 8. For to what did God ſay, Increaſe and
multiply, and replemiſh the earth &c: was it to a ſenceles
body, not hauing the breath of life, or was it to the
whole man in whom God had breathed the breath of
life, who was thereby made a liuing ſoule? It is true,
the Spirit is from heauen, of God that gaue it, and therefore
(eſpecially) is Adam called,Act. 17. 26. 29. 
               The Son of God: and all
mankind are ſaid to be the ofſpring of God; not that
God doth breath in euery perticular child of man, in the
wombe, the breath of life immediately from himſelfe,
in the ſame maner as he did vnto Adam. Nay he did it
then once for all, inſomuch as if God had executed his
iuſtice on Adam, immediately vpon his tranſgreſſion,
we all had beene hid and had periſht in him both ſpirits
and bodies; whereas he being ſpared brought forth
and repleniſht the earth, elſe man were inferior to all
creatures. We reade that God created euery thing to
haue ſeede in it ſelfe,Gen. 1. 24. according to his kind, and all creatures
do (we ſee) produce and bring forth their like, by
the word and prouidence of God, when God ſaid, bring

forth, he gaue power by the ſame his word, to the
creatures he had made (through the meanes he had
ordained) to doe their office he had ſet them in. Euery
tree hath it ſeed in it ſelfe, the ſeed being ſowne in the
earth, increaſeth to roote, and then to branches, and afterward
bringeth forth fruit, or ſeed againe, nothing
differing from the ſeed that was firſt ſowne. And as an
euill tree bringeth forth ſeed as euill as it ſelfe; ſo doth
man beget and bring forth as euill and corrupt as himſelfe.
For ſo ſaith Iob,
               Iob 14. 4. 
               For how can a cleane thing come out
of that which is vncleane?
               Pſalm 51. 5. And Dauid ſaith of himſelfe,
that he was ſhaped in iniquitie, and in ſinne his mother
conceiued him. If the fountaine from whence Dauid
came, was vncleane, how could he be cleane? That
which moued Dauid to call this to minde, was not ſo
much any thing concerning his mother, as himſelfe;
the apprehenſion of his owne preſent ſinne he was faln
into, which he was now lamenting and confeſſing before
God, vrged him to call to mind his firſt beginning,
and in his confeſſion to charge himſelfe with ſin, euen
from the time that his mother firſt conceiued him, and
confeſſeth the ſame alſo to his owne ſhame and confuſion,
thereby to cut off all good opinion of himſelfe, as
touching his originall firſt eſtate, which he had by his
naturall conception and firſt birth, the more to confirme
vnto his ſoule the neceſſitie of the ſecond newbirth
from aboue. For he knew that Adam by his ſinne
had not only polluted himſelfe in ſoule and bodie, and
was fallen from his firſt integritie of nature and bleſſed
eſtate he was in, but that the ſame euill ſeed (which
then was ſowne in the heart of Adam) hath brought
forth ſo great increaſe, that it hath polluted and made
vncleane the hearts and natures of all that come of him.
As alſo another teſtifieth,4. Eſdras. ſaying, The graine of euill ſeed
was ſowne in the heart of Adam from the beginning, and how
much vngodlineſſe hath it brought vp vnto this time? and how
much ſhall it yet bring forth vntill the time of threſhing come?

Ponder now with thy ſelfe, how great fruit of wickedneſſe, the
graine of euill ſeed hath brought forth; and when the eares
ſhall be cut downe, how great a floore ſhall they fill? In which
words this holy Prophet plainly ſheweth, that their firſt
graine, namely, the ſin which was firſt ſowne in Adams
heart, was, and is, the original root and firſt ground of all
ſin, that hath ſprung vp & ſhall ſpring vp in the hearts
of all his poſteritie to the worlds end, and ſo of all their
miſery; and therefore he ſaith againe, Oh thou Adam,
what haſt thou done? for though it was thou that haſt ſinned,
thou art not falne alone, but we all that come of thee. The
very ſame alſo doth Saint Paul affirme, (hauing ſpoken,
and being ſpeaking of the reconciliation, grace, and life
eternall, which is by the death and life of Chriſt onely
attainable) wherefore ſaith he,Rom. 5. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. 
               As by one man ſin entred
into the world, and death by ſin, and ſo death paſſed vpon all
men, in whom all men haue ſinned, and ſo forward, ſetting
it downe, not as a thing in queſtion, but as wel known,
ſhewing that as by one, euen Adam, ſinne entred into
the hearts of all men, and death is paſſed vpon them,
for that all (by that meanes) haue ſinned: ſo grace and
life, is by one, euen Chriſt, and none ſhall liue, but by
him. And that not any one man whatſoeuer, old or
yong, male or female, ſhall euer enter into life, except
he be changed from that he is by nature, by a heauenly
power of grace through the Spirit; Chriſt himſelfe
fully ratifieth and confirmeth, ſaying, Verily I ſay vnto
thee,
               Iob. 3. 3. 
               except a man be borne againe, he cannot ſee the kingdom
of God. And againe the ſecond time, Verily, verily, I ſay
vnto thee,
               ver. 5. 
               except a man be borne of water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdome of God. Meaning by a man,
euery child of man, (without exception) of what age
or ſex ſoeuer, if he be one conceiued and borne of fleſh,
he muſt be borne againe of water and of the Spirit, or
elſe he cannot be ſaued. Meaning by water, a heauenly
power, whereby the heart, which is naturally (euen
from the birth) hard and ſtubburne, being ſeaſoned

with Adams ſinne, euen from the conception, is diſſolued
and made meeke and tender as water; and by the
ſpirit, a heauenly gift of the holy Ghoſt, which comforteth
his tender heart, and brings vnto it from God (in
and through Chriſt) peace and ioy vnſpeakable; and
that children are capable of this, in and from the womb,
let the babe which ſprang in his mothers wombe for
ioy, giue teſtimonie. And if any ſhall ſay, Chriſt doth
not call a child (new borne) a man; let him reade theſe
words of Chriſt: A woman when ſhe trauaileth hath ſorrow
becauſe her houre is nigh;
               Ioh. 16. 21. 
               but as ſoone as ſhe is deliuered of
the child, ſhe remembreth no more the paine, for ioy that a man
is borne into the world.
            
            If children dying before they commit actuall ſinne
are ſaued,Abſurdities. becauſe they haue no originall pollution of
ſinne, (as theſe ſilly men ſay;) then Chriſt died not for
children, neither was he promiſed vnto them, nor yet
are they ſaued by him, but by their owne innocencie;
and ſo this promiſe,Gen. 3. 15. 
               The Seed of the woman ſhall bruiſe
the ſerpents head, belonged only to Adam and Euah, and
not to any of their children, becauſe they were to be
borne all innocents, without ſinne. Theſe, with many
other abſurdities will follow from this their doctrine.
But it is an error, as their other points are; and therefore
error muſt needs be the conſequence of it. If one ſhould
aske theſe men, at what age a child may commit an actuall
ſinne, whereby it doth loſe it innocencie and perfection
of nature; and then at what age it is capable of
the new birth; and alſo why the luſt or thought of euill
in the heart, as well as an act of euill, may not take their
innocencie and vertue of nature from them. It is
much to be maruelled, what anſwers they would make.
But to leaue them to better conderations, hoping they
will now ſee their folly, and learne to be wiſer for time
to come.
         
         
            
            Their ſixt point. That none ought to be baptized but ſuch men and women
of yeares onely, as haue attained to true repentance and iuſtifying
faith, being both in the account of the Church and in
the ſight of God regenerate perſons: and that the baptiſme of
children vſed, is no baptiſme at all, but is the marke of the
Beaſt ſpoken of in Reuelat. 13.
            
            Anſw.
            THe doctrine of the Church of God, is, that not only
ſuch men and women (of yeares) as haue true
repentance and iuſtifying faith, but that all which do
beleeue Ieſus to be the Chriſt, and acknowledge him,
ſubmitting themſelues to be informed and guided by
his word and Goſpell, may be baptized, though as yet
they neither haue true repentance nor iuſtifying faith;
and that the children of all ſuch may be baptized.
            That ſuch as haue true repentance & iuſtifying faith
may be baptized, it is granted of all men (without
any further conſideration) to be paſt all queſtion; but
it is euident there may be ſuch, who yet (notwithſtanding)
may not lawfully be baptized.Act. 10. 31. ver. 32. 
               Cornelius, Lydia,
and the Eunuch, were true worſhippers of God, as the
Spirit teſtifieth of them, and therefore had both true
repentance & iuſtifying faith before they knew Chriſt
to be come in the fleſh, yet theſe might not be baptized
till they did know and acknowledge Chriſt to be
come in the fleſh, and that Ieſus Chriſt was he: but
Chriſt being manifeſted vnto them, the Scriptures concerning
him being vnfolded, and God opening their
hearts to attend vnto the ſame, and they beleeuing the
truth thereof, were baptized, being now (of all other)
the meeteſt perſons therefore. For we are to know, that
when Chriſt came into the world, he found the people
in ſeuerall conditions; ſome (though but few) very true
Iſraelites, who had both repentance and iuſtifying faith
before Chriſt, as touching his perſonall appearing

in the fleſh, was known vnto them as Simeon, Nathaniel,
thoſe before named and others; For the ſame way to
ſaluation that is now, was euer, euen from the dayes
of Abell, and ſhall be to the end; as repentance from
dead workes, and faith towards God &c. And ſome
poore repentant ſinners and theſe were few alſo; which
had not yet Iuſtifying faith, but onely trauelling vnder
the burthen of their ſins, did much deſire to be releiued.
Such were thoſe poore, which are ſpoken of, the bruiſed
and heauy laden, Sicke, loſt, dead, &c. And others
were they, that had neither repentance, nor faith, as the
multitudes of the Iewes, and of the whole world: and
to theſe ſeuerall ſorts of people, the Goſpell was preached
in ſeuerall maners.Heb. 1. 1. To the firſt ſort, that Chriſt
was now come, euen the meſſenger of the couenant,
whom they deſired in their hearts to ſee and heare, as
one that did ſpiritually dwell in their hearts already,
theſe, beleeuing, were baptized. To the ſecond was
preached, that Chriſt is come, and alſo that the glad
tidings of peace, and reconciliation with God, in him,
did belong to them, in particular, and therefore Chriſt
calleth theſe, particularly, ſaying, Come vnto me all ye &c.
Againe, The Sonne of man is come to ſeeke and ſaue that
which is loſt, &c. The poore haue the Goſpell preached vnto
them: and theſe beleeuing and acknowledging Chriſt,
were baptized. And to the other third ſort, Chriſt was
not to be preached in any ſuch ſpecial peculiar manner,
as to the former, but more generally, as namely, that
Chriſt is come in the fleſh &c: and that repentance and
remiſſion of ſinnes is granted in his name; ſo that whoſoeuer
doth repent and beleeue the Goſpell, ſhalbe ſaued.
Now they that did beleeue, and accknowledge
the truth of theſe things; as Iudas, the many diſciples
mentioned in the fourth and ſixt of Iohn, the thornie
and ſtony ground, Simon Magus, with many others,
were, and might lawfully be baptized, though they
had not yet true repentance, nor iuſtifying faith. Nay

it is manifeſt that neither Chriſt, nor his Apoſtles, did
reiect any from the outward baptiſme, for the want
thereof, ſo as they did beleeue, and outwardly ſubmit
themſelues, to the doctrine of the Goſpell. Yet neuertheles,
Chriſt did not, neither did his holy Apoſtles,
therevpon Iuſtifie them; For then neither he, nor they,
would (ſo ſoone after) haue made ſuch exceptions,
and write ſo ſuſpitiouſly as they did of many of them;
ſaying,Luk. 13. 24. 
               Striue to enter in at the ſtraight gate; for many I
ſay vnto you, will ſeek to enter in, and ſhall not be able. Beware
of falſe Prophets,
               Mat. 7. 15. 
               which come to you in ſheepes cloathing,
               19. 
               but
inwardly they are rauening wolues. Euery tree that bringeth
not foorth good fruit, is hewen downe, and caſt into the fire.
Not euery one that ſaith vnto me,
               21. 
               Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into
the kingdome of heauen, but he that doth the will of my Father
which is in heauen. Many will ſay vnto me in that day,
               22.
               Lord, Lord, haue we not propheſied in thy name, and in thy
name caſt out diuells, and in thy name done many great workes;
               23.
               And then will I profeſſe vnto them, I neuer knew you, depart
from me yee that worke iniquity. Except ye eate the fleſh of
the Sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, ye haue no life in you.
But there are ſome of you that beleeue not.
               Ioh. 6. 64. All theſe things
Chriſt ſpake vnto his Diſciples, who though they did
beleeue, & were baptized, yet they had not (al of them)
eaten of his fleſh, and drunke of his bloud; all did not
beleeue in him vnto iuſtification of life, all brought not
forth good fruit; And therefore he ſaith, No man can
come vnto me except it be giuen him of my Father. And
euery branch that beareth not fruit in me, he taketh away;
And euery branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it
may bring forth more fruite. So that men may beleeue after
a generall maner, and be baptized, and be (in ſome
ſort) branches in the vine, in regard of the outward profeſſion
thereof, receiue great gifts, doe wonderfull
workes, in the name of Chriſt, and yet not be come to
Chriſt, not haue the faith of Chriſt, which iuſtifieth,
not beare fruit in him. And it will come to paſſe, that

in the day of iudgement,Mat. 7. 23. he will ſay vnto them, Depart
from me yee that worke iniquity, I neuer know yee. And the
Apoſtles (alſo) writing to the Churches of their times;
where all were beleeuers, and baptized, (and that lawfully)
ſay, that (ſuch among them) as had not the
Spirit of Chriſt, were none of his; and doe charge ſome
of them to be carnall and contentious, ſtriuing about
their outward baptiſme,1. Cor. 3. 4. ſome will be of Paul, ſome of
Cephas, ſome of Apollo, and ſome of Chriſt. As if this
baptiſme, and the worthineſſe of the perſon, by whom
they were baptized, did make them happy, and ſome
of them, better then other. Some againe there were,
that did ſet light by the Apoſtles of Chriſt, & eſteemed
better of ſome other falſe Apoſtles; Some were vncleane
laſciuious perſons,1. Cor. 12. 20. 
               I feare (ſaith Paul to ſome) that when
I come, I ſhall not find you ſuch as I would, and that I ſhall
be found vnto you ſuch as you would not.
               2. Cor. 13. 5. 
               Examine your ſelues
(ſaith he) whether ye be in the faith, Proue your ſelues, know
ye not your owne ſelues, that Ieſus Chriſt is in you, except ye
be reprobates. By which it is euident, that men may beleeue,
and be baptized, and yet not be in the faith of
Chriſt, not know Chriſt to be in them, which (to
know) is the faith that Chriſtians muſt haue, if they
be not reprobates. Againe, ſome they charged with the
want of the knowledge of God; And ſome that denied
the reſurrection of the dead; And ſome that made their
belly their God, and minded earthly things; ſome to
be falſe Apoſtles, falſe teachers, ſuch as taught hereſies,
ſome falſe brethren; ſome couetous perſons, ſome hipocrites;
ſome that raiſed needleſſe queſtions about the
Law; ſome that taught circumciſion neceſſary to ſaluation,
and that Chriſtians muſt be circumciſed, or
they could not be ſaued; ſome were whiſperers, Backbiters;
ſome were louers of pleaſures, more then louers
of God, treacherous, high minded, yea, and what not;
And yet all beleeuers, and Lawfully baptized, and were
in the Churches, euen in the Apoſtles times, but not ſo

approued of them, as ſome others were; They did not
account of all whom they baptized, to haue true repentance,
and Iuſtifying faith, neither before they baptized
them, nor after, for they knew, that it neuer was,
nor could be ſo, ſome would proue falſe in heart, and
in ſome the grace of God did not yet appeare, vnto
iuſtification; therefore they ſenſured none, till they
ſaw iuſt cauſe, neither did they iuſtifie any, till they ſaw
proofe of their faith, but then they did, to both their
comforts and conſolations Nay, when they ſaw great
cauſe of feare and ſuſpition of many, yet they vſed
ſtrong arguments and perſwaſions to bring them to
repentance, as we ſee how they both ſpake, and write.
They did not eaſily reiect any, no not an Hereticke,
without twiſe or thriſe admonition; And when Simon
Magus diſcouered himſelfe, to be in the gall of bitternes,
and that Peter ſaw his heart was not right in the
ſight of God, yet Peter caſt him not off, but ſaid vnto
him,Act. 8. 22. 
               Repent thy ſelfe therefore of thy wickednes, and pray
God, If perhaps the thoughts of thine heart may be forgiuen
thee.
            
            Now if this was the eſtate of the Church in the dayes
of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, how may we thinke it can
be better now (nay) but whē we ſtriue to make it better
we make it worſe. As concerning the inward eſtate, the
gifts of the Spirit, and power, that then were in the Apoſtles
and faithfull ſeruants of Chriſt, both in the reſpect
of the Adminiſtration of the word, grace of life
and peace, and workes of righteonſnes, I am ſure we all
come ſhort of: and ſhall we thinke to outſtrip them in
the outward? Nay, doubtles, I would we could (therein)
but compare with them, ſo we did alſo pertake of ſome
of their inward graces; otherwiſe the outward can doe
vs ſmall pleaſure. It is an euident ſigne, that where there
is much contending about the outward forme, externall
waſhings, and ſuch like, the inward purification of the
heart is little thought of.
            
               
So then, as concerning the outward eſtate of the
Church, we conclude, that as from the beginning
there was Cain, a beleeuer and ſacrificer, as was Abel,
though Abel had iuſtifying faith, and not Cain; and
as Iſhmael was circumciſed as well as Iſaac, though Iſhmael
might not inherite the heauenly promiſes as well
as Iſaac; and as in the Church of the Iewes from time
to time, all that acknowledge that true God and his
word, and did ſubmit themſelues to the outward ordinances
of the law, were circumciſed, and were Iewes
outwardly, though but few were Iewes inwardly, and
circumciſed in heart: ſo was it in the dayes of Chriſt
and his Apoſtles, ſo is it now, and ſo ſhall it be to the
end; Chriſt himſelfe went neuer about to alter this,
but both he and his Apoſtles baptized thoſe that did
beleeue, and acknowledge him, and ſubmit themſelues
to be informed by his word, though they had not yet
either true repentance, or iuſtifying faith. For they
knew, that ſuch a beliefe and profeſſion, as made men
meet for outward baptiſme, might be, where iuſtifying
faith was not; and that both, that beliefe, profeſſion,
and baptiſme, did but make a Chriſtian outwardly, as
the outward profeſſion and circumciſion of the Iewes
did but make a Iew outwardly; and no better did they
iudge, or conclude of any, but when they ſaw better
cauſe.
            Now concerning the baptizing of children, (which
they ſay is no baptiſme at all, but do call it the marke
of the Beaſt,) we affirme that the children of all ſuch
beleeuers (as may themſelues be baptized) may alſo be
baptized, and that it is not, nor can be the marke of the
Beaſt ſpoken of, but is true outward baptiſme. Firſt, to
auoid many of their vaine and idle obiections, and that
we may come the more cleerer to the point, let vs remember
that it is ſufficiently proued already, that all
haue ſinned in Adam, and that death is paſſed on all,
for that all haue ſinned in him, being polluted from

their very conceptions; and that (therefore) there is a
neceſſitie of a new birth from aboue, of water and of
the Spirit, as wel to the yongeſt man of dayes or houres,
as to the eldeſt man of yeares. So that whoſoeuer is
borne of the fleſh, he muſt be borne again, from aboue
of the Spirit, either ſooner or later, if he be ſaued; and
that, although repentance and faith be the parts of this
new birth, and that repentance hath theſe parts (whereby
it is expreſt in men of yeares,) ſorrow for ſinne,
confeſſion of ſinne, and deſire of pardon, (as we haue
before defined;) and that iuſtifying faith (which is the
other part of this new birth) be an aſſurance or full perſwaſion
wrought in the repentant heart by the Spirit,
of the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes and reconciliation with
God in Ieſus Chriſt, as we haue alſo defined it; I ſay, in
men of yeares, who alſo do confeſſe with the mouth,
as it is written, With the heart man beleeueth vnto righteouſneſſe,
and with the mouth confeſſion is made vnto ſaluation;
yet (neuertheleſſe) the true nature of both theſe
parts of the new birth, may be in another maner defined,
and ſtill remaine the ſame in ſubſtance, as the firſt
part is called in Scripture, A heart of fleſh, an humble and
contrite heart, a broken heart; and Saint Paul calleth it,
the fleſhly tables of the heart; in which regard it is called,
the baptiſme of water, and the birth of water; which we define
thus, namely, that it is a ſpeciall effect or working
of the holy Ghoſt, whereby the heart (which is naturally
hard and ſtubburne, euen from the birth) is made
ſoft and tender as water, or as fleſh is in compariſon of a
ſtone, that ſo it may receiue the impreſſion of the grace
and loue of God. The ſecond part, which is called the
baptiſme of the holy Ghoſt and the birth of the Spirit, we define,
to be a ſpeciall gift of the Spirit alſo, but more excellent,
which writeth and ſealeth in the ſoft and tender
heart of fleſh, grace and peace from God in
Chriſt, and filleth it with heauenly comfort and ioy,

like vnto that which is ſaid of Iohn (being in his mothers
womb) when the voice of the ſalutation of Mary
ſounded in the eares of Elizabeth, The babe leaped in her
womb for ioy; which (doubtleſſe) was cauſed by the Spirit
of Chriſt, in the ſoule of the child. Now in this ſort,
children are capable of both the parts, and ſo of the
whole new birth, which in them is no other in nature,
but the very ſame which is in men of yeares, (though
it be not outwardly ſo expreſt,) as we may perceiue
by the words of Paul to the faithfull of the Church
of Corinth: Foraſmuch (ſaith he) as ye are manifeſtly declared
to be the Epiſtle of Chriſt, miniſtred by vs, written
not with inke, but with the Spirit of the liuing God; not in
tables of ſtone, but in the fleſhly tables of the heart. For as the
law of death was written in tables of ſtone, and all the
hard and ſtonie hearts of the whole poſteritie of Adam,
not onely might, but alſo did, and doe receiue, euen in
their very conceptions, a deepe impreſſion thereof: ſo
on the contrary, the law of the Spirit of life, which is in
Chriſt Ieſus, euer was, is, and is to be, written in hearts
of fleſh, ſoft and tender hearts, and in no other. And
therefore it was, that God did promiſe to take away
from his elect the hard and ſtonie heart, and to giue
them a heart of fleſh, an humble and broken heart, becauſe
his pleaſure and promiſe is, to dwell with ſuch, to
reuiue and comfort them, and no other. And to ſpeake
plainly (howſoeuer perhaps ſome doe otherwiſe conceiue)
it is not our act of beleeuing that doth iuſtifie vs,
but it is the free gift of grace, ſealed in our hearts by the
Spirit of Chriſt, whereby God iuſtifieth vs; which grace
and Spirit, is the cauſe of our act of beleeuing, or faith,
by which we are ſo often ſaid in Scripture, to be iuſtified,
where the effect is named for the cauſe, by reaſon
it is thereby made apparent vnto vs; as alſo (in another
ſenſe) we are ſaid to be iuſtified by works, becauſe works
do demonſtrate and make manifeſt our faith to others,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
as it is ſaid of the primitiue Church of Rome, that their
faith had ſhined throughout the world, meaning by
works, which are the effects of faith. So that Saint Paul
calleth the faithfull the Epiſtle of Chriſt, not ſo much
for their act of beleeuing, as in reſpect of the grace of
God, which was written in their hearts by the Spirit of
Chriſt, by which they did now beleeue, and crie Abba,
Father, as it is written, He hath ſent forth the Spirit of his
Son into our hearts, which crieth Abba, Father. And for this
cauſe,Rom. 8. the grace of the Goſpell is called, The law of the
Spirit of life which is in Chriſt Ieſus.
            
            Theſe things being ſo, what ſhould now let, that children
may not be baptized. Are they capable (as we ſee)
of regeneration, and are they not capable of the ſigne
thereof? May their hearts be ſanctified by the Spirit of
Chriſt, and may not the filth of their fleſh be waſhed off
with water? for the baptiſme of water, is bnt the doing away
of the filth of the fleſh, as Saint Peter ſpeaketh; euen
as outward circumciſion was but the cutting off the
fore-skin of the fleſh, repreſenting the cutting off the
ſinnes of the fleſh, the circumciſion of the heart, as alſo
baptiſme doth. For the circumciſion, which was the cutting
off part of the fore-skin of the fleſh; and that baptiſme,
or waſhing away the filth of the fleſh; we doe
not ſay, that the one was a type of the other, but
were both types of one truth, (namely) the baptiſme
or purification of the heart by faith. So then, if they
both aimed at one thing or end, (as ſhall appeare they
did;) then it will euidently appeare alſo, that by vertue
of what precept the one was practiſed, by vertue of the
ſame precept the other is to be performed and practiſed.
It is alſo ſaid, that whoſoeuer did omit the practiſe
which that precept required, was to be cut off from among
the people, that is to ſay, that ſuch a perſon
ought not to be acknowledged as one in the outward
eſtate of the Church then vnder the law: ſo proportionably
it will follow, that what perſon ſoeuer, yong or

old, that is not baptized, he is alſo to be cut off, (that is)
not to be accounted or numbred, in the outward
eſtate of Chriſtians, now vnder the Goſpell.
May ſuch beleeuers, as are not ſanctified in heart, be
baptized, (as before is proued) and may not the children
of beleeuers be baptized? Why are the children of
beleeuers ſaid to be holy? (the children of vnbeleeuers
throwout the whole Scriptures are neuer ſaid to be
holy) doubtleſſe it is becauſe they are in heart holy;
or elſe becauſe they being the children of the faithfull,
haue ſome promiſe (as touching the inheritance of life
belonging to them) as the children of the faithfull had
formerly; and ſo haue right to enter into the Congregation,
where the wayes of life are taught, as they then
by circumciſion, ſo theſe now by baptiſme, that they
may be informed in the wayes of the Lord; elſe would
there be no difference, betweene the children of the
faithfull, and the children of infidels. So that, to this
end, is the vnbeleeuing husband ſaid, to be ſanctified
to the beleeuing wife, and beleeuing wife to the vnbeleeuing
husband; becauſe otherwiſe, if the vnbeleeuer
(in this regard) were not ſanctified to the beleeuer, then
were their children vncleane (that is to ſay) as the children
of infidels,Deut. 28. that haue no promiſe belonging to
them, but rather a curſe, and therefore are vncleane,
and may not enter. It is therefore meete, ſeeing God
hath put difference betweene the children of the faithfull,
and the children of infidels, that they ſhould be
diſtinguiſhed from them, by ſome outward ſigne, concerning
the ſame. And what can they haue leſſe then
baptiſme, which can giue to no man any more, then
the outward name of a Chriſtian, as circumciſion did
the outward name of a Iew. It doth neither confer, nor
confirme grace to the heart of any, no more then circumciſion
did. It proueth that a man is a Chriſtian outwardly,
and it teacheth that he ſhould be ſo inwardly;
and ſo did circumciſion. It proue a man to be a Iew

outwardly, and it taught that he ſhould be a Iew inwardly;Rom. 2.
yea a Chriſtian inwardly, to ſpeake fully as the
truth is; for euery true inward Iew, was a true inward
Chriſtian. And to be circumciſed in heart, was to be
baptized or purified in heart, by faith through the
Spirit; as alſo to be baptized in heart, (by faith through
the Spirit) is to be circumciſed in heart; for ſo doth
Saint Paul in plaine words affirme, writing to thoſe
Chriſtians, whoſe hearts were ſanctified by faith, ſaying,
And ye are compleate in him which is the head of all principalities
and powers, In whom alſo yee are circumciſed with the
circumciſion made without hands, in putting off the body of the
ſinnes of the fleſh, by the circumciſion of Chriſt, buried with
him in baptiſme, wherein alſo ye are riſen with him through
the faith of the operation of God, who hath raiſed him vp from
the dead. In which words (I ſay) he ſetteth downe expreſly,
that the baptiſme which ſaueth, the baptiſme
whereby we put on Chriſt, the baptiſme whereby our
hearts are purged and ſanctified, and the ſinnes of our
fleſh done away, whereby we are buried with Chriſt,
and doe riſe with him, euen that which is through the
faith and operation of the Spirit, is one and the ſame,
with the circumciſion of the heart, which he therefore
calleth, the circumciſion made without hands, the circumciſion
of Chriſt, whereby alſo it appeareth clearely, and
beyond all contradiction, that the circumciſion, or
the cutting off the foreskin of the fleſh, was a ſigne and
true repreſentation of the doing away of their ſinnes,
of the clenſing of the heart by faith (as now the doing
away of the filth of the fleſh with the baptiſme of water
is;) for which vſe and end, it was alſo giuen to Abraham
at the firſt, as this Apoſtle alſo declareth in an other
place, ſaying, And he receiued the ſigne of circumciſion, a
ſeale of the righteouſnes of the faith which he had, being vncircumciſed,
that he might be the Father of all them that beleeued,
though they be not circumciſed,
               Rom. 4. 11. 
               that righteouſnes
might be imputed to them alſo. Where he (I ſay) fully

declareth, that the circumciſion of the fleſh was giuen,
not to that end and purpoſe, as the carnall corrupt Iews
imagined, to teach righteouſnes to be by the Law
(which was to make the promiſe voide, which is to be
attained onely by faith, and not by workes) but is
taught and directed to the righteouſnes which is by
faith, through the promiſe in the circumciſion of the
heart, which Abraham had, and which all their ſeed
(of whom God made him the Father) were to haue;
and that the circumciſion of the fleſh was a ſigne of, and
did teach the circumciſion of the heart (if any yet queſtion
it) the ſame Apoſtles words, (a little before) proueth
it, where he ſaith, For he is not a Iew which is one
outwardly,
               Rom. 2. 
               neither is that circumciſion which is outward in
the fleſh, but he is a Iew which is one within, and the circumciſion
is of the heart in the Spirit, not in letter; whoſe praiſe
is not of men, but of God. Where we ſee, that there was
a Iew outwardly, and a Iew inwardly; a circumciſion
outward in the fleſh, and a circumciſion inward of the
heart, in the ſpirit. The outward had but the name,
and did onely ſignifie and teach what ſhould be inwardly
in the heart; and that in the heart, was the
thing it ſelfe.
            All theſe things being now thus cleere, we reaſon
thus.
            That if children might once receiue the ſigne of circumciſion
of the heart, after the old forme of the Law, then may they
now after the new forme of the Goſpell.
            But they might once, after the old forme of the Law.
            Therefore alſo now, after the new forme of the Goſpell.
            That they might once after the old forme, is paſt all
queſtion. And that they may now after the new forme,
we proue thus.
            That which was once for good ends in the time of the Law
appointed, and is not by the Goſpell diſanulled, it is lawfull ſtill.
            But it was appointed for good ends, that children ſhould
receiue the ſigne of the circumciſion of the heart; and it is not

by the Goſpell any way diſanulled.
            Therefore it is lawfull now ſtill.
            But theſe men obiect and ſay, that there is no plaine
commandement, nor example, in the new teſtament
for baptiſing of children.
            I anſwere, It ſaith oft times, that whole houſholds
were baptized, without any exception of children; and
we haue ſmall reaſon to thinke, that beleeuers ſhould
be barren more then others. The naming of whole
houſholds without any exception, ſheweth plainely,
that the Spirit of truth neuer intended to exclude children.
If he had euer intended any ſuch thing, then
(doubtles) would he haue giuen ſome little touch, or
tittle, to that purpoſe, which he hath neuer done. And
to ſet downe in plaine words (particularly) that children
were or might be baptized, there was then no
neede, becauſe there were none in thoſe dayes that
queſtioned it, as there might well, and would (doubtleſſe)
haue beene, if the Apoſtles had not baptized
any, but refuſed them. If it might be concluded that
there were no children in thoſe mentioned Families, as
we haue ſmall reaſon to thinke, that Chriſtians beleeuers,
ſhould be more barren then Infidells, (yet) no
doubt, in all the Apoſtles times, ſome children were
offered (as we ſee ſome were brought to Chriſt, and not
refuſed of him) which if the Apoſtles had once reiected,
the Iewes (eſpecially) would haue taken exception
againſt them (as well they might) and haue enquired
what ſhould be the reaſon thereof; and alſo haue demanded,
why children might not aſwell be baptized, as
before they were circumciſed. And the Apoſtles would
haue giuen them anſwere, and ſo by that meanes your
queſtion had beene diſſolued long agoe. But becauſe
there were not then, in their dayes any ſuch queſtioners,
nor any cauſe of any ſuch queſtion, by them giuen:
therefore they tooke no care, either to ſet downe in
particular, that children were, or might be baptized,

nor yet to ſhew any one the leaſt exception againſt it▪
for they knew it was not a matter of ſuch conſequence,
as you imagine. If they had either ſeene or foreſeene
any ſuch dangerous euill, as you conceiue, you ſee in it,
as that it was or would be the marke of the Beaſt, which
the Spirit ſpeaketh of, they would certainly haue foretold
and forewarned the Church of it (as they haue
done of other things, which in your ſight is of leſſe
moment,) that ſo either it might not haue taken ſuch
great place as it hath, or elſe (at leaſt) that the people
of God might (without ſo great difficultie) haue ſeene
what a dangerous euill it was, or would come to, and
with conſtancie and comfort haue auoided and withſtood
it; but they being guided by the holy Ghoſt,
haue done whatſoeuer was needfull. Againe, if there
muſt needs be a plaine word, either by ſome precept
or example, expreſt, for the proofe of whatſoeuer may
be practiſed among Chriſtians; then where finde we
any where written, that women (in particular) may partake
in the Sacrament of the Supper, though (doubtleſſe)
it may be ſoundly prooued by argument from
Scripture, that women may partake therein, as we haue
already proued children may be baptized.Mr. Smith baptized himſelfe firſt, and then Mr. Helwis, and Iohn Morton, with the reſt. If I ſhould
now demand of you your warrant, for a man to baptize
himſelfe; I much maruell where you would finde ſuch
a practiſe in all the new Teſtament of Chriſt; I am ſure
it would be a taske too hard for you to find. Well, to let
paſſe thoſe things, we will now go on. When the Apoſtle
Peter ſpake of the baptiſme which ſaueth, leſt
any ſhould miſtake him what baptiſme he meant, he
ſaith, Not the doing away of the filth of the fleſh. So if any
of the Apoſtles or pen-men of the Scriptures▪ when
they did ſet downe that whole houſholds were baptized,
or at any other time, had but ſaid, except yong
children, it had been enough. And if they had ſo ſaid,
what occaſion might the Iewes haue taken, to except
and obiect againſt it. Might they not haue reaſoned

againſt it thus: Doth Chriſt the meſſenger of the couenant
of peace, and Preacher of good tidings, deale more
hardly now (in this time of the plentie of grace) then
he did before in the time of the law? Might children
then be admitted by circumciſion into the congregation
of the Lord, and may they not now by baptiſme?
They were formerly called Iewes, and counted of the
ſeed of Abraham, in whom a bleſſing by promiſe was to
be expected, as namely, that God would call a ſeed, out
of that ſtocke or ſeed, which ſhould inherite his couenant,
whereof circumciſion was a ſigne vnto them; and
may they not now be allowed the name of a Chriſtian
through Baptiſme? They are the ſame that they were
then, and why ſhould not Chriſt (in whom the bleſſing
and promiſe reſteth) be the ſame?
            Thus they might haue argued, if it had been ſo, if
the caſe were now ſo altered, as touching children; if
Chriſt were not the ſame, that he then was: but it is otherwiſe,
and Chriſt is the ſame, yea (and in regard of
the large bountie and plentie of grace, which he hath
now vouchſafed) he is more then the ſame; therefore
let not children be denied that which belongeth vnto
them.
            Chriſt was much diſpleaſed with thoſe diſciples that
rebuked them that brought little children vnto him,
that he ſhould touch them, and ſaid, Suffer little children
to come vnto me,
               Mark 10. 13, 14, 15. 
               and forbid them not, for of ſuch is the kingdome
of God. Verily I ſay vnto you, whoſoeuer ſhall not receiue
the kingdome of God as a little child, he ſhall not enter
therein. And (the text ſaith) he tooke them vp in his armes,
and layd his hands vpon them, and bleſſed them. Whence it is
euident, that little children ought by no meanes to be
denied baptiſme, becauſe they are ſuch true ſimilitudes
of regeneration, of which baptiſme is a ſigne; and ſeeing
(alſo) Chriſt maketh it an argument againſt thoſe
that would haue hindered them to be brought vnto
him, ſaying, for of ſuch is the kingdome of God: ſo that

it may be as rightly ſaid, Suffer little children to come
to baptiſme, and forbid them not, for of ſuch is the
kingdome of God; of ſuch as be conuerted and are become
like vnto little children, doth the Church of God
conſiſt.
            Whereas they further affirme, that infants baptiſme
is the marke of the Beaſt, and ſo muſt be caſt away, with
euery part thereof; becauſe whoſoeuer dieth with that
marke on them (without repentance) ſhall certainly
drinke of the cup of Gods wrath. Which marke of the
Beaſt, is thus deciphered by them: All maner of ordinances
which are performed by the miniſtery of the
Church of England (being an Antichriſtian miniſtery,
whereof infants baptiſme is one) are none of Gods ordinances,
but a marke of the Beaſt.
            From which obſerue what will follow againſt themſelues.
            Euery action which is performed by the miniſtery of the
Church of England, is a marke of the Beaſt.
            But the mariage of the Anabaptiſts in the Church of England,
is an action performed by the miniſtery of the Church
of England.A retortion vpon themſelues.
            
            Therefore the mariage of the Anabaptiſts in the Church
of England, is a marke of the Beaſt.
            Whoſoeuer do retain the marke of the Beaſt, ſhall certainly
drinke of the cup of Gods wrath.
            But whatſoeuer Anabaptiſt do retaine the mariage of the
Church of England, do retaine the marke of the Beaſt.
            Therefore whatſoeuer Anabaptiſt do retaine the mariage
of the Church of England, ſhall certainly drinke of the cup of
Gods wrath.
            Euery mariage which is marke of the Beaſt, muſt be made
void, to auoid the wrath of God.
            But euery mariage of the Anabaptiſts in the Church of
England, before their ſchiſme from it, is a mark of the Beaſt.
            
               
Therefore euery mariage of the Anabaptiſts in the Church
of England, before their ſchiſme from it, muſt be made void,
to auoid the wrath of God.
            Which being true, then ceaſe they to be maried, as
children to be baptized.
            That the baptiſme of children, neither is, nor can be
the mark of the Beaſt, ſpoken of in Reuel. 13. 16. Theſe
men might eaſily perceiue (if they were not altogether
ignorant and deſtitute of vnderſtanding) what the nature
of that marke is. For the marke of the Beaſt there
ſpoken of, is ſuch a thing (indeed) as yong children are
not capable of; and therefore they are not ſet downe among
thoſe that are ſaid to receiue the ſame.Reu. 13. 
               And hee
cauſeth all, both ſmall and great, rich and poore, free and bond
to receiue a marke in their right hand, or in their forehead▪
               
Meaning by ſmall and great, ſuch as are ſo, in regard of.
their high and low places and callings in the world:
and by rich and poore, ſuch as are rich or poore, in regard
of the plenty or ſcarcitie of the riches and things of this
world and preſent life: and by free and bond, they that
are at libertie and free, and they that be in bondage or
captiuitie, in regard of any captiuitie or ſeruitude to
men. Hee doth not ſay, yong and old, which (if
yong children had been included amongſt them)
he ſhould haue ſaid, becauſe they are all ſo diſtinctly
and ſeuerally named that doe receiue it. Beſides, the
marke of the Beaſt being ſuch a thing as it is, (namely)
a voluntary ſubmiſſion and reſolute purpoſe to do and
ſubſcribe to all the lawes and commandements of the
Beaſt, whether ſecretly or openly; and to declare and teſtifie
themſelues to be ſuch as are allied vnto him, both
by word and deed. And thus (hauing alſo made cleere
this point) we end, hoping that the things which are
ſpoken, will giue to thoſe that are not wilfull and obſtinate,
but of a meeke and lowly heart, full ſatisfaction.
         
         
            
            Their ſeuenth point.

                  That Church of England is a falſe Antichriſtian
Church, and ought to be ſeperated from.
                  That it is falſe, and Antichriſtian, we proue thus.
                  That the Church whoſe Biſhop and Miniſters, haue had
their firſt ordination from the falſe Antichriſtian Church of
Rome, whereof Antichriſt is the head, is falſe and Antichriſtian.
                  But the Church of England, her Biſhops, and Miniſters,
haue had their firſt ordination from the falſe Antichriſtian
Church of Rome, whereof Antichriſt is the head.
                  Therefore the Church of England, is a falſe Antichriſtian
Church.
                  That it ought therefore to be ſeperated from, we
proue thus.
                  If euery falſe Antichriſtian Church ought to be ſeperated
from, then the Church of England ought to be ſeperated from,
becauſe ſhe is falſe and Antichriſtian, as before is proued.
                  But euery falſe and Antichristian Church, ought to be ſeperated
from, as Reu. 18. 4. Come out of her my people. &c.
                  Therefore the Church of England ought to be ſeperated
from.
               
            
            We Anſwere.
            THe firſt propoſition of this Argument is falſe. A
Church whoſe Biſhops & Miniſters haue had their
firſt ordination (outward) from the falſe Antichriſtian
Church of Rome, whereof Antichriſt is head, may yet
(notwithſtanding) be a true Church, and they true Biſhops
and Miniſters, and not Antichriſtian.
            It is not the outward ordination, which a Biſhop or
Miniſter hath (before his conuerſion) receiued of a falſe
Antichriſtan Church, that can either pollute him (benow
conuerted, and called of God) or make the Church
to which he miniſtreth, falſe or Antichriſtian: Neither
is it the bare outward ordination receiued of the beſt
Church that euer was in the world, and in the beſt outward
forme that is, that can make either him that receiueth

it, a true faithfull Miniſter of God, or the
Church to which he miniſtreth, a true Church of
Chriſt; But he may be, both a falſe teacher, an Antichriſt,
and his Church falſe and antichriſtian, notwithſtanding.
Thoſe falſe teachers and Antichriſts, that were
in the Apoſtles times, had (no doubt) their firſt ordination
from the true Church of God, in as good an outward
forme, as any is, or can be; and that Church or
people, that were led by them, could not chuſe but be
vnſound.
            The Scriptures (foretelling of falſe prophets, falſe
teachers, Antichriſts, and of the great Antichriſt which
ſhould ariſe, deſcribeth them to riſe, not from among
the heathen or Iewes (as ſome imagine the great Antichriſt
ſhall) but in, and out of the Church of God,
euen of and from among thoſe that ſhould ſucceed the
Apoſtles and Elders of the Churches (which the Apoſtles
did plant) ſucceed (I ſay) as touching the
outward ordination in the externall offices and places
of them.
            Saint Paul being neere his departure from his labors,
to the Lord, calling the Elders of the Church of Epheſus
together,Act. 20. 25, 26. 27. 28. 29. 30▪ 31 forewarned them, ſaying, And now behold
I know, that yee all amongſt whom I haue gone preaching the
kingdome of God, ſhall ſee my face no more; wherefore I take
you to record this day, that I am pure from the bloud of all
men, for I haue kept nothing backe, but haue declared vnto
you all the counſell of God: take heed therefore vnto yourſelues,
and to the flocke, whereof the holy Ghoſt hath made you ouerſeers,
to feede the Church of God, which he hath purchaſed
with his owne bloud. For I know this▪ that after my departing
ſhall grieuous wolues enter in among you, not ſparing the flock.
Moreouer of your owne ſelues ſhall men ariſe, ſpeaking peruerſe
things to draw diſciples after them. Therefore watch and
remember. Theſe were ſuch as the holy Ghoſt had made
ouerſeers; ſo that their outward calling, ordination,
and ſucceſſion, could not be excepted againſt; and yet

we ſee what Paul foretells, and forewarnes them of.
Againe, Saint Iohn ſpeaking of Antichriſts, that roſe in
his time,1. Ioh. 2. 19. ſaith, They went out from vs &c. And Chriſt
himſelfe foretelling of the abhomination of deſolation,
which ſhould be ſet vp by the great Antichriſt, ſaith,
that it ſhall ſtand in the holy place, where it ought not,
When yee therefore ſhall ſee the abhomination of deſolation,
               Mat. 24. 15.
               ſpoken of by Daniel the Prophet, ſtand in the holy place,
Meaning by the holy place, the Church of God, the
place where God dwelleth, and is worſhipped, as Saint
Paul declareth, ſaying, Let no man deceiue you by any
meanes;
               2. Theſ. 2. 3. 4. 
               for that day ſhall not come, except there be a departing
firſt, and that the man of ſinne be reuealed, the Sonne
of perdition, who oppoſeth and exalteth himſelfe aboue all that
is called God, or that is worſhipped; ſo that he as God, ſitteth
in the temple of God, ſhewing himſelfe that he is God. According
as the Prophet had ſpoken of him long before,
propheſying alſo of his deſtruction, ſaying. How art thou
falne from heauen,
               Eſa. 14. 12. 13. 14. 
               O Lucifer, ſonne of the morning, how art
thou cut downe to the ground, thou that didſt weaken the nations,
and ſaidſt in thine heart I will aſcend into heauen, I will
exalt my throne aboue the ſtarres of God, I will ſit alſo vpon
the mount, euen the holy mount, of the congregation (of God)
in the ſides of the North, I will aſcend aboue the height of the
clouds, I will be like the moſt high. So that the great Antichriſt
was to ſit, and doth ſit, euen in the Church, in the
Temple of God, in the place where (indeed) he ought
not to ſit. If then all theſe things be ſo, as theſe Scriptures
doe declare. If it be not the outward calling, ordination,
or ſucceſſion in the offices and places of the
true Elders and Miniſters of God,Ioh. 10. in the outward ſtate
of the Church of God, that can either make them true
faithfull Miniſters of God, ſuch as come by the doore,
as Chriſt ſpeaketh; Or the Church, of which they are
ouerſeers and miniſters, the true holy Church of Chriſt:
but that theſe Elders and Miniſters may yet neuertheleſſe
proue falſe Prophets, falſe teachers, grieuous rauening

wolues in ſheepes cloathing, Antichriſts &c. And
the Churches be corrupted by them, robd, and deuoured,
both outwardly and inwardly, and become
euen heatheniſh and Antichriſtian. And that theſe deceiuers
ſhall riſe in the Church of God, and be ſuch as
haue had their outward ordination and ſucceſſion, from
hand to hand (as it were) euen from the Apoſtles.
And that the great Antichriſt himſelfe ſhall ſit in the
holy place, in the temple of God, vpon the holy mount
of the congregation of God, aboue and beſides the
ſtarres of God. What reaſon haue we then to thinke, I
ſay (this being ſo) that the outward calling, or ordination,
which the Elders, and Miniſters of the Church
of England receiued (at firſt) from the Church of
Rome, ſhould make either them, or the Church falſe
and Antichriſtian? It was not the outward ordination,
or ſucceſſion in the offices, and place of the Elders, that
did corrupt any of them before mentioned. (Nay) The
Biſhop of Rome himſelfe, might haue beene Biſhop of
Rome long enough, to this day, to the day of Chriſts
comming in the cloudes of heauen, and haue done his
maſter Chriſt good ſeruice, If he had kept the firſt faith,
If he had liued the firſt life, If he had ſucceſſed the Apoſtles
and Elders, (in faith, in doctrine, in exhortation,
in patience, in temperance, in meekeneſſe, in mortification,
in loue, in good workes, in feeding the flock
of Chriſt, and giuing them their meate in due ſeaſon)
as he did ſucceed them in outward place; he had then
beene a Scribe well taught in the kingdome of God;
A faithfull Biſhop, an Elder worthy of double honour,
and happy had that flock beene of which he had beene
an ouerſeer, and his maſter at his comming would haue
ſaid,Mat. 24. 46. 
               Bleſſed be this ſeruant. But ſeeing he failed in all
theſe things, and did not ſucceed his Elders in this way,
and order of ſucceſſion, (as all their true ſucceſſors to
this day haue euer done) ſeeing his heart was euill and
vnfaithfull, ambitious, couetous, and loued pleaſures

and voluptuouſneſſe more then God; and ſaid in his
heart, My maſter will deferre his coming, and therefore
take vpon him to ſmite his fellowes,Math. 24. 48, 49, 50, 51. to eate and drinke
with the drunken; his Lord will come in a day which
he thinketh not on, and in an houre that he is not aware
of, and will hew him in peeces, and giue him his
portion with the hypocrites; and vnhappie is the flock
that hath him for their ſhepherd.
            The Church of Rome was once a glorious Church,
not in regard of any ſuch pomp and princely ſtate as ſhe
that now is, ſits in, which (poore virgin) ſhe was neuer
acquainted with, but in reſpect of the light and
brightneſſe of her faith,Rom. 1. 8. as Saint Paul teſtifieth, which
(by reaſon of the fruite it did effect and bring forth in
her) ſhined, and made her face to ſhine throughout
the world. She was a ſiſter and daughter of that woman
which Iohn ſaw ſo wonderfully and heauenly deckt and
adorned, and which he deſcribeth, ſaying,Reuel. 12. 1. 
               And there
appeared a great wonder in heauen, a woman clothed with
the Sunne, and the Moone vnder her feete, and vpon her head
a crowne of twelue ſtarres: that is to ſay, ſhe had put on
Chriſt, he dwelt in her heart by faith, ſhe was clothed
with him, his righteouſneſſe couered her nakedneſſe
and all her defects, and made her beautifull within and
without; ſhe had the earth, and all earthly glorie, vnder
her feete, as tranſitorie and vaine; ſhe was mortified to
ſinne, and to the pleaſures thereof; and her ſoules delight
was with her Lord in heauen, where he was aſcended,
and yet remaineth; and her crowne of ſtate,
which ſhe had on her head in thoſe days, was the Lambs
twelue Apoſtles, whoſe doctrine and example of walking,
were her guide and patterne; and who, as they had
receiued of the Lamb the word of God, ſo they left it
with her, to be her light and leader in the deſart, when
her publique guides ſhould faile her, of which word
of truth (not ſo much the letter, as the ſpirituall true intent
thereof) ſhe and her children (her true ſucceſſors)

haue been the ſuſtainers and pillars of, to this day.
            This was once (of a truth) the eſtate of the Church
of Rome, as alſo of other Churches elſewhere, but (alas)
it laſted but a while, it fared with her as with the
reſt: for by the bloody perſecution of the great red
Dragon,Reuel. 12. her outward beautie was defaced; ſhe was diſperſed,
and forced to flie with them into the wilderneſſe;
and then (after a while) when the ſtorme of perſecution
was ouer, and that a calme began to be ſettled,
ſo as ſhe began to conceiue ſome hope of recouering
her firſt eſtate,Arianiſme. hereſies ſprang vp, and were maintained
with great force, on the one ſide, and carnall ſecuritie
grew on the other; and that iniquitie might be increaſed,
according as the Lord had foretold,Math. 24. 12. 
               the loue of many
waxed cold. The myſtery of iniquitie, which began to
worke in the Apoſtles times (they being departed) took
now faſter footing, according to their words, and ſtroue
daily to perfection; and at laſt, he that letted, was taken
away, and the man of ſinne (Antichriſt) was reuealed,
and ſet vp in the throne of the Dragon; and the Dragons
religion was by him and his, ſo commanded, and
commixt with the external profeſſion of the name and
religion of Chriſt, as that no man could partake of the
better, but he muſt partake of the worſe. For after that
the Biſhop of Rome had obtained at the Dragons hāds,
that his Church ſhould be the Mother of all other
Churches, and that all muſt crouch and bend to her,
and that he became Lord and maſter of all; then did he
(among the reſt of his requitals) entertaine and command
ſuch part of the Dragons religion and Church-ſeruice,
as might giue him the beſt content, and moſt
aduance his owne temporall ſtate of glorie. So that hauing
once obtained the Dragons ſeate, and that all his
heads, hils and hornes were his, he thought he might
now do what he liſt, fell to deſolating of the true worſhip
of God,1. Pet. 2. 5. and to conſuming of the Saints of the moſt
high (the remnant of the true Spouſe, the children of

the woman, before deſcribed,) and pulled downe the
daily and ſpirituall ſacrifice, which they (the ſpirituall
houſe of God) offered vp acceptable to him by Ieſus
Chriſt,Dan. 9. 27. caſt the truth to the ground, as the Prophet
had foretold of him, brought in and ſet vp the abhominable
and moſt execrable religion of the heathen,
compounding it, and dignifying the parts, practiſe, and
practiſers of it (the more to delude the world) with the
names and titles of God, Chriſt, holy Spirit, the word of
God, his holy Church, his worſhip, Seruice, his holy Sacraments,
and Saints. And that he might haue all in obedience,
made ſuch lawes, by the aduice of his priuie councell,
that whoſoeuer would not worſhip the Beaſt and
this image of the Beaſt (the idols and abhominations
of the heathen and pagans) ſhould by the executioners
of his will, be taken and killed. And becauſe he would
be ſure to know his own, and to find out all that would
not ſubmit, cauſed all, both ſmall and great, rich and
poore, free and bond,Reue. 13. 16, 17 to receiue a marke in his right
hand or in his forehead; and that no man might buy
or ſell, ſaue he that had the marke, &c.
            Now when once things were come to this paſſe, it
was no longer time (for any ſoule that would be ſaued)
to ſtay; and for this cauſe it was, that Chriſt commandeth,
ſaying,Reuel. 18. 4, 5. 
               Come out of her my people, that ye be not partaker
of her ſinnes, and that ye receive not of her plagues: for
her ſins haue reached vnto heauen, and God hath remembred
her iniquities.
            
            And theſe were the very reaſons, why at the firſt the
Church of England ſeparated from her, and alſo why
ſo many of other nations did forſake her. When Wickliffe,
Huſſe, Tindal, Luther, Cranmer, Latimer, and others,
forſooke the Church of Rome, and came out of
her, they ſtood not to make queſtion about their outward
calling or ordination they had receiued before of
the Church of Rome; but God hauing called them
now, by a more ſpeciall heauenly calling, to preach his

truth, they ſtaid not for, neither did they look after another;
Nay, if they had, the truth might haue lien hid, &
we might haue ſat in darkneſſe vntill this day; but they
finding the approbation of God and his people, It was
enough.
            Let me aske? If God ſhould vouchſafe to call the
Biſhop of Rome, the Pope that now is, and that he
ſhould forſake all thoſe abhominations, which he now
liueth in, and become ſuch a Scribe, Biſhop, or Elder,
as (before) we haue deſcribed; who would condemne
him, or call him Antichriſt, for that he was once the
Pope of Rome, though he had neuer other outward
ordination, more then the approbation of God and his
people, or who would call the people that ſhould imbrace
him, Antichriſtians? doubtleſſe, not any of the
children of wiſdome.
            Agiane, preſuppoſe that the ſtate of all Europe were
now as it hath beene heretofore, all vnder Antichriſt
and his Church; and that God ſhould call one of the
Biſhops of that Church out from them, and in due him
with the knowledge of his truth, by his word & Spirit▪
and that there be a neceſſitie as thou ſaiſt, that he muſt
haue another outward ordination, before he can Miniſter
the word of God vnto any people, ſo as to be a Biſhop
or Elder vnto them; whither wouldeſt thou haue
him to goe for it, or where wilt thou finde an Elderſhip
to ordaine him? In Europe there be none, all are Antichriſtians.
Wilt thou haue Apoſtles againe, to lay a
new foundation, and muſt they ordaine new Elders
before their can be a true conſtituted Church with her
offices and ordinances, as thou termeſt them? Is this
thy iudgement? It may be, if it be not; Nay, it muſt
be, if thou hold thee to thy former; It hath beene the
opinion of ſome of thy predeceſſors, that held themſelues
as wiſe as thy ſelfe whatſoeuer thou art, as for
inſtance, there were (among others) three Brethren, ancient
Separatiſts from the Church of England, liuing

ſometimes in the Cittie of London, their names were
Legat, theſe held it ſtifly, that their muſt be new Apoſtles,
before their could be a true conſtituted Church,
and they drew it from this their ground, the one was
called Walter Legat, who about twenty yeares ſince
was drowned, being with one of his brethren waſhing
himſelfe in a riuer, called the Old Foord; Another of
them called Thomas Legat, died in Newgate about ſixteene
yeares ſince, being laid there for the Hereſie of
Arius; The third called Bartholomew Legat, was burnt
in Smithfield about ten yeares ſince, being condemned
for the ſame Hereſie of Arius, for they all held, and
ſtood ſtoutly for the ſame alſo. Theſe Legats had a conceit,
that their name did (as it were) foreſhew and entitle
them, to be the new Apoſtles, that muſt doe this
new worke; but you ſee what became of them. There
was alſo one Iohn Wilkinſon, another ancient ſtout Separatiſt,
who with diuers that followed him, held the ſame
likewiſe, drawing it from the ſame ground, as a neceſſary
conſequence thereof, who alſo came to naught.
But if there be any yet that will needs haue new Apoſtles,
as no doubt there be; for their carnall contentions
worke ſtill to that point; then let me aske thee, whence
muſt they come? who ſhall ſend them? Chriſt is aſcended,
and he doth not now appeare to call, and ſend
any, as he did the Apoſtle Paul; and Apoſtles muſt be
ſuch as come from the preſence of the Lord▪ and haue
ſeene him; For which cauſe Saint Paul ſaith in the defence
of his Apoſtleſhip,1. Cor. 9. 1. 
               Haue not I ſeene the Lord? &c.
And he that was to be in Iudas his roome,Act. 1. 21. 22. muſt be one
that had bin conuerſant with the Apoſtles the time of
Chriſts being then on earth, an eye witnes to publiſh
that which he ſaw and beleeued. So that Apoſtles thou
canſt not vpon any good ground expect.
            If thou ſaiſt, the Church may ordaine n
                  ••
                Elders.
            I aske, whence came that Church? who plant 
                  〈◊〉
                firſt?
can there be an Orchard of fruitfull trees, and was there

not a husbandman that planted it? Can faith be without
preaching? or can there be a Church without faith? If
thou haſt found a true Church, find but out him that
planted it, that firſt preached the word of God vnto it,
whereby it beleeued, and became his Church, thou haſt
found an Elder, feare it not; thou needeſt not make
further enquiry from whence he came, or who ordained
him; he could not doe ſuch a worke, except God
ſent him, though he came from Rome. If thou ſaiſt,
Euangeliſts may preach the Goſpell to the people, and
ordaine Elders, as Timothy and Titus did. It is true; but
where be they who ſhall ordaine ſuch, and ſend them
to doe this? Apoſtles we haue none. If thou ſaiſt, diſciples
may preach,Luk. 10. 1. as the ſeuentie did &c. I aske ſtill,
who made thoſe diſciples? Didſt thou euer know a
field beare good wheate, that was neuer ſowne? If thou
haſt found good diſciples, doubtles, there was one or other
that did firſt informe them. So that thou mayſt ſee,
thou art ſtill in the ſame caſe thou wert in, and that of
neceſſitie it will follow, that if there can be no true
Church, till there be a new outward ordination, then
there will neuer be a true Church. Wherefore we conclude,
againſt thee, and againſt all that are of thy iudgement;
that as you erre greatly in all your former points,
ſo in this: and as many of the former do agree with the
ancient errors of the Antichriſtian Church of Rome; ſo
doth this; for they deny Gods predeſtination, and
election of ſome particular perſons in Chriſt, to grace
and life, from the foundation of the world, and ſo doe
you; They teach free will, and falling away from the
beſt grace, and that the certaintie of mans ſaluation
doth depend vpon his acts of faith, obedience, and continuing
therein, and ſo doe you; They teach that outward
ordination and ſucceſſion doth make, conſtitute,
and proue a true Church, and ſo ſay you in part, if not
in the whole. That whereas you charge others to be of
Antichriſt and his Church, it is euident, you are more

neerely allied to her, by theſe deceitfull doctrines of
hers, then they can be, with the things ye charge them
with; Nay, they may notwithſtanding be free from
her, when you ſhall by this meanes be found children
of her.
            If outward ordination and ſucceſſion in that kind,
doe make, conſtitute, or be an Argument ſufficient to
to proue a true Church, a Church wherein Chriſt
dwelleth, againſt which the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile,
to which Chriſt hath giuen the keyes of the kingdome
of heauen,Mat. 16. 19. and power to bind and to looſe, to remit
and to retaine ſins, which is the pillar and ground
of truth,1. Tim. 3. 25. which hath the ſpirit of truth, which Chriſt
promiſed to be with vnto the end of the world; and
that whereſoeuer two or three of them ſhould be gathered
together in my name,Mat. 18. 19. he would be in the middeſt;
(for all theſe treaſures, and many more do belong
to the true Church, which is the body and ſpouſe of
Chriſt;) then the Chuch of Rome hath as good ground
for the proofe, and confirmation of her ſelfe, to be the
ſame true Church, as any Church elſe whatſoeuer;
nay, better ground then any other can ſhew. And
therefore her children (which ſtands for her, and doe
pleade her cauſe) take this to be, and doe vſe it as the
ſtrongeſt and moſt inuincibleſt argument they haue
to proue their Church to be the onely true Church,
this day extant; and that all Churches and Chriſtians,
ought therefore to come vnder her gouernment, to be
taught and nurtured by her, to ſubmit to her counſels,
ordinances, canons, decrees, doctrines of faith, rules for
manners, ceremonies, cenſures, and whatſoeuer ſhe
ſhall impoſe, becauſe what ſuch a Church (which hath
thoſe forenamed priuiledges) ſhall agree vpon, teach
or command, is truth, and may not be queſtioned or
oppoſed,Act. 15. 28. and therefore it is ſaid, For it ſeemed good vnto
the holy Ghoſt and to vs.
            
            But we vtterly deny any ſuch ordination or ſucceſſion,

to make, conſtiture, or to be an argument ſufficient
to proue ſuch a true Church; and affirme, that a Church
may be falſe and Antichriſtian, notwithſtanding the
ſame. For although there be ſuch an ordination and
ſucceſſion, a Church, againſt which the gates of hell
ſhall not preuaile, as the Lord himſelfe declareth, ſaying,
And vpon this rocke will I build my Church,
               Math. 16. 18. 
               and the
gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt it; to which all thoſe
former priuiledges do belong, and are to continue with
vnto the end of the world; yet we denie that kinde of
ordination and ſucceſſion to be it, or to haue any of
thoſe priuiledges belonging thereunto, but that it may
be (notwithſtanding) an vtter aduerſary to the true
ſucceſſion, and to all thoſe her treaſures; which wee
proue thus:
            That kind of ordination and ſucceſſion, which haue
oppoſed the word and truth of God, that haue perſecuted
and murdered his ſeruants (from time to time) for
the preaching and maintaining of the ſame truth and
word of God, is not (nor can be) that ordination and
ſucceſſion, or church, againſt which the gates of hell
ſhall not preuaile, nor to which any of thoſe treaſures
do belong, but may be an aduerſary both to it & them.
But the outward ordination and ſucceſſion in the
roomes, publique offices and ſeates of the true Elders
and Prieſts of God, (which is the beſt ordination and
ſucceſſion, the Church of Rome that now is, hath, or
can pleade for her ſelfe, and which the ſeparations doe
contend for) haue oppoſed the word and truth of God,
haue perſecuted and killed the ſeruants of God, which
preached and maintained the ſame his word and truth,
and for the ſame cauſe. Therefore the outward ordination
and ſucceſſion, in the roomes, publique offices
and ſeates of the true Elders and Prieſts of God, is not
(nor can be) that ordination and ſucceſſion, or church,
againſt which the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile, or to
which, any of her priuiledges do belong, but may be

an vtter aduerſary both to her and them.
            And that ſuch an ordination and ſucceſſion, as the
Church of Rome and our Separatiſts pleadeth and contendeth
for, haue done, and may doe all theſe euils againſt
the truth and true ſeruants of God, is euident
by thoſe Prieſts, Elders and Scribes of the Church of
the Iewes, who had their outward ordination and ſucceſſion
from the former Elders and Prieſts, yea from
Moſes and Aaron, and ſate in their ſeates, and ſupplied
their places, and yet (neuertheleſſe) were the great opoppoſers
of Gods word and truth, and the perſecuters
and murderers of the Prophets and righteous men of
God, which preached the ſame his word and truth from
time to time, as Chriſt himſelfe often affirmeth to their
faces,Math. 21. and foretelleth them in a parable, that they would
be the betrayers and murderers of him alſo, which
ſhortly after came to paſſe.
            And the Church of Rome (for her part) hath ſhewed
herſelfe in enmitie to the truth, and bloody proceedings
againſt the maintainers thereof, (for aboue a
thouſand yeares) not onely to equall, but to out-ſtrip
Ieruſalem, and to be euen the perfection and full accompliſhment
(as it were) of all abhominations & cruelties,
againſt the truth of God and his Church, according
as Chriſt (by the miniſtery of his Angell vnto his
ſeruant Iohn) teſtifieth,Reuel. 17. 5. where he calleth he, The Mother
of Harlots and the abhominations of the earth; and foreſheweth
how drunke ſhe would be with the blood of
the Saints, and with the Martyrs of Ieſus. And as he laid
to the charge of the Scribes and Phariſees of his time,
the blood of the righteous that had been ſlaine,Math. 23. 35. from
Abel to Zecharias;
               Reuel. 18. 24. ſo he chargeth theſe with the blood
of all that euer (for the truth) ſhould be ſlaine vpon the
earth, and with his owne blood alſo, becauſe they and
thoſe that crucified him, are all of one houſe and generation,
euen from Cain to this day, being the right and
true ſucceſſors of one another in euill. So that their

maine argument of ſucceſſion, in the roomes & chaires
of the righteous ſeruants of God, auaileth them nothing
to the purpoſe they aime at, ſeeing this, not only
may be, but is their condition notwithſtanding. For,
as they were not of Abrahams ſeed, which came of Abraham
after the fleſh, nor they (all) Iſrael, that came of
Iſrael; and as that was not circumciſion, which was outward
in the fleſh; nor that baptiſme, which waſheth away
but the filth of the fleſh: ſo neither is that the true
heauenly and ſpirituall ſucceſſion, which is outward,
by an externall ordination and ſucceſſion in the roomes
and ſeates of the righteous ſeruants of God; but the
true and heauenly ſucceſſion (which haue all thoſe heauenly
treaſures belonging to it) is that which Chriſt
hath built vpon the rocke, are they that haue the faith
of Peter, of Iohn, and the reſt of the Apoſtles, euen thoſe
liuely ſtones, which Saint Peter ſpeaketh of, who are
by faith built vpon Chriſt the chiefe corner ſtone,1. Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. like
as Peter was, and ſo are made a ſpirituall houſe by this
meanes, and do offer vp ſpirituall ſacrifices acceptable
to God by Ieſus Chriſt, and are that choſen generation,
that royal prieſthood, holy nation, and peculiar people,
which he deſcribeth, who haue receiued ſpirituall gifts
from aboue,Epheſ. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. as Saint Paul teſtifieth, ſaying, Wherefore
he ſaith when he aſcended vp on high, he led captiuitie captiue,
and gaue gifts to men. According as Saint Iames ſaith,
Euery good and perfect gift is from abou
                     •
                  ; and cometh downe
from the Father of lights,
               Iam. 1. 17. 
               with whom there is no variableneſſe
nor ſhadow of turning. That as they only are the ſeed
and children of Abraham, that haue the faith and works
of Abraham; and as the circumciſion of the heart, is the
true circumciſion; and as to haue the heart ſanctified
by faith through the Spirit, is to be baptized with the
baptiſme which ſaueth, to put on Chriſt by baptiſme,
and to be a true Chriſtian: ſo likewiſe, to be a true Paſtor
or Elder, is to enter
                  ••
               in by the doore firſt, euen
through Chriſt, by faith; for he is the doore & the way,

whereby euery true Paſtor muſt enter, and to be called
and ordained of God, by thoſe heauenly gifts of Chriſt,
whereby they are made able Miniſters of the new Teſtament;
and then in the ſecond place, to be approued
and iuſtified of his Church and children of wiſedome.
For the calling of a true Miniſter of God, and that
which maketh him ſo to be, is as heauenly and ſpirituall
as that which maketh a true Chriſtian; elſe euery true
Chriſtian had a greater priuiledge then euery true Miniſter
of Chriſt, which (doubtleſſe) is not ſo, but rather
euery true Miniſter hath a greater; yea ſuch are the gifts
of the Spirit, which Chriſt ſince his aſcenſion hath giuen
to his Church, for the adminiſtration of the Goſpel
of peace, that whereas he gaue this teſtimonie of Iohn,
that in regard of the gifts of the Spirit, which were giuen
him for the adminiſtration of repentance, a greater
Prophet then Iohn, was neuer (before him) borne of
women,Luk. 7. 28. yet neuertheleſſe he ſaith, that he which is leaſt
in the kingdome of heauen, is greater then he; meaning the
leaſt true Miniſter of the Goſpell, the word of reconciliation.
            And if yet they alledge for their ſeparation, as their
maner is to doe, That in the Church of England there
be many very ſuperſtitiouſly minded, many vngodly,
proud, couetous and vnclean perſons, both in the publique
office of the miniſtery, as alſo of the people, who
do partake as well in the Sacrament of the Supper, as in
the adminiſtration of the word: let them remember
what hath been manifeſted before, as touching the eſtate
of the Churches in the Apoſtles times, how that
there were then in the Churches,2 Cor. 11. 13. falſe Apoſtles, falſe
teachers,Philip. 1. 15. deceiuers, ſome that preached Chriſt through
enuie,2. Pet. 2. 14. ſome that had eyes full of adulterie, and that
could not ceaſe from ſinne; ſome that made merchandize
of the people;1. Cor. 6. 6. ſome who went to law one with annother,
and that amongſt the infidels; couetous, wicked,
proud, laſciuious perſons, which had not repented of

their wickednes;Phil. 3. 18. 19. ſome that made their belly their God,
whoſe glory was their ſhame, who minded earthly
things;1. Cor. 11. 
                     ••
                  . and ſome, that at the Sacrament of the Supper
were drunken, and deſpiſed the poore; theſe and diuers
other euills were in the Churches, and yet no ſeparation
to be made from any of them, onely the Apoſtles,
ſharply reproued thoſe deceiuers, as euill doers, and
warned the people with teares to take heed of them, and
of their euills, and to ſhun them.
            
               Againe, there were ſome that with conſcience of the
very Idols of the heathen, did eate things in ſacrifice to
the Idoll,
               1. Cor. 8. 7. 
               as Saint Paul affirmeth, ſaying, For ſome with
conſcience vnto the Idoll vnto this houre, eate it as a thing
offered vnto an Idoll. Declaring vnto them, that the things
which the Gentiles ſacrificed, they ſacrificed to Deuills,
and not to God,
               1. Cor. 10. 20. 21. 22. 
               and ſaid, I will not that you ſhould haue
fellowſhip with Diuells, yee cannot drinke of the cup of the
Lord, and of the cup of the deuills; yee cannot be partaker of
the Lords table, and the table of deuills. Do yee prouoke the
Lord, &c. And by this it appeareth, they came alſo to
the Lords table, though as Saint Paul told them, they
could not truly and ſpiritually partake thereof, ſo long
as they did partake of the other. Yea it is euident, that
theſe corinthians were much adicted to their old heatheniſh
ſuperſtitions; For Saint Paul in his next Epiſtle
doth againe call vpon them, ſaying, Be not vnequally
yoked with Infidels,2. Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. for what fellowſhip hath righteouſnes with
vnrighteouſnes & what communion hath light with darknes,
and what concord hath Chriſt with Beliall, and what part
hath he that beleeueth with an Infidell, and what agreement
hath the Temple of God with Idolls? for yee are the Temple of
the liuing God, as God hath ſaid, I will dwell in them, and
walke in them▪ and will be their God, and they ſhall be my people;
wherefore come out from among them, and be ye ſeparate
from them, and touch not the vncleane thing, and I will receiue
you, and will be a Father vnto you, and yee ſhall be my
Sonnes and Daughters, ſaith the Lord Almighty.
            
               
Here we ſee by the plain commandement of God, &
exhortation of Saint Paul, that a ſeparation ought to
be made from all kind of Idolatry and vnrighteouſnes
of the heathen, and from all fellowſhip with them in
their vncleane things. But here is no ſeparation from
the Church, though theſe ſuperſtitious Chriſtians were
in it. Nay, it is euident, there was neuer any ſeparation
admitted,Such as were carnall, hauing not the Spirit. either by word, or by example, (except by
thoſe that ſeparated themſelues to make ſects, which
are reproued by the Apoſtles) vntill ſuch time as by
the mallice and ſubtiltie of the Diuell,Iud. 19. and through the
pride and wickednes of the Biſhop and Church of
Rome, after they had gotten Iuriſdiction ouer all, that
they had brought into the Church the Idolatries and
abhominations of the Pagans, and ſo cunningly compounded
them, with the name and religion of Chriſt,
that no man could pertake of any good among them,
but he muſt pertake of the euill alſo. Then, and not till
then,Reu. 18. 4. I ſay, the Lord commanded ſaying, Goe out of her
my people, that ye be not pertaker of her ſinnes, and that you
receiue not of her plagues. This was not, becauſe there were
many offenders in the Church of Rome, nor becauſe
of their perſonall preſence in the Aſſemblies, but becauſe
the Lord would not haue his people partake, (in
their owne perſons) of their ſinnes; which if they
continued with them, could not be auoided.
            Neither was there a ſeparation to be made from the
Church of the Iewes, as bad and as cruell as it was, but
Chriſt and his Apoſtles did alwayes both by word and
example, teach the contrary; onely the falſe doctrine
and hipocriſie, and wickednes of the Iewes, they warned
the faithfull to take heed of.
            And as concerning the Church of England, which
thou ſo much contemneſt, although there be many
euill workers, vngodly, and vnregenerate perſons▪
ſuperſtitiouſly minded, as well of the Miniſtery, as of
the people, as out of all doubt there are. For if, of but

twelue Apoſtles,Note, how that there were euer in the pureſt Churches, ſuch as were bitter one to another, full of ſtrife, ſeditions, & all maner of euill workes, which are condē
                  ned by the Apoſtle to be earthly, ſenſiuall, and diuelliſh. one was a Diuell; and that there were
falſe Apoſtles, and falſe teachers, proud, and couetous,
in the primitiue Churches, and falſe brethren, belly
gods, and ſuch like, when Chriſtians were but few in
number; How ſhould it be, but there muſt now be
many; yet this is not ſufficient ground for thy ſeperation.
Nay, ſuppoſe (as the truth is) that the faithfull
be but few in number, and rare, as the duſt or oare that
gold commeth of, and the vngodly as common as the
clay that men make pots of, as the Prophet ſpeaketh;
For doubtles, if God ſaid of the Iſraelites, that though
their number were as the ſand of the ſea, yet but a remnant
of them ſhould be ſaued;Eſa. 10. 22. we haue no reaſon to
thinke it ſhould be otherwiſe with vs; Nay, Saint Paul
ſheweth plainly, that God will finiſh the worke, and cut it
ſhort in righteouſnes,
               Rom. 9. 27. 28. 
               becauſe a ſhort worke will the Lord
make vpon the earth. Yet what of this, thou haſt no
ground from hence to proue a ſeparation. Nay, vnleſſe
thou canſt proue that the Church of England, hath ſet
vp, and doth command the Abhominations of the heathen,
as doth the Church or Rome, and ſo mix them
and Chriſtian religion together, as thou couldeſt not
partake of the good, but thou muſt partake of the euill,
and ſo ſinne againſt God in thine owne perſon, thou
haſt no ground at all for thy ſeparation. Art thou
offended becauſe God hath beene ſo gracious to this
kingdome, aboue all other nations, in cauſing the
Princes and Kings thereof (now in theſe latter dayes)
to ſet their helping hands to the repairing and building
vp againe of the decaied walles of Ieruſalem, and to the
reſtoring of the morning and euening ſacrifice of praiſe
and thankſgiuing, as it was in former time, and in the
dayes of old. Doſt thou not know it was the word of
truth, the ſword which proceedeth out of the mouth of
the Lord, miniſtred by his faithfull ſeruants, whom he
raiſed vp in theſe latter times, which hath beene the
cauſe of the reuolt of the Church and Kingdome of

England from the abhominations and tyranny of the
Church of Rome, and that God hath done it for his
choſen ſake, according to his word, art thou not
bound to be thankefull vnto God for the ſame, and
with gladneſſe of heart to imbrace all the good he
hath vouchſafed, yet ſo as not therewithall to iuſtifie
any of the preſent euills, nor yet to reſt thy ſelfe ſecure
in that good which is in being, as if all things were already
come to their full meaſure, and ſo exclude thy
ſelfe from all future grace and truth, which God hath
decreed (in and by his word) to bring to light. For as
the truth and dayly ſacrifice (which Chriſt and his Apoſtles
did erect) were not all wholy (in a moment)
caſt to the ground, nor the abhomination of deſolation
ſet vp at full in one day, but that the one increaſed by
degrees, and the other waſted accordingly: ſo muſt it
now be in the reſtauration; as then iniquitie and falſehood
increaſed, and truth and loue faded and waxed
cold, ſo now (on the contrary) iniquitie and falſehood
muſt conſume and be expelled, and truth and the loue
thereof muſt increaſe and come to their place againe;
Iudgement was to begin at the houſe of God, but it
muſt end in the houſe of iniquitie.
            Learne therefore now to be a wiſe, let the confuſions
which the heady extreams of thoſe carnall contentious
times haue brought forth, admoniſh thee to take
better heed; embrace thankfully, and make right vſe
of the preſent good thou ſeeſt in place; ſhun the euils,
and labour to increaſe in the wiſdome which is from aboue;
doubtleſſe, there are great riches and treaſures
with God to be attained, ſuch as the carnall mind ſhall
neuer ſee nor know; conuerſe with the wiſe and holy in
heart, ſuch as are ſpirituall and heauenly minded, haue
ſpeciall fellowſhip with them, pray, weepe, and reioyce
(dayly together) with them; call often to minde the
hope of the ioy and glory ye ſhall receiue in the world
to come, in the day when Chriſt your Lord ſhall appeare;

hope, loue, and long for his appearing, and edifie
your ſelues with theſe things; pray vnto God, and
vſe all good meanes (according to your meaſure and
place) to redreſſe what is amiſſe in others; labour (thorough
patience and meekneſſe) to winne them to the
truth, and loue thereof; ſo ſhall ye be profitable members
of the Church of God, diligent and faithfull ſeruants
of Chriſt.
            You are not ignorant (I ſuppoſe) of the manifold
miſchieues that men haue fallen into, by reaſon of the
fleſhly wranglings which haue been in theſe late times,
what confuſion, diuiſion and diſtraction there is among
the people; what and how many ſundry opinions and
ſeuerall ſects there are, yea ſects vpon ſects, diuiſion
vpon diuiſion, error vpon error, hath been bred and
brought forth. Many haue riſen (in theſe latter times)
ſpeaking peruerſe things, to draw diſciples after them,
to get themſelues a name, the diuell deluding them
through pride, vnder pretence of ſome excellent way
of truth, which he makes them beleeue is reuealed vnto
them. As firſt, for the Church of Rome, all the world
ſeeth what confuſion, what fearfull deluſions are therein,
what multitudes of ſects of new deuiſed orders of
Prieſts,Note, that theſe ſtriuings are (onely) about formes and outward ordinatiōs, which leade to nothing but contentions. of Friers, each drawing a traine after him; and
now (ſince the light of the truth hath broken forth)
what ſtrange contentions haue beene raiſed in the
Church of God about things of no moment (when
great and weightie matters haue been neglected,) and
what emulations, diuiſions and ſeparations haue bred
thereupon; and then, how after this, people being in
diſtraction, haue runne from one ſect and error to another,
from ſeparation to ſeparatiō, diuiding themſelues
into many ſeuerall ſects, to Anabaptiſtry, wherein (aagaine)
are diuided into fiue or ſix ſundry ſects, each
hatefully condemning other, holding (alſo) many dangerous
errors, ſome to expect new Apoſtles, ſome to
the hereſie of Arius; and ſome others (who being, as it

were, diſtracted with theſe things) haue fallen to another
(the moſt blaſphemous and erronious ſect this day
in the world) commonly called by the name of the Family
of loue, whoſe author was one Henrie Nicolas, or
H. N. for ſo they will haue him called, that is (as they
expound it) Homo Nouus, the new man, or the holy nature,
or holineſſe, which they make to be Chriſt, and ſin
they will haue to be Antichriſt, becauſe it is oppoſite to
Chriſt. They ſay, that when Adam ſinned, then Chriſt
was killed, and Antichriſt came to liue. They teach, that
the ſame perfection of holineſſe which Adam before he
fell, is to be attained here in this life; and affirme, that
all their Family of loue are as perfect and innocent as
he. And that the reſurrection of the dead, ſpoken of
by Saint Paul in the 1. Cor. 15. and this propheſie, Then
ſhall be fulfilled the ſaying which is written, O death, where is
thy ſting? O graue, where is thy victory? is fulfilled in them,
and denie all other reſurrection of the body to be after
this life. They will haue this blaſphemer H. N. to be the
ſonne of God, Chriſt, which was to come in the end of
the world to iudge the world; and ſay, that the day of
iudgement is already come; and that H. N. iudgeth the
world now by his doctrine; ſo that whoſoeuer doth
not obey his Goſpel, ſhall (in time) be rooted out of the
world; and that his Family of loue ſhall inherite and inhabite
the earth for euer, world without end; only (they
ſay) they ſhall die in the bodie, as now men do, and their
ſoules go to heauen, but their poſterities ſhall continue
for euer. This deceiuer deſcribeth eight through breakings
of the light (as he termeth them) to haue beene
in eight ſeueral times from Adam to the time that now
is, which (as he ſaith) haue each exceeded other; the
ſeuenth he alloweth Ieſus Chriſt to be the publiſher
of, and his light to be the greateſt of all that euer were
before him; and he maketh his owne to be the eighth,
and laſt, and greateſt, and the perfection of all, in and
by which Chriſt is perfected, meaning holineſſe. He

maketh euery one of his Family of loue to be Chriſt,
yea and God, and himſelfe God and Chriſt in a more
excellent maner, ſaying, that he is Godded with God,
and codeified with him, and that God is hominified
with him.
            Theſe horrible blaſphemies, with diuers others, doth
this H. N. and his Family teach to be the euerlaſting Gospel,
which the Angell is ſaid to preach in Reuelation
14. 6. and himſelfe to be the Angell, yea and the
Archangell which is ſaid to ſound the great and laſt
trump, Reuel. 11. 15. They profeſſe greater loue to the
Church of Rome, and to all her idolatries and ſuperſtitions,
then they do to any Church elſe (whatſoeuer) except
themſelues. They wickedly abuſe theſe words of
Chriſt,Luk. 13. 32. 
               I muſt walke to day and to morrow, and the third day
I ſhall be perfected; and ſay, that by to day is meant the time
of Ieſus Chriſt and his Apoſtles; and by to morrow, all
the time of the religion of the Church of Rome; and by
the third day, this their day of H. N. and his Family,
wherein they wil haue Chriſt to be perfected. And they
doe compare all the whole religion of the Church of
Rome, to the law of Moſes; affirming, that as God did
teach his people by thoſe ſhadowes and types till Ieſus
Chriſt came, ſo he hath taught the world (euer ſince)
by the images, ſacrifices, and filthy heatheniſme of the
Church of Rome, till this wretch H. N. came, and now
he muſt be the onely chiefe teacher, Gods obedient
man, yea his ſonne, as they blaſphemouſly call him; he
(by his Goſpell) muſt make all perfect. They will outwardly
ſubmit to any kind of religion, and to any idolatrous
ſeruice whatſoeuer, pretending it is not the bodie
that can ſinne, but the ſoule. They will be Prieſts
in the Church of Rome, and act their Seruice after their
maner of deuotion; and as Satan can transforme himſelfe
into an Angell or light, ſo they can thruſt themſelues
(likewiſe) 
                  •
               o be publike Miniſters and Preachers
in the Church of England; yea into the Kings Chappell,

and to be of his officers and meſſengers, ſo bold
they are, euen at this preſent; and ſo cloſe and cunningly
they can carry themſelues (being directed thereto by
their Maſter H. N.) that yee ſhall hardly (euer) find
them out. They will profeſſe to agree in all points with
the Church of England, as alſo with the Church of
Rome, if they ſhould be examined by them, onely this,
they will not (lightly) deny their Maſter H. N. nor
ſpeake euill of him or his writings,Notes how to diſcouer a Famileſt. if they ſhould be
put to it: and there is no way but this whereby to diſcouer
them, I ſay, to put them to the deniall and abiuring
of him and his writings, and to pronounce him
a blaſphemer, and his doctrine blaſphemous; this
they will hardly doe, vnleſſe they be not yet his full
diſciples.
            Theſe horrible blaſphemies, & wicked actions (which
I hate to deſcribe) but that I deſire Chriſtians ſhould
take notice of them, and beware) doth this blaſphemer
and his blaſphemous ſect, teach and practiſe. But I
ceaſe, ſighing and ſorowing in my heart, (God doth
know) to ſee that the deuill ſhould worke ſuch miſcheife
now in this laſt time, wherein (I know) God will
haue his truth to proſper, and moſt of all, becauſe many
ſilly ſoules are taken in their ſnares like poore vnwary
birds (in time of winter, when foode is ſcarſe) ſeeking
for releife. Alas, what may be the cauſe of this? Is there
not ſome great fault in thoſe that ſhould giue light to
the world, who ſit in the places of the ſtarres of God.
Doth not their negligence & coldnes driue the people
into theſe extreames? or are the violent courſes, and
carnall contentions of ſome other the cauſe thereof, or
is it both? doubtles, they are both great cauſes thereof,
the diuell being the cheife Author, for there is nothing
that he doth enuie more, then the power of truth and
godlines; if he cannot worke all men aſleepe, by cold
carnall ſecurity, as he doth the moſt, he will (if it be
poſſible) deceiue the reſt by ſome pretended ſtrict way

of truth, for his aime is to deceiue all, he ſpareth none.
O that the watchmen (therefore) would lay theſe
things to heart, and examine themſelues, by the examples
of the holy Apoſtles, and rules which they haue
ſet downe, to proue them by? What will it auaile you
(in the day of accompt) that ye haue bin called the
Miniſters of God, the Shepheards of his flocke, when ye
haue not done the office of faithfull Miniſters and
Sheepheards to his flock, what will your pleaſure, your
profit, your praiſe and eſtimation of men (in that day)
doe ye good Ah deare Sirs, take heed, it concerneth
your ſelues much, as it doth the people alſo. To be called
the Miniſters of God, is a high and honorable title,
but a thouſand times more honor it is, to be a faithfull
Miniſter of God, in deed, and in truth; what though
you be not eſteemed of the world; nay? what if ye be
deſpiſed and hated thereof? what though you ſhould
be deſtitude and afflicted, and vndergoe hunger, thirſt,
cold, labours, watchings, weepings, perills, priſonments,
ſword, &c. Chriſt ſaith, I was an hungry, I was athirſt, I
was naked, ſicke in priſon, &c, he meaneth you, if ye be
his ſeruants; if ye partake not with him in his ſufferings,
how can ye looke to reigne with him, if ye follow him
not in the regeneration, ye ſhall not ſit on throanes
with him. What will theſe words of the Lord auaile or
concerne you, where he ſaith, And God ſhall wipe away
all teares from their eyes: and there ſhalbe no more death nor
ſorrow, neither ſhall there be any more paine. If ye neuer
knew what any of theſe things meant, it is better to
ſow here in teares, that we may hereafter reape with ioy,
then to laugh here, and weepe for euer; Let not therefore
(I humble beſeech you) the feare of the loſſe and
fauour of friends, of your pleaſures, profits, praiſe, or
eſtimation with men, or whatſoeuer this world can
afford, keepe you from following the Lord, in whom
there is great reward, oh happy is the ſoule that can forſake
all theſe things for the loue of Chriſt, and his Goſpells

ſake, for he ſhall receiue an hundred fould more
(ſuch treaſures as cannot be vttered) euen here in this
preſent time, and in the world to come life euerlaſting,
feare not, (if ye can caſt your care on him) certainly
he will not ſee you left deſtitute: Neuer ſhall any man
know what the treaſures of wiſdome, and riches of his
grace, in the Goſpell are, except he can preferre them in
his heart, aboue all carnall things whatſoeuer, nay, except
he can truly forſake them all, and himſelfe alſo, for
loue thereof, neither will God (elſe) euer take pleaſure
in him, or impart vnto him his ſecrets, let him be how
skilfull, how learned, how eſteemed of men ſoeuer. But
he that can like the Merchant, ſell all he hath, and purchaſe
the field wherein the true treaſure lieth, he ſhall
not onely be rich himſelfe, but be able to make others
rich thereby, according alſo as Chriſt ſaith, Whoſeeuer
beleeueth in me, as the Scriptures hath ſaid, out of his belly
ſhall flow riuers of water of life. He ſhall not onely himſelfe
(being entred in by the doore) go in and out and
finde paſture, but ſhall guide others alſo in by the ſame
doore to the ſame paſtures of life, and ſo hauing turned
many to righteouſnes, by the faithfull adminiſtration
of the word of truth, ſhall poſſeſſe peace, comfort, and
a good conſcience here, and when the Lord ſhall come
in his glory to reward euery one according as his works
and labours haue beene, he ſhall ſhine, not onely like
the brightnes of the firmament, (as euery wiſe holy
Chriſtian ſhall doe) but as the ſtarres for euer and euer,
as the Prophet Daniel teſtifieth, ſaying, And they that be
wiſe ſhall ſhine as the brightnes of the firmament,
               Dan. 12. 
               and they
that turne many to righteouſnes, as the ſtarres for euer and
euer.
            
         
         
            An eight point,
held at this preſent by the antient Anabaptiſts. That a King or Maieſtrate cannot be a true Chriſtian,
except he giue ouer his kingly office or Maieſtracie.
            
            
            Anſwer.
            THis, although it be not fully the opinion of theſe
our Engliſh Anabaptiſts, yet becauſe it is a point
ſo generally held among the other ſects of them, and
for that theſe (with others) are not yet rightly informed
as touching the authoritie of kings & gouernours, what
it is, how far it doth extend, nor yet how far forth
Chriſtians are bound to obey and ſubmit vnto them;
we will therefore firſt diſproue that error of the elder
Anabaptiſts, then ſhew what the authoritie of kings and
gouernours is, how far it doth extend, and how farforth
euery true Chriſtian is bound by the word of
God (as he is a ſubiect or Citizen) to obey and ſubmit
vnto them, and then, that all kingdomes, peoples,
powers, and authorities whatſoeuer, ſhall ſerue and
obey the King of Kings & Lord of Lords for euermore.
They that haue ſerued and obeyed him according to
his Goſpell here in this life, ſhall ſerue, honor, and
praiſe him freely and with ioy for euer hereafter, and
they that would not by the voice of the Goſpell be
brought to ſerue and obey him here in this life, ſhall
be made (by force of torments) to ſerue and obey him
for euer in the world to come; this will we briefely doe
if God permit.
            That kings and rulers, gouernours and magiſtrates,
may be true Chriſtians, and retaine their kingly places,
rule, authoritie, and magiſtracie, is euident by the examples
of Dauid, of Solomon, and others, who were true
Chriſtians by faith according to the promiſe in the Spirit,
though Chriſt was not yet come in the fleſh, they
liued and dyed kings of this world, and true Chriſtians
alſo: and the caſe is not now altered by the comming
of Chriſt in the fleſh, the Goſpell hath not made any
alteration in that reſpect, but doth rather confirme it,
where Chriſt ſaith vnto his diſciples, (who ſtriued among
themſelues, which of them ſhould be the greateſt)
Luk. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. (a place which theſe

Anabaptiſts do chiefly alledge for their purpoſe,) The
Kings of the Gentiles exerciſe Lordſhip ouer them, and they
that exerciſe authoritie vpon thē,
               Luk. 22. 
               are called gracious Lords,
but ye ſhall not be ſo; but he that is greateſt among you, let
him be as the leaſt, and he that is chiefe, as he that doth ſerue.
He doth not here forbid a Chriſtian to be an earthly or
temporall King, nor ſuch a King to be a Chriſtian; nay,
his words do allow both; only he forbiddeth that Chriſtians
ſhould aſpire in their minds, or ſeeke to be great,
or to rule ouer one another, as they are Chriſtians, children
of one God and Father, and ſeruants of one Lord
Ieſus Chriſt. And that if any of them be great Kings &
Rulers in the world, they ſhould not exerciſe authoritie
ouer their brethren, as do the Kings of the Gentiles, or
as now the Lords of Rome do, as if they were Lords ouer
Gods heritage; nay, but though they be Kings, and (as
touching their temporall ſtate and dominion) doe and
may lawfully reigne and rule ouer all, and are chiefe
and head of all perſons, as well Eccleſiaſticall as ciuill,
true Chriſtians as others, conſidered (alſo) as they are
ſubiects or citizens; yet as Kings are Chriſtians, and as
their ſubiects are Chriſtians, and of the ſame bodie of
Chriſt with them, they may not take Lordſhip vpon
them, nor exerciſe dominion ouer them, neither ought
they (in that reſpect) to yeeld it vnto them, becauſe
that title of honour and dominion ſpirituall, doth belong
to their Lord and Maſter Ieſus Chriſt onely; and
therefore he ſaith,Math. 23. 
               Call no man Lord on earth, for one is
your Lord; call no man Maſter, for one is your Maſter: as
Saint Paul likewiſe ſaith, For although there be on earth
many that be called Gods and Lords, (as there be many
Gods,
               1. Cor. 8. 5. 6. 
               and many Lords) yet vnto vs there is but one
God, euen the Father of all, and one Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
&c. Chriſt is the Lord, the Prince and head of Chriſtians,
as they are Chriſtians; but the King is the Lord
and Prince and head of Chriſtians, as they are citizens
or ſubiects. So that theſe words of Chriſt,

               But he that is greateſt among you, let him be as the leaſt, and
him that is chiefeſt, as him that ſerueth, haue this meaning:
That that Chriſtian which is the greateſt of Chriſtians,
in regard of his temporall honour and dignitie of place
in this world, ſhould be in heart and affection, yea and
in outward actions of loue, meekneſſe and humilitie,
(I ſay) as he is a true Chriſtian euen as the leaſt true
Chriſtian; and he that is chiefeſt in any externall office
or place, ſhould (as he is a Chriſtian) be euen as that true
Chriſtian whoſe place is to ſerue (I ſay) in mercie, humilitie,
charitable actions, &c.
            Now, that Kings and Rulers haue lawfull authoritie
from God ouer all perſons, and that all ought to be obedient
vnto them and their lawes,Rom. 13. Saint Paul declareth
at large, ſaying, Let euery ſoule be ſubiect to the higher
powers: for there is no power but of God; the powers that be,
are ordained of God; whoſoeuer therefore reſiſteth the power,
reſiſteth the ordinance of God, and they that reſiſt, ſhall receiue
to themſelues damnation: for rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the euill; wilt thou not be afraid of the power? do
that which is good, and thou ſhalt hane praiſe of the ſame; for
he is the miniſter of God to thee for good: but if thou do that
which is euill, be afraid, for he beareth not the ſword in vaine,
for he is the miniſter of God, a reuenger to execute wrath vpon
him that doth euill. Wherefore ye muſt needs be ſubiect, not
onely for wrath, but alſo for conſcience ſake. For, for this cauſe
pay you tribute alſo, for they are Gods miniſters, attending
vpon this very thing. Render therefore (ſaith he) to all their
due, tribute to whom tribute is due, cuſtome to whom cuſtom,
feare to whom feare, honour to whom honour, &c. By all
which (I ſay) it is euident, that the power and authoritie
of Kings is of God, and ordained by him, yea though
they be infidels; and that it doth extend ouer all, as wel
true Chriſtians as others, Eccleſiaſticall perſons as ciuill,
and that euery ſoule ought to be ſubiect vnto them
and to their lawes and ordinances, euen for conſcience
ſake, (alwayes prouided that they be not oppoſite to

the lawes and ordinances of God, and rules of the Goſpell,
though they be not the ſame, but their owne, euen
the ordinances of man, as Saint Peter termeth them, ſaying,
Submit your ſelues to euery ordinance of man,
               1. Pet. 2. 13, 14. 
               for the
Lords ſake, whether it be to the King as ſuperiour, or vnto
gouerners, as vnto them that are ſent by him for the puniſhment
of euill doers, and for the praiſe of them that do wel, &c.
If then Kings and gouerners (being infidels) haue authoritie
from God to make lawes and ordinances, ſuch
as God commandeth not, but are their owne, and indifferent
in reſpect of conſcience towards God (ſome
of them) and might be left vndone, if they were not
by authoritie commanded; and that this is to be done
of euery ſoule, euen for conſcience ſake, and for the
Lords ſake, as the Apoſtles ſpeake; not for conſcience
as touching religion, as if there were any religious vſe
or conſcience that way to be made of them, but in reſpect
of dutie to Kings and gouerners. As touching the
things that God commandeth, and they alſo require,
we ought to obey them, not becauſe the King commandeth
them, but becauſe God commandeth them,
and not as mans ordinances, but as Gods. If (I ſay) Chriſtians
ought to be thus obedient vnto infidels, (for ſuch
were the Kings where Chriſtians in thoſe days liued,)
much more ought we to be obedient to Chriſtian kings
in the like reſpects, and much more authoritie haue
they to conſtitute and require the lawes and ordinances
of God according to his word: for their office & dutie
is, not only to ſee their people gouerned and prouided
for, as touching their temporall ſtates, to place officers
(vnder him) ouer them for the ſame purpoſe, but
alſo and chiefly to ſee them prouided for as touching
their eternall eſtates, to plant ouer them faithfull ſhepherds
to feed their ſoules with the bread of life, and to
roote out and ſuppreſſe ſuch as ſpoile and deuoure the
flock, and ſow hereſies among the people, as haue done
and doe the popiſh prieſts and Ieſuites, theſe Anabaptiſts,

Familiſts and others. And as the dutie of a Chriſtian
King is to place ouer his people faithfull ſhepherds:
ſo it belongeth to him alſo to ſee them prouided
for,Deut. 25. 4. according to the commandement of the Lord,
which ſaith,1. Cor. 9. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 
               Thou ſhalt not muzzle the mouth of the oxe
which treadeth out the corne. For, to Princes and Rulers,
and ſuch as haue power to muzzle their mouthes and
to ſee them prouided for, doth the Lord ſpeake.
            Thus much briefly touching the authoritie of Kings
and Rulers, how far their power doth extend, and how
far forth Chriſtians are bound to obey and ſubmit vnto
them; and thus it muſt be during the time of this
world, Kings muſt rule (by Gods appointment) ouer
all people, all are bound to obey them in all their lawes
and ordinances which are not oppoſite to the lawes of
God; but if they ſhall command any thing that God
forbiddeth, or forbid anything that God requireth (as
the Antichriſt of Rome, and many heatheniſh Kings &
gouerners, Iews, & ſome profeſſed Chriſtian Kings haue
done) they may not be obeyed, but Chriſtians ought
rather to ſuffer (with patience and meekneſſe) whatſoeuer
they ſhall inflict vpon them, for they are here called
to ſuffer. And that there will come a day, in which
all Kings, Princes and powers muſt lay downe their
Crownes and Scepters at the feet of Chriſt, and reſigne
all their power and authoritie to him the King of kings
and Lord of Lords, whoſe right all the kingdomes of
this world are, and that all powers and principalities,
peoples and nations ſhall ſerue and obey him (the moſt
high Lord and King of all) for euer and euer, the Scriptures
do euidently and often declare, ſo often as would
be too long for me now to recite, onely ſome few I will
mention for proofe thereof. The Prophet Daniel hauing
deſcribed the foure great Monarchs which were
to reigne in the earth ouer the inhabitants thereof, frō
that time to the end of the world, and hauing alſo foreſeene
the end and deſtruction of them,Dan. 7. 13, 14. ſaith, I ſaw in

the night viſions, and behold, one like the Son of man, came
with the clouds of heauen, and came to the Ancient of dayes,
and they brought him neare before him, and there was giuen
him dominion and glorie, and a kingdome, that all people, nations
and languages ſhould ſerue him, his dominion is an euerlaſting
dominion which ſhall not paſſe away, and his kingdome
that which ſhall not be deſtroyed. This doth he further
explane in the 27 verſe of this Chapter, ſaying,
And the kingdome,
               Dan. 7. 27. 
               and dominion, and the greatneſſe of the
kingdome vnder the whole heauen, ſhall be giuen to the people
of the Saints of the moſt High, whoſe kingdome is an euerlaſting
kingdome, and all dominions ſhall ſerue & obey him.
As alſo in the interpretation of the dreame of Nebucadnezzar
(the firſt of the f
                  •…
               ure Monarchs,Dan. 2. 44.) after he had
deſcribed the laſt, he ſaith, And in the dayes of theſe kings
ſhall the God of heauen ſet vp a kingdome which ſhall neuer be
deſtroyed; and the kingdome ſhall not be left for other people,
but it ſhall breake in peeces and conſume all theſe kingdomes,
and it ſhall ſtand for euer. And againe, ſpeaking of the
reigne of the ſame Monarch,Dan. 7. 18. he ſaith, But the Saints of
the moſt High ſhall take the kingdom, and poſſeſſe the kingdom
euen for euer and euer. By all which the Prophet ſheweth
plainly, that the Stone which was cut out of the mountaine
without hands, Chriſt which was to come of the
houſe of Dauid, ſhould (by the power of the moſt high,
through the word which was to proceed out of his
mouth) breake in peeces, conſume & deſtroy all thoſe
Monarchs which were to reigne in the world; and that
he (the Lord & owner of all) ſhould poſſeſſe the kingdome,
and reigne on the earth for euer and euer, world
without end. And that the Saints of the moſt High
(not the carnall Iewes yet remaining, as ſome imagine,
but all his redeemed, from the beginning of the world
to the end) ſhall poſſeſſe the kingdome, and reigne
with him, not in a carnall earthly maner, but in a heauenly
eſtate of glorie; not for a time, but for euer & euer,
beyond all time; and that then & from thenceforth

all powers and dominions, people and nations whatſoeuer,
ſhall ſerue and obey him. This in briefe (is that)
which the Prophet intendeth, which (alſo) the reſt of
the holy Prophets foreſaw and foretold of, as Saint Peter
teſtifieth, ſaying, And he ſhall ſend Ieſus Chriſt, which
before was preached vnto you, whom the heauens muſt receiue,
vntill the time of reſtitution of all things which God
hath ſpoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets ſince the
world began, meaning this great reſtitution, which is to
be fulfilled at the ſecond coming of Chriſt in the clouds
of heauen, when the ſeuenth Angell ſhall ſound the
laſt Trump, as Saint Iohn witneſſeth, ſaying, And the ſeuenth
Angell ſounded, and there were great voices in heauen,
ſaying, The kingdomes of this world are becom the kingdomes
of our Lord and of his Chriſt, and he ſhall reigne for euer &
euer.
               Eſa. 27. 13 And that this ſhall not be till the great Trump ſhal
ſound,Mat 24. 31. mentioned by Eſaias the Prophet, by Chriſt in
the Goſpell,1 Cor. 15. 52. by Saint Paul to the Corinthians & Theſfalonians,
by Saint Iohn in the Reuelation,1. Theſ. 4. 16. till Chriſt
ſhall come in the clouds of heauen,Reu. 10. 7. and that euery eye
ſhall ſee him,Reu. 11. 15. euen they that pierced him, and that all
the kindreds of the earth ſhall mourne and waile before
him,Mat. 24. 30. is manifeſt (I ſay) by all thoſe ſeuerall Scriptures,
as alſo by the teſtimonie of the holy Author to the Hebrewes,Reu. 1. 7.
where he ſaith,Heb. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8 
               For vnto the Angels hath he not
put in ſubiection the world to come, whereof we ſpeake, but one
in a certaine place teſtified ſaying, What is man, that thou art
mindfull of him? or the ſon of man, that thou viſiteſt him?
thou crownedſt him with glorie & honour, and didſt ſet him
ouer the workes of thy hands, thou haſt put all things in ſubiection
vnder his feete, &c. In which place the Apoſtle
ſheweth cleerly, that it is the world to come, in which
all powers and things ſhall be actually and viſibly ſeene
to be vnder his feet, and all the kingdoms of this world
ſhall be the Fathers and his; then (I ſay) in that world,
not in this,Ioh. 18. 39. as Chriſt ſaith, My kingdom is not of this world,
then when the laſt enemy is deſtroyed, when this world

ſhall be made another world, according to his promiſe,
then ſhall all powers and principalities,Eſa. 45. 23. all people and
nations ſerue and obey him; he will no longer be diſhonored
by them, they ſhall not vſe their tongues and
powers then as they liſt, and as they had wont to do, but
all tongues ſhall confeſſe, and euery knee ſhall bow to
him; they that in their life times would not be brought
by the faire meanes of his Goſpel to ſerue & obey him,
ſhall be brought to do it (after death) by paine; yea Satan
himſelfe (the author of wickedneſſe, who neuer intended
to giue praiſe and honour to God or to Chriſt)
euen he with all his angels and ſpirits of wickedneſſe
(vnder their torments, and by force of the rod of iron,
which Chriſt the King of the whole earth ſhall exerciſe
ouer them in that world) ſhall be compelled, with all
powers, people and kings whatſoeuer, to confeſſe and
bow before him, ſerue and obey him, praiſe and magnifie
him, his iuſtice and mercie for euer. For if at the
name of Ieſus euery knee ſhall bow,Phil. 2. 10, 11. both of things in
heauen, and things in earth, & things vnder the earth,
and that all tongues ſhall confeſſe that Ieſus Chriſt is
the Lord, to the glory of God the Father, as the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh; then (doubtleſſe) Satan and his followers are
not exempted, yet euermore vnder torments (as we
haue ſaid.) If Satan and his Angels, or any of the curſed
children of men, which ſhall be condemned and tormented
for euer with them, ſhould after iudgement
raile againſt God, and blaſpheme him, as ſome do teach
they ſhall; or if they ſhould doe the leaſt miſchiefe (any
kind of way) either againſt Chriſt, or againſt any of his
brethren, the children of God, which ſhall then reigne
for euer with him; how is it then ſaid, that al powers ſhal
ſerue and obey the moſt High? how are all things then
ſubdued to Chriſt, and put vnder his feet? how hath he
looſed the works of the diuell? as the Scriptures ſpeake.
If the laſt enemy be death,Hoſ. 13. 14. and that death be once ſwallowed
vp in victorie,1 Cor. 15. 55. and it be fulfilled which is written,

               O death, where is thy ſting? O graue, where is thy victory?
what is the thing then left, that can doe the leaſt euill
againſt God, againſt Chriſt, againſt Sion, or againſt any
of her children which are now redeemed from all thoſe
former captiuities? nay, none ſhall euer hurt or deſtroy
in all that holy mountaine; and for that old Serpent,
vpon his belly ſhall he go, and duſt ſhall be his meate.
When Satan (that Serpent) went firſt about to ſeduce
mankind, by ſowing ſinne (the ſting of death) in his
heart, he aimed not at his owne perpetuall torments,
neither did he intend to come to praiſe & glorifie God
for euer and euer, (as he ſhall one day be compelled to
do) theſe were no part of his thoughts; nay, but his aime
& purpoſe was to bring all men in ſubiectiō to himſelf,
to do him homage and ſeruice, and ſo to depriue God
of all his honour on earth for euer, that he and his wickedneſſe
might haue the rule; this was his plot; hee
litle thought of a ſeed to come, to bruiſe his head; nay,
after the Seed was promiſed, he ceaſed not for all this,
but ſtroue ſtill to effect his purpoſe, and he preuailed
much therein, chiefly by preſenting riches, honor, and
the glorie of this world vnto men: ſo that when the
Seed himſelfe (in perſon) came, he ſpared not to tempt
him with the like baites; but he ouercame him, and
hath in part, and ſhall ere long, fully vndoe his whole
plot, and caſt him where he ſhall receiue that which he
aimed not at, and force him to doe that which he neuer
intended: and Sion which had been ſo long deſolate
and waſte, ſhall be ſet vp the praiſe of the whole
earth, and be eſtabliſhed in righteouſneſſe and ſafetie
for euer, according to the Prophets. She ſhall be farre
from oppreſſion,Eſa. 54. 13, 14. for ſhe ſhall not feare; and from terror,
for it ſhall not come neare to her; violence ſhall be no
more heard within her land, nor waſting & deſtruction
within her borders;Eſa. 60. 14. ſhe ſhal call her walls ſaluation, and
her gates praiſe, her gouernment ſhall be peace, and her
exacters righteouſneſſe; all thoſe that formerly deſpiſed

her, and the ſons of them that did afflict her, ſhall come
bending vnto her,Reu. 3. 9. and worſhip at the ſoles of her feete,
and ſhall call her, the Citie of the Lord, Sion of the holy one
of Iſrael; her Sunne ſhall no more go downe, neither
ſhall her Moone withdraw it ſelfe, for the Lord ſhall be
her euerlaſting light, and the dayes of her mourning
ſhall be ended.
         
         
            
               Reuelat. 15 4.
               Who ſhall not feare thee O Lord, and glorifie thy Name, for
thou onely art holy: for all nations ſhall come and worſhip before
thee, for thy iudgements are made manifeſt.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            ERRATA.
            
               Pag. 9 lin. 13. 14. iuſt vpon, reade iuſt vpon them. p. 24. l. 23. principall,
reade principle. p. 33. l. 34. braken, read broken. p. 34. l. 3 conſideration, read
conſidence. & l. 30. perfection, read protection. p. 47. l. 5. points, r. point. & l.
10. read Paradiſe. & l. 24. had eaten, read had not eaten. & l 37. they, r. there.
p. 51. l. 33. reade conſiderations. p. 53. l. 37. proue, read proues. p 69. l. 2. that
Church, read that the Church, & l. 5. put out the. & l. 32. be, reade being.
p. 71. l. 33. read ſuch as come in by the doore. pag. 72. l. 23. ſucceſſed, reade
ſucceeded. p. 81 l. 26. he, read her. p. 86. l. 21. or, read of. p. 87. l. 24. leaue
out a. & l. 25 thoſe, read theſe.
         
      
   