
      
         
            
            
            HERE begynneth a merry Ieſte of a ſhrewde and curſte Wyfe, lapped in Morrelles Skin, for her good behauyour.
            
            ¶JMPRINTED AT London in Fleeteſtrete, beneath the Conduite, at the ſigne of Saint Iohn Euaungeliſt, by H. Iackſon.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  LYſten friendes, and holde you ſtill,
               Abide a while and dwell:
               A mery Ieſt tell you I will,
               And how that it befell.
               As I went walking vpon a day,
               Among my friendes to ſporte:
               To an houſe I tooke the way,
               To reſt me for my comforte.
            
            
               ¶A greate feaſt was kepte there than,
               And many one, was thereat:
               With wyues and maydens and many a good man,
               That made good game and chat.
               It befell then at that tyde,
               An honeſt man was there:
               A curſed Dame ſate by his ſyde,
               That often did him dere.
            
            
               ¶His wife ſhe was I tell you playne,
               This dame ye may me trowe:
               To play the maiſter ſhe would not layne,
               And make her huſband bowe.
               At euery word that ſhe did ſpeake,
               To be peace he was full fayne:
               Or elſe ſhe would take him on the cheeke,
               Or put him to other payne.
            
            
               ¶When ſhe did winke, he durſte not ſtere,
               Nor play where euer he wente:
               With friend or neighbour to make good chere,
               Whan ſhe her browes bente.
               
                  Theſe folke had two maydens fayre and free,
               Which were their Daughters dere:
               This is true, beleeue you me,
               Of condicions, was none their pere.
            
            
               ¶The yongeſt was meeke, and gentle ywys,
               Her Fathers condicion ſhe had:
               The eldeſt her mothers withouten miſſe,
               Sometime franticke and ſometime mad.
               The father had his pleaſure in the one alway,
               And glad he was her to behold:
               The mother in the other this is no nay,
               For in all her curſtneſſe, ſhe made her bolde.
            
            
               ¶And at the laſt ſhe was in fay,
               As curſte as her mother in word and deede:
               Her miſchieuous pageauntes ſometime to play,
               Which cauſed her fathers heart to bleede.
               For he was woe and nothing glad,
               And of her would fayne be rid:
               He wiſhed to God that ſome man her had,
               But yet to maryage he durſt her not bid.
            
            
               ¶Full many there came the yongeſt to haue,
               But her father was loth her to forgoe:
               None there came the eldeſt to craue,
               For feare it ſhould turne them to woe.
               The Father was loth any man to beguile,
               For he was true and iuſt withall:
               Yet there came one within a while,
               That her demaunded in the Hall.
            
            
               
               ¶Another there came right ſoone alſo,
               The yongeſt to haue he would be fayne:
               Which made the fathers heart full woe,
               That he and the yongeſt, ſhould parte in twayne.
               But the mother was fell, and might her not ſee,
               Wherefore of her ſhe would haue bene rid:
               The yong man full ſoone ſhe graunted pardy,
               Greate Golde and ſyluer, with her ſhe bid.
            
            
               ¶Saying full ſoone, he would her haue,
               And wedded they were ſhorte tale to make:
               The Father ſayd ſo god me ſaue,
               For heauineſſe and ſorrowe, I tremble and quake.
               Alſo his hearte was in greate care,
               How he ſhould beſtowe the eldeſt ywys:
               Which ſhould make his purſe full bare,
               Of her he would be rid by heauens bliſſe.
            
            
               ¶As hap was that this yong man ſhould,
               Deſyre the eldeſt withouten fayle:
               To maryage he ſayd full fayne he would,
               That he might her haue for his auayle.
               The Father ſayd with wordes anon,
               Golde and ſyluer I would thee giue:
               If thou her marry by ſweete ſaynt Iohn,
               But thou ſhouldeſt repent it all thy liue.
            
            
               ¶She is conditioned I tell thee playne,
               Moſte like a Fiend, this is no nay:
               Her Mother doth teach her, withouten layne,
               To be mayſter of her huſband another day.
               
                  If thou ſhouldeſt her marry, and with her not gree,
               Her mother thou ſhouldeſt, haue alway in thy top:
               By night and day, that ſhouldeſt vex thee,
               Which ſore would ſticke, then in thy crop.
            
            
               ¶And I could not amend it by God of might,
               For I dare not ſpeake my ſelfe for my life:
               Sometime among be it wrong or right,
               I let her haue all for feare of ſtrife.
               If I ought ſay, ſhe doth me treate,
               Except I let her haue her will:
               As a childe that ſhould be beate,
               She will me charme the Deuill her kill.
            
            
               ¶Another thing thou muſt vnderſtande,
               Her mothers good will thou muſt haue alſo:
               If ſhe be thy friend, by ſea or by lande,
               Amiſſe with thee, then can it not go.
               For ſhe doth her loue with all her minde,
               And would not ſee her fare amiſſe:
               If thou to her dareling could be kinde,
               Thou couldeſt not want by heauens bliſſe.
            
            
               ¶If thou to the mother, now wilt ſeeke,
               Behaue thy ſelfe then like a man:
               And ſhew thy ſelfe both humble and meeke,
               But when thou haſte her doe what thou can.
               Thou woteſt what I ſayd to thee before,
               I counſayle thee marke my wordes well:
               It were greate pitty, thou werte forlore,
               With ſuch a deuilliſhe Fende of Hell.
            
            
               
               ¶I care not for that the yong man ſayd,
               If I can get her mothers good will:
               I would be glad to haue that mayde,
               Me thinketh ſhe is withouten euell.
               Alas good man I am ſorry for thee,
               That thou wilt caſt thy ſelfe away,
               Thou arte ſo gentle and ſo free:
               Thou ſhalt neuer tame hee I dare well ſay.
            
            
               But I haue done I will ſay no more,
               Therefore farewell and goe thy way:
               Remember what I ſayd to thee before,
               And beware of repentaunce another day.
            
         
         
            ¶How the yong man departed from the Father, and ſought to the Mother, for to haue the Mayde to mariage.
            
               
                  Yongman.
               
            
            
               
                  Mother.
               
            
            
               
                  Daughter.
               
            
            
               
               NOw is the yong man come to the Dame,
               With countenaunce glad, and manners demure:
               Saying to her God keepe you from blame,
               With your dere daughter ſo fayre and pure.
               She welcommeth agayne the fayre yong man,
               And bid him come neare gentle friende:
               Full curteouſly he thanked the good dame than
               And thought her wordes full good and kinde.
            
            
               ¶Then he began I ſhall you tell,
               Vnto the Mother thus to ſay,
               With wordes fayre that become him well,
               For her deare daughter thus to pray.
               Saying good Dame now by your leaue,
               Take it for none eueli though I come here:
               If you to me good leaue would giue,
               With you right fayne would I make good chere.
            
            
               ¶The dame ſayd ſyt downe a while abyde,
               Good chere anon then will we make:
               My daughter ſhall ſit downe by thy ſyde,
               I know well thou commeſt onely for her ſake.
               You ſay full true forſooth ſayd he,
               My minde is ſtedfaſtly on her ſet:
               To haue that mayden fayre and free,
               I would be fayne if I coulde her get,
            
            
               ¶The Mother thanked him for his good will,
               That he her daughter ſo did deſyre:
               Saying I hope you come for none euell.
               But in good honeſty, her to requyre.
               
                  For if ye did, I will be playne,
               Right ſoone it ſhould turne you vnto griefe:
               And alſo your comming I would diſdayne,
               And bid you walke with a wylde miſchiefe.
            
            
               But ſurely I take you for none of thoſe,
               Your condiſtions ſhew it in no wiſe:
               Wherefore me thinke you doe not gloſe,
               Nor I will not counſell you, by mine aduiſe.
               For I loue my Daughter as my harte,
               And loth I were, I will be playne:
               To ſee her ſuffer payne and ſmarte,
               For if I did my harte were ſlayne.
            
            
               ¶If that thou ſhouldeſt another day,
               My daughter haue and her good will:
               Order her then vnto her pay,
               As reaſon requireth it is good ſkill.
               In women ſometime great wiſdome is,
               And in men full little it is often ſeene:
               But ſhe is wiſe withouten mis,
               From a yong child by ſhe hath ſo beene.
            
            
               ¶Therefore to her thou muſt audience giue,
               For thine owne profite when ſhe doth ſpeake:
               And than ſhalt thou in quiet liue,
               And much ſtrife, thus ſhalte thou breake.
               Howe ſayeſt thou yong man what is thy minde,
               Wouldeſt thou her haue my doughter dere,
               Than to her thou muſt be kinde,
               And alway ready to make her good chere.
            
            
               
               ¶For an .C.li. of money haue thau ſhalte,
               Of Syluer and eke of Golde ſo round:
               With an .C. quarters of Come and malte,
               And .xl. acres of good ground.
               If thou wilt liue with her like a man,
               Thou ſhalte her haue, and this will I giue:
               And euer after while I can,
               Be thy good Mother as long as I liue.
            
            
               ¶And I will ſpeake to my daughter for thee,
               To know if it be her will alſo:
               If ſhe be content, my daughter free,
               Then together may ye go.
               The mother demaunded, her daughter than,
               If that ſhe could fynde in her minde:
               With all her harte to loue that yong man,
               So that he to her would be kinde.
            
            
               ¶She ſayd yea mother as you wyll,
               So will I doe in worde and deede:
               I truſt he commeth for none yll,
               Therefore the better may we ſpeede.
               But I would haue one that hath ſome good,
               As well as I good reaſon is:
               Me thinke he is a luſty blood,
               But gooddes there muſt be withouten miſſe.
            
            
               ¶The yong man was glad theſe wordes to here,
               And thanked the mother of her good will:
               Beholding the Mayden with right mild cheare,
               And prayed her hartely to be ſtill.
               
                  Saying to her then in this wiſe,
               Mine heart, my loue, my dearling deare:
               Take no diſpleaſure of my enterpriſe,
               That I deſyre to be your peare.
            
            
               ¶I am not riche of Gold nor fee,
               Nor of greate marchandiſe ye ſhall vnderſtand:
               But a good Crafte I haue pardee,
               To get our liuing in any land.
               And in my heart I can well fynde,
               You for to loue aboue all other:
               For euermore to you to be kynde,
               And neuer forſake you for none other.
            
            
               ¶Lyke a woman I will you vſe,
               And doe you honour, as ye ſhould doe me:
               And for your ſake all other refuſe,
               As good reaſon is, it ſhould ſo be.
               By my trouth, but well you ſay,
               And me thinke by your countenaunce ywis:
               That ye ſhould not another day,
               For no cauſe deale with me amis.
            
            
               ¶And in you I hope pleaſure to take,
               If ye woulde be gentle as ye ſhould:
               And neuer none other for your ſake.
               To marry for a .M. pound of gold.
               But ſometime ye muſt me a little forbeare,
               For I am haſty but it is ſoone done:
               In my fume I doe nothing feare,
               Whatſoeuer thereof to me become.
            
            
               
               ¶And I cannot refrayne me in no wiſe,
               For I haue it by nature a parte ywis:
               It was wonte to be my mothers guiſe,
               Sometime to be mayſter withouten miſſe.
               And ſo muſt I by God now and than,
               Or elſe I would thinke it ſhould not be well,
               For though ye were neuer ſo good a man,
               Sometime among I will beare the bell.
            
            
               ¶And therefore tell me with wordes playne,
               If ye can be pacient what time it is:
               To ſuffer with me a little payne,
               Though that you thinke I doe amiſſe.
               Or elſe ſay nay, and make a ſhorte ende,
               And ſoone we ſhall aſonder departe:
               Then at your liberty you may hence wend,
               Yet I doe loue you with all my harte.
            
            
               ¶The yongman was glad of her loue in fay,
               But loth he was maſter her for to make:
               And bethought him what her father before did ſaye,
               When he on wooing his iorney did take.
               And ſo couſented to all her will,
               When he aduiſed him what he ſhould doe:
               He ſayd ye may me ſaue or ſpill,
               For ye haue my loue ſweete heart and no moe.
            
            
               The mother hearing this, for the father ſente,
               Showing to him what was befall:
               Where with he was right well content,
               Of all their promiſes in generall.
               
                  Vpon this greement they departed then,
               To prepare all thinges for the feaſt:
               Glad was the bride and her ſpouſe then,
               That they were come to this beheaſt.
            
         
         
            ¶Howe the Bryde was maryed with her Father and Mothers. good wyll.
            
               
            
            
               THe day approched, the time drue neare,
               That they ſhould be wedded withouten miſſet
               The Bryde was glad and made good cheare,
               For ſhe thought to make greate ioye and bliſſe.
               As that day to tryumphe with games and ſporte,
               Among her friendes a rule to beare:
               And eake with his friendes that thither ſhould reſorte,
               Thinking that no body might be her peare.
            
            
               
               ¶The Bridegrome was glad alſo in ſay,
               As man might be vpon the molde:
               And to himſelfe thus gan he ſay,
               Now ſhall I receyue an heape of golde.
               Of poundes many one, and much goods beſyde,
               To reioyce my ſorrowes, and alſo my ſmarte:
               I know not her peare in this country ſo wyde,
               But yet I feare alway her proude harte.
            
            
               ¶She is ſo ſyb to the mother withouten fayle,
               Which hath no peare that I know:
               In all miſchiefe ſhe dare aſſayle,
               The boldeſt Archer that ſhooteth in a bow.
               But no force I care not, I wote what I thinke,
               When we be wed and keepe houſe alone,
               For a ſmall ſtorme I may not ſhrinke,
               To run to my neighbour, to make my mone.
            
            
               ¶Soone to the church now were they brought
               With all their friends them about:
               There to be maryed as they ought,
               And after them followed a full great rout.
               With them to offer as cuſtome is,
               Among good neighboures it is alway ſeene:
               Full richly deckte withouten mis,
               And ſhe thought her ſelfe, moſt likeſt a Queene.
            
            
               ¶Incontinent when the Maſſe was done,
               Homeward forſooth they tooke the way:
               There followeth after them right ſoone,
               Many a tall man and woman full gay.
               
                  The fathers and mothers next of all,
               Vnto the Bridgrome and Bryde alſo:
               As to them then, it did befall,
               With them that tyde, ſo for to go.
            
         
         
            ¶How the Bryde and her friendes came from the Church, and were of the Brydegroome at their feaſt honeſtly ſerued.
            
               
            
            
               WHen they came home the bordes were ſpread,
               The Bride was ſet at the hye dyſſe:
               Euery one ſayd, ſhe had well ſped,
               Of ſuch a fayre huſband as ſerued her myſſe.
               The friendes ſate about her on euery ſyde,
               Each in their order, a good ſyght to ſee,
               The Bryde in the middeſt, with much pryde,
               Full richely beſeene, ſhe was pardye.
            
            
               
               ¶The mother was right glad of this ſight,
               And faſt ſhe did her daughter behold:
               Thinking it was a pleaſaunt wight,
               But alway her Fathers heart was cold.
               When he remembred what might befall,
               Of this yong Daughter, that was ſo bold:
               He could nothing be merry at all,
               But moned the yong man full many a fold.
            
            
               ¶Beholde how often with countenaunce ſad,
               Saying to himſelfe alas this day:
               This yong man proueth much worſe then mad,
               That he hath marryed this curſed may.
               Where I haue counſayled him by heauens bliſſe
               That he ſhould not meddle in no wiſe:
               Leaſt he repented withouten miſſe,
               That euer he made this enterpriſe.
            
            
               ¶But ſeeing it is thus, ſelfe doe ſelfe haue,
               He is worſe then mad that will him mone:
               For I will no more ſo God me ſaue,
               But God ſend him ioy, with my daughter Ione.
               She is as curſte I dare well ſwere,
               And as angry ywis as euer was waſpe:
               If he her anger ſhe will him tere,
               And with her nayles alſo him claſpe.
            
            
               ¶What auayleth it to ſay ought now,
               The deede is done, no remedy there is:
               Good cheare to make I make God auowe,
               Is now the beſt withouten miſſe.
               
                  For now is the time it ſhould ſo be,
               To make good game and ſporte in fay:
               In comforting all this company,
               That be aſſembled here this day.
            
            
               ¶The father and mother, were dilligent ſtill,
               To welcome the friendes both more and leſſe:
               The yongman did alſo his good will,
               To ſerue them well at euery meſſe.
               Wherein the mother great pleaſure tooke,
               And ſo did the father eake truely,
               The Bride gaue a friendly looke,
               Caſting on him a wanton eye.
            
            
               ¶Then was the Brydegrome reioyſed ſore,
               Alway our Lord thanking of his great grace:
               Hauing in minde times many a ſcore,
               That his Bryde ſhewed him ſuch a fayre place.
               The mynſtrelles played at euery bord,
               The people therewith reioyſed right well:
               Geuing the Bridegrome their good word,
               And the bryde alſo that in bewty did excell.
            
            
               ¶The time paſt forth the dinner was done,
               The tables were taken vp all:
               The Brydegroome welcommed them euery echone,
               That were there in the hall.
               They thanked him then and the Bryde alſo,
               Of their greate cheare they had:
               And ſware great othes ſo mote I go,
               They were neuer at feaſt ſo glad.
            
            
               
               ¶Nowe we will remember you or we depart,
               As vſe and cuſtome doth requyre:
               He thanked them with all his harte,
               So did both dame and ſyre.
               The Bryde to the Table agayne was ſet,
               To keepe countenaunce than in deede:
               The friendes that were together met,
               Be gyfted them richely with right good ſpeede.
            
            
               ¶The father and the mother fyrſt began,
               To order them in this wiſe:
               The Brydegrome was ſet by the Brydes ſyde than,
               After the countrey guiſe.
               Then the father the fyrſt preſent brought,
               And preſented them there richly in fay,
               With deedes of his land in a boxe well wrought,
               And made them his heyres for aye.
            
            
               ¶He gaue them alſo of malte and corne,
               An hundred quarters and more:
               With ſheepe and oxen, that bare large horne,
               To keepe for houſehold ſtore.
               And then came the mother as quick as a bee,
               To the Brydegrome with wordes ſmart:
               Saying ſonne ſo mote I thee,
               I muſt open to thee my harte.
            
            
               ¶She gaue them alſo both carte and plow,
               And bid them alway to doe well:
               And God ſhould ſend them good ynow,
               If they did marke, what ſhe did tell.
               
                  Before the people in this Hall,
               I will ſay and to thee rehearſe:
               An hundred pound now geue thee I ſhall,
               But harken fyrſt vnto my vearſe.
            
            
               ¶Thou haſte here my daughter deare,
               A pleaſaunt thing it is:
               In all the countrey I know not her peare,
               So haue I parte of bliſſe.
               For ſhe is wyſe and fayre with all,
               And will nothing caſt away:
               I trow there be now none in this hall,
               That better can ſaue all thing in fay.
            
            
               ¶Nor better doth know what doth behoue,
               Vnto an houſe or huſwiuery:
               Then ſhe doth, which cauſeth me to moue,
               This matter to thee ſo buſily.
               She can carde, ſhe can ſpin,
               She can threſh, and ſhe can fan:
               She can helpe thee good to win,
               For to keepe thee like a man.
            
            
               ¶And here is an hundred pound in Golde,
               To ſet thee vp, thy crafte to vſe:
               Wherefore I am playne I would thou ſhould,
               In no maner of wiſe thy ſelfe abuſe.
               To ſtriue with my daughter or her to intreate,
               For any thing that ſhe ſhall doe:
               Here after my child, therefore to beate,
               It ſhould turne playnely, to thy greate woe.
            
            
               
               ¶O my deare mother take no diſpleaſure,
               Till you haue cauſe what ſo befall,
               But vſe your ſelfe alwaye by meaſure,
               For other cauſe none haue you ſhall.
               My wyfe and I full well ſhall gree,
               I truſt to God in throne:
               She is my loue and euer ſhall be,
               And none but ſhe alone.
            
            
               ¶O my deare ſonne thou makeſt me glad,
               Which before was full of ſorrowe:
               For my deare daughter, I was full ſad,
               But now I ſay our Lord to borrow.
               Thou geueſt me good comfort now farewel care
               Here is thy hundred pound,
               I pray God geue thee well to fare,
               And kepe thee whole and ſound.
            
            
               ¶I thanke you dere mother the yong man ſayd
               Of your good gifte and daughter deare:
               Me thinkes ſhe is the worthieſt mayde,
               In all this Lande withouten peare.
               I hoape to liue with her alway,
               So gentelly that ſhe ſhall fynde:
               And you her mother I dare well ſay,
               In euery ſeaſon gentle and kynde.
            
            
               ¶The people ſtanding them to behold,
               Regarded the wordes of the Brydegrome than,
               And ſayd he aunſwered with wordes cold,
               Which become full well the good yong man.
               
                  And then they preſt forth ech after other,
               With golde and ſyluer, and riche giftes eake:
               And many a ſcorne they gaue the mother,
               But euer they prayſed the yong man meeke.
            
            
               ¶To whome he gaue thankes with all his mighte,
               As honeſty requyreth him to doe:
               He ordred himſelfe alway aright,
               Yet they thought all he ſhould haue woe.
               For he was matched ſo ywys,
               That he could not wante for ſorrow in fay,
               But alway hampred withouten miſſe,
               Of mother and daughter, foreuer and aye.
            
            
               ¶When all was done they gan depart,
               And tooke their leaue full friendly thoe:
               Thanking ech other with all their harte,
               And on their way home they gan go.
               The Father and mother thanked them all,
               The Bryde and Brydegrome, alſo without mis,
               Did thanke the company in generall,
               Departing from them with ioy and bliſſe.
            
            
               ¶Then they went home while it was day,
               And lefte the Bryde and Brydegrome there,
               And they that did abide there in good fay,
               They made at euen agayne good cheare.
               And after ſupper they did make good ſporte,
               With dauncing and ſpringing as was the vſe:
               Yong people by other there did reſorte,
               To no mans hynder nor confuſe.
               
                  After that all ſportes were ended and done,
               And that the bryde ſhould goe to bed:
               Aboute the hall they daunced ſoone.
               And ſuddaynly away the bryde was led.
               To take her reſt with her dere ſpouſe,
               As reaſon would it ſhould ſo be:
               Euen as the cat, was wonte with the mouſe,
               To play forſoth euen ſo did he.
            
            
               ¶The next morning if that ye will heare,
               The mother did come to their bedſyde:
               Demaunding them what was their cheare,
               And the Bryde began her head to hyde.
               Saying to her as one aſhamed,
               Iwys deare mother I would ye were gone:
               Or ye came heare I was not blamed,
               For being in his armes heare all alone.
            
            
               ¶Myne own deare daughter, be not diſpleaſed
               Though I doe let you of your deſport:
               I would be loath ye were diſeaſed,
               But you ſhall haue a Cawdell for your comforte.
               A while I will goe and let you alone,
               Till ye be ready for to ryſe:
               And ſodaynely the mother was from them gone
               To make the Cawdell after the beſt wiſe.
            
            
               ¶When that the mother departed was,
               The dallyed togither and had good game,
               He hit her awry, ſhe cryed alas,
               What doe ye man, hold vp for ſhame.
               
                  I will ſweete wife then gan he ſay,
               Fulfill your mynde, both loud and ſtill:
               But ye be able I ſweare in fay,
               In all ſportes to abide my will.
            
            
               ¶And they wreſtled, ſo long beforne,
               That this they had, for their greate meade:
               Both ſhyrt and ſmock was all to torne,
               That their vpryſyng had no ſpeede.
               But yet the mother came agayne,
               And ſayd to her daughter how doeſt thou nowe,
               Mary mother betweene vs twayne,
               Our ſhyrtes be torne, I make God auowe.
            
            
               ¶By Gods dere mother, ſhe ſware than,
               This order with vs may not continue:
               I will no more lye by this man,
               For he doth me braſt both vayne and ſinew.
               Nay nay deare mother this world goeth on wheeles,
               By ſweete ſaynt George ye may me trowe:
               He lyeth kicking with his heeles,
               That he is like to beare me a blow.
            
            
               ¶My owne deare daughter if thy ſmock be aſonder,
               Another thou ſhalte haue then by this light:
               I pray thee hartely doe thou not wonder,
               For ſo was I dealt with the fyrſt night.
               That I by thy father lay by the roode,
               And I doe thee, with wordes playne:
               Me thought neuer night to me ſo good,
               As that ſame was, when I tooke ſuch payne.
            
            
               
               ¶Why mother were ye then glad,
               To be thus delt with as I am now:
               Me thinke my huſband worſe then mad,
               For he doth exceede I make God auow,
               I could not lye ſtill nor no reſt take,
               Of all this night beleue ye me:
               Sometime on my ſyde, and ſometime on my backe,
               He rolde and layd me ſo mote I thee.
            
            
               ¶And from the beds head vnto the beds feete,
               A cloth we had not vs for to decke,
               Neyther our couerlet nor yet our ſheete,
               That I pray God the deuell him checke.
               For I am aſhamed my mother deare,
               Of this nightes reſt by God in throne:
               Before our friendes I dare not appeare,
               Would to Gods paſſion, I had layne alone.
            
            
               ¶Nay nay deare daughter be not aſhamed,
               For here is nothing done amis:
               They be more worthy to be blamed,
               That hereof thinketh ſhame ywys.
               For this is honeſty for thee and vs all,
               And a new ſmock I will thee fet:
               And eke for thee my ſonne I ſhall,
               For thy true laboure, a new ſhyrte get.
            
            
               ¶And ſoone of theſe, they were both ſped,
               The daughter and eake the ſonne alſo:
               Full quickly they roſe out of their bed,
               And with their mother, they gan go.
               
                  Abroade among, their friendes all,
               Which bid them good lucke, and eake good grace,
               The cawdell was ready there in the Hall,
               With myrth and glee for their ſolace.
            
            
               ¶Thus ended the feaſt with ſporte and play,
               And all their friendes each with other:
               Did take their leaue and went their way,
               From bryde, and Brydegrome, with father and mother.
               Which right hartely did thanke them tho,
               So did the Bryde, and Brydegrome eke:
               Yet when the friendes were all ago,
               This yong folke abode with the mother all the weeke.
            
            
               ¶The father was glad to ſee them agree,
               So was the mother by heauen queene:
               And ſayd eche to other ſo mote I thee,
               I thought not ſo well it ſhould haue beene.
               Betweene them twayne as it is now,
               And therefore alone here ſhall they bide:
               We will leaue them all I make God auowe,
               And go to dwell in our houſe harde beſide.
            
            
               ¶At ſhorte concluſyon they went their way,
               Leuing their children all that was there:
               And come not agayne of many a day,
               For their deare daughter to inquere.
               Thus they bode together than,
               He ſet vp his ſhop with haberdaſh ware:
               As one that would be a thriuing man,
               To get great goods for his welfare.
            
            
               
               ¶And after that he tooke greate payne,
               To order his plowes and cattell alſo:
               He kepte both boye and alſo ſwayne,
               That to the carte and plow did goe.
               And ſome kepte neate, and ſome kept ſheepe,
               Some did one thing, ſome did another,
               But when they came home to haue their meate,
               The wife played the deuell then, like her mother.
            
            
               ¶With countenaunce grun and wordes ſmart,
               She gaue them meate and bad them braſt:
               The pore folke that come from plow and carte,
               Of her lewde wordes they were agaſt.
               Saying eche to other what dame is this,
               The deuill I trow hath brought vs here:
               Our mayſter ſhall know it by heauens bliſſe,
               That we will not ſerue him another yeare.
            
            
               ¶The good man was fourth in the towne abroade,
               About other thinges I you ſay,
               When he came homeward he met with a goade,
               One of his carters was going away.
               To whome he ſayde Lob whether goeſt thou,
               The carter ſpyde his maſter than:
               And ſayd to him I make God auow,
               No longer with thy wife abide I can.
            
            
               ¶Mayſter he ſayd by Gods bliſt,
               Our dame is the deuell thou mayſt me beleeue:
               If thou haue ſought her thou haſte not miſte,
               Of one that full often thee ſhall greeue.
               
                  By God a man, thou canſt not haue,
               To go to carce, ne yet to plow:
               Neyther boy, nor yet knaue,
               By Gods deare mother I make God auow.
            
            
               ¶That will bide with thee day or night,
               Our Dame is not for vs for ſhe doth curſe:
               When we ſhall eate or drinke with right,
               She bannes and frownes, that we be all the worſe.
               We be not vſed where euer we wende,
               To be ſorely looked on, for eating of our meate,
               The deuell I trow vs to thee ſend,
               God helpe vs a better may
                     ••
                  res to get.
            
            
               ¶Come on thy way Lob, and turne agayne,
               Go home with me and all ſhall be well:
               An Oxe for my meyny ſhall be ſlayne,
               And the hyde at the market I will ſell.
               Vpon this together, home they went,
               The good man was angry in his minde:
               But yet to his wife with good intent,
               He ſayd ſweete heart you be vnkinde.
            
            
               ¶Entreate our meyny well alway,
               And geue them meate and drinke ynough:
               For they get our liuing euery day,
               And theirs alſo, at carte and plough.
               Therefore I would that they ſhould haue,
               Meate and drinke to their behoue:
               For my ſweete wife, ſo god me ſaue,
               Ye will doe ſo, if ye me loue.
            
            
               
               ¶Gyue them what thou wilt I doe not care,
               By day nor night man beleeue thou me:
               What euer they haue or how they fare,
               I pray God euell mote they thee.
               And ſpecially that horeſon that doth eomplayne,
               I will quite him once if euer I liue,
               I will daſh the knaue vpon the brayne,
               That euer after it ſhall him greeue.
            
            
               ¶What my deare wife for ſhame be ſtill,
               This is a payne ſuch wordes to heare:
               We can not alwayes haue our will,
               Though that we were a Kinges pere.
               For to ſhame a Knaue what can they get,
               Thou arte as lewde for God as they:
               And therefore ſhalt thou ſerue them of meate,
               And drinke alſo, from hence alway.
            
            
               ¶What wife ye be to blame,
               To ſpeake to me thus in this wiſe:
               If we ſhould ſtriue folke woud ſpeake ſhame,
               Therefore be ſtill in mine aduiſe.
               I am loth with you to ſtriue,
               For ought that you ſhall doe or ſay:
               I ſweare to Chriſt wife by my liue,
               I had rather take Morell and ryde my way.
            
            
               To ſeeke mine aduenture till your moode be paſt
               I ſay to you theſe manners be not good:
               Therefore I pray you that this be the laſt,
               Of your furious anger that ſemeth ſo wood.
               
                  What can it auayle you me for to greeue,
               That loueth you ſo well as I doe mine harte:
               By my trouth wife you may me beleeue,
               Such toyes as theſe be, would make vs both ſmarte,
            
            
               ¶Smarte in the twenty fayning Deuelles name,
               That liſte me once well for to ſee:
               I pray God geue the euell ſhame,
               What ſhouldeſt thou be werte not for me.
               A ragge on thine arſe thou ſhouldeſt not haue,
               Excepte my friendes had geuen it thee:
               Therefore I tell thee well thou drunken knaue,
               Thou arte not he that ſhall rule me.
            
            
               ¶O good wife ceaſe and let this ouerpaſſe,
               For all your great anger and hye wordes eake:
               I am mine owne ſelfe euen as I was,
               And to you will be louing, and alſo meeke.
               But if ye ſhould doe thus, as ye doe begin,
               It may not continue no time ywys:
               I would not let for kyth nor kin,
               To make you mend, all thinges that is amys.
            
            
               ¶Make me, mary out vpon the dreuill,
               Sayeſt thou that, wilte thou beginne:
               I pray God and our Lady that a foule euill,
               Lyghten vpon thee and all thy kinne.
               By Gods deare bleſt vex me no more,
               For if thou doe thou ſhalte repente:
               I 
                     •
                  aue yet ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     •
                  t for thee in ſt
                     •
                  re,
               And with that a ſtaffe in her hand 
                     •
                  he hent.
            
            
               
               ¶At him full ſoone then ſhe let flee,
               And wholled about her as it had bene a man:
               Her huſband then was fayne perdy,
               To voyde her ſtroake and goe his way than.
               By Gods deare mother then gan ſhe ſweare,
               From henceforth I will make thee bow:
               For I will trim thee in thy geare,
               Or elſe I would I were cald a Sow.
            
            
               ¶Fye on all wretches that be like thee,
               In word or worke both lowde and ſtill,
               I ſweare by him that made man free,
               Of me thou ſhalte not haue thy will.
               Now nor neuer I tell thee playne,
               For I will haue Golde and riches ynow:
               When thou ſhalte goe iagged as a ſimple ſwain
               With whip in hande at carte and plough.
            
            
               ¶Of that my deare wife I take no ſcorne,
               For many a good man with minde and harte:
               Hath gone to plough and carte beforne,
               My time ywys with payne and ſmarte.
               Which now be rich and haue good at will,
               Being at home and make good cheare:
               And there they intend to leade their life ſtill,
               Till our Lord doe ſende for them heare.
            
            
               ¶But now I muſt ryde a little way,
               Deare wife I will come right ſoone agayne:
               Appoynt our dinner I you pray,
               For I doe take on me great payne.
               
                  I doe my beſt I ſweare by my life,
               To order you like a woman ywys:
               And yet it cannot be withouten ſtrife,
               Through your lewde tongue by heauens bliſſe.
            
            
               ¶Ryde to the Deuell and to his dame,
               I would I ſhould thee neuer ſee:
               I pray God ſende thee mickle ſhame,
               In any place, where euer thou be.
               Thou wouldeſt fayne, the mayſter play,
               But thou ſhalte not by God I make thee ſure▪
               
               I ſweare I will thy Peticote pay,
               That long with me thou ſhalte not endure.
            
         
         
            ¶How the good man rode his way till he thoughte her anger was paſt, and then he retourned home agayne.
            
               
            
            
               
               THe good man was ſorry and wente his way,
               About his buſynes, as he was vſed:
               And to himſelfe thus gan he ſay,
               Lord God, how was I thus abuſed.
               When I tooke this wife I was worſe then mad
               And yet can I blame my ſelfe and none other,
               Which maketh me ſigh and often be ſad,
               Repenting full ſore by Gods deare Mother.
            
            
               ¶Fye vpon goods withouten pleaſure,
               Betweene man and wife that cannot agree:
               It is a payne far paſſing meaſure,
               Such ſtryfe to ſee where as loue ſhould be.
               For there was neuer man ywys,
               So hampred with one wife as I am now,
               Wherefore I thinke withouten miſſe,
               She ſhall repent it I make God auow.
            
            
               ¶Except ſhe turne and change her minde,
               And eake her conditions euerichone:
               She ſhall fynde me to her ſo vnkinde,
               That I ſhall her coyle both backe and bone.
               And make her blew and alſo blacke,
               That ſhe ſhall grone agayne for woe:
               I will make her bones all to cracke,
               Without that ſhe her condicions forgoe,
            
            
               ¶I was neuer ſo vexte this time beforne,
               As I am now of this wife alone:
               A vengeaunce on her that euer ſhe was borne,
               For ſhe maketh me often full woe begon.
               
                  And I cannot tell, where me to tourne
               Nor me to wende, by God in faye
               Which cauſe me often for to mourne
               Or yet to know what for to ſay.
            
            
               ¶I am worſe, then mad or wood,
               And yet I am loth with her to begin,
               I feare me I ſhall neuer make her good
               Except I do wrap her in black Morels ſkin,
               That can no more drawe at plough ne carte,
               It ſhall be to late to call for her kinne,
               When ſhe beginneth once for to ſmarte,
               For little eaſe thereby ſhe ſhall winne.
            
            
               ¶Morell is olde, he can labour no more,
               Nor doe no good but alway eate,
               I trowe I haue kept him thus long in ſtore,
               To worke a charme that ſhall be feate.
               The horeſon is blynde and lame alſo
               Behynde and before, he cannot ſtere,
               When he from the ſtable to the ſteeete ſhould go,
               He falleth downe, ryght than in the myre.
            
            
               ¶Yet I am loth him for to kyll
               For he hath done me good ſeruice or nowe,
               But if my wyfe fulfyll not my wyll
               I muſt him flea by God I trowe
               But at thys poynt nowe will I be,
               I wyll be mayſter as it is reaſon,
               And make her ſubiect vnto me
               For ſhe muſt learne a newe leſſon.
            
            
               
               ¶Her father did warne me of this beforne,
               How I ſhould it finde in euery degree:
               But I did take it for halfe a ſcorne,
               And would not beleeue him then perdee.
               But now I perceaue it very well,
               He did it for good will ywis:
               Wherefore I thinke that Morels fell,
               Muſt mend all thing that is amis.
            
            
               ¶Thus he that will not beleeue his friend,
               As her deare father was vnto me:
               He is worthy for to fynde,
               Alway greate payne and miſery.
               But I may not chooſe him to beleeue,
               For the deede doth proue himſelfe in fay:
               Euer ſhe is redy me for to greeue,
               And thinkes to continue ſo alway.
            
            
               ¶But now I will home to proue her minde,
               And ſee what welcome I ſhall haue:
               She may be to me, ſo vnkinde,
               That ſhe ſhall repent it, ſo God me ſaue.
               For if I ſhould of her complayne,
               Folke would me mock, and giue me ſcorne:
               And ſay I were worthy of this payne,
               Becauſe it was ſhewed me ſo well beforne.
            
         
         
            ¶How the goodman was welcommed, when he retourned home agayne.
            
               
               
            
            
               THe good man came ryding to the gate,
               And knocked as he had bene wode:
               His ſeruaunt right ſoone did meete him thereat,
               And bid him welcome with right milde moode.
               The mayſter ſayd what doth my dame now,
               Is ſhe as frantick yet as ſhe was:
               Than will I tame her I make God auow,
               And make her ſing full loude alas.
            
            
               ¶Where arte thou wife ſhall I haue any meate,
               Or am I not ſo welcome vnto thee:
               That at my commaundement I ſhall ought get,
               I pray thee hartely ſoone tell thou me.
               If thou doe not ſerue me and that anon,
               I ſhall thee ſhew mine anger ywis:
               I ſweare by God and by ſaynt Iohn,
               Thy bones will I ſwaddle ſo haue I bliſſe.
            
            
               
               ¶Forth ſhe came, as brym a bore
               And like a dog ſhe rated him than:
               Saying thus I ſet no ſtore,
               By thee thou wretch thou arte no man.
               Get thee hence out of my ſight,
               For meate nor drinke thou getteſt none heare:
               I ſweare to thee by Mary bright,
               Of me thou getteſt, here no good cheare.
            
            
               ¶Well wyfe he ſayd thou doſte me compell,
               To doe that thing, that I were loath:
               If I bereaue Morell of his old fell:
               Thou ſhalte repente it by the fayth now goath.
               For I ſee well that it will no better be,
               But in it thou muſt, after the new guyſe:
               It had bene better ſo mote I thee,
               That thou haddeſt not begon this enterpryſe.
            
         
         
            ¶How the good man cauſed Morell to be flayn▪ and the hide ſalted, to lay his wife therein to ſleepe.
            
               
            
            
               
               NOw will I begin, my wife to tame,
               That all the world ſhall it know:
               I would be loth her for to ſhame,
               Though ſhe do not care, ye may me trow.
               Yet will I her honeſty regard,
               And it preſerue where euer ye may,
               But Morell that is in yonder yarde,
               His hyde therefore he muſt leeſe in fay.
            
            
               ¶And ſo he commaunded anon,
               To flea old Morell his greate Horſe:
               And flea him then, the ſkin from the bone,
               To wrap it about his wiues white coarſe.
               Alſo he commaunded of a byrchen tree,
               Roddes to be made a good great heape:
               And ſware by deare God in Trinity,
               His wife in his ſeller ſhold ſkip and leape.
            
            
               ¶The hyde muſt be ſalted then he ſayd cake,
               Bycauſe I would not haue it ſtinke:
               I hope herewith ſhe will be meeke,
               For this I trow will make her ſhrinke.
               And bow at my pleaſure, when I her bed,
               And obay my commaundementes both lowde and ſtill,
               Or elſe I will make her body bleede,
               And with ſharp roddes beate her my fill.
            
            
               ¶Anon with that to her he gan to call,
               She bid abide in the diuelles name:
               I will not come what ſo befall,
               Sit ſtill with ſorrow and mickle ſhame.
               
                  Thou ſhalte not rule me as pleaſeth thee,
               I will well thou know by Gods deare Mother,
               But thou ſhalt be ruled alway by me,
               And I will be mayſter and none other.
            
            
               ¶Wilte thou be mayſter deare wife in fay,
               Then muſt we wreſtle for the beſt game:
               If thou it win then may I ſay,
               That I haue done my ſelfe greate ſhame.
               But fyrſt I will make thee ſweate good Ione,
               Redde blood euen to the heeles adowne,
               And lappe thee in Morels ſkin alone,
               That the blood ſhall be ſeene euen from the crowne.
            
            
               ¶Sayeſt thou me that thou wretched knaue,
               It were better thou haddeſt me neuer ſeene:
               I ſweare to thee ſo God me ſaue,
               With my nayles I will ſcratch out both thine eyen,
               And therefore thinke not to touch me once,
               For by the maſſe if thou begin that,
               Thou ſhalte be handled for the nonce,
               That all thy braynes on the ground ſhall ſquat.
            
            
               ¶Why then there is no remedy I ſee,
               But needes I muſt doe euen as I thought:
               Seing it will none otherwiſe be,
               I will thee not ſpare by God that me bought.
               For now I am ſet thee for to charme,
               And make thee meeke by Gods might,
               Or elſe with roddes while thou arte warme,
               I ſhall thee ſecurge with reaſon and right.
            
         
         
            
            
               ¶Now good Morels ſkin, 
               Receiue my cur
                     •
                  t wife in.
            
            
               
            
            ¶How the curſt wife in Morels ſkin lay,
            Becauſe ſhe would not her huſband obay.
            
               NOw will I my ſweete wife trim,
               According as ſhe deſerueth to me:
               I ſweare by God and by ſaynt Sim,
               With Byrchen roddes well beate ſhall ſhe be.
               And after that in Morels ſalte ſkin,
               I will her lay and full faſt binde,
               That all her friendes, and eake her kyn,
               Shall her long ſeeke or they her fynde,
            
            
               
               ¶Then he her met, and to her gan ſay,
               How ſayeſt thou wife wilte thou be mayſter yet:
               She ſware by Gods body, and by that day,
               And ſodaynly with her fyſt ſhe did him hit.
               And defyed him dreuill at euery worde,
               Saying precious horſeſone what doeſt thou thinke
               I ſet not by thee a ſtinking torde
               Thou ſhalt get of me neyther meate nor drinke.
            
            
               ¶Sayeſt thou me that wyfe quoth he than
               With that in his armes he gan her catche
               Streyght to the ſeller with her he ran
               And faſtened the dore with locke and latche
               And threwe the key downe him beſyde,
               Aſkyng her than if ſhe would obay
               Than ſhe ſayde nay for all thy pryde
               But ſhe was mayſter and would abyde alway.
            
            
               ¶Then quoth he we muſt make a fraye
               And with that her cloths he gan to teare
               Out vpon thee horeſone than ſhe did ſaye
               Wylte thou robbe me of all my geare
               It coſt thee naught thou arrant theefe
               And quickly ſhe ga
                     •
                   hym by the heade
               With that ſhe ſayde God giue thee a miſchiefe
               And them that fed thee fyrſt with breade.
            
            
               ¶They wreſtled togyther thus they two
               So long that the clothes a ſunder went
               And to the grounde he threwe her tho
               That cleane from the backe her ſmock he rent.
               
                  In euery hand a rod he gate,
               And layd vpon her a right good pace:
               Aſking of her what game was that,
               And ſhe cryed out horeſon, alas, alas.
            
            
               ¶What wilte thou doe, wilte thou kill me,
               I haue made thee a man of nought:
               Thou ſhalte repente it, by Gods pitty,
               That euer this deede thou haſte y wrought.
               I care not for that dame he did ſay,
               Thou ſhalt gi
                     •
                  e ouer or we departe
               The mayſterſhip all, or all this day
               I will not ceaſe to make thee ſmarte.
            
            
               ¶Euer he layde on, and euer ſhe did crye,
               Alas, alas, that euer I was borne
               Out vpon thee murderer I thee defye
               Thou haſt my white ſkin, and my body all to torne
               Leaue of betyme I counſayle thee,
               Nay by God dame I ſaye not ſo yet,
               I ſweare to thee, by Mary ſo free
               We begyn but nowe, this is the firſt fyt.
            
            
               ¶Once agayne, we muſt daunce about
               And then thou ſhalt reaſt in Morels ſkyn,
               He gaue her than ſo many a great cloute
               That on the grounde the bloud was ſeene.
               Within a whyle, he cryed newe roddes newe
               With that ſhe cryed full lowde alas,
               Daunce yet about dame, thou came not where it grewe,
               And ſodainely with that in a ſowne ſhe was.
            
            
               
               ¶He ſpyed that and by he her hente,
               And wrang her harde then by the noſe:
               With her to Morels ſkin, ſtraight he wente,
               And therein full faſt he did her cloſe.
               Within a while, ſhe did reuiue,
               Through the groſe ſalte that did her ſmarte:
               She thought ſhe ſhould neuer haue gone on liue,
               Out of Morels ſkin ſo ſore is her harte.
            
            
               When ſhe did ſpy that therein ſhe lay,
               Out of her wit ſhe was full nye:
               And to her huſband then did ſhe ſay,
               How canſt thou doe this vilany.
               Nay how ſayeſt thou, thou curſed wife,
               In this foule ſkin I will thee keepe,
               During the time of all thy life,
               Therein for euer wayle and weepe.
            
            
               ¶With that her moode began to ſinke,
               And ſayd deare huſband for grace I call:
               For I ſhall neuer ſleepe nor winke,
               Till I get your loue whatſo befall.
               And I will neuer to you offend,
               In no maner of wiſe, of all my lyue:
               Nor to doe nothing that may pretend,
               To diſpleaſe you with my wittes fyue.
            
            
               ¶For Father nor Mother whatſoeuer they ſay
               I will not anger you by God in throne:
               But glad will your commaundementes òbay,
               In preſence of people and cake alone.
               
                  Well on that condicion thou ſhalt haue,
               Grace and fayre bed to reſt thy body in:
               But if thou rage more ſo God me ſaue,
               I will wrap thee agayne in Morels ſkin.
            
            
               ¶Then he tooke her out in his armes twayne,
               And beheld her ſo pitteouſly with blood arayed,
               How thinkeſt thou wife, ſhall we arrayne,
               Haue ſuch buſineſſe more to her he ſayd,
               She aunſwered nay my huſband deare,
               Whyle I you know, and you know me,
               Your commaundementes I will both far and neare,
               Fulfill alway in euery degree.
            
            
               ¶Well then I promiſe thee by God euen now,
               Betweene thee and mee ſhall neuer be ſtrife,
               If thou to my commaundementes quickly bow
               I will the cheriſh all the dayes of my life.
               In bed ſhe was layde and healed full ſoone,
               As fayre and cleare as ſhe was beforne,
               What he her bid was quickly done,
               To be dilligent ywys ſhe tooke no ſcorne.
            
            
               ¶Then was he glad, and thought in his minde
               Now haue I done, my ſelfe great good,
               And her alſo, we ſhall it finde,
               Though I haue ſhed parte of her blood.
               For as me thinke, he will be meeke:
               Therefore I will her father and Mother,
               Byd to gueſt, now the next weeke,
               And of our neighboures, many other.
            
         
         
            
            ¶Howe the good man did byd her Father and Mother to gueſt, and many of his neyghbours that they might ſee his wiues pacyence.
            
               
            
            
               GReat payne he made his wife to take,
               Agaynſt the day that they ſhould come:
               Of them was noue that there did lack,
               I dare wel ſay vnto my doome.
               Ye Father and mother and neighbours all.
               Dyd thether come to make good cheare,
               Soone they were ſet in genera
                     •
                  l,
               The wyfe was dilligent as did appeare.
            
            
               
               ¶Father and mother was welcome then,
               And ſo were they all in good fay:
               The huſband ſate there like a man,
               The wyfe did ſerue them all that day.
               The good man commaunded what he would haue,
               The wyfe was quick at hand,
               What now thought the mother, this arrant knaue,
               Is mayſter as I vnderſtand.
            
            
               ¶What may this meane then ſhe gan thinke,
               That my daughter ſo dilligent is:
               Now can I nother eate nor drinke,
               Till I it know by heauen bliſſe.
               When her daughter came agayne,
               To ſerue at the borde as her huſband bad,
               The Mother ſtared with her eyen twayne,
               Euen as one that had ben mad.
            
            
               ¶All the folke, that at the boord ſate,
               Did her behold then euerichone:
               The mother from the boord her gate,
               Following her daughter and that anone,
               And in the Kitching ſhe her fand,
               Saying vnto her in this wiſe:
               Daughther thou ſhalte well vnderſtand,
               I did not teach thee after this guyſe.
            
            
               ¶A good mother ye ſay full well,
               All thinges with m
                     •
                  is not as ye weene:
               If ye had bene in Morels fell,
               As well as I it ſhould be ſeene.
               
                  In Morels fell what deuill is that,
               Mary mother I will it you ſhow:
               But beware that you come not thereat,
               Leſt you your ſelfe then doe beſhrew.
            
            
               ¶Come downe now in this ſeller ſo deepe,
               And Morels ſkin there ſhall you ſee:
               With many a rod that hath made me to weepe,
               When the blood ranne downe faſt by my knee.
               The Mother this beheld and cryed out alas.
               And ran out of the Seller as ſhe had bene wood,
               She came to the table where the company was,
               And ſayd out horeſon I will ſee thy harte blood.
            
            
               ¶Peace good Mother, or ſo haue I bliſſe,
               Ye muſt daunce elſe as did my wyfe:
               And in Morels ſkin lye, that well ſalted is,
               Which you ſhould repent all the dayes of your lyfe.
               All they they that were there, held with the yong man,
               And ſayd he dyd well in euery maner degree,
               Whan dynner was done, they departed all than,
               The mother no lenger durſt there be.
            
            
               ¶The Father abode laſt and was full glad,
               And gaue his children his bleſſyng ywys,
               Saying the yong man full well done had,
               And merely departed wythouten mys,
               This yong man was glad ye may be ſure,
               That he had brought hys wyfe to this,
               God gyue vs all grace in reſt to indure,
               And hereafter to come vnto his bliſſe.
            
            
               
               ¶Thus was Morell flayne out of his ſkin.
               To charme a ſhrew ſo haue I bliſſe:
               Forgeue the yongman if he did ſin,
               But I thinke he did nothing amiſſe.
               He did all thing euen for the beſt.
               As it well prooued then,
               God ſaue our wiues from Morels neſt,
               I pray you ſay all amen.
            
            
               ¶Thus endeth the ieſt of Morels ſkin,
               Where the curſt wife was lapped in,
               Becauſe ſhe was of a ſhrewde leere.
               Thus was ſhe ſerued in this maner.
            
            Finis.
            
               quoth Mayſter Charmeher.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶JMPRINTED AT LONdon in Fleeteſtreate, beneath the Conduite, at the ſigne of S. Iohn Euaungeliſt. by Hugh Iackſon.
         
         
            
            ¶He that can charme a ſhrew de wyfe,
            Better then thus:
            Let him come to me, and fetch ten pound,
            And a golden purſe.
            
               
            
         
      
   