
      
         
            
            
            SEVEN GODLY
AND LEARned
Sermons, preached by
the Reuerend Father in God
IOHN IVEL, late Biſhop
of Salisburie. Neuer before imprinted. Newly publiſhed to the glorie of God, and
benefit of his Church.
            LACTANT.
            Noſtrae voces licèt aurae miſceantur atque euaneſcant, tamen plarunquè
permanent literis comprehenſae.
            
               LONDON
Jmpenſis G. Biſhop. 1607.
         
         
            
            
            To the moſt Reuerend
Father in God, my L. of Canturburie
his Grace, Primat of England,
and of his Maieſties moſt Honourable
priuie Counſell.
            
               I Offer here vnto your
Grace a kind of preſent:
which if it be valued
by the greatnes,
is but ſmall; if by the
goodneſſe either of it
ſelfe, or of my duetifull affection towards
your Grace, is ſurely great. Certaine
Sermons are they of that reuerēd
learned Father of ſo worthy memorie
B. Iuel; which hauing receiued of a
friend, and reſerued by me ſome good
time in writtē hand (howbeit faithfully
written, as I truſt ſhal after appear) I
could no longer, no longer, I ſay, could
I be either ſo iniurious, or ſo enuious to
the publike good, as not to publiſh thē
to the glorie of God, and benefit of his
Church. And if the renowned Orator

               Tully could not indure to haue the
leaſt & meaneſt of his painfull trauells
periſh or be loſt, were it but ſome familiar
Epiſtle or letter, as is apparēt by that
he wrote to his friend Varro in the like
caſe: Etſi 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               erat illa epiſtola, Albeit the
letter which Caninius cauſed mee to
write (but as I take it, had forgotten to
cal for) were ſtale and out of ſeaſon, yet haue I ſithēce deliuered it vnto him for thee: Quia nolui perire lucubrationē meā,
ſaith he. Norblame him pardy, for why
ſhould ſo ſweet a veine of wit and eloquence
flow out in vaine? Then what
reaſon were it that theſe ſo many, ſo
learned, ſo godly, ſo eloquent Sermons
of this reuerēd Father & great Diuine;
eſpecially treating, not as Tully doth, of
matters earthly, but heauenly, not of
things temporal, but eternal, not of the
Commonwealth of the Romans, but
the ſauing health of al chriſtians: I ſay,
what pity were it that theſe his ſo ſūdry
& worthy labors, ſhould either be ſmothered

vp in hugger mugger, or buried
in obliuion, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                wife alwaies impropried,
ingroſſed, & reſtrained vnto
any one, & not rather imparted, diuulged
& made common vnto many one,
for the generall behoofe of the preſent
age, & ſo of future poſteritie? They are
in Philoſophie (as your Grace well
knoweth) rules both antient & authentike:
Bonum quo communius, quo diuturnius,
eo melius, Good things the more
they ſtretch themſelues to the benefit
of many, & the more durable they are,
the better they are. For as Lactantius
ſaith, and ſaith verie well, Noſtrae voces
&c. Our words once vttered, diſſolue
& vaniſh into ayre: but let them
be put in writing, or print, and for the
moſt part they remaine vnto all ſucceeding
ages. Wherfore not long to hold
your Grace (being holden ſufficiently
with your publike trauels for the good
both of Church and Commonweale;
for which to Almighty God, to his excellent

Maieſtie, & to your Grace we
are, and I truſt, ſhalbe ſtil more & more
beholden) It may pleaſe your Gr. to
accept this ſmall 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                of
my thankfull dutie, & dutiful thankfulneſſe;
of whom I am bold to ſay truely,
which I adde without flatterie, that
next after God the meane liuelihood I
haue, whatſoeuer I haue, by your Graces
meane I haue: & therfore do pray,
and ought to pray, and will not ceaſe to
pray; that like as the Almightie hath in
ſpeciall fauour placed you in ſo high
roome of honour & aboue others graced
you; ſo he will continue forth his
louing kindneſſe & gratious fauor towards
you; ſo he will multiply his ſpirituall
gifts, & heauenly bliſſings vpon
you, to the glorie of his name, the good
of his Church, and your Graces inceſſant
comfort both here and for euer.
            
               Your G. moſt bounden
at com. I. K.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            SEVEN GODly
and learned Sermons, preached
by the reuerend Father
I. IVEL, Biſhop of
Salisburie.
            
               I. Corinth. 4. verſ. 1. 2.
               
                  1. Let euery man eſteeme vs, euen for
the Miniſters and Stewards of the
ſecrets of God.
                  2. Now is there no more required of
the Stewards, but that they bee
found faithfull.
               
            
            
               DEarely beloued in
our Lord and Sauior
Ieſus Chriſt,
The people of the
citie of Corinth, to
whome S. Paule
wrote this Epiſtle
or letter, were at great ſtrife, contention,
and variance among themſelues,
as touching the Preachers of Chriſts

Goſpell, and Miniſters dwelling among
them. For, whereas God had
ſent them ſtore of Preachers, as Peter,
Paul, Apollo, Cephas, and ſuch
other, which were notable in the miniſterie
of God; they of theſe great gifts
and benefits of God, tooke occaſion of
ſtrife, tooke (I ſay) occaſion of great
contention and debate among themſelues.
For whoſoeuer liked Peter beſt,
would ſay, I hold of Peter; whoſoeuer
thought Pauls Doctrine better than
Peters, would ſay, I ſtand of Pauls
ſide; whoſoeuer againe thought that
Apollo excelled the reſt, would ſay,
I hold with Apollo. And thus of their
owne fancies, they tooke occaſion of
ſtrife, & found fault with the preaching
of Chriſts Goſpell. As for Peter, as for
Paul, as for Apollo, they all preached
one thing, they taught one Doctrine,
there was no ſtrife, no debate, no diſſention
among them. Yet notwithſtanding,
though the Schoolemaſters
agréed, the Diſciples and Schoolers
could not bée at one: though they all
preached one and the ſame Doctrine,

yet could not the people fancie their
Preachers alike. And therefore Paul
concluded before, and ſaid; Let no
man reioyce in men, for all is yours,
whether it bee Paule, or Apollo, whether
it bee Cephas or the world,
all is yours. And hereupon followed
theſe words of his, that you heard
read vnto you. As for vs (ſaith
Saint Paule) eſteeme vs as the
Miniſters of Chriſt: whatſoeuer
they bee that Preach vnto you the
Goſpell of GOD, regard them
as the Stewards of the ſecrets of
God.
            
            So it happeneth oftentimes that either
the people iudge too much of the
Preachers of Gods word, or elſe they
iudge too little: Sometime they attribute
vnto them too much honour, ſometime
againe they giue them too little
honour: Sometime they credit them
too much, ſometime they beléeue them
nothing at all. So are the people
alwaies inconſtant, ſo are they mooued
on either ſide. When Paule
and Barnabas at Liſtra began toAct. 14.
               
preach, by and by the whole multitude
of the people thought them to be Gods
and no men, forthwith they erected Altars,
they brought their Sacrifices,
their oxen, their calues, their ſhéepe,
minding to haue ſacrificed vnto them,
and Paule they called Mercurius; Barnabas,
Iupiter. This was too great an
honour. And therefore when Paule and
Barnabas vnderſtood the ſame, they
rent their clothes, tore their owne
garments, run in among the people,
cried out and ſaid: Yee men and brethren,
why doe yee this? So likewiſe
Peter being appointed by God to goe
to Cornelius the Captaine,Act. 10. ſo ſoone
as he came in vnto him, by and by
Cornelius met him, fell downe at
his féete, and worſhipped him, hee
thought him a God and no Man. And
thus, as yée ſée, ſometimes the people
offended too much on that hand, and
gaue more honour and reuerence vnto
Gods Miniſters than God himſelfe
required, or they looked for:
Sometimes againe on the other hand,
they gaue them no reuerence, they

attributed no honour vnto them, they
did ſet too little by the Preachers of
Gods word; and this was a fault on
the other ſide.
            When Chriſt in our nature began
firſt to preach, and ſet abroad his fathers
will, and the glad tydings of
the Goſpell, the people forthwith
found fault with him; he is, ſaid they,
but a Carpenters ſon,Iohn. 6. wée know his
Father, wée know his Mother, he
was neuer ſet to Schoole, how can
this man haue learning? Afterward,
when the Diſciples and Apoſtles of
Chriſt preached and taught the people,
and beganne to ſpeake with
ſtrange tongues,Act. 2. in ſo much that euery
man maruailed to heare his
owne ſpeach and language, both
Medes, Perſians, and they of Meſopotamia;
yet ſaid the people, theſe
men are full of new wine. And this
was too little honour. Therefore if
the Preacher bée too much honoured,
then is God diſhonoured: if hee bee
deſpiſed and nothing ſet by, then is
Chriſt himſelfe deſpiſed, and not regarded.

They that ſaid Chriſt was
a Carpenters ſonne, a man vnlearned,
and ſuch a one as neuer went
to ſchoole: they that ſaid the Apoſtles
of Chriſt were full of new wine,
ſpake not this of any priuate malice
or hatered that they bare either
vnto Chriſt, or his Apoſtles, but onely
to bring Gods word to ſhame, only
to bring Chriſts holy Goſpell out of
credit with the people: this was
their entent and purpoſe, and nothing
els. Therefore Saint Paule in this
place ſheweth the Corinthians how
they ſhould eſtéem the teachers of gods
holy word, how they ſhould thinke
and iudge of them. For the people
ſometime eſtéeme moſt a policicke
man, ſuch a man as by his great
wit is able to conclude Peace and
Leagues betwéene Princes, they regard
him that is of ſtout courage and
learned in the Lawes, they ſet moſt
by him that is eloquent and able to
perſwade; yea and they regard him
not that is not excellently learned,
and ſéene in all Sciences: but heere

Saint Paule ſheweth them, that
they ſhould not eſtéeme the Preachers
of Gods Goſpell as men politicke,
as men of great wit, as men of
ſtout courage, and learned in the
Law as men eloquent, and excellently
well ſéene in ſciences: but as
the Miniſters of Chriſt, and Stewards
of the ſecrets of God. Thus
ſhould the Miniſters of Chriſt bee
eſtéemed, and thus ought the teachers
of Gods word ſhew themſelues, as
Miniſters of Chriſt, and diſpenſers
of Gods ſecrets. And therefore ſaint
Paule in another place ſaith; We come
not to preach our ſelues,
               2. Cor. 4. all our
preaching, all our teaching, all our
Doctrine, is that you know Ieſus
Chriſt; as for our ſelues, wée are but
your ſeruants. So Chriſt himſelfe;
Qui de ſe loquitur, gloriam propriam
quaerit,
               Ioh. 7. 
               Hee that ſpeaketh of himſelfe,
ſeeketh his owne glorie, ſaith
Chriſt.1. Cor. 3. So Paule likewiſe, Quid Petrus,
quid Paulus, quid Apollo, niſi Miniſtri?
What is Peter, what is Paule, what
is Apollo? thinke you them any other

than the ſeruants and miniſters of
God? Paule hath planted, Apollo
watered, but God hath giuen the encreaſe.
The encreaſe came not from
Peter, not from Paule, not from
Apollo, but from God alone. Apollo,
Paule, and Peter, are nothing
els but the miniſters and ſeruants
of God; God is he that giueth
the encreaſe, God alone is hee that
giueth the encreaſe. When the great
Citie of Ieruſalem vnderſtood of Iohn
the Baptiſt, and began to ſéeke
vnto him, they aſked him, What
art thou? Hee anſwered them, Ego
vox clamantis in deſerto, Parate viam
Domini.
               Iohn 1. 
               I am. ſaid hee, a man not
worthy to be eſteemed, I am but a meſſenger
ſent vnto you, I am nothing
els but a voice to cry, Prepare you the
way of the Lord. So Moſes and
Aaron that had the conducting of
the people of God, when the whole
Campe was in a tumult and vprore,
and the people ran in rage againſt
them, like to haue ſlaine
them, they ſtretched out their hands

and ſaid,Exod. 16. 
               Non contra nos, ſed contra
Dominum, nam nos qui ſumus? This ſtir,
this hurly burly, this tumult, that you
make is not, ſaid they, againſt vs, but
againſt God; for alas, what are we? we
are but Gods ſeruants, Gods meſſengers,
appointed to lead and guid you.
Thus therefore ought euery man eſtéeme
the Preachers of Gods goſpell,
as meſſengers, as ſeruants as Miniſters
of Chriſt, thus ought euery man
thinke, and iudge of them.
            But what kind of ſeruant is this
Preacher, what manner of Miniſter
is he? Saint Paul ſaith, He is the Steward
and Diſpenſer of Gods ſecrets, he
ſetteth foorth, and ſheweth abroad the
myſteries of his holy Goſpel. And theſe
myſteries that S. Paul here meaneth,
(to conclude in one word) are none
other than the Articles of our Faith:
That Chriſt is the Sonne of God, conceiued
by the holy Ghoſt, borne of the
virgine Marie; that he was crucified,
dead, buried, deſcended into Hell, roſe
againe, and ſitteth at the right hand of
his Father; that by his blood, our ſinnes

were waſhed away; that our bodies
ſhall at the laſt day ariſe, and we
poſſeſſe eternall life. Theſe be the ſecrets,
theſe be the myſteries, that the
Miniſters of Chriſt, the ſeruants and
Stewards of God, do vtter and declare
to Gods people: no wiſdome of
man is able to compaſſe this, no learning
of this world able of it ſelfe to
expound theſe hidden ſecrets. For
ſaith Saint Paul, Animalis homo non
percipit ea quae ſunt ex Deo.
                  1. Cor. 2. The naturall
man perceiueth nothing of the
ſpirit of God, he vnderſtandeth not
ſuch things as are of God. It is fooliſhneſſe
vnto him, and he can not
perceiue it, for it muſt be ſpiritually
diſcerned.Ioh. 1. Chriſt himſelfe alſo, Non
ex hominibus, nequè ex voluntate carnis,
ſed ex voluntate Dei, they which are
Gods children, and able to vnderſtand
his myſteries, are ſuch which are not
borne of blood, nor of the will of the
fleſh, nor of the will of man, but of
God. When Chriſt had aſked of Peter
what he thought of him, and Peter
had ſaid,Math. 16. 
               Tues Chriſtus, filius Dei

                  viui, Thou art Chriſt the Sonne of the
lyuing God: He anſwered, O happie
art thou Simon the Sonne of Ionas,
for fleſh and blood hath not opened
that vnto thee, but my Father that is
in Heauen. Theſe myſteries therefore
are onely opened by the ſpirit of
God, by Gods only working, not by
any wiſdome of man, not by any cunning
and great learning of this world.
Now therefore, ſaith Saint Paul,
thinke thus of vs, iudge vs to be the
Miniſters and ſeruants of God, and
marke well whether we reueal vnto
you Gods myſteries, and his holie
Goſpell; Conſider with your ſelues,
and ſée whether wée open vnto you
Gods hidden Secrets: By this ſhall
you know, whether wée be the ſeruants
and diſpenſers of Gods myſteries.
            But like as in S. Pauls time, there
was diſſention, ſtrife, & great debate,
euen amongſt the Chriſtians, and ſuch
as profeſſed the name of God: So likewiſe
in our dayes, (good Bretheren)
euen in the time that wée our ſelues

haue ſéene, there hath béen diſcord and
parts-taking among vs. Some haue
ſaid, I will beléeue the old learning:
ſome againe haue ſaid, I will beléeue
the new: ſome haue ſaid I will credit
this man: ſome I will beléeue that
man. And thus the father hath fallen
out with the ſonne, the Mother with
the daughter, the brother with his brother,
and one neighbor with another;
ech man defending that part, which he
himſelfe beſt liked. But alas, (good
Bretheren) this is no new thing, this
hath béen from the beginning, and
euen in Chriſtes time. For at what
time Chriſt himſelfe walked here on
this earth, & began to preach the glory
of his father, ſome ſaid he was a good
man,Ioh. 7. Luk. 7. ſome other ſaid no, ſome ſaid he
was a Prophet, ſome other ſaid he was
none, but one that deceiued the people,
ſome reioyced that it pleaſed God to
ſend ſuch a Preacher as Chriſt was,
ſome againe deſpiſed his doctrine, and
ſaid,Ioh. 7. 
               he had a deuill. Theſe words
the people then ſpake of Chriſt, theſe
words, I ſay, they ſpake of Chriſt himſelfe.

He was called a Samaritane,
               Luk. 7. 
               a
wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and
ſinners, a ſeducer of the people. Therefore,
it is the leſſe maruaile if ſuch
words be now at theſe dayes ſpoken,
as were ſpoken in the beginning of
the Church; if ſuch words be ſpoken
againſt vs, as were ſpoken againſt
Chriſt himſelfe. But S. Paul hath here
giuen vs a rule, whereby to know the
true ſeruants of Chriſt, and Stewards
of Gods ſecrets. Chriſt was the true
Prophet, and why ſo? becauſe he preached
his fathers will.Ioh. 15. 
               What euer I haue
heard of my Father, ſaith Chriſt, the
ſame haue I declared vnto you. Saint
Paul was the true ſeruant of Chriſt,
and ſteward of his ſecrets, and why
ſo? becauſe he labored in Gods vineyard,
he preached, he taught, more than
all the reſt of the Apoſtles of Chriſt did,
Laboraui plus quàm, caeteri omnes.
               1. Cor. 15. 
               I haue
labored more than all the reſt of the Apoſtles
haue done. Therefore was he
the true and faithful miniſter of Gods
myſteries, becauſe he thus diligently
alwaies taught Gods Goſpell, and the

glorie of his name: for this cauſe I ſay,
and none other, was he the Steward
and diſpenſer of Gods ſecrets. So
were the Patriarches, and the Prophets,
the true ſeruants of God, becauſe
they declared the will of God.
And here haue we to conſider, that
Chriſt which was the true Prophet,
the Apoſtles which were the ture Miniſters
and Stewards of Chriſt, the
Patriarches & Prophets, which were
the true and faithfull ſeruants of God,
were all greeuouſly afflicted, perſecuted
from place vnto place, and laſtly put to
moſt cruell death. This I ſay, hapned
to Chriſt himſelf, and all his Apoſtles,
S. Iohn the Euangeliſt only excepted.
And yet was Chriſt Gods own ſonne,
the Apoſtles were the true Miniſters
and Stewards of Gods ſecrets. And
therefore if we ſhall in our time ſée the
Preachers of Gods word afflicted, the
Teachers of the Goſpell of Chriſt perſecuted,
the Stewards of Gods ſecrets
miſerably tormented, yet let not vs
(good Bretheren) let not vs giue ouer
and ſhrink from Gods goſpell, let vs

conſider that this is no new thing, no
ſtrange hap, but ſuch as hapned to
the Patriarches, to the Prophets, to
the Apoſtles, yea, and to Chriſt himſelfe.
            Now then, let vs take this rule of
S. Pauls, and thereby let vs trie whether
the Preachers in times paſt, the
Popes, the Cardinals, the Biſhops,
were the true ſeruants of God, Stewards
and diſpenſers of his holie ſecrets.
There are at this day ſome that
be called Biſhops, ſome that be called
Cardinals, & they ſay that they carry
vp the Church of Chriſt, and are the
props & pillers of the ſame: and therefore
in token therof they haue alwaies
pillers borne before them. At this day
the Biſhop of Rome calleth himſelfe a
generall Biſhop, an vniuerſal Biſhop,
not ouer this part, or that part, but
ouer all Chriſtendome; yea, & he ſaith,
he is the head of Chriſts Church: he
ſaith that he hath power ouer Kings,
ouer Princes, he hath power ouer purgatorie,
ouer Soules departed, ouer
Deuils, ouer Angels: he can parden

not only ſinnes alreadie done, but ſuch
alſo as ſhall be at any time hereafter
committed: and that he can not miſtake
the Scriptures of God, that he
can not erre, and be deceiued: what
euer he doth, all is well done: no man
can iudge him and ſit vpon his doings.
I ſpeake not this of malice, I ſpeake
it not for any grudge or hatred I owe
to his perſon, God is my witneſſe, I
neyther know him that now is, nor
any of them that haue heretofore time
béen Biſhops of Rome. But all theſe
their doings are written, all theſe
words which I haue here ſpoken, are
written I ſay, euen in their owne
Lawes and Decrées; the places may
be alleaged and brought forth. Alas,
theſe are glorious titles, to be called
vniuerſall Biſhop, and head of Chriſts
Church, to haue dominion ouer Kings
and Princes, to haue power ouer Purgatorie,
ouer Soules departed, ouer
Deuils, ouer Angels, to haue authoritie
to pardon ſinnes paſt, & ſinnes hereafter
to be committed, not to erre, not
to be deceiued: all theſe are glorious

and triumphant titles, as you well ſée.
But let vs now take Pauls rule, the
rule I ſay that S. Paul hath here giuen
vs, and let vs by the ſame trie, whether
the Biſhops, the Cardinals, the
Popes, haue heretofore time, or at this
time, do diſpenſe vnto vs the myſteries
of the Goſpell, as Stewards of the ſecrets
of God: whether they do preach
& teach the Goſpel of Chriſt, as the ſeruants
and Miniſters of Chriſt. Alas,
we ſée they do nothing leſſe, they do,
we ſée, nothing leſſe than ſet forth the
Goſpell of God, & the glory of his holy
name. Now then can they call themſelues
Paſtores, when they féede not
Gods ſhéepe? how can they call themſelues
watchmen, when they haue no
regard to Gods flocke? how can they
call themſelues pillers of the Church,
yea, and the head of the Church,
when they ſhew themſelues rather
deſtroyers of the Church of Chriſt,
and not members of the ſame? Alas,
if they be not Gods ſeruants, whoſe
ſeruants are they? if they be not Diſpenſers
& Stewards of Gods ſecrets,

of whoſe ſecrets are they Stewards?
if they be not ſo much as members,
how are they then the Pillers & head
of Chriſts Church?
            Saint Paul goeth further and ſaith,
It is not ſufficient to be called Seruants,
to be called Miniſters, to be called
ſtewards of Gods ſecrets, but it is
further required at the Stewards hand,
that he be found faithful. In this world
the Maſter committeth the order of his
houſe to the gouernance of his Steward;
the diſpoſing of his whole liuing,
& order of all other things, he committeth
only to his Stewards wiſdome: &
he looketh that he be found faithfull in
all his doings. And if this be in worldly
things, if the Maſter here in this world
will look for, & require faithful dealings
at his Stewards hands, in ſuch things
as are but tranſitorie, & of little value:
how much more then will God require
faithfulneſſe in his Stewards, as touching
things Eternall, things Heauenly,
and the diſpoſing of his ſecrets.
But from the beginning, euen from
the firſt beginning of the world, there

haue béen alwayes vntruſtie and wicked
Stewards. For, at what time
God framed man, and placed him in
Paradiſe in great ioy and pleaſure, the
Deuill enuying this his felicitie, became
a wicked Steward, and ſaid vnto
Adam, Tuſh, ye ſhall not dye,
eate of this fruit,Gen. 3. ye ſhall not dye,
God doth but mocke with you: for he
doth know that in what euer houre ye
eate of it, your eyes ſhalbe opened, & ye
ſhall be as God, knowing both good &
euill. And thus he became a moſt wicked
Steward. Ieremy alſo the prophet
ſaith, that in his time ther were wicked
and vntruſty Stewards: Currunt ſaith
he, at ego non miſi, loquuntur, at ego non
ſum loquutus illis,
               Ier. 23. 
               They run, ſaith God,
but I ſent them not, they haue ſpoken,
but I ſpake not vnto them. So Chriſt
himſelfe ſaid, that in the later dayes
there ſhould come falſe Stewards,
falſe Prophets, falſe Preachers, and
ſay,Math. 24▪
                
               Hic eſt Chriſtus, illic eſt Chriſtus,
Lo, here is Chriſt, there is Chriſt; and
ſhould do great wonders and tokens,
in ſo much that, if it were poſſible, the

verie choſen ſhould be brought into
error alſo.
                Antechriſt in likewiſe ſhall
come ſaith Paul, The man of ſinne, the
ſonne of perdition,
               2. Theſſ. 2. 
               he ſhall exalt himſelfe
aboue all that is called God, he
ſhall ſit in the holie place, in the Temple
of God, in the conſcience of Men:
and when he commeth he ſhall not ſay,
I am Antechriſt, I am a falſe Prophet,
I am a wicked Steward; but he
ſhall rather ſay, I am a true Prophet,
I am a faithful Steward. I am Chriſt
the Sonne of God, yea I am God
himſelfe. Now therefore how will you
know the true ſeruant, from the falſe
Miniſter, how will you trie the faithfull
Steward from the vnfaithfull?
Mary, ſaith S. Paul, if he doth his Maſters
will and commaundement, if he
doth all thoſe things faithfully that his
Maſter requireth at his hands, if he
this doth, then is he a faithful Miniſter
and a truſtie Steward. By this ſhall
you know him, by this token, & none
other ſhall you ſoone diſcerne, whether
he be a faithfull Steward, this is the
point of a truſty ſeruant. And therfore

God vnto Ezechiel his prophet, and ſo
by him to all ſuch as ſhall become his
Stewards & Preachers of his Goſpel,
ſaith,Ezech. 3. 
               I haue appointed thee a Watchman
ouer my houſe of Iſrael, to crie vnto
my people, therefore take good heed
to the words of my mouth, and giue
them warning at my commandement:
thou ſhalt heare it at my mouth, ſaith
God, and then ſhalt thou pronounce it
vnto my people. So Paul was bould to
ſay,1. Cor. 11. 
               Quodaccepi à Domino, tradidi vobis,
That which I deliuered vnto you, receiued
I of the Lord:
                what thing ſoeuer
I receiued of the Lord, that haue
I deliuered & ſthewed vnto you, without
adding any thing thereto, or diminiſing
any thing therefro. Euen ſo,
Chriſt himſelfe ſaid,Ioh. 7. 
               Sermo quem audiſtis
non eſt meus, ſed patris mei qui miſit
me: The doctrine which you hear is not
mine, but his that hath ſent me:
                Theſe
words that you haue heard, are not
mine, but my fathers that ſent me:
I do but my Fathers meſſage, ſaith
Chriſt, all that I teach, all that I
preach vnto you, is nothing elſe but

the will of my Father.Ioh. 7. By this therefore
(my Bretheren) ſhall you ſoone trie
whether they are true ſeruants of God:
for if they ſhall only diſcloſe vnto you
the wil of God, if they ſhal preach vnto
you the ſecrets of Gods Goſpell, & the
glory of his holie name, then are they
true ſeruants, then are they Chriſts
miniſters, & faithful diſpenſers of Gods
ſecrets. But if they teach you not the
ſincerity of Gods Goſpel, if they preach
not vnto you the myſteries of Gods
word, if they diſcloſe not vnto you the
will of God, if they do not this; then are
they not Gods ſeruants, then are they
not Chriſts Miniſters, nor Stewards
of Gods ſecrets. And therfore ſaith S.
Iohn in his Epiſtle,
                  
                     •
                  . Ioh. 1. 
               If any man come
vnto you, & bring not this doctrine, receiue
him not into your houſe, neither
ſalute him: if any man, ſaith he, come
vnto you, & teach you any other Goſpel,
than this that I haue preached, let him
not enter into your houſe, do not ſomuch
as bid him, God ſpéed. So Eſay the prophet,Eſa. 8.
               If they ſpeak not according to this
word, they ſhall haue no morning light.
            
            
               
Now as touching the variance & diuerſity
of opinions nowadaies, as touching
the diſſention & controuerſie that
is at this time among vs I would to
God that all ſuch as defend & maintain
the Popes authoritie & power, would
be content to be iudged by this rule, to
be tried by this only rule that S. Paul
here giueth. Theſe are the moſt & the
greateſt controuerſies, wherupon hath
riſen all the contention & variance that
we haue ſéen; whether we ſhould haue
a Communion, or a priuat Maſſe: whether
the Communion ſhould be miniſtred
vnder both kinds, or not: whether
we ought to haue our Prayers in our
vulgar tongue: whether we ſhold haue
and ſet vp in our Churches any grauen
Images: and whether we may lawfully
haue the Scriptures in our common
tongue, that euery man may read
and vnderſtand them. Theſe are, I
ſay, the controuerſies, whereon hangeth
all our debate. But now let vs ſée
and conſider, whether ſuch as taught
you to haue a priuate Maſſe: ſuch as
would haue the Communion miniſtred

vnder one kind alone: ſuch as taught
you to worſhip Images: ſuch as would
you to pray in an vnknowen tongue:
ſuch as would not ſuffer you to haue
the knowledge of Gods word and his
goſpell: let vs I ſay, according vnto S.
Pauls rule, ſée whether they were the
true Miniſters of Chriſt, & faithful ſtewards
of the ſecrets of God; let vs
weigh whether they diſcloſed vnto you
the myſteries of Gods word, and whether
their doctrine agréed with the goſpell
of Chriſt.
            Chriſt at his laſt Supper ordeyned a
Communion,Luk. 22. for the comfort of all our
Soules; but they turned this into a priuat
Maſſe, that one man ſhould receiue
alone. This was contrarie to Chriſt,
contrarie to that he ordeined. And how
then ſhould wée eſteeme them, as the
Miniſters of Chriſt, & Stewards of the
ſecrets of God? Chriſt miniſtred this
Communion to his Diſciples in both
the kinds; yet they notwithſtanding
miniſtred it vnder one kind alone, they
robbed the people, and took the cup from
them. And this was contrary to Chriſt,

& his inſtitution. And how then ſhould
wée eſtéeme them as the miniſters of
Chriſt, & ſtewards of the ſecrets of God?
God gaue vs in commaundement to
make no grauen Image: they taught
that we ſhould make ourſelues grauen
Images, that wee ſhould knéele, that
we ſhould bowe, that we ſhould créepe
vnto them, and that we ſhould offer &
ſticke vp candles before them.
            This they taught to bee neceſſarie
doctrine, and that our ſaluation depended
therupon. This haue they done,
you all right well know, and this contrarie
to the expreſſe commandement
of God. And how then ſhould wee eſteem
them as the miniſters of Chriſt,
and Stewards of the ſecrets of God?
S. Paul willeth our praiers in the congregation
to be ſuch,1. Cor. 14. to be red and ſong
in ſo plain a tongue, in ſo diſtinct and
knowne a language, that the common
people may vnderſtand them, and ſo
altogether may anſwere the miniſter,
and ſay Amen. And this was vſed in
the Patriarches, in the Prophets, in
the Apoſtles, in the old Doctours

times, in the Primitiue Church: and
yet there haue beene men, and now
are, that would haue the praiers in Latine,
in a tongue to vs ſtrange and vnknowne,
and in a tongue that few or
none vnderſtand. And how then can
they ſay they are the Miniſters of
Chriſt, & Stewards of Gods ſecrets?
God, in the old Law, gaue in charge
to his people,Num. 15. Deut. 11. that they ſhould haue his
Law alwaies before their eyes, that
they ſhould haue his commandements
written in their hands, on their ſleeues,
on their doore threſholds, in the ſkirts
of their garments. This God himſelfe
commanded. And Chriſt in the new
Law, Scrutamini Scripturas, ſaith he,
illae enim teſtimonium perhibent de me,
               Ioh. 5.
               Search ye the Scripturs, for they do bear
witneſſe of mee. And yet this notwithſtanding,
notwithſtanding Chriſt
commaunded vs to ſearth the Scripturs,
yet you your ſelues haue known
men, and ſuch as were Preachers, forbid
you to haue Gods Goſpell in your
hands, would not ſuffer you to haue
the holy Teſtament of Chriſt in your

houſes, no nor in the Churches for all
men to read. This was contrarie to
Gods commandement, and the mind
of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt. And how
then can they ſay they are the Miniſters
of Chriſt, & Stewards of Gods
ſecrets? Chriſt ſaid vnto Peter, Amas
me? paſce oues meos,
               Ioh. 21▪
                
               paſce agnos meos, paſce
gregem meum: Peter (ſaid Chriſt) loueſt
thou me? feed my ſheepe, feed my
lambes, feed my flock: But our great
clearkes, our Popes, our Cardinals,
our Biſhops, would ſeldome or neuer
make a Sermon; they fed not Gods
ſhéepe, they fed not Gods lambs,
they had no regard to Gods flocke:
and how then could they ſay, they
were the Miniſters of Chriſt, and
Stewards of Gods ſecrets? I leaue
out much of purpoſe, good brethren, I
wittingly ouerpaſſe here many things
els, that I could ſay herein; the time
would faile me, if I ſhold reherſe vnto
you al thoſe things wherin they haue
moſt ſhamfully abuſed thēſelues. But
iudge you, my brethren, by theſe things
only which I haue here ſhewed vnto

you, whether they ſhould be eſtéemed
as the Miniſters of Chriſt and Stewards
of the ſecrets of God? Chriſt
willed them not only to be Stewards
but faithfull Stewards, faithfull miniſters,
faithfull diſpenſers of his
ſecrets. If to do nothing be the faithfulneſſe
that God requireth in them,
if this bee the charge that Chriſt demandeth
of them, then may wee well
call them the ſeruants of God and miniſters
of Chriſt: otherwiſe how can
we ſay, that they are the Stewards of
Gods ſecrets, and faithfull diſpenſers
of his hidden myſteries?
            Saint Paul goeth forth and ſaith;
It is but a ſmall thing that I ſhould be
iudged of you. Saint Paul notwithſtanding
he was an elect veſſel of God,
to beare abroad the glorie of his name,
notwithſtanding hee was the greateſt
of the Apoſtles, and a faithfull diſpenſer
of Gods ſecrets; yet ſome men
ſaid that hée was vnlearned, ſome
ſaid hee was no Miniſter of Chriſts,
ſome ſaid that there were many other
Preachers better than hee. And this

was ſpoken of him euen by the Chriſtians,
and ſuch as profeſſed Gods
name. And thus a great number of
the people iudged that S. Paul was
not the ſeruant of God, was not the
Miniſter of Chriſt, was not a Steward
of Gods ſecrets. But S. Paule
appealed from them, he appealed from
their iudgements, and ſaid; It is but a
ſmal matter for me to be iudged of you,
or of mans daie &c. Here may wee ſée
what a bold courage, what a ſtout ſtomacke
was in S. Paul, when he durſt
thus openly, and as it were, to their faces,
appeale from the peoples iudgement,
and ſo bring them before the
dreadfull maieſtie of the eternall God.
This was a great courage of his, this
was a ſigne that hee little or nothing
feared the force of the people. But this
he did, becauſe he wel knew that what
euer befell him in this world, what
euer puniſhment hee ſuffered in this
life, he could not miſcarie before God,
hée could not doe other than well in
the life to come. And therefore likewiſe
in another place hee bouldly ſaid

vnto the people, I am pure from the
bloud of all men, I haue kept back nothing
that was profitable, I haue hid
nothing from you, but haue ſhewed
you all the counſell of God. And ſo,
where, at this day ſome men there are
which ſay that this Doctrine which is
now preached vnto you, ſhall againe
haue a change, that this Religion ſhall
be taken away and once againe altered,
that it can not long ſtand & continew:
to ſuch we boldly anſwere here
as S. Paule to the Corinthians did,
that it is but a ſmal matter for vs to be
iudged of you, that we much force not
what you iudge and déeme of vs. For
we haue kept nothing backe from you,
we haue diſcloſed vnto you al the counſell
of God. But if ſuch change doth
happen, if any alteration of our Religion
doth chance, as poſſible enough it
is ſo to come to paſſe, yet is it not (good
brethren) a thing to bee reioyced at,
it is not a thing wherat we ſhould triumph
and be glad.
            For oftentimes when God ſéeth his
benefits miſuſed, when he perceiueth

his Goſpell little regarded, when hee
eſpieth his holy word neglected and nothing
ſet by: then he pulleth from vs
againe his benefits earſt beſtowed,
then he taketh away his word from
out of the congregation, then hee will
not ſuffer the light of his holy Goſpell,
any longer to ſhine vpon them. And
this when he doth, he doth it onely for
our ſinfulneſſe, only for our owne ſins
& wretchedneſſe. For ſo in times paſt
he ſaid by Oſe his Prophet; For the
wickedneſſe of my people I will get me
away, they ſhal not ſee me. So Chriſt
himſelfe alſo ſaid;Mat. 21. 
               Auferetur à vobis regnum
Dei, The kingdom of God ſhalbe
taken from you, & giuen to the heathen
which ſhall bring forth the fruits of it.
But alas, when Gods kingdom is taken
away, in whoſe kingdom and dominion
do the people then liue? when
Gods goſpel & his word is no longer
preached, what learning, what doctrin,
what diſcipline is there left to bee
taught? And this oftentimes commeth
to paſſe by means of our owne ſin and
wickednes: that for ye miſuſing of God

and his goſpel, we neither haue Gods
Kingdome, nor his Goſpell among
vs. But then alas, in what great miſerie,
in what wretchedneſſe, in what
wofull caſe ſhall wée ſtand? For if
Gods Kingdom be ſhut from vs, whither
ſhal we fly? If the light of his goſpell
be taken from vs, what light ſhall
be left vs? If God will get him away
from vs, who ſhall bee our ſuccour?
And therefore no man ought to reioice
hereat, no man ought to be glad of ſuch
a change. But though Gods kingdom
be taken away from vs, though Gods
Goſpell bee no more preached vnto vs,
though God fly from vs, and will hide
himſelfe away, yet is God and his
goſpell nothing thereby altered; God
is ſtill one, and the ſame God, his goſpell
is the ſame goſpell that it was before,
his Kingdome continueth in one
ſtay and eſtate, it is not changed nor
altered. For ſaith Chriſt, Caelum & terra
tranſibunt,
               Mat. 5. 
               verbum autem meum non
tranſibit: Heauen and earth ſhall periſh,
but may word ſhall not periſh. And again,
Portae inferorū nō praeualebūt aduerſū
               
               Mat. 16.
               
               illud: The gates of hell ſhal not preuaile
againſt it. And therefore S. Paul hauing
on his ſide this word of God, which neuer
changeth, but alwayes continueth
one and the ſame: hauing, I ſay, this
word of his which ſhal neuer periſh, and
againſt which the verie gates of hel ſhal
not preuaile, he was bould to appeale
from the ſlaunderous iudgement of the
people, and ſay, I paſſe not what you
thinke of me, It is but a ſmall matter for
mee to bee iudged of you, or of mans
day, &c.
            
            Good people, you haue here heard declared
vnto you, and thereby you may
well perceiue, that S. Paul notwithſtanding
hée was the ſeruant of God,
an elect veſſell of the holy Ghoſt, and the
chiefeſt Apoſtle of Chriſt; yet was euill
ſpoken of and miſliked euen of the Chrians,
and ſuch as profeſſed the name of
God: notwithſtanding he was indéed
the true ſeruant of God, the miniſter of
Chriſt, and a faithfull diſpenſer of the
ſecrets of God, yet could not all men
ſpeake wel of him, al men could not giue
him a good report. And therefore to cauſe

them to conceiue a better opinion of
him, and report of him none other than
he deſerued, he here willeth them, that
they ſhould firſt weigh well and conſider
his doings, they ſhould examine his
doctrine, and the goſpel that he had preached
amongſt them: they ſhould marke
well and ſee whether he had been a faithfull
diſpenſer of the myſteries of Gods
goſpell, and then ſo eſtéeme him, as the
miniſter of Chriſt, and Steward of the
ſecrets of God. And therefore iudge you
nothing (ſaith he) before the time that
the Lord come, which ſhall bring that to
light which is hid in darkneſſe, and open
the counſels of the hearts, and then ſhall
euerie one haue prayſe of God. And ſo
in theſe daies, as Paul in his time was
miſliked of many, ſo I ſay, in theſe our
dayes the miniſters of God, and preachers
of his goſpell, are euill ſpoken of amongſt
all men: ſome ſay they are vnlearned,
they know nothing, they are
crafts men, they were neuer ſet to ſchool,
this they haue ſaid, and do yet report of
them. Some men ſay, they preach they
cannot tell what, they ſpeake againſt

prayer, againſt faſting, againſt almes
déeds, and all other good works; they allow
nothing that good is, they diſallow
in manner all things. This you know
hath béene ſpoken, and yet is reported of
ſuch as now are miniſters in Gods goſpell.
But hereunto haue I none other
thing to ſay, than that which S. Paul in
this place writeth to the Corinthians,
It is ſufficient for vs to bee found the ſeruants
of God, the miniſters of Chriſt, &
faithfull diſpenſers of Gods ſecrets. In
the meane ſeaſon doe not you (good brethren)
thinke euill of the preachers of
Gods word, report not amiſſe of the miniſters
of Chriſt, account not them your
enemies, that bring vnto you the glad
tidings of the goſpel.Acts 17▪
                When Paul came
to Berea from Theſſalonica, and began
there to preach the Goſpell of Chriſt,
the people ranne to their bookes, ſearched
the Scriptures, conferred his
doctrine with the word of God: and
when they found that in all points it agréed
therwith, then they beléeued Paul,
then they embraced his doctrine, then
with willing harts they claue to his diſcipline.

And as they did, euen ſo let vs
do, good brethren; let vs not iudge raſhly
of Gods miniſters, let vs not ouer
haſtily giue ſentence of them, let vs not
report euill of Gods ſeruants: but let
vs well weigh and conſider what thing
they teach vs, let vs examine & trie their
doctrine with the touch-ſtone of Gods
word: let vs conferre their preaching,
their teaching, their diſcipline, with the
Scriptures of the holy Ghoſt. And this
when you haue done, then bée you our
iudges; then if you ſée that we teach you
nothing but the myſteries of God, if
you perceiue that we onely diſcloſe vnto
you the will of God, if you ſée that wée
preach vnto you none other thing than
the ſecrets of Gods goſpell, eſtéeme vs
to be the ſeruants of God, the miniſters
of Chriſt, and ſtewards of the ſecrets of
God.
            The end of the firſt Sermon.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND
Sermon.
            
               Pſalme 67. 3. 4.
               
                  3. Let the people prayſe thee O God, let
all the people prayſe thee.
                  4. O let the people reioyce and be glad
that thou iudgeſt the folke righteouſly,
and gouerneſt the Nations vpon
the earth, &c.
               
            
            
               AT what time the Iewes
had grieuouſly offended
God their Lord, forgotten
their obedience towards
him, and betaken
themſelues to ſtrange
gods, euery man wandring after his
owne luſt and fanſie; and thereupon
God began to plague and puniſh them
with ſundry and diuers plagues, and
with vnſeaſonable weather, ſo that their
graſſe, their corne, their fruits, & what
euer other commodities ſprang out of
the earth, were al in great danger: then
Dauid the Prophet, ſéeing all theſe miſeries
at once fall vpon the people, called

them home againe, ſhewed them how
they ſhould returne from their wickednes,
& come vnto God. For God deſireth
not our deſtructiō, he is loth to work
reuengement vpon vs when we anger
& diſpleaſe him.Eze. 18. 
               In what euer houre the
ſinner ſhal returne from his ſin, & come
vnto me, ſaith the Lord, I ſhall be readie
to receiue him. As for all his ſins that hee
did before, they ſhall not be thought vpon:
but in his righteouſneſſe that he hath
done he ſhal liue. In what euer time a
man ſhall hold vp his hands, acknowledge
gods mercy, & be ſory for his offences
from the bottom of his hart, God aſketh
no more, he craueth no more at his
hands, he is pleaſed only with his humble
repentance. And therefore Dauid in
the beginning of this Pſalm ſhewed the
people how they ſhold in this wiſe come
vnto God, & deſire mercy at his hands,
ſaying: God bee mercifull vnto vs, and
bleſſe vs, & ſhew vs the light of his countenance,
and be mercifull vnto vs.
            
            And now therefore, when Dauid perceiued
that this grace of god, this mercy,
this bleſſing of his was not giuen in

vaine, was not fruſtrat & void, he cauſed
all the people to ſay, Let the people
praiſe thee O God, let all the people
praiſe thee. This is a ſhort ſentence, but
ſuch a ſentence it is, as ſhall endure and
continue for euer. This is our profeſſion,
this is our baptiſme, this is our religion.
It is not ſufficient to know the goſpel,
to know God, to know Chriſt, but
we muſt confeſſe the goſpel, we muſt cō
               feſſe
God, we muſt confeſſe & acknowledge
Chriſt. The goſpel that Chriſt left
vs, is not a ſong to delight our ears, it is
not an harmony to content & pleaſe our
hearing, but it is a ſquire to direct our
liues by, it is a rule to frame all our doings
by. S. Paul ſaith,Titus 2. 
               To this end hath
the grace of God, that bringeth ſaluatiō,
appeared vnto vs, that we ſhold deny vngodlyneſſe
& worldly luſts: and that we
ſhould liue diſcreetly, righteouſly, and
godly, in this world. Therefore hath
God giuen vs h
                  ••
                goſpell, therefore hath
he giuen vs his word, that we ſhould according
thereunto liue a ſober, a diſcreet,
and modeſt life, ſaith he. And in another
place: That we by the ſame goſpell may

ſerue and pleaſe him in newneſſe of life.
And ſo Zacharie that holy Father, béeing
filled with the holy ghoſt,Luke 1. ſaid: that
wee beeing deliuered out of the hands of
our enemies, might ſerue him al the daies
of our life, in ſuch holineſſe and righteouſneſſe,
as is accepted before him. For
like as our profeſſiō is, ſo ſhold our liues
be. If wée profeſſe the name of Chriſt,
we ſhould liue like chriſtians: if we profeſſe
God, we ſhould liue as becommeth
the ſeruants of God.1. Ioh. 3. Saint Iohn ſayth,
For this purpoſe appeared the Sonne of
God, to looſe the workes of the diuell:
to this end, that all ſinne and wickedneſſe
ſhould be left and forſaken. By
this are the children of God knowne
from the children of the diuell. S. Paul
in his Epiſtle to the Romans ſaith, before
God they are not righteous which
heare the law, but they that do the law
ſhall be iuſtified. God reckoneth no man
iuſt for hearing of the law, hee accounteth
no man righteous for knowing of
his goſpell, but for the kéeping of his
law, for the obſeruing of his goſpell;
though no man indéed be able throughly

to fulfill and kéepe the ſame.Iam. 1. S. Iames
alſo ſaith, See that yee bee doers of the
word, and not hearers onely, deceiuing
your owne ſelues. For if any heare the
word and do it not, he is like vnto a man
that beholdeth his bodily face in a glaſſe:
for as ſoone as hee looketh on himſelfe,
hee goeth away and forgetteth immediatly
what his faſhion was. But who
ſo looketh in the perfect law of libertie,
and continueth therein, (if hee bee not a
forgetfull hearer, but a doer of the work)
the ſame ſhall be happie in his deed. If
ye therfore heare the word of God preached
vnto you, if you know the goſpell
of Chriſt neuer ſo well, if yée dayly and
howerly read and ſtudy the ſame: yet if
you liue not according to the word of
God, if you walke not after the goſpel of
Chriſt, you doe nothing elſe but deceiue
your ſelues, you doe I ſay, nought elſe
but deceiue your owne ſelues. S. Iohn
the Baptiſt when he preached and prepared
the way of the Lord, hée began
with this leſſon,Math. 3. 
               Penitentiam agite: doe
you (ſaid he) the workes of repentance.
For hereunto are we all called, not only

to know Gods way, but alſo to walke
in Gods way: not only to know God &
his name, but alſo to confeſſe God and
praiſe his holy name. Therefore do wée
receiue Chriſts holy Sacraments, therfore
are we baptiſed, therfore eat we the
Sacrament of Chriſts body, and drinke
his moſt holy blood. But O mercifull
God, how many are there that ſay they
know Gods way, & yet walk not in that
way! how many that ſay they know
their faith & promiſe made in baptiſm, &
yet forſake the ſame! how many that receiue
the Sacrament of Chriſts body &
blood, & yet cōtinue in their old ſin & wickedneſſe!
But God ſaith, God I ſay,
that cannot lye,1. Ioh. 2. ſaith, Qui manet in peccato
non nouit me, hee that continueth in ſin
knoweth not me. Ezechiel declaring the
folly of the people in his time,Ezech. 33. ſaith: O
theſe come vnto thee after the manner of
a great people: yea my people ſit down
before thee, and heare thy words, but
they doe not thereafter: For in their
mouths they ſhew themſelues as though
they were feruent, but their heart goeth
after their owne couetous lucre. They

haue my word in their mouthes, they
ſpeake euer of my name, ſaith God,
but their hearts are farre from mee.
And ſo likewiſe Iude the Apoſtle of
Chriſt,Iude 1. 
               Veritatem Dei verterunt in luxum,
ſaith hee, They haue turned the
truth of Gods word into riot: they are
vngodly, and turne the grace of our
God into wantonneſſe, and deny God.
Paul complaining of the miſliuing of
of the people in his time,Rom. 1. ſaid, Whereas
they know God, they glorifie not
God: Where they know his name,
they glorifie not his name. Whoſoeuer
he be that taketh vpon him to know
Gods way, and walketh not in Gods
way, whoſoeuer taketh vpon him to
know God and his goſpell, and directs
not his dooings according vnto
Gods will & his holy commandements,
hée doth not confeſſe God, and glorifie
his holy name. Saint Paul found
fault with the Iewes,Rom. 2. and ſaid, For
your ſake is the name of God euill ſpoken
of among the Gentiles: for your
ſake, for your euill and corrupt lyuing,
ſaid S. Paul
               
Good brethren, let vs conſider that as
many of vs as ſay, we know gods way,
we know gods word & his goſpel; if vertue
follow not, if honeſt conuerſation &
vpright liuing follow not this our profeſſion,
we ſhame God, and diſhonor his
holy name. Dicunt ſe noſce Deum, ſaith
S.Titus 1. 
               Paul, ſed factis negant: they ſay they
know God, ſaith he, they ſay they know
his holy word & goſpel, but in their deeds
they deny God, they deny his goſpel. An
horrible thing it is to deny God. The
Turks, the Iews, the Heathen, & Infidels,
do not deny God: & yet S. Paul ſaid
that in his time Chriſtian men, ſuch as
profeſſed the name of god, in their déeds
denied god & his goſpel. If thou ſay thou
knoweſt God, if thou ſay thou knoweſt
his goſpell: if thou liue not as God commaundeth
thée, if thou liue not as it becommeth
a profeſſor of Gods goſpell,
thou blaſphemeſt Gods name, and diſhonoreſt
his goſpel. Ore ſuo appropinquant
ad me,
               Eſay 29. ſaith God by his prophet Eſay, corda
autem illorū longe abſunt à me: this people
draweth nigh vnto mee with their
mouthes, but their hearts are farre from
               
me. They honor me with their mouthes
but with their hearts they deny mée.
And in another place God by his Prophet
Dauid ſaith: O thou man,
               Pſal. 50. 
               why doeſt
thou preach my lawes, and takeſt my
couenant in thy mouth? for with the ſinfull
thou art ſinfull, with the théefe thou
art a théefe, with the adulterer thou art
an adulterer.
            Therefore, if wee haue the word of
God as a ſong to delight our eares, if we
turne the truth of Gods goſpel into riot
and wantonneſſe, if we confeſſe God
with our lips, & deny him in our déeds,
if we ſay we know Gods law, we know
his commaundements, and yet liue not
thereafter; we do not prayſe God and
confeſſe his name, but we ſhame God,
and diſhonor his holy name: we cauſe
the people to thinke euil of Gods word,
and ſlaunder his goſpell. And this is the
cauſe why the common ſort of people
iudge, that not to be the goſpel, which is
this day preached & taught vnto them;
becauſe ſuch as profeſſe the goſpell, liue
not after the goſpell, becauſe ſuch as ſay
they know Gods way, walke not in

Gods way. And thus through our own
folly, through our owne euill and corrupt
liuing, we offend our brethren, we
offend our ſelues, and ſo in them offend
Ieſus Chriſt: and their bloud ſhall bée
required at our hands. Let vs remember
what God by the Prophet Eſay
ſaith,Eſay 39. 
               Haec eſt vera via, ambulate in ea:
This is the true way, walke in the ſame.
Chryſoſtome ſaith, if yee heare Gods
word preached vnto you, and yee follow
it not, yee learne, ſaith he, but your
owne damnation, yee learne nought els
but your owne deſtruction: The words
that you heare preached vnto you, ſhall
accuſe and condemne you. God ſayth,
Thou ſhalt not ſteale,
               Exod. 20. 
               thou ſhalt not
commit adulterie, thou ſhalt beare no
falſe witneſſe, &c. theſe words, this law
of God written vnto vs, ſhall accuſe,
yea, and condemne vs, I ſay; if wee to
our powers follow not the ſame, if wée
walke not and continue in them accordingly.
Alas, the verie age of the world,
the profeſſion that wee haue taken vpon
vs, is, or ſhould bee ynough to put vs
in remembrance of another life, of another

world to come. Let vs not take the
name of God in vaine, let vs all prayſe
and extoll God, let our mouthes, our
hands, our hearts, and all other our
members praiſe and confeſſe his name
for euer. Laetentur & exultent populs, &c.
O let the people reioyce and bee glad,
that thou iudgeſt the folke righteouſly,
& gouerneſt the nations vpon the earth.
Thy way, O Lord, is knowne, ſaid Dauid,
thy way is knowne vpon the earth,
therefore let all people, all nations, yea,
all the whole world reioyce and be glad
thereat.
            Diuers people ſet their minds on diuers
things: ſome in conqueſt, ſome in
great power and force of men, ſome in
heapes of money, and treaſures of this
world, ſome others, that they are able
to make other men feare, and they
feare nothing themſelues. But all
theſe things are vaine, both conqueſt,
power, and heapes of great treaſure,
are tranſitorie, and fade away: but
the man of God, that dreadeth God,
and hath a delight in his Law, ſetteth
his ioy and delight in thoſe things

which haue no end, but continue for euer.
And therefore Dauid here ſaith, Let
all the people reioice and be glad, in this
thing alone, becauſe thou iudgeſt the
folke righteouſly, and gouerneſt the nations
vpon the earth.
            
            Let vs conſider if there were a whole
Chriſtian nation brought in captiuitie
vnder the Turke, in thraldom and ſubiection
vnto him, in ſuch ſort that they
ſhould neuer heare the Scriptures, neuer
receiue the Sacraments, neuer
come to the church to pray, but alwaies
be where God ſhould be deſpiſed, and
his name diſhonored: cōſider I ſay with
your ſelues, in what miſerie, in what
wretchedneſſe, in what great thraldome
ſhould they be. With what conſcience
ſhould they be able to abide this?
But if it would then pleaſe God to deliuer
them ſtanding in this ſtate, if it
would pleaſe God to reſtore vnto
them his Scriptrues, if it would pleaſe
God that they might receiue againe
his holy Sacraments, and might
come and pray together: if God would
thus much doe for them, O what ioy,

what tryumph, what mirth would they
make! Let vs therfore here conſider the
eſtate of Gods Church before the time
of the Prophet Dauid, & as it was in his
time. Before the Raigne of Dauid, the
Tabernacle of God was broken,1. Reg. 5. the
Arke loſt, the Scriptures taken from
them, the Prieſts ſlaine: God made
them no anſwere by Prophet, Angell,
nor by dreame: euery man ran whither
himſelfe beſt liked, without any
feare of God, or dread of his Law: ſo
had Saul that wicked King, miſerably
toſſed and turmoyled the ſame. But it
pleaſed God, by the hands of King Dauid
his Prophet, to reſtore againe his
Church ſo ouerthrowne, to her former
eſtate and condition: it pleaſed God by
him to make vp the Tabernacle againe,2. Reg. 6.
to find out the Arke that before was
loſt, to ſet vp all other things in good
ſtay and order: and this was as much,
as if he had called them from death vnto
life, from bondage to fréedome, from
Hell to Heauen. Therefore when all
theſe things were thus reſtored againe
by the might and power of God, this

prophet Dauid comforted his heart,Pſal. 118. and
ſaid; Haec eſt dies quā fecit Dominus, laetemur
& exultemus in ea: This is a ioyfull
day which the Lord hath made, let vs reioyce
& be glad therin. And ſo likewiſe
in another place;Pſal. 99. 
               Dominus regnauit, moueatur
terra: The Lord beareth the rule,
the Lord is king, be the people neuer ſo
vnpacient: Let the whole world conſpire
(ſaith he) let it be moued & do what
it can againſt God, for God ruleth and
raigneth ouer al. Zacharie, when he ſaw
the comfortable time that ſhould enſue
the birth of Chriſt, he fel downe & cried
out, ſaying: Benedictus Dominus Deus Iſrael,
               Luk. 1.
               quia viſit auit & fecit redemptionē plebis
ſuae: Bleſſed be the Lord God of Iſrael,
for he hath viſited & redeemed his
people. So Simeon that old and holy father,
ſo ſoone as he beheld Chriſt, & had
receiued his redéemer into his armes, by
and by his heart brake out for ioy, & ſaid;
Nunc dimittis ſeruū tuū Domine,
               Luk. 2. 
               ſecundū
verbū tuū in pace &c. Now letteſt thou
thy ſeruant, O Lord, depart in peace, according
to thy word: for mine eyes haue
beholden thy ſaluation, mine eyes haue

ſeene thy Sauiour, whom thou haſt prepared
for al people. Euen ſo in this place
the prophet Dauid conſidering the great
mercie that God had ſhewed, ye wonderous
work that he had then wrought, &
how that in his time al the whole people
knew Gods way, he ſaid; Laetentur & exultent
populi &c: Let the people reioyce &
be glad, yea let all the people reioyce, becauſe
thou iudgeſt the folke righteouſly,
& gouerneſt the nations vpon the earth.
            
            Now (good brethren) foraſmuch as we
haue here ſéene & conſidered the ſtate of
Gods Church before Dauids time, & the
ſtate wherunto it was reſtored again in
Dauids time: Euen ſo let vs in like conſider
the ſtate of Chriſts Church before
our time, & the ſtate & condition of ye ſame
in our own time, in thoſe daies that we
our ſelues haue ſéen. Let vs cōſider how
horrible darkneſſe, what error & confuſion
hath of late time bin in the Church of
god, let vs weigh & conſider (I ſay) ye deformity
& great abuſes ye were in ye ſame.
For alas, we had the ſacraments, we had
ye holy goſpel & word of god, but wee had
them al in vain. Baptiſm we had, but we

knew not the Principles of our faith.
The Sacrament of the body and bloud
of Chriſt wee had, but wee vnderſtood
not why Chriſt left vs this Sacrament,
we knew not why he ſaid; Take, eate,
this is my body &c. It is the greateſt
Sacrament, and yet we perceiued not
what it meant. We had Praiers, wee
had Pſalmes, wee had ſupplications
vnto God, and yet we vnderſtood them
not, we vnderſtood no word of them.
Wee worſhipped things made with
mens hands, Images of blockes and
ſtones, ſuch as had eyes and ſaw not,
eares and heard not, neither had any
breath in their mouthes: ſuch things
we worſhipped, and this contrarie to
the expreſſe commandement of God.
The Scriptures were rent, were torne,
were troden vnder foote, were burnt before
our eyes. We groped our way in
the middeſt of the day, as ſaid the Prophet
Ieremie. And as the ſame Prophet
of his owne time ſpake, ſaying; Secundum
numerum Ciuitatum tuarum ſunt Dij
tui:
               Ier. 11.
               According to the number of the cities,
are thy Gods, O Iuda: ſo might we

of our owne time haue ſaid. For looke
how many cities we had, ſo many Gods
had wee alſo. Euery Borough, euery
Towne, yea, euery village (in a maner)
had his proper and peculier Saint. It
was then come to paſſe that Eſaie propheſied,Eſa. 5.
ſaying; Hell hath opened her
mouth maruellous wide, Hell hath gaped
(ſaith hee) becauſe they haue no
knowledge of God, becauſe they haue
no vnderſtanding. And ſo likewiſe Salomon:
               Pro. 29.
               When Propheſie faileth, the
people muſt needs be ſcattered. This
is the word of God, and this is the
miſerie that wee our ſelues haue
ſéene. The old father Tobie, when God
had ſtricken him with blindneſſe, and ſo
taken his ſight from him, and therefore
his friends and acquaintance, reſorted
vnto him to comfort him, and ſomwhat,
if they might, eaſe him of his great grief:Tob. 5.
               Alas (ſaid he) what comfort can I receiue
that cannot ſee the light of the Sunne.
Thus ſaid he only becauſe he could not
behold the light of this world. Alas,
what comfort then, what ioy, what conſolation
could wee haue, when God

tooke from vs the knowledge of his goſpell,
the light of his word, yea the knowledge
of God himſelfe; when euery man
ran whither himſelf beſt liked, & folowed
that way which pleaſed his owne
phanſie. Therefore were wee caried away,
therefore were we led into errour,
therfore loſt we the knowledge of God,
becauſe propheſie failed, becauſe Gods
word was not taught and preached vnto
vs. But now it hath pleaſed God to
reueale himſelfe vnto vs, now we know
what is what, now can we diſcerne light
from darkneſſe, good from bad; now we
vnderſtand & know this, I ſay. Now
we haue the Scriptures in our mother
tongue, that euery man may read and
vnderſtand them: the ſame Scriptures
that Chriſt hath ſealed with his owne
bloud. And theſe Scriptures Ieremie
that old father calleth, The prop of
our Faith.
               Ioh. 5. So Chriſt himſelfe; Illae ſunt
quae teſtimonium perhibent de me: They
beare witneſſe of me, (ſaith Chriſt) and
they ſhall lead you into al truth. Hillary
ſaith; The Scriptures are the ſquire and
Rule of our life.
               Ioh. 5. 
               In the Scriptures (ſaith

Chriſt) you ſhall find euerlaſting life.
And Paule writing vnto the Romains,
ſaith;Rom. 1. 
               The Goſpell of Chriſt is the power
of God, to ſaue all that beleeue theron.
The Scriptures were written
(ſaith he) that we thereby ſhould know
our ſaluation. All theſe things God hath
now reſtored vnto vs. Now are wee
able to know our profeſſion, now are
we able to know our Religion, to know
God, to know Chriſt, to knowe our ſaluation.
Now haue wee the vſe of the
Primitiue Church, the Communion
vnder both kinds: now haue wee our
praiers in our knowne tongue, as in the
Apoſtles time, as in the old Fathers and
Doctors times they were vſed: Tertullian
that old Doctour ſpeaking of his
time; We come together (ſaith he) and
hear the Scripturs read vnto vs. We may
now do, as S. Baſil writeth the people
in his time did: Sonus virorū, mulierū, &
paruulorū, in orationibus claugorē edit, tāquā
fluctus ferientes littora: The ſound (ſaith
he) of men, women, and children praying
together, maketh a noyſe like the
waues of the Sea beating on the ſhore.
               
Thus ſaith that old father, they did in
his time, and thus may you now do.
Now may we ſay, as Athanaſius ſaid;
If I be deceiued, thou haſt deceiued me,
O Lord. For thy word is plaine, thy
Goſpell is true, and therefore if we be
now deceiued, it is thy word, it is thy
Goſpell, that deceiueth vs: God hath
ſo plainly ſhewed vnto vs the light of
his Goſpel, the knowledge of his word.
Therfore haue we moſt iuſt cauſe to ſay
with the prophet Dauid: Laetentur & exultent
populi, Let the people reioyce & be
glad. And therfore let vs not be vnkind,
let vs not be vnthankful, let vs ſay; thou
O Lord, iudgeſt the folk righteouſly, &
gouerneſt the Nations vpon the earth.
Thou haſt now reſtored vnto vs our
praiers in our known tongue, thy ſacraments
as they were vſed in the Apoſtls
time, in ye Primitiue Church; in the old
Fathers & Doctors times. And let vs ſay
with Zachary that holy father; Benedictus
Dominus Deus Iſrael, Bleſſed is the Lord
God of Iſrael. Let vs ſay with Dauid;
Haec eſt dies, laetemur & exultemus in ea, this
is the ioyful day, let vs reioyce & be glad

therin. Let vs with Simeon the prophet
ſay, Nunc dimittis ſeruum tuū Domine, ſecundum
verbum tuum in pace, Now letteſt
thou thy ſeruant, O Lord, depart in
peace, according vnto thy word. Let vs
ſay, as the prophet here ſaith, Laetentur &
exultent populi, Let the people reioice and
be glad, becauſe thou ruleſt the Nations
vpon the earth. O let the people praiſe
thee, O God, let all the people praiſe
thee. And God, euen our owne God
giue vs his bleſſing, that the earth may
bring forth her increaſe.
            
            Thou haſt, O Lord, ſent vnto vs thy
meaſure, thou haſt giuen vs thy ſquire,
whereby to meaſure and rule our liues:
thou haſt ſent, I ſay, vnto vs thy Goſpell,
thy holie word, the light of thy
déerely beloued Sonne Ieſus Chriſt,
whereby we may guid our ſelues, & direct
our waies vpon the earth. And when
we ſhall thus liue, when we ſhall once
begin ſo to direct our doings, as Gods
Goſpell teacheth, & his holie word commaundeth
vs; then ſhall the earth bring
forth her increaſe, then ſhall ſhe yeeld vs
her fruit in due ſeaſon. For like as God.

when we turne from him, following
our owne luſts and deſires, plagueth
and puniſheth vs: ſo when we repent
and returne vnto him, he is good, he
is louing, he is mercifull vnto vs.
Turne vnto me,
               Ier. 3. ſayth God, by his
prophet Ieremie, and I will turne vnto
you.
               Eze. 33. 
               When ſoeuer a ſinner repenteth
him of his ſinnes, I will forget his iniquities,
ſaith the Lord. It is the Lord
that gyueth vs fruit, it is the Lord
that maketh the ground fertile; it is
not the ground of it ſelfe that bringeth
forth fruit, it is not the corne that féedeth
vs, it is the bleſſing of God, the
bleſſing I ſay of God alone. And therefore
ſaith the prophet Dauid,
               Pſal. 145. 
               If thou
O Lord, wilt open thy hand, then all
things ſhall be filled with thy bleſſing.
It is the Lord that maketh the Sunne
to ſhyne,Pſal. 44. the Moone to giue light, the
raine to fall on the earth. I am the Lord
that doth all this, ſayth God. Dauid
alſo in his Pſalme ſaith,Pſal. 85. 
               Sciant quòd
manus tua fecit haec, Let them know, O
Lord, ſaith he, that thy hand alone hath
done theſe wonders. It is God, I ſay,

that cauſeth the earth to be fruitfull,
and bring forth increaſe, it is God that
cauſeth the heauens to heare the earth,
the earth to crie vnto the Heauens.
Your harts ſhall be full of my bleſſing,
ſaith the Lord. If we ſhall forſake our
ſinnes, if we will leaue our wickedneſſe,
and turne vnto God, our harts
ſhall be full of his bleſſing, and then
ſhall the earth bring forth her increaſe:
the earth this dead thing, this vnſenſible
thing, this maſſe of clay, at Gods
commaundement, at his will and pleaſure,
it ſhall bring forth corne, it ſhall
bring forth graſſe, and all other kind
of fruits, to ſerue them, that neuer
thinke vpon him that beſtowed them.
O that wée were kinde, that wée
were not vnmindfull, that we would
remember God: But alas, wée are
vnkind, we are vnmindfull, we neyther
thinke on God, nor his works:
and therefore God cloſeth vp his hand,
therefore he gyueth not vnto vs hys
bleſſing, therefore is the earth barren
and vnfruitfull. And this our
owne ſinnes cauſeth, this our owne

wickedneſſe, and ſinfull lyuing cauſeth.
Oſe the prophet vnto the people of Iſrael,
(when they had forſaken God their
Lord, and therefore were gréeuouſly puniſhed)
cried out and ſaid,Oſc. 13. 
               Malum tuum
ex te ô Iſrael, Thy euill is come of thy
ſelfe O Iſrael. All this ſcarſitie, all this
dearth, all this plague, commeth of thy
ſelfe alone: Thou art, ſaith he, the cauſe,
thou thy ſelfe art the cauſe hereof. And
euen as they were the cauſe of their plague,
ſo are we the only cauſe of all this
our puniſhment: and yet we ſée not, nor
know Gods anger. I haue ſtriken thee,
ſaith God by his prophet, and yet thou
feeleſt not: and where ſhall I ſtrike thee
once againe?
               Eſa. 1. 
               Filios educaui, ſaith God by
his prophet, I haue bred vp, I haue nouriſhed
vp children, and they deſpiſe me,
they ſet nought by mée, they will not acknowledge
mée their father. Good Bretheren,
let vs turne vnto God, let vs amend
our ſinfull lyuing, let vs ſubmit
our ſelues wholy to his mercie: ſo ſhall
the earth bring forth her increaſe, ſo ſhal
ſhe yéeld vs her fruit in due time & ſeaſon.
Let vs conſider the dignitie that

God hath giuen vs: he made vs in Paradiſe,
he faſhioned vs to his owne likeneſſe,
he breathed life into vs; and laſtly,
where we by the fall of our firſt parent
Adam, were all adiudged to eternall
death, he redéemed vs again by the blood
of his déere Sonne, and Paſſion of our
Sauior Ieſus Chriſt. Behold theſe
things, and be not vnthankfull. Let vs
(good Bretheren) behold our ſelues, let
vs behold our owne vocation, our owne
profeſſion, let vs behold Chriſt our Sauior.
We are the children of God, the
bretheren of Chriſt, and heyres of the
euerlaſting kingdom; we are Chriſtian
men, we profeſſe Gods Goſpell: let vs
therfore remember that we muſt walke
as becommeth the ſeruants of Chriſt,
we muſt liue like the profeſſors of Gods
holie Goſpell. Let vs remember how
many wayes God calleth vs, how diuerſly
he allureth vs vnto him, by what
ſundry meanes he prouoketh vs to come
vnto him. O thou proud ſoule, ſayth
God by his prophet, thou earth & aſhes,
when wilt thou forſake thy ſinfull lyuing
and come vnto me? when wilt thou repent

and turne vnto me? Alas, do we
looke that the ſtones in the ſtréets, the
verie ſtones vnder our féete ſhould riſe
vp, and call vs to repentance? The heauens
drop downe teares for our ſake,
they wéepe and are ſorie for vs; and wilt
not thou O man burſt out in teares,
and bewaile thy ſinfull life? God looketh
when we will come, he wayteth
when we will returne vnto him, he daily
and hourely watcheth when we will
ſubmit our ſelues, & receiue his mercie.
So louing, ſo good, ſo gratious a Lord
is he. Why ſhould you periſh, ſaith
Chriſt, giue me thy hart, O thou man,
and I am contented.
            Let vs all therefore my Bretheren,
let vs all returne vnto God, let vs altogether
come forth & confeſſe Gods holie
name; let our hands, our mouthes, our
harts, praiſe and laud him for euer: let
all the people reioyce and be glad, that
God iudgeth the folke righteouſly, and
gouerneth the Nations vpon the earth.
So ſhall the earth bring forth her increaſe,
ſo ſhall ſhée yéeld vs her fruit in
due ſeaſon: ſo ſhall we be bleſſed in our

houſes, bleſſed in the fields, bleſſed in
our commings in, and our goings out:
ſo ſhall our corne, our cattell, our ſhéepe,
and oxen, be alwayes bleſſed: and ſo
ſhall Gods bleſſing be vpon vs, and our
Children, and God, euen our owne God
ſhall bleſſe vs, and remaine with vs for
euer. Amen.
         
         
            THE THIRD
Sermon.
            
               Rom. 6. verſ. 19.
               19. Like as ye haue giuen ouer your
members to the ſeruice of vncleanneſse,
from one wickedneſse to an
other: euen ſo now alſo giue ouer
your members, to the ſeruice of
righteouſneſse, that ye may be holie
&c.
            
            
               FOr the better vnderſtanding
of theſe words written
by the Apoſtle S. Paul,
we muſt conſider that there
be two Princes of contrary diſpoſitions

and natures, which haue the rule and
gouernance of this world, that is to wit,
God, and the Deuill; and that neuer
was there man, ſithence the firſt foundation
of the world, but was in ſubiection
and vnder obedience either of the
the one, or of the other: And as God is
the father of light, the God of all good
men, ſo is the Deuill the father & Prince
of this world, the Lord of darkneſſe, the
king of this age,Epheſ. 6. as ſaith S. Paul, and
ruler of the wicked: And like as all good
men fight vnder the banner of God
their Lord, ſo all vngodly fight vnder
the ſtandard of the Deuill their Prince:
And euen as the iuſt man hath his reward
of God, ſo hath the wicked man
his ſtipend of the Deuill. And thus be
Infidels, Turkes, Iewes, and all Heathen
people, vnder the power and dominion
of the Deuill, vnder the ſtandard
of Sathan: and therefore are they not
able to thinke any good, to conceiue one
good thought, becauſe they fight vnder
his Banner, becauſe they haue giuen
ouer all their members to be ordered of
the Deuill, without any féeling of good,

without any feare of God. And thus, as
I ſaid, do the Turkes, thus do the Infidels,
thus do all Heathen people at
this day, and ſo did the Iewes in the
time of Paul, In vmbra mortis ambulauerunt,
               Pſal. 107. Ephe. 4.
ſaith he, They walked in the ſhadow
of death. But after that it pleaſed
God the Father, by the comming of his
déere Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, to reueale
himſelfe vnto them, to open and declare
his Goſpell among them, then began
the people to renounce the Deuill, to
forſake his Law and ſeruice, and to betake
themſelues wholy to the gouernance
of God. And therefore S. Paul,
the further to incourage them thereunto,
willeth them in this Epiſtle of his,
That like as before time they gaue ouer
their members to the ſeruice of vncleanneſſe,
from one wickedneſſe to another,
ſo ſhould they now giue ouer the ſame
their members, to the ſeruice of righteouſneſſe.
For, to this end was Chriſt
borne into this world, to this end liued
he here among vs, to this end preached
he, and taught the people Gods holie
word, that we by his example, and the

doctrine of his Goſpell, ſhould liue an
vpright and holie life. And therfore Zacharie
that holie prophet, being filled
with the holie Ghoſt propheſied, and
ſaid, before Chriſts birth, that Chriſt
ſhould for this cauſe appeare in this
world, That we being by him deliuered
from the feare of our enimies,
               Luk. 1. 
               might
ſerue him in pureneſſe and holineſſe all
the daies of our life. And S. Paul likewiſe
ſaith, Ye were darkeneſſe, but now
ye are light,
               Ephe. 5. 
               walke therefore as becommeth
the children of light. Therefore
are we deliuered from the power of
darkeneſſe, ſaith S. Paul, that we ſhould
walke in the light, and haue no fellowſhip
with the vnfruitfull workes of
darkneſſe. And ſo in like, Vocauit nos Deus,
               1. Theſſ. 4.
               non ad immunditiem, ſed ad ſanctitatem,
God hath not called vs to vncleanneſſe,
but to holyneſſe and ſanctitie of
life. Thus hath he called vs, that we not
only in Body, but in Soule, ſhould be
pure & vnſpotted. And therefore S. Paul
vnto the Romanes, Know you not,
ſaith he, that all we which are baptized
into Ieſus Chriſt,
               Rom. 6. are baptized into his

death? Therefore are we buried with
him by Baptiſme into death, that like
as Chriſt was raiſed vp from the dead,
euen ſo alſo ſhould we walke in a new
life. And for this cauſe this ſame Paul
likewiſe ſaith, Exhibete vos tanquam viua
membra,
               Rom. 12. 
               Shew your ſelues as quicke and
liuely members. And in an other place,
Exhibete corpora veſtra ſacrificium ſanctum
& acceptatum Deo.
               Rom. 12. 
               Giue ouer your
bodies for a ſacrifice holie and acceptable
before God. And alſo,1. Cor. 3. 
               Neſcities corpora
veſtra eſſe templa Dei? Know you not
that ye are the temple of God, and that
the ſpirit of God dwelleth in you? Theſe
and ſuch other many leſſons hath S.
Paul giuen vs, to call vs vnto pureneſſe
and holyneſſe of life. Let vs therefore,
(good Bretheren) liue holy; conſider
that God hath not called you to vncleanneſſe,
but to puritie of life; conſider
if yée be baptized with Chriſt into death,
you muſt alſo walke with him in a new
life: let your bodies be a ſacrifice holie &
acceptable vnto God: ſhew your ſelues
liuely members of Chriſt, and the Temple
of the holie Ghoſt. Vocauit nos Deus,
               1. Theſ. 
                     •
                  .
               
ſaith S. Paul,
               1. Theſſ. 4. 
               Vt viueremus ſobriè, God
hath called vs, God hath appointed vs,
to liue in ſoberneſſe, to liue in pureneſſe,
to liue in holyneſſe: and this not in one
part of our Bodies, not in one part of
our Soules, but in our whole bodies, in
our whole ſoules. For Chriſt our Sauior
ſuffred not his bodie to be crucified
in one part,Math. 27. 
               Sed à planta pedis, vſque ad
ſummum capitis, But euen from the ſole
of the foote, to the crowne of his head,
was he beaten, rent, and torne, and miſerably
tormented in his whole Bodie.
His Bodie was ſcourged with whips,
his head prickt with thornes, his hands
and féete nayled to the Croſſe, his ſide
pierced with a ſharp ſpeare. For Chriſt
ſpeaking of himſelfe, ſaith,Pſal. 22. 
               Foderunt manus
meas, & pedes meos, They haue digged
my hands, and my feete, they haue
made holes thorough them. And thus ſithence
Chriſt ſuffred all his whole Body
to be tormented for vs, ſithence he ſuffred
all his members to be crucified for
our ſakes; let vs applie our ſelues, and
all our member to ſerue and pleaſe him
in holyneſſe and vpright lyuing all the

dayes of our liues. And therefore ſaith
ſ. Paul here, Ye haue now betaken your
ſelues vnto Chriſt; therefore let your
conuerſation be according, liue as becommeth
the ſeruants of Chriſt: For
euen as before this time, ye gaue ouer
your members to vncleanneſſe, from one
wickedneſſe to an other, ſo now giue ouer
your members to the ſeruice of righteouſneſſe.
            And ſuch (good Bretheren) was the
life of all Chriſtian men, in the beginning
of Gods Church: ſuch was, I ſay,
their life & lyuing. They ſubdued their
fleſh, they mortified their members, and
gaue them ouer wholy vnto Chriſt, and
ſo made them members vnto righteouſneſſe.
When Chriſt walked here on this
earth, & was conuerſant in our fleſh, and
this nature of ours; at what time he entered
into the houſe of Zacheus, which
was a Ruler of the Publicans, & deſired
to ſée Ieſus, by and by Zacheus was
turned into a new man, and by and by
he ſtoode forth, and ſaid vnto the Lord:
Behold Lord,
               Luk. 19. 
               the halfe of my goods I
giue vnto the poore, and if I haue defrauded

any man, I reſtore him foure fold.
Thus was he only by the preſence of
Chriſt, turned into a new man, thus
he of an vncircumciſed Publican was
made the child of Abraham, and of a ſinfull
and wretched creature, he became
forthwith a Chriſtian. And ſo in like,
when Chriſt had but once called vnto
Mathew,
               Math. 9. and bad him follow him, immediatly
he left the Toll-gathering, he
left the receipt of the cuſtome, he left his
owne proper game and profit, and ran
after Chriſt. Of ſuch force was the preſence
of Chriſt vnto Zacheus, of ſuch
power was the commaundement of
Chriſt, with Mathew the Toll-gatherer.
Saint Auguſtine a little before he returned
vnto Chriſt, & embraced his trueth,
he feared, he trembled, and alwaies ſtood
in doubt: but ſo ſoone as Chriſt had once
inſpired him with his holie ſpirit, and reuealed
his trueth vnto him, forthwith
without any further doubt or delay, he
renounced his errors, and became a perfect
Chriſtian. There was once a Chriſtian
man, whoſe name was Euſebius,
and being demaunded what he was,

anſwered, a Chriſtian: being aſked what
countrey man, ſaid, a Chriſtian: who
was his father, a Chriſtian: where he
dwelt, a Chriſtian: and ſo to ech other
demaund, he anſwered a Chriſtian: as
who would ſay, what ſo euer I be, I am
nothing elſe but a Chriſtian. In the beginning
of Gods Church, all good men
were called Chriſtian men: and yet was
it not one thing to be a Chriſtian, and a
good man. The Chriſtian men, for that
they conſidered they were called to ſaluation,
to redemption by the death of
Chriſt, & to the inheritance of Heauen,
they had their delight and only felicitie
in heauenly things: they eſtéemed not
the vaine pleaſures of this world: and
becauſe they thus carried Chriſt in their
Bodies, becauſe they had their members
crucified vnto Chriſt, therfore were
they called Chriſtians. And ſo ſhould
we doe, (good Bretheren) ſo ſhould we
conſider our redemption, ſo ſhould we
mortifie our members, and renouncing
the vaine delights of this world, we
ſhould fixe our eyes, our minds, and all
our doings on Heauenly things alone.

Saint Cyprian ſaith, The people come
to learne the Goſpell, to heare the word
of God; and wherefore? that they might
worke according vnto the Goſpell, that
they might bring forth fruits worthie
the word of God: that they may thus
doo, therfore they heare Gods word, ſaith
S. Cyprian. And thus if wée do not,
what euer we brag of our Redemption,
what euer we brag of our profeſſion,
what euer we boaſt of the knowledge of
Gods Goſpell, it is to no end, it is not
to effect or purpoſe. And therefore if we
haue heretofore time giuen ouer our
members vnto vncleanneſſe, from one
wickedneſſe vnto an other, now let vs
giue ouer the ſame our members vnto
the ſeruice of righteouſneſſe.
            For, ſaith S. Paul, What profit, what
fruit had ye at that time in thoſe things,
whereof you are now aſhamed? for the
end of ſuch things is death. It is the
part of a wiſe man, and the office of a
diſcréet man, in ſuch good order to diſpoſe
all his buſineſſe, and to bring all
his doings to ſo good end, that he take
no foile, nor haue any ſhame therefore.

Ye haue committed ſin (ſaith ſaint Paul)
yée haue giuen ouer your members from
one wickedneſſe to another, and now ye
be aſhamed, now are ye ſorie for thoſe
your miſdoings: But what profit then
had yee of thoſe things, whereof you
are now aſhamed? This is an horrour,
and the greateſt horrour that may
be, that no man can commit ſin without
a great burden of conſcience, without
great torment & diſquietneſſe of minde.
Iudas, when he had betraied his maſter
Chriſt,Mat. 27. by and by, his conſcience accuſed
himſelfe, and was ſo great a burden
vnto him, that to deliuered and eaſed
thereof, he went imediatly and hanged
himſelfe. When Caine had ſlaine his
owne brother, and committed that execrableGen. 4.
murther, God ſaid vnto him,
Why doſt thou lowre? Such a thing is
ſin, that whoſoeuer committeth it, it
will forthwith appeare in his face, it
will appeare and ſhew in his countenance.
But happie is that man that ſooneſt
commeth to repentance, happie is
he that is ſooneſt ſorie for his ſins and
miſdoings. Adam,
               Gen. 3. ſo ſoone as hee had

eaten of the forbidden fruite, & ſo tranſgreſſed
the commaundement of God,
God called vnto him, and ſaid, Adam, vbies?
Where art thou? He anſwered; I
am fled away Lord, I hide my ſelfe. And
why fled he away, why hid he himſelfe
from the ſight of God? becauſe he was
aſhamed.Luk. 15. The prodigall Son ſpoken
of in the Goſpell, after he had riotouſly
conſumed his whole ſubſtance, and ſo
brought to extreame pouertie, hee returned
againe, came home to his father,
fell downe before his féete, and
ſaid; O father, I haue ſinned againſt
Heauen and againſt thee. And why ſaid
he thus? becauſe he was aſhamed. The
people in the time of Daniel the Prophet,Dan. 9.
when they ſawe their owne wickedneſſe,
and repented them thereof,
cryed out and ſaid; Shame is come vpon
vs, ſhame and confuſion is this day fallen
vpon vs. Dauid the Prophet,
when hee had by tyranie cauſed his
faithfull and truſtie ſeruant Vrie to be
ſlaine,2. Reg. 11. thereby to haue his pleaſure of
Berſabee his wife, and after had ſéene
his owne foly, cryed out vnto God,

ſaying;Pſal. 51. 
               Miſerere mei quoniam iniquitatem
meam ego cognoſco, Haue mercie vpon
me, O Lord, becauſe I know mine iniquities.
And why ſaid he thus? becauſe
he was aſhamed. Ieremie, Poſtquam oſtendiſti
mihi peccata mea, erubui: After
thou hadſt, O Lord, ſhewed me mine
offences, I was aſhamed (ſaid he.) Thus
(good brethren) a wicked conſcience euermore
beareth ſhame about with it,
euermore carieth a moſt heauie burden,
euermore is prickt and tormented,
and neuer at quiet.
            And though ſome men there bee, ſo
giuen ouer vnto ſinne, that they féele
no ſhame in this life, that are not moued
in their conſcience in this world,
yet may they aſſure themſelues they
ſhall féele bitter torments in the world
to come, and eternall ſhame that neuer
ſhall haue end. And if there bee any
that will now ſay, as the people
in the time of Daniel did; whatſoeuer
we doe, God will not looke vnto vs,
hee regardeth not our doings, whether
wee doe good or euill, God hath
no reſpect vnto it; and ſo bee nothing

moued in their conſcience for their ſinful
liuing: when they ſhal be caſt into vtter
darkneſſe where ſhall be wéeping and
gnaſhing of téeth, then ſhall their conſcience
be moued with repentance, then
ſhall they bee aſhamed; but then al too
late.Luk. 16. Remember the glutton, the rich
glutton (that in his life time had nothing
but pleaſure, neuer felt aduerſitie,
nor neuer was prickt in conſcience for
his miſlyuing) after hee fell into Hell
fire, was there tormented, and the
worme of his conſcience began to gnaw
him; then he cryed out vnto Abraham,
then hee was aſhamed, but then was it
too late. And thus ſhall the wicked people
doe at the laſt day, the wicked people
(I ſay) that ſhall then be liuing and ſée
the great terrour of that day, They ſhal
ſay vnto the Hils, fall vpon vs, vnto the
mountains,
               Luk. 23. 
               comecouer vs: then ſhal their
owne wicked conſcience accuſe them,
then ſhall they be aſhamed, but then too
late. Now (good brethren) what profit
had all theſe of their owne ſinfulneſſe,
what profit and commoditie had they of
all their wickedneſſe? What profit had

               Adam by tranſgreſſing the commaundement
of God? What profit had Cain
for murthering of his brother? What
profit wan the prodigall Son by miſpending
of his fathers goods? What
profit had the people in the time of Daniel,
for their miſliuing? What profit
had Dauid by killing of Vrie? What
profit had the rich glutton that liued in
ſuch pleaſure? What profit (I ſay) had
all theſe of their owne wickedneſſe? No
profit, no commoditie, no pleaſure a
                  •
                al,
but ſhame, nothing els but ſhame and
confuſion. Euen ſo here S. Paul; What
profit (ſaid he) had yee then of all thoſe
things, of which yee are now aſhamed?
It appeareth well yée haue gotten nothing
but diſpleſure, nothing but ſhame
and confuſion. For the end of ſuch things
is death.
            
            And this that is well ſpoken of honeſtie
of life, this that is well applyed to
honeſt conuerſation, may wel be ſpoken
and applied to Religion. For it behooueth
a man ſo to worſhip God, that hee
haue no ſhame, no confuſion therefore.
But alas, from the beginning, euen

from the firſt creation of man, there haue
bin good, there haue bin bad: ſome there
hath bin, that forſaking the liuing God,
haue worſhiped their own deuiſes: ſome
in ſtéed of God, haue worſhipped ſtocks
and ſtones: ſome haue ſacrificed to the
Sun and Moone,Ier. 8. and made them their
Gods: and this hath béene from the beginning.Ier. 44.
And therefore Ieremie writeth,
that the people in his time ſaid, Ibimus
& ſacrificabimus Lunae Reginae caeli:
We wil do ſacrifice & offer oblations vnto
the Queen of heauen: for ſo (ſaid they)
our Fathers did, and did proſper in their
doings.
               Ier 
                     •
                  . Some ſaid vnto the Stone, Pater
noſter es, and to a Stocke, Deus noſter
es, exuerge adiuua nos.
            
            And this hath béene euen from the
beginning. The Babilonians worſhipped
Bell their God,Bel. which was but
a blocke: they worſhipped alſo a Dragon,
which they called their liuing
God, and this did they in good ſooth.
The Iewes made a golden Calfe, and
fell downe before the ſame, and worſhipped
it,Exod. 32. and ſaid, Iſti ſunt Dij tui,
Theſe are thy Gods, O Iſraell, theſe are

they that brought thée out of the land of
Egypt, and deliuered thée. Wée read alſo
that they worſhipped a Braſen Serpent,2. Reg. 18.
and burnt Incenſe and ſacrifice
vnto it. And as they had theſe vaine Idols
for their Gods: ſo likewiſe had
they a number of Superſtitious ceremonies
of their owne deuiſing, which
here were too long to be ſpoken of. And
all this did they of blindneſſe, thinking
they had done well, meaning nothing
but good therein. But afterwards when
it pleaſed God to ſhew them their owne
blindneſſe, to ſhew them their folly, to
ſhew them the wickedneſſe they walked
in: then were they aſhamed of their
doings, then (I ſay) they were aſhamed
confounded. And therfore ſaid Ieremy
the prophet, Verè patres noſtri coluerūt
mēdatia, truly our forefathers followed
after lies. The Gentiles, when they perceiued
that the Sun & Moon their chief
Gods, were indéed no gods, & able to do
them no pleaſure, then they were aſhamed.
When the people of Babilon ſaw &
vnderſtood their own folly in worſhiping
their God Bell & their Dragon, & that

they were not ſuch, as they tooke them
to be, then were they aſhamed. And ſo
in like, when the Iewes ſaw before their
eyes their golden Calfe molten, and
their braſen Serpent broken & ground
into poulder, then were they aſhamed,
then were they ſorie and aſhamed of
their former doings. Thus ſaith the
Prophet Eſaie, or rather God by the
mouth of his Prophet, Why offer yee
ſo many ſacrifices vnto me? offer me no
moe oblations.
               Eſai. 1. 
               I abhorre your incenſe,
I may not away with your new moones
and Sabbathes. I am troubled with them,
I am wearie of them, Quis iſta requirit?
Who looketh for theſe things, who cō
                  mandeth
you ſo to doe? Eſaie in another
place alſo;Eſai. 55. 
               Why doe you lay out
your money for the thing that feedeth
not, and ſpend your labour about the
thing that ſatisfieth not? And ſo likewiſe
in another place the ſame prophet ſaith;
They make my people forget my name,
               Eſai. 59.
               for their owne traditions. He ſaith alſo;
Taelas aranearum texunt, They weaue the
Spiders web, they doe nothing els but
breed the Cockatrice egs, and weaue

the Spiders webbe,
                ſaith he. And ſo Ieremie
cried out,Ier. 2. and ſaid, Duo mala fecit populus
meus, me dereliquerūt Dominum Deum
ſuum, & foderunt ſibi ciſternas quae aquas
non poſſunt continere: my people,
                ſaith
God by his Prophet Ieremie, haue forſaken
men their Lord, and digged themſelues
pits that can hold no water.
               Eſay 1. 
               Eſay
calleth mans inuention 
                  Sordes, droſſe:
Ieremie calleth it chaffe:
               Ier. 23. Malach. 1. 
               Malachie, very
mans dung: Zacharie, Gods curſe.
Chriſt himſelfe calleth it,Luke 11. 
               Fermentum
Phariſaeorum, the leuen of the Phariſies:
Hée calleth it alſo, Tenebras, vtter darkeneſſe.
Thus it pleaſed God to deſcribe
vnto vs mans inuention, to call it cobwebs,
to call it filth, to call it droſſe, and
chaffe, mans dung, Gods curſe, the leuen
of the Phariſies, and vtter darkeneſſe.
And this doth he for none other
purpoſe, than onely to make his people
aſhamed of their owne deuiſes.Acts 22. 
               Paul notwithſtanding
hee was a great learned
man, ſkilfull in the lawes and cuſtomes
amongſt the Iewes, brought vp at the
féet of Gamaliel: yet when hée knew

Chriſt, when he was filled with the holy
Ghoſt, and embraced Gods goſpel, he
was aſhamed of all he had learned before,
he was aſhamed of his owne ignorance.Iohn 20.
Saint Thomas, who would not
beléeue Chriſt to bée riſen from death,
when he felt Chriſts ſide, & had put his
finger into his wound, then hee was aſhamed,
then he was ſory for his vnveléefe.
The Iewes when they perceiued
their owne folly & ignorance,Acts 2. ſaid, Viri
fratres quid faciemus? O men & brethren
what ſhall we do.
                The Epheſians, when
S. Paul had preached vnto them,Act. 19. & they
receiued the doctrine of Chriſt, by & by
ſuch as vſed curious crafts, came and
brought their bookes of enchauntment,
their books of witchcraft, & burnt them,
caſt them into the fire and burnt them:
ſo much were they aſhamed of their
owne folly.1. Cor. 13. And ſo S. Paul, Cum eſſem
paruulus, ſentiebam vt paruulus, When I
was a child, I ſpake as a child, I vnderſtood
as a child, I imagined as a child. But
as ſoone as I was a man, I left all childiſhneſſe:
Now I am become a man, and
therfore I am now aſhamed of my childiſhneſſe

Thus might the Prophets
haue ſaid to the Gentiles, what profit
had you of your gods, the Sun and the
Moone, what profit had you of them,
wherof yée are now aſhamed? So might
Moyſes haue ſaid to the children of Iſrael,
what profit had yée in this golden
calfe? So Ezechias, what profit had yée
in this braſen ſerpent, of which now yée
are aſhamed? Euen thus Eſay might
likewiſe haue ſaid, what profit had yée in
your calends, & new Moones, in your holy
daies and ſacrifices? And ſo other the
Prophets might well haue ſaid, what
profit had ye in your dreames, in your
ſpider cobbes, in your droſſe, in your
chaffe? what commoditie had yee of all
theſe things? Alas ye are now aſhamed
of them, & therefore yee had no profit of
them, yée had no pleaſure by them, they
brought you no commoditie, they
brought you only ſhame and confuſion.
            Thus (good brethren) let vs weigh
and conſider, what profit wée had in
times paſt of thoſe things, of which wée
are now aſhamed. And let vs conſider
how much we are beholden to god, that

now may ſée and know our owne folly
and ignorance, and ſo bée aſhamed. But
herein, good brethren, there néeds not
many words: for there is no man ſo
blind, but may well ſée, no man ſo deafe,
but may well heare, no man ſo dull, but
may wel perceiue and vnderſtand, the
great errour, the great blindneſſe, the
great darkneſſe, that we haue béene in.
And therefore let vs all now giue God
thankes, that hee hath reſtored his light
vnto vs, and taken that great error and
darkneſſe from vs. Loth I am here to
ſpeake of thoſe things whereof we may
be aſhamed: loth and ſory I am to repeat
that vnto you, wherof we are now
aſhamed: but this place now requireth
the ſame, this time and place willeth me
ſomewhat to ſpeake thereof. The time
hath béene, that we haue put our truſt
in pardons, in Buls of the Popes, in
vaine ſcrolles, and writings of his; yea,
and in them wée haue had greater hope
and affiance, than in the death of Chriſt,
and merits of his paſſion. We haue fallen
downe before images, before ſtocks,
and ſtones, ſuch as had eyes, and ſaw

not, eares, and heard not: before them
we prayed, before them we knéeled, and
ſtacke vp candles. But now we are aſhamed
of them, we all are, I thinke,
now ſory and aſhamed of this our folly:
but what profit had we then of all theſe
things. Sometime wee prayed in a
ſtrange tongue, in a tongue that we vnderſtood
not: we prayed contrarie to the
vſe that was in the Patriarchs times,
in the Prophets times, in the Apoſtles
times: but then what profit had wee
of thoſe prayers, whereof we are now aſhamed?
We haue ſéene lawfull marriage
forbidden, and mens lawfull wiues
taken from them: and yet the vſe of a
concubine graunted, as though God
were diſpleaſed with marriage, & pleaſed
with whooredome: but what profit
had yée then of that thing, of which yée
are now aſhamed? We had Baptiſme,
but we vnderſtood not the principles of
our faith: & euen as the Prophet ſpake
of his time, Qualis populus,
               Oſe 4. 
               talis Sacerdos,
the Prieſt is become like the people:
                ſo
might wee well haue ſaid of our owne
time; blind were they both, and therefore

both fell into the dike. This we are
now aſhamed of, but what profit had
we then therby?Ier. 5. 
               The Prophets (ſaid Ieremy)
teach falſly, and the Prieſts follow
them, & my people hath pleaſure therein.
And lo, euen this ſame which the
Prophet Ieremie ſaid, the Prieſts and
Prophets did in his time, we our ſelues
haue ſéene done in our dayes, and now
we are aſhamed thereof: but what profit
had we then by it? We had the Sacrament
of Chriſts bodie, but we knew
not why Chriſt inſtituted the ſame, wée
knew not why Chriſt left vs that Sacrament;
wée did all things contrary to
Chriſts inſtitution. Chriſt ordained a
Communion, but wée had a priuat
Maſſe: Chriſt ordained, that the whole
people ſhould receiue in both kinds, but
wée miniſtred it vnder one kind alone:
Chriſt, when hée inſtituted this Sacrament,
ſpake in the common tongue that
all might vnderſtand him: but wée
contrarie to Chriſt, contrarie to the Apoſtles,
contrarie to the primitiue
Church, conſecrated the ſame in an vnknowne
tongue, that no man might

vnderſtand vs. And hereof are we now
aſhamed, but what profit had we then
thereby? We haue knowne this to bée
taught, that the bread in the Sacrament
was turned into the verie bodie
and blood of Chriſt our Sauiour: this
we al know, and do yet remember. But
Chriſt, when hee ſaid, the Sacrament
ſhould bee turned, meant not that the
bread ſhould bée turned into his bodie,
but that we which receiue the ſame ſhold
be turned, that we, I ſay, ſhould be turned,
& made one body with him. This
was the meaning, this I ſay, was the
meaning of our Sauiour Chriſt. And
therfore S. Paul,
               1. Cor. 10. 
               
                  Panis quem frangimus,
participatio corporis & ſanguinis Christi est,
the bread which we breake is the participation
of the body and blood of Chriſt.
For we many are one bread, & one body
in as much as we all are partakers of one
bread.
               Math. 14. Chriſt himſelfe ſaid, I wil drinke
no more of the liquor of the vine: Chriſt,
I ſay, after the conſecration, ſaid
hée would not drinke any more of the
liquor of the Vine: The bloud of Chriſt
is not Wine, it is not the liquor of

the vine. Saint 
                  Auguſtine, in Sermone
ad Infantes, ſaith plainly, 
                  Quod videtis in
menſa panis eſt: that which you ſee on the
table, is bread. Theodoretus alſo, 
                  Non
mutatur ſubſtantia panis, the ſubſtance &
nature of the bread is not changed, ſayth
he. Gelaſius likewiſe, whom peraduenture
yée will the more credit, becauſe hée
was ſometime biſhop of Rome, ſaith,

                  Non deſinit eſſe ſubſtantia panis, there leaueth
not to bee the ſubſtance of bread.
Natura panis in Sacramento remanet, the
nature of the bread remaineth in the Sacrament.
Chryſoſtome alſo, 
                  Non mutatur
ſubſtantia panis, the ſubſtance of the bread
is not altered. I could ſay more, but this
is for this time ynough; this onely I
truſt, amongſt a number of other, ſhall
be now ſufficient to perſwade you the
truth herein. Yée ſée here that S. Auguſtine,
Theodoretus, Gelaſius, and Saint
Chryſoſtome do all affirme, and herein
agrée; that the ſubſtance or nature of the
bread, after the conſecration is not changed.
            Let vs therefore, good brethren, notwithſtanding
we haue béene otherwiſe

taught, let vs, I ſay, beléeue theſe holy
Doctors, let vs credit them; they wil not
mocke vs, they will not deceiue nor beguile
vs. But this other doctrine, this
doctrine of tranſubſtantiation, was of
late deuiſed, not paſt thrée hundred
yeres agoe, in the councell of Laterane.
And there, vpon this new deuiſe of
theirs, they made a great ſolemne, and
feſtiuall day, and called it, Corpus Chriſti
day. And now we are aſhamed of this:
but then what commoditie, what profit
had we thereof? We found out of our
ſelues a new ſacrifice, the ſacrifice (I
mean) of the maſſe, as though the death
of Chriſt had not béene a ſacrifice ſufficient,
as though Chriſts blood had not
once for al waſhed away our iniquities,
as though Chriſt had not ſaid, I haue
paid the ranſome for your ſins. It were
an infinit labor to repeat vnto you particularly,
all the abuſes of late dayes vſed
in the Church of Chriſt; you your
ſelues can well remember them, I néed
not here to rehearſe them vnto you. But
then what profit had ye of al ſuch things
of which you are now aſhamed? But

ſome men there bee peraduenture, that
wil not be aſhamed of theſe abuſes, but
alwaies vphold & maintain the ſame: &
ſuch if there be any, they are like them
whom Ieremie propheſied of, ſaying:
Thou haſt taken an harlots countenance
thou haſt gotten thee a whores forehead,
               Ier. 3.
               and canſt not be aſhamed: they are like
them alſo whom Eſay the Prophet ſpeaketh
of, & ſaith, Malice hath made you
blind, you barke againſt the truth. This
is the ſin that neuer will bée forgiuen,
this is ſo great an offence, that it wil neuer
be pardoned. Therefore let vs, to
whom God hath giuen eyes to ſée, eares
to heare, & harts of vnderſtanding: let
vs I ſay, conſider that it is no ſhame to
confeſſe our errors, to acknowledge our
blindneſſe; but ſhame it is to continue in
error, too much ſhame it is to remaine ſtil
in blindneſſe. And ſuch as will not be aſhamed
of their euill, but laugh at and
ſcorne others, that are ſory and aſhamed,
may well bée likened vnto them
whom ſaint Paul writing to the Epheſians
ſpeaketh of,Eph. 4. 
               They being
paſt repentance, haue giuen themſelues

ouer vnto wantonneſſe, to worke al maner
of vncleanneſſe, euen with greedines.
And ſuch are giuen ouer in reprobum ſenſum,
               Rom. 1.
               into a lewd mind. Such Dauid the
Prophet ſpeaketh of, ſaying:Pſal. 17. 
               They caſt
their eies downe to the ground. For ſuch
as wilfully offend, and wittingly caſt
away themſelues, there is no ſaluation
Paul ſaith, Finis illorum mors eſt,
               Rom. 6. 
               their end
is death, their end is onely deſtruction.
This is the ſame that Saint Iohn ſpeaketh
of,Math. 12. which neither ſhall be forgiuen
in this world, nor in the world to come.
Wherefore were they caſt into hel, that
now lye therein? for what cauſe continue
they in thoſe endleſſe tormentes?
becauſe they would not acknowledge
their errors, becauſe they would not be
aſhamed of their owne folly. Wherefore
is there in hell, fire vnquenchable,
torments ſuch as cannot be thought, vtter
darkeneſſe, and eternall death, but
onely to puniſh ſuch as wilfully liue in
wickednes, to plague them that wil not
be aſhamed of their ſins & offences.Mar. 9. 
               They
ſhall be caſt into vtter darkeneſſe, where
ſhalbe weeping & gnaſhing of teeth, into

fire that neuer ſhall be quenched, where
the worme of the conſcience neuer dieth.
If we delight in couetouſneſſe, in adultery,
in fornication and filthy liuing, the
end, let vs ſay, is death, the end thereof
is none other than eternall death.Pſal. 15. 
               Quis
habitabit in tabernaculo tuo? ſaid Dauid
the Prophet, O Lord, who ſhall dwel in
thy Tabernacle, ſaith he, or who ſhall
reſt vpon thy holy hil? Euen he that leadeth
an vncorrupt life, that doth the
thing which is right, and ſpeaketh the
truth from his heart: Hee that hath not
ſworne and deceiued his neighbor. But
O mercifull God, who walketh now
innocently? who leadeth an vncorrupt
life? who doth the thing that is
right? who ſpeaketh truth from his
heart? what man is there, that hath not
ſworne and deceiued his neighbour?
Ieremie ſpeaking of the people in his
time, ſaith, Confuſi ſunt, imo non ſunt confuſi:
They are aſhamed, nay, they are not
aſhamed,
                ſaith Ieremie. And euen ſo may
we of our daies well ſay, the people are
not aſhamed, they are nothing ſory nor
aſhamed of their euill liuing. Theſe S.

               Paul ſpeaketh of, writing vnto the Philippians:
I ſpeake with teares,
               Philipp. 3. ſaith hée,
they are the enemies of Chriſts croſſe,
their end is damnation, their glorie ſhall
be turned into ſhame.
            
            And ſhall we then liue thus? ſhal we
thus dye? ſhall we thus end our liues?
ſhall we thus appeare at the later day,
and not be aſhamed? ſhall adulterers,
fornicators, whooremongers, couetous
perſons, come & ſtand before the iudgement
ſeat of God, before the throne of
his maieſtie, and not bée aſhamed? Is
this the marriage garment that wée
ſhould be clad with? are we thoſe that
are called to the feaſt by the Bridegroome?
are we Chriſts brethren, and
heires of the kingdome of God? No.
Non reſurgent impij in indicio,
               Pſal. 1. 
               the wicked
ſhall not ariſe in iudgement, ſaith the
Prophet Dauid, the vngodly ſhal not be
able to ſtand in the iudgement, neither
the ſinners in the congregation of the
righteous. Wo bee vnto them that run
from God with a deſperat mind, wo bee
vnto them that wilfully forſake, and fly

from him. S. Gregorie ſaith, One ſinne
linketh in another, as one linke of a
chaine holdeth the other. It is an horrible
thing to turne from God, it is a
terrible thing to flye from him: for if
we turne from God, whither ſhall wée
goe? if wée flye from him, whither ſhall
we run? 
                  Conſcientia mille teſtes, our owne
conſcience, though wee hide our ſelues
neuer ſo cloſe, ſhall be as a thouſand witneſſes
againſt vs, our owne conſcience
ſhall vtter and bewray vs. Saint Auguſtine
ſaith, If we do not indeed repent,
we faine that wee doe repent, wee onely
faine, ſaith he, that we do repent, and ſo
we mocke with God. But God will not
be mocked of vs, he will not bée deluded
by vs. But we ſhal be aſhamed and confounded,
when we appeare before God,
when wee appeare, I ſay, before the
iudgement ſeat of God. But then what
profit ſhall we haue of that we are aſhamed?
what commoditie ſhall wée then
haue of that whereof wee are aſhamed.
Let vs conſider, that we are fleſh
of Gods fleſh, bones of his bones, and

members of his members. And therefore
let vs giue ouer our whole bodies,
let vs giue ouer all our members, let
vs giue ouer our eyes, our eares, our
tongues, our hearts, vnto the homage
and ſeruice of God. So ſhall wee haue
profit of Chriſt our Sauiour, ſo ſhall we
haue profit of his death and paſſion, and
ſo ſhall Chriſt ſay vnto vs, Come yee
bleſſed of my Father, and inherit
the kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning
of the world.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH
Sermon.
            
               Pſalme 7. verſ. 11. 12. 13.
               
                  11. God is a righteous Iudge, and God
is euer threatning.
                  12. If men will not trune, he hath whet
his ſword, he hath bent his bow, and
made it ready.
                  13. He hath prepared him the weapons
of death, and ordained his arrows to
deſtroy.
               
            
            
               ALmightie God our heauenly
Father, like as hée
is both good, & alſo mercifull,
like as he is patient,
and of long ſufferance:
So he vſeth two maner
of wayes to allure and call vs vnto him,
when we of our owne heads follow our
owne deuiſes, and lewdly run whither
our luſts leadeth vs: Sometimes of
his great mercie hee vſeth promiſes;
ſometimes of his iuſtice he vſeth threatning.
He promiſeth to vs for our well

doing, his fauour and grace, for kéeping
his commandements eternall bliſſe. He
threatneth vs for euill liuing, with
plagues and puniſhments, and for breaking
of his Law, eternall death. Thus
hee of his mercie ſomtimes vſeth promiſes,
and threatneth againe of his rigor
and iuſtice. He promiſeth to comfort,
aid, and ſuccour vs, if we come vnto
him: and hée threatneth to ſtrike the
terrour of death into vs, if wee turne
from him. And ſo almightie God moſt
mercifully vſed his promiſes vnto Abraham.
Ego ſum protector tuus & merces
tua, I am (ſaid he) thy defender and
thy reward:
               Gen. 12. 
               
                  Ego benedicam benedicentibus
tibi, & maledicam maledicentibus tibi, I wil
bleſſe them that bleſſe thee, and curſe
them that curſe thee. So ample, ſo large.
ſo great a promiſe made God vnto him.
And thus almightie God when he wold
deliuer his elect people the children of
Iſraell from their great bondage and
captiuitie,Deut. 11. 
               Inducam te in terram fluentem
lacte & melle, I will bring you into a land
that ſhall flow with milke and hony; this
will I performe, this will I bring to

paſſe for you, and this will I doe for my
names ſake. And ſo likewiſe to theſe his
people he made this merciful promiſe againſt
their enemies,Leuit. 26. ſaying: Yee ſhall
chaſe your enemies, and they ſhall fall into
the ſword before you, fiue of you ſhal
chaſe an hundred, and an hundred of you
ſhall chace ten thouſand. Thus alſo God
by his Prophets promiſed his people,Zach. 1.
and ſaid: Turne vnto mee, and I will
turne vnto you. And euen thus likewiſe
Chriſt in the Goſpel, maketh moſt cleare
and manifeſt promiſes of euerlaſting life
and ſaluation to all ſuch as for his name
ſhall forſake the pleaſures and delights
of this word, and repoſe their felicitie
onely in him: Beati pauperes ſpiritu, beati
qui lugeant,
               Mat. 5. 
               
                  beati qui eſuriunt, beati qui
perſequutionem ferunt: Bleſſed are the
poore in ſpirit, bleſſed are they that
mourne, bleſſed are they that hunger &
thirſt, bleſſed are they that ſuffer perſecution.
And why ſo? For what cauſe
are they bleſſed that are poore in ſpirit?
For what cauſe are they bleſſed that
mourne? Why are they happy that hunger?
What reward ſhall they haue that

ſuffer perſecution? becauſe (ſaith Chriſt)
theirs is the Kingdom of Heauen, they
ſhall be comforted, they ſhall bee filled,
they ſhall obtaine a crowne of glorie.
When two or three are gathered together
in my name
               Math. 18. (ſaith Chriſt) I will bee
in the middeſt of them. Whatſoeuer yee
ſhall aſke my father in my name,
               Ioh. 14. 
               it ſhall
be giuen vnto you. Theſe manifold and
great promiſes it pleaſed almightie God
to make vnto his choſen & elect people:
theſe cōfortable promiſes Chriſt himſelf
vouchſafed to pronoūce to al ſuch as ſhal
cleaue vnto him: thus mercifully it pleaſed
God by faire promiſes to allure and
win vs vnto him. But oftentimes, alas,
we ſet little or nothing by theſe ſwéet &
comfortable promiſes, we little eſtéem or
regard them: and therfore god then vſeth
his threatning, his rigor and Iuſtice among
vs: when no ſwéet words can win
vs, then hee ſtriketh his terror into vs.
For when god in old time perceiued yt no
gentlenes, no kindneſſe, no mercy of his
could win his people vnto him, he cauſed
Eſay his prophet to cry out & ſaid; 
                  Impius
in beneficijs me nō aguouit, in anguſtijs autē
                     
clamauit ad me: The wicked and ſinfull
man (ſaith he) in my great goodneſſe &
benefits beſtowed vpon him, would not
acknowledge nor confeſſe me; but in his
miſerie and trouble, in his anguiſh and
woe, then he ran vnto me, and called on
my name. And ſo likewiſe by the Prophet
Ieremie God him ſelfe ſayeth;Ier. 32. 
               
                  Conuerterunt
ad me terga, non faci
                        •
                     s ſuas: in die
autem tribulationis inclamant me: They
haue turned their backes, and not their
faces vnto me: but in the day of their
trouble, in the time of neceſſitie they call
and cry vpon me. And ſo in like the ſame
Prophet Ieremie, or rather God by this
ProphetDeut. 32. Ier. 2. ſaith: 
                  Impinguatus & incraſsatus
eſt populus meus, My people are waxen
fat and luſtie: they haue forſaken mee
the well of life, and digged themſelues
pits, yea vile and broken pits that can
hold no water. Such a thing is the felicitie
and pleaſure of this world, that it
maketh vs ſoone to forget God, and the
felicitie of the world to come. And therfore
God ſo often warned his people of
Iſrael,Deut. 8. 11. that when they were once come
into the land of Canaan, into that plentifull

country which flowed with milke
and hony, wherein ſhould bee no dearth
nor ſcarceneſſe: that then they ſhold not
forget the Lord their god, that then their
hearts ſhould not be deceiued, that then
they ſhould not goe aſide, and ſerue other
gods; and ſo his wrath and indignation
waxe hote vpon them. And therfore
when faire promiſes & louing kindneſſe,
cannot win vs to God, then vſeth
he another way, then doth he appoint another
meane, then beginneth hee to
threaten and feare vs, and that of his rigour
and iuſtice. And thus did hée to
our firſt father Adam: becauſe he would
not he ſhould tranſgreſſe his commaundement,
he threatned him,Gen. 2. and ſaid; 
                  In
quocunque die comederis ex hoc fructu,
mortem morieris, In what-euer day thou
ſhalt taſt of this fruit, thou ſhalt dye the
death. So likewiſe God to the whole
multitude of his people of Iſraell ſaid;Deut. 28.
               Vnleſſe ye giue eare to the voice of the
Lord your God, to doe all his commandements
and ordinances, curſed ſhall you
be in the towne, and curſed in the field,
curſed ſhall thy baſket be and thy ſtore,

curſed ſhalbe the fruit of thy body & the
fruit of thy land, curſed ſhalt thou bee in
thy comming in, & in thy going out.
You ſhall call, and I will not heare, you
ſhall cry vnto me, and I will not giue
eare.Leuit. 26. 
               
                  Dabo vobis caelum aeneum, & terram
ferreum, The heauen ſhall be as braſſe,
and the earth as Iron; the heauens ſhall
giue you no raine, the earth ſhall bring
you forth no fruit, your trauell and labour
ſhal be loſt, your land ſhal not giue
her encreaſe. Thus almightie God
threatned his elect & choſen people, and
all to kéep them in awe and feare of him.
And ſo in another place he ſaith;Leuit. 26. 
               I will
ſet my face againſt you, and ye ſhall bee
ſlaine before your enemies, and they that
hate you ſhall haue dominion ouer you,
& ye ſhal fly when no man chaſeth you.
Thus you ſee, that it pleaſeth almightie
God oftentimes to vſe theſe and ſuch
like words of threatning, to vſe ſuch rigour,
to beat a terrour into his people,
when faire promiſes and ſwéet words
can doe nothing; and this doth hee of
his great iuſtice. And therfore Dauid in
this place; God is indeed, (ſaith he)

               a rightfull iudge, and God is euer threatning.
If men will not turne, he hath whet
his ſword, and hath bent his bowe and
made it readie: He hath prepared him
the weapons of death, and ordained his
arrowes to deſtroy. So mightie, ſo omnipotent
is God, that hee can puniſh,
and ſo righteous a iudge is he, that hee
will puniſh when it beſt pleaſeth him.
But ſome man would here peraduenture
ſay, if God be thus able to puniſh,
and will indéed puniſh when hee is offended,
why then doth he it not by and
by, why is not he reuenged out of hand?
becauſe (ſaith the Prophet) he is mercifull,
pacient,
               Pſal. 103. 
               and of long ſufferance.
Therefore he procéedeth not to reuenge
his anger, therfore hee haſteth not to
wreake himſelfe on vs, ſo ſoone as wee
offend him, and tranſgreſſe his will:
but tarieth, and maketh long delaies
to ſée whether wée will repent and
returne vnto him. But yet (ſaith
Dauid, foraſmuch as hee is abuſed,
for as much as yée haue left and
forſaken him, notwithſtanding he be
mercifull, notwithſtanding he be pacient

cient and of long ſufferance, Hee hath
now whet his ſword, he hath bent his
bowe, and made it readie, hee hath prepared
him the weapons of death, and ordeined
his arrowes to deſtroy: and this
will he doe out of hand, he will make no
longer delay at all. Here muſt wee not
fancie, that God will ſtrike vs with a
ſword of Iron, that he hath a bow bent
and arrowes to deſtroy withall: for euery
creature on the earth, what euer it
be, be it neuer ſo vile, neuer ſo ſimple,
neuer ſo weake and abiect, but is able at
Gods commandement to bee an inſtrument
to plague and puniſh withall. And
therefore conſider what is ſo weake as
water, ſo ſimple as flyes, ſo vile as lice
and frogs: and yet it pleaſed almightie
God, by theſe weake, by theſe ſimple,
by theſe vile things, to puniſh and
ſtrike the Egyptians, yea, and ſo
much therby to plague them, that neuer
before they felt the like, neuer earſt
they heard of the like puniſhment. It
pleaſed God to turne their water into
bloud,Exod. 7. ſo that in the whole country no
water could be found to drink, no liquor

of water to refreſh their Bodies. This
was a great plague, and yet was this
wrought by want of water, which was
but a weake and ſimple creature. A flye,
you know, is a ſimple thing, a thing of
little ſtrength and no force: yet God ſo
increaſed the number of them, he ſent
ſuch a multitude of Flyes among the
Egiptians,Exod. 8. that euen in the kings houſe
they fell vpon what euer the king eate
or dranke, fell vpon his meat, fell into
his drinke, and ſo putrified and corrupted
the ſame. The Lice wherewith God
in like plagued them, fell not only vpon
the king, and his people, but vpon their
Shéepe, their Dren, their Aſſes, their
Horſes, their Mules, and their whole
heards of Cattell, what euer they were.
The Frogs entered into their houſes,
into the kings Palace, into his hall, his
p
                  •
               rlor, his chamber, yea, and into his
Bed alſo. Thus it pleaſed God to vſe
againſt the Egiptians theſe ſimple, theſe
baſe, and vile creatures, as his rod, as
his ſcourge, as his ſword of puniſment.
Euery creature, euery thing, whether it
hath life, or no life, when it pleaſeth God

to vſe it, is his ſword, is his rod to ſtrike
withall. The fire that fell from Heauen,
and deſtroyed the two famous Cities,
Sodom and Gomorra, & the whole Region
there about, was none other than
the ſword of God.Gen. 19. Therefore ſaith the
prophet Dauid,
               Pſal. 104. 
               The ſpirits of tempeſts
doe his will, the thunder and lightnings
fulfill his commaundement. And ſo the
ſame prophet, here in this place: now
hath God begun to ſtrike, Now hath he
whet his ſword, & bent his bow, ſaith he,
now hath he prepared his arrowes to deſtroy,
& there is no way now to eſcape his
vengeance, no way to auoyd his puniſhment,
but only this, to turne vnto him, to
run & ſubmit your ſelues wholy to him.
            Theſe words Dauid the prophet (being
perſecuted of his enemies, and beſet
round about of them) ſpake vnto Saul
the proud king, and his adherents and
ſouldiers: putting them in remembrance
how they had prouoked & iuſtly
deſerued the vegeance of God, for perſecuting
of his innocent ſoule. And euen
as this prophet Dauid ſpake & pronounced
theſe words vnto Saul, & his wicked

companie, to reduce vnto their memorie
the power of God, and the puniſhment
that then hanged ouer their heads: So
may we likewiſe well vſe the ſame in
theſe our dayes, firſt to bring vs in remembrance
that God is a righteous
Iudge; and then to conſider how we
dailie prouoke and deſerue his iuſt
wrath, and ſo at the leaſt for feare of
puniſhment, to be ſorie for our miſdéeds,
and returne vnto him: For if we will
not be conuerted, hée hath whet his
ſword, he hath bent his bow, prepared
hym the weapons of death, and
ordeyned his arrowes to deſtroy. But
before we come vnto God, (good Bretheren)
before we returne vnto him, we
muſt one come vnto another, we muſt
one turne to another; before we be reconciled
to Chriſt, we muſt be reconciled
vnto our neyghbor, before we be at
one with God, we muſt be at one with
our Chriſtian Brother. This is the
order that God looketh wée ſhould obſerue,
this is that rule which Chriſt commaunded
vs to kéepe. Remitte, & remittetur
tibi,
               Luk. 6. 
               Forgiue, and thou ſhalt be
               
forgiuen. Si remiſeris alijs peccata ſua,
tua remittentur tibi,
               Math. 18. 
               It thou ſhalt forgiue
other men their offences towards thee,
then ſhall thy ſinnes alſo be forgiuen;
then ſhall God pardon thée thine offences,
when thou ſhalt pardon thy Brother
that he hath offended thée, then, I
ſay, ſhall God forgiue thée, and not before.Math. 5. And againe, Niſi remiſeritis alijs peccata
ſua, veſtra non remittentur vobis, Vnleſſe
ye forgiue other men their treſpaſſes,
your owne ſinnes ſhall not be releaſed,
               
ſaith Chriſt. Remember (good Bretheren)
remember and marke well theſe
words, Chriſt is the author, Chriſt is
the ſpeaker, Chriſt is the commaunder
hereof. And ſo Chriſt our Sauior in an
other place of his Goſpell,Math. 5. 
               When thou
offereſt thy gift at the Aultar, ſaith he,
and there remembreſt that thy Brother
hath ought againſt thee; leaue there thine
offring before the Aultar, & go thy way
firſt and reconcile thy ſelfe to thy Brother,
and then come and offer thy gift.
God is contented his honor be deferred,
he is contented to tarrie for his Sacrifice,
till thou art agréed with thy Brother,

till thou art at one with him. And
when thou haſt thus done, then come
& there offer thy Sacrifice. This is the
ground of the attonement betwéen God
and vs, this is the token that Chriſt is
reconciled vnto vs, if we be at one with
our neyghbor, if we be reconciled to our
Chriſtian Brother.1. Ioh. 4. For if we ſhall hate
our Bretheren whom we ſée, if we ſhall
be at debate with our Neyghbors being
daily conuerſant with vs; how can we
loue God whom we ſée not, how can we
agrée with Chriſt, with whom we are
not conuerſant? But to declare further
vnto you, that God accepteth not our
Sacrifices, that he regardeth not our petitions,
that he is not pleaſed with our
prayers, vnleſſe we be at one & pleaſed
with our Bretheren; He crieth out by
Eſaie his prophet, and ſaith,Eſa. 1. 
               Cum clamabitis
ad me, ego non exaudiam vos, quia manus
veſtrae plenae ſanguinis ſunt, When you ſhal
call vpon me, I wil not heare you, though
ye make many praiers, yet heare I nothing
at all,
                ſaith God. And wherefore?
Becauſe your hands are full of blood. It
is written in Geneſis,Gen. 4. that God would

not looke vpon Cayn and his Offring,
that he would haue no regard to his Sacrifice:
and wherefore? becauſe his hart
was full of malice. Salomon ſaith, Precatio
iniuſti abhominabilis eſt, The praier of
the wicked is abhominable, the ſinfull
mans prayer is abhominable in the ſight
of God.
               
               Pſal. 109. 
               Dauid alſo, Let their prayers be
as a ſinne, let their prayer be turned into
ſinne, ſaith he. O miſerable man thou
art, if thou be not in charitie, wretched
and too ſinfull thou art, if thou be not
in loue and vnitie, thy Prayer is abhominable,
yea, thy prayer is no prayer,
thy prayer is ſinne. Thou prayeſt to be
forgiuen, but thou thy ſelfe wilt not forgiue,
this is ynough to condemne thée.
For our Religion is none other but a
Brotherhood knit together in the loue of
God; our profeſſion is none other than
charitie and brotherlie loue towards all
men in our Sauior and Redéemer Ieſus
Chriſt.1. Ioh. 4. God is the God of loue,
Chriſt is the Prince of peace, his Goſpell
is the Goſpell peace; and we that
are Gods ſeruants, ought to liue in godlie
loue, we that are Chriſts bretheren,

ought to liue in Brotherlie peace. We
are all baptized in one water, whereby
we ſhould haue in remembrance, that
we ſhould in loue liue as one together.
Theſe, and ſuch other are, or may be,
ſufficient to bring vs in remembrance
of Brotherlie loue, of faithfull amitie,
and vnfained concord, if we of our ſelues
were not too forgetfull. O how oft ſaid
Chriſt to his Diſciples,Ioh. 14. 
               Pacem meam do
vobis, pacem meam relinquo vobis, I giue
you my peace, my peace I leaue vnto
you.
               
               Ioh. 13. By this cogniſance and none other
ſhall men know you to be my Diſciples
ſaith Chriſt, if ye loue together, if ye haue
loue one to an other. He ſaith alſo, A
new commandment giue I you, that you
loue together, as I haue loued you. What
a zealous fire, what an earneſt loue had
Chriſt when he praied and ſaid, O Father,
               Ioh. 17.
               cauſe that theſe be one, as thou and
I are one, that like as thou Father art in
me, and I in thee, that they alſo may be
one in vs. Becauſe ye be few, ſaid Chriſt
to his Diſciples, and in the middeſt
of your enemies, liue you in concord
and peace one with an other, one beare

with another, and all you hold together.
S. Paul ſaith,Rom. 13. 
               That he which loueth his
Brother, hath fulfilled the whole law.
Let not the Sunne goe downe on thy
wrath,
               Eph. 4. ſaith Paul. And againe,Rom. 12. 
               Reuenge
not, but giue place vnto diſpleaſure;
wreke not your ſelues, but giue roome to
the wrath of God. Dauid, when he was
in moſt extreame perſecution, & his enemies
laid daily wait for his life, ſéeking
his deſtruction, euen then fell he to moſt
earneſt praier, he ſought not to be reuenged,
but he made his prayer vnto God,
and ſaid,Pſal. 108. O Lord, they ſpeake euill of
me, they reuile me, they call me Traitor,
they call me all that naught is, but I
haue none other help, but to pray vnto
thée, my only ſuccour is to flie vnto thée.
Thus did that holie prophet Dauid, and
ſo did the Chriſtians in the beginning of
Chriſts Church. For Tertullian, an old
and holie father, ſaith, Fratres ſe appellabant
& more voluerunt pro muicem, They
called them ſelues Bretheren, ſaith he, and
one would not ſticke to dye for an other.
O what a charitie, what a loue, what
a Brotherly affection was this among

Chriſtians, in the beginning of Gods
Church. Saint Steuen, when he was
ſtoned, all his bones cruſht and burſt in
péeces, and his Soule readie to leaue his
bodie, euen then he prayed for his Tormentors,
euen then he cried out vnto
God, and ſaid,Act. 1. 
                  O Domine, ne ſtatuas illis
peccatum hoc, Lord, lay not this ſinne to
their charge.
                   So that holie father Nazianzen,
when the hangman that moſt
cruelly had tormented him, deſired pardon
of him, he méekely anſwered, Qui
mihi ignouit, ignoſcat tibi He that hath forgiuen
me, the ſame forgiue thee;
                   God
hath pardoned mée, and I béeſech him
that he will in like pardon thée. Euen ſo
likewiſe Chriſt, when he hanged on
the Croſſe, when his hands and féete
were nailed to the trée and he in the middeſt
of all his woe, euen then he prayed
for his perſecutors, then he deſired his
Father to pardon them, and ſaid,Luk. 23. 
                  O Pater,
ignoſce illis, neſciunt enim quid faciunt,
Father, forgiue them, for they wote not
what they doe. This is an example for
vs to follow, thus ought wée to do, as
in the beginning of Chriſts Church,

the Chriſtians did, who called themſeues
Bretheren, and one would dye for
an other: Thus ought we to ſay, as S.
Steuen ſaid, Lord, lay not this ſinne to
their charge: thus ſhould we do, as that
holie father Nazianzene did, and ſay, He
that hath forgiuen me, the ſame forgiue
thée. And laſtly ſo ought we to pray for
our enemies, as Chriſt did for his perſecutors,
and ſay, Father forgiue it them,
they wote not what they doe. Thus
ought we to do, if we mind to liue according
to our profeſſion, and if we will be
Chriſtians, as we are called Chriſtians.
We read, written by S. Luke in the
Acts of the Apoſtles, that in the beginning
& firſt ſpring of Gods Church, the
whole congregation had one thought,Act. 4.
one mind, one hart. Such a loue, ſuch
a charitie, ſuch a Chriſtian conformitie
was among them. And in commendation
of Chriſtian charitie, & brotherly loue
one with an other, the prophet Dauid
ſaid,Pſal. 133. 
               O quàm bonum, & quàm iocundum,
habitare fraires in vnum, Behold how
good & ioyfull a thing it is Bretheren to
dwell together in vnitie:
                He eſtéemed

loue to be ſo great a iewel, he thought
concord and vnitie a thing of ſo great
price, that he could not ſpeake too much
good of it. And therfore he ſayd, It was
like the oyntment that ran vnto Aarons
beard, and like the dew of Hermon
which fell vpon the hill of Sion, where
the Lord promiſed his bleſſing, and life
for euermore. But O mercifull God,
vnto what times haſt thou reſerued vs?
where is now the peace giuen, the loue
left by our Sauior Ieſus Chriſt? where
is that charitie that ſhould alwayes remaine
among Chriſtians? Now is the
time, euen now, (good Bretheren) are
the dayes come, which Chriſt himſelfe
propheſied ſhould come,Math. 24. ſaying, The
time ſhall be that iniquitie ſhall haue the
vpperchand, and the loue of many ſhall
abate. Chriſt ſaid, that ſuch a time
ſhould come, and euen now, euen
now, that time and ſeaſon is come vpon
vs. So likewiſe Saint Paul the
Apoſtle of Chriſt ſaid,2. Timo. 3. 
               In the laſt
dayes there ſhall come perilous times,
Erunt homines ſeipſos amantes, There
ſhall bem en which ſhal loue them ſelues,

couetous, boaſters, proud, curſed ſpeakers,
and ſuch as ſhall be deſpiſers of them
that are good. O ſee the prophet ſaith,
Non eſt veritas in terra,
               Oſe. 4. 
               There is no trueth,
no faithfulneſſe in the whole world, there
is no mercie, no knowledge of God in
the land; but ſwearing, lying, manſlaughter,
theft, and adulterie. Ieremie
alſo the prophet of God, Frater venabitur
fratrem ad mortem,
               Ier. 9. ſaith he, One
Brother ſhall hunt and perſecute an other
vnto death: no man may ſafely truſt his
owne Brother, for one Brother vndermyneth
an other, and one neyghbour
beguyleth an other. And all this do we
now ſée, wée, I ſay, in theſe our dayes
do ſée and behold all this. We ſée now
that which Nazianzen that old holie
father ſpeaketh of, Membra Chriſti pugnant
inter ſe, The members of Chriſt are
at ſtrife and variance among them ſelues,
               
ſaith he, and euen thoſe members that
Chriſt died for, thoſe members I ſay
that Chriſts blood redéemed, thoſe members
we now ſée at debate and fighting
together. I ſpeake but in generalitie,
I ſpeake not now in particularitie, I do

not here repeat to your memories our
particular offences, and great crimes,
which to conſider would cauſe any honeſt
hart to be ſorie, yea, which to remember
would enforce the ſtonie hart
to bléed. I do not now rehearſe vnto
you by name any ſuch our offences. O
rip vp your conſciences, deſcend into
your owne harts, ſée whether iniquitie
doth not abound, ſée whether there be
not in theſe our dayes, men, ſuch as are
louers of them ſelues: ſée whether there
be any trueth, any fidelitie vpon the
earth: ſée whether one brother doth not
hunt and perſecute an other vnto death:
and laſtly ſée whether the verie members
of Chriſt are not now at debate
and fighting together. Dauid, when he
conſidered the great oppreſſion, tyrannie,
and perſecution vſed againſt the
faithfull, in his time, cryed out and
ſaid,Pſal. 12. 
               Serua me Deus, quia defecit ſanctus,
O ſaue me Lord, for there is not
one Saint more, verie few faithfull are
there among the children of men: Euery
man telleth lyes to his neighbor, they
do but ſlatter with their lips, and diſſemble

in their hart. Ieremie
                the prophet,
when he ſaw the whole multitude of the
people in his dayes forſake God, and
run after their owne affections, euery
man whether his luſt lead him, he cried
out and ſaid,Ier. 9. 
               Quis capiti meo dabit aquam,
& occulis meis fontem aquarum, O who
will giue my head water ynough, and a
well of teares for mine eyes, that I may
bewaile the iniquitie of this people.
                And
euen like as Dauid in his time, ſo may
the iuſt man ſay now, Serua me Deus,
quoniam defecit ſanctus, O Lord helpe,
becauſe there is no holie man left.
                Like
as Ieremie, ſo may the vertuous bewaile
now the wickedneſſe of theſe our dayes,
and ſay, O who ſhall poure water into
my head, and giue a fountaine of teares
vnto myne eyes, that I may bewaile the
wickedneſſe of this people. O Chriſt,
where is now thy new commaundement?
where is now thy cogniſance, thy
badge whereby thy ſeruants are knowen?
where is that peace which thou
leafteſt to thy Diſciples? where is now
that one hart, that one mind, that one
thought, that was in the congregation

in the beginning of thy Church?
But what néed I to ſpeake, what néed
I to ſay any thing, if they would heare
thée, Lord, if they would heare thy
word and Goſpell? O Lord where is
thy ſtrength become? where is that power,
that force of thy word, which
was able to diuide the marrow from the
bone?
               Heb. 4. What is now become of that
marueilous might of thy word? Thy
word, O Lord, is one, thy Goſpell is
the ſelfe ſame and one, but the harts of
men, the harts of thy people are not
one. But this commeth to paſſe for my
ſinnes, this I ſée well is wrought by
thée, O Lord, for myne owne ſinnes
and offences: for other poore men preach
thy Goſpell, other poore men doe teach
and inſtruct thy people with thy holie
word, and by and by the people
mourne, by and by they are ſorie for
their ſinnes, they repent them of their
wickedneſſe, and turne vnto thée. And
I ſpeake as they doe, I preach the
ſame Goſpell, the ſame word of thine
as they do, and yet I doe ſée no amendment,
I doe not ſée any one won vnto

thée thorough my teaching. And therefore
my ſinne is the cauſe, myne owne
ſinne and nothing elſe is the cauſe hereof;
thou haſt not thought me a man worthie,
by whom any one loſt ſhéepe ſhould
be conuerted, and brought home vnto
thée. But O thou my Brother, that here
ſtandeſt like an ydoll, thou hoſt eyes to
ſée, and eares to heare, ſeeſt thou not that
God hath his ſword whet, his bow bent,
his arrowes readie to deſtroy? heareſt
thou not how he calleth thee to repentance?
Thou doeſt ſée, and heare this,
and yet thou increaſeſt ſinne vpon ſinne,
and ſo heapeſt vp anger and diſpleaſure
againſt the day of wrath. I call God to
witneſſe. I haue vttered vnto you Gods
trueth, I haue preached among you his
holie Goſpell, I haue reuealed vnto you
his diuine word, ſo that none of you all
can excuſe your ſelues by ignorance.
But take you héed to your ſelues, take
good héed, I ſay, my Bretheren, & marke
well what S. Paul ſaith,Hebr. 10. 
               Peccantes poſt
acceptam gratiam, deſtituti ſunt omni miſericordia,
They which wilfully ſinne after
they haue once receiued the knowledge of

the truth, are deſtitute of all mercie: there
remaineth vnto them no more ſacrifice
for their ſins, but a fearefull looking of
iudgement, and violent fire, which ſhall
conſume the aduerſaries.
                And this is it
that the Apoſtle ſaith, to bee caſt into a
reprobate ſence. This is the ſin that S.
Iohn maketh mencion of, ſaying; Eſt
peccatum in ſpiritum ſanctum, there is a ſin
againſt the holy Ghoſt, which ſhall neuer
be forgiuen in this world, nor in the
world to come.
                And for this great ſin,
for this horrible wickedneſſe, good people,
God hath drawne out his ſword,
for this cauſe hath he bent his bow, and
prepared his arrowes to deſtroy.
            Therefore (good brethren) let vs lay
aſide al contention, al ſtrife, and debate,
and let vs looke vp vnto heauen, let vs
caſt our eies thither, where is no rancor,
no diſcord, no ſtrife, no debate: let vs fix
our eyes, our hearts, and our whole
mindes on Ieſus Chriſt, on him I ſay,
who hanging on the croſſe, praid for his
perſecutors, and ſaid; O father forgiue
them, they wote not what they doe. Let
vs imagine that wee now behold him,

and that he now ſpreadeth out his arms
vnto vs, and ſaith, O thou ſinfull man
that ſlumbreſt in thy ſins, and ſléepeſt
in thine own wickedneſſe, awake, now
is it time for thee to awake out of thy
ſlumber, to ariſe from thy heauie ſléepe:
remember thou art a Chriſtian man,
conſider thou are a lymbe of my lymbs,
a member of my bodie, the child of God,
and coheire of my fathers kingdome.
You children of men, how long will yée
dwell in your old wickedneſſe? How
long will yée liue in hatered one with another?
How long will ye continue in
rancour and ſtrife? Shall I ſo forgiue
you as you forgiue your neighbours?
ſhall I ſo pardon you your ſins, as you
pardon your brethren their offences? O
I forgaue thée thy great debt, and wilt
not thou forgiue thy brother that little,
wherein he hath offended thee? I haue
paid his debt, I haue paid the ranſome
for his treſpaſſe, if my bloud be a ſufficient
ranſome for the ſame: for that
blouds ſake of myne forgiue him, if
nought els will moue thée, if thou wilt
not for his owne ſake, yet for my ſake

pardon him. Good brethren, wee haue
long enough ſerued the deuil, the prince
of this world, let vs now ſerue God our
maker, and Chriſt our redéemer. We
haue long ynough, yea too long, continewed
in rancour and malice one with
another: let vs now therfore, if there be
any ſocietie betwéene God and vs, if
there be in vs any loue of Chriſt, if there
bee any feare of Gods wreake and
vengeance, let vs one forgiue another;
let euery man forgiue his Chriſtian
brother, let vs all caſt aſide al rancour,
ſtrife, and debate, and ſo let vs dwell
together in vnitie, in brotherly loue, and
concord.
            This day we haue heard Gods Goſpel
preached vnto vs, this day wee haue
learned out of the word of God, that if
wée be Chriſtians, we ſhould liue like
Chriſtians, if we be the children of God
we ſhould liue as becommeth the children
of God, without enuie, without
hatred, without ſtrife or malice. Let vs
therfore now leaue off our old contention
& ſtrife, let vs euen here in this place
one forgiue another, and ſo be reconciled

one vnto another, and ſaie; Remitte nobis
debita noſtra, ſicut & nos dimittimus debit
oribus noſtris, O Lord forgiue vs our
ſins, as we forgiue them that treſpaſſe againſt
vs.
                This is our profeſſion, this is
our Religion, hereunto are we called of
God, appointed by Chriſt, and commanded
by his holy word. Let vs conſider
our white & hore hairs, let vs behold
our riueled ſkinne, let vs haue alwaies
before our eyes the graue whereunto
we are créeping: Let vs conſider that
death daily hangeth ouer our heads.
And ſhall wee then in this ſort liue out
the reſt of our years? Shall wee thus
die, and come to our graues? Let vs
ſhew our ſelues in our workes to be the
children of God, and the brethren of
Chriſt: let vs not ſhew our ſelues Chriſtians
in name and not in déed: let vs
not loue in word alone, but in déed and
veritie: let vs not requite euill with euill,
one miſchiefe with another; but let
vs (according vnto S. Pauls Rule)Rom. 12. 
               Ouercome
euill with good, hatred with
loue, and ſo fulfill the Law of God. So
ſhall God hold backe his ſword, though

alreadie drawne, ſo ſhall he not ſmite vs
though he hath bent his bow, prepared
him the weapons of death, and ordained
his arrowes to deſtroy. But God ſhall
continue our God, and remain with vs
for euer. Amen.
            
         
         
            THE FIFT SERMON.
            
               Luk. 10. verſ. 23. 24.
               
                  23. And he turned him to his Diſciples,
and ſaid: Bleſsed are the eyes which
ſee that ye ſee.
                  24. For I ſaie vnto you, many Prophets
& kings would haue ſeen the things
that ye ſee, and haue not ſeene them,
and haue heard the things that yee
heare, and haue not heard them.
               
            
            
               OUR Sauiour Chriſt, before
he began to declare and
ſet forth the will of his Father,
before hee began to
preach abroad the high myſteries of our
redemption, the glad tidings of mans

ſaluation, ſent abroad into the world a
many of Diſciples to the number of thrée
ſcore and ten, to the end that they ſhould
eſpie out and ſée the ſtay of the people,
how they would accept his Doctrine,
and firſt to giue them this warning, and
ſay; Paenitentiam agite, appropinquat enim
regnum caelorum, Repent your ſelues, for
the Kingdome of Heauen is at hand.
               
Theſe Diſciples of Chriſt, after they
had in all points accompliſhed their maſters
commiſſion, and fulfilled his commandement,
returned againe vnto
Chriſt, and ſhewed him the maruailes
that they had wrought in his name, reioycing
much therat, and eſpecially for
that Deuils departed from men poſſeſſed,
and were driuen out by them; The
verie Deuils (ſaid they) are ſubdued vnto
vs in thy name. But when Chriſt
heard them thus ſay, and perceiued that
they reioyced there at, he turned to his
Diſciples, hee pulled them from this
vaine fancie, and ſaid; I ſaw Sathan fall
downe from heauen as lightning. Behold
I haue giuen you power to tread vpon
Serpents, to go ouer Scorpions, ouer all

venemous and noyſome beaſts; they ſhal
be ſubiect, & obedient vnto you, & they
ſhal not hurt you. But reioyce not in this,
reioyce not that you ſhall haue power ouer
Serpents, that you ſhall be able to
tread vpon Scorpions and all other venemous
beaſts, & be nothing therwith
annoyed, but reioyce you in this, that
your names are written in the booke of
life. Put away (ſaid Chriſt) this vaineglory
that your haue conceiued, this fond
fancie wherein ye reioyce, and reioyce
yée only in this, that your names are
written in heauen: and that you know
God, and his ſon whom he hath ſent into
the world. For no man knoweth the
Son, but the Father,
               Math. 11. 
               neither knoweth any
man the Father, ſaue the Son, & he to
whom the Son will open it. This is your
felicitie, this is your ioy, & no man but
you, hath this great ioy & felicitie. And
therfore bleſſed are the eyes which ſée,
that ye ſée. This heauenly felicity, this
marueilous bliſſe, that Chriſt in this
place ſpake of to his Diſciples, was propheſied
and long time before ſpoken of,
euen at the firſt beginning of the world:

for at what time Adam had tranſgreſſed
Gods commaundement, and ſo fallen
from the ioyes of Paradiſe; God
himſelfe, to put Adam in ſome comfort
againe, prouounced theſe words againſt
the wicked Serpent that had
wrought him that woe,Gen. 3. and ſaid, Ipſum
conteret caput tuum, The ſeed of the woman
ſhall tread downe thy head:
                he, he
it is that ſhal breake downe and deſtroy
the power of the deuill, ſaid God vnto
Adam. This promiſe (I ſay) euen at the
beginning of the world was made by
God vnto Adam, and ſo continued to
the time of Chriſt: for afterward this
ſame promiſe declared God likewiſe, to
many a good and godly man. Hee ſaid
vnto Abraham,
               Gen. 22. 
               In ſ
                     •
                  mine tuo benedicentur
omnes fiues terrae, In thy ſeed
                (ſaid God)
in that ſeed of thine ſhall all the Nations
of the earth be bleſſed. To Dauid alſo
God declared likewiſe this promiſe,
and ſaid;Pſal. 131. 
               De ſemine tuo ponam ſuper ſoliū
tuū, Of the truit of thy body ſhal I ſet
vpon thy ſeat. And ſo in the time of Eſay
his prophet, god continued this promiſe,
and ſaid;Eſa. 7. 
               Ecce virgo concipiet, & pariet

filium cuius nomen erit Emanuel, behold, a
virgine ſhall conceiue and bring forth a
ſonne, whoſe name ſhall bee Emanuel,
               
that is, God amongſt vs. And hereunto
witneſſed all the Patriarches and Prophets,
euen from the firſt beginning of
the world, vnto the time of the comming
of our Sauior Ieſus Chriſt. And
therfore, becauſe the whole Scriptures,
the Patriarches, the Prophets, ſpake
thus plainely of Chriſt, and declared his
comming. Chriſt ſaid, Scrutamini Scripturas,
               Ioh. 5.
               illae enim teſtimonium perhibent de
me, ſearch you the Scriptures, for they do
beare witneſſe of me.
                Likewiſe againe
to the Scribes and Phariſies, hee ſaid,
Si Moſei crederetis crederetis & mihi,
               Ioh. 5. 
               If ye
beleeued Moſes, ye would beleeue mee,
for Moſes alſo hath written to mee; hee
hath told you of me, ſaid Chriſt, & therefore
if you beléeued him, yée would alſo
beléeue me. And thus all the whole bodie
of the Scriptures bare record of the
comming of Chriſt: the Patriarches
knew long before that Chriſt ſhould be
borne: the Prophets propheſied of his
comming into the world. But when

Chriſt ſhould be borne, when his glorious
comming ſhould appeare, that neither
the ſcriptures declared, neither the
holy Patriarches knew, nor the Prophets
were able to ſhew. And therfore
ſaid Chriſt,Iohn 8. 
               Abraham voluit videre diem
meum, Abraham would faine haue ſeene
my day, & he ſaw it, & therefore he reioiced.
               
But how did Abraham ſée it? with
bodily eyes? no, but in faith, & becauſe
he was in faith able to ſée it, therefore he
reioyced. What then if he had with his
eyes ſéene Chriſt, if he had talked with
him, if he might haue touched and embraced
Chriſt: what ioy would hée haue
made? how would he haue reioyced and
béene glad? No doubt, as the birth of
Chriſt was moſt acceptable and welcome
to al good men in that time, ſo was
his comming much longed for of the holy
Patriarches and Prophets before
time: for they well knew that his time
ſhould be a time moſt acceptable, that
then all things ſhould be in quietneſſe,
vnitie and concord in euery place, peace
through the whole world. And therefore
ſaid Eſay the Prophet,Eſa. 9. 
               Et vocabitur

princeps pacis, He ſhalbe called the Prince
of peace.
                And to declare this more plainly,
the ſame Prophet ſaith,Eſay 11. 
               Then ſhall
the Wolfe dwell with the Lambe, the
Leopard ſhall lye downe by the Goat,
Bullocks, Lyons, and cattell ſhall keepe
company together, the Cow and the
Beare ſhall lye together: and there ſhall
be no crying, no wayling, no noyſe heard
in the ſtreets. And therefore this Prophet
Eſay in another place, conſidering
the great ioy, the great felicitie that
Chriſt ſhould bring into the world,
when hée ſhould be borne, cryed out and
ſaid, Diſrumpe coelos, & deſcende,
               Eſay 64. 
               O Lord
ſaid he, breake the heauens and come
downe. And ſo another Prophet in
like foreſéeing this great felicitie that
ſhould enſue the birth of Chriſt, ſaid,
Quis viuet, & videbit haec? O who ſhall
liue to enioy this merueilous felicitie?
               
When Chriſt was come into this
world, though then not borne, but in
his mothers wombe, Iohn the Baptiſt
béeing a babe, and in his mothers
belly alſo, yet at the Maieſtie of his
Lord,Luke 1. and at the preſence of Chriſt,

he ſprang for ioy, and leapt in his mothers
wombe. So likewiſe at the birth
of Chriſt, for ioy that the Angels in heauen
conceiued thereat,Luk. 2. they ſang Gloria
in excelſis Deo, & in terra pax hominibus,
Glorie be to God on high, and in earth
peace vnto men.
                After that time whē 
               Simeon
that holy prophet had in ſpirit perceiued
the true Meſſias, & Sauior of the
world to be born, & had receiued Chriſt
into his armes,Luke 2. he cried out & ſaid, Nunc
dimittis ſeruum tuum Domine, ſecundum
verbum tuum in pace, Now letteſt thou thy
ſeruant depart in peace, according to thy
word:
                Now, euen now that this ſight
is prouided before the face of the whole
world, that ſo long hath béene looked for,
now that light is appeared which ſhall
be the light of the Gentiles: Now, O
Lord, ſaid be, let thy ſeruant depart in
peace, I haue lyued long ynough to ſée
thy ſaluation.
            Thus, good brethren, all the Scriptures
throughout, the Patriarches, the
Prophets, ſhewed long before vnto vs,
the ioy and felicity that ſhould come vpon
the whole world, at ſuch time as

Chriſt ſhould be borne. And therefore
to confirme all this that they before had
propheſied of him, Chriſt here ſaid vnto
his diſciples, Bleſſed are the eyes which
ſee that ye ſee. Bleſſed are your eies, ſaid
Chriſt, for your eyes haue ſéene Gods
promiſes performed: that promiſe which
he made to Adam, ſaying, The ſeed of
the woman ſhall breake the head of the
Serpent: Your eies haue ſéene that promiſe
made vnto Abraham, The ſeed
wherein all nations ſhall bee bleſſed:
That promiſe alſo your eyes haue ſéene
performed, which God made vnto Dauid,
ſaying: Of the fruit of thy bodie wil
I ſet vpon thy ſeat: You haue ſéene, and
do now ſée that Emanuel, of whom Eſay
propheſied: You, I ſay, haue ſéene that
thing, whereunto all the Patriarches, al
the Prophets, & the whole body of the
Scriptures do beare witneſſe: You do
ſee and behold him, whom Abraham
would gladly haue ſéene: You ſée him,
whom Eſay calleth the Prince of peace:
him, in regard of whom the Prophet
cried out, and ſaid, O who ſhall liue to
ſee this great ioy? You ſée him, at whoſe

preſence Saint Iohn the Baptiſt being
in his mothers wombe, ſprang, & leapt
vp for ioy: him, at whoſe birth the verie
Angels in heauen ſang, Gloria in excelſis:
him, whom Simeon pronounced to bee
the Sauiour of the world. All this, ſaid
Chriſt, you ſée, you my diſciples, your
eyes do ſée all this, and therefore bleſſed
are your eyes, happy and bleſſed are the
eyes that ſée whiche yée ſée. In the beginning,
               Heb. 1.
ſaith S. Paul, God ſpake diuerſly,
and by ſundry meanes vnto his people,
ſometimes by dreames, ſometimes by reuelation,
ſometimes by propheſies, ſometimes
by Angels, and ſometimes by his
owne voice: but now in theſe dayes hee
hath ſent amongſt vs his owne ſonne: by
him, ſaith he, God hath declared his wil
vnto vs cléerely and plainly, euen by the
mouth of his owne ſon. When S. Iohn
the Baptiſt baptized Chriſt in the riuer
of Iordan, it pleaſed God the Father to
crye from heauen, and ſay, Hic eſt meus
filius dilectus,
               Luke 3. 
               ipſum audit, This is my
beloued ſonne, heare him,
                hearken vnto
his voice, giue eare vnto his doctrine:
for he it is to whom both the law & the

Prophets haue their reſpect. And S.
Paul ſaith,Colloſſ. 1. 
               Myſterium abſcōditum a ſaeculis
nunc autem reuelatur per Ieſum Chriſtum,
the myſterie, that high myſterie of mans
ſaluation, that hath beene ſo many hundred
yeres hid, is now reuealed by Chriſt
our Sauiour: ſo long it hath béene hidden,
ſaith Saint Paul, and now it is opened
and ſhewed vnto the whole
world by Chriſt. Therefore bleſſed are
your eyes, ſaid Chriſt, yea, bleſſed are
the eyes which ſée that yée ſée, for your
bodily eyes ſee that which the Angels
did lacke, you ſée that which the Patriarches
and the Prophets neuer ſaw:
you, ſaid Chriſt, you my Diſciples are
bleſſed that ſée me, that heare my goſpel
and beléeue the ſame, and therefore bleſſed
are your eyes, and the eyes which ſée
that you ſée. For otherwiſe the Scribes
ſaw Chriſt as the Apoſtles did, the
Phariſies ſaw him as the Apoſles did,
and yet were they alwaies Scribes and
Phariſies, that is, ſuch as withſtood
Chriſt, and gainſaid his doctrine: Caiphas
ſaw Chriſt as the Apoſtles did,
and yet hée rent his clothes, and ſayd,

that Chriſt was a blaſphemer.Mar. 14. 
               Pilat ſaw
Chriſt as the Apoſtles did, and yet hée
gaue iudgement againſt Chriſt.Luke 23. 
               Iudas
ſaw Chriſt as the reſt of his fellows the
Apoſtles ſaw him,Iohn 13. and yet he betrayed
Chriſt.Math. 27. The Souldiers, and ſuch as
hung Chriſt on the croſſe, ſaw Chriſt as
the Apoſtles did, yet were they wicked
men, & did put Chriſt vnto death. Shall
we then ſay, that theſe mens eyes were
bleſſed? that the eies of the Scribes and
Phariſies were bleſſed? that Caiphas
eyes, Pilats eyes, Iudas eyes were bleſſed?
ſhall wee ſay, that the Souldiers
eyes, & the eyes of them that put Chriſt
vnto death, were bleſſed, becauſe they
ſaw Chriſt, & beheld his bodie? O good
brethren, theſe men ſaw Chriſt, and yet
ſaw him not: they ſaw him with their
bodily eyes, and yet they knew him not:
they ſaw him as the Aſſe, the Wolfe,
and the Dogge ſaw him: they ſaw him
as the diuell ſaw him,Luke 8. and ſaid, Tu es filius
Dei, Thou art the ſonne of God:
                thus
they ſaw Chriſt as touching the bodie,
but they ſaw him not as the Apoſtles
ſaw him: they ſaw him as a man, but

not as the ſonne of God: they ſaw him
as the ſonne of a Carpenter,
               Luke 4. for ſo they
ſaid he was,Math. 13. but they ſaw him not as the
Apoſtles ſaw him, to be the verie ſonne
of God: they ſaw Chriſt as a miſerable
man, but the Apoſtles ſaw him as the
Sauiour of the world. And therefore
Peter was bold to ſay,Math. 16. 
               Tu es Chriſtus, filius
Dei viui, Thou art Chriſt, the ſonne of
the liuing God.
                And againe he was in
like able to ſay,Ioh. 6. 
               Tu habes verbum ſalutis,
Thou haſt the words of life. Thus the
Apoſtles ſaw Chriſt, and beléeued him
to be the redéemer of the world, & therefore
Chriſt ſaid vnto them, Bleſſed are
your eyes, and the eies which ſee that you
ſee. For I ſay vnto you, many Kings and
Prophets would faine haue ſeene the
things that you ſee, and could not ſee
them.
            
            This promiſe, good brethren, of the
birth of Chriſt, and his comming into
the world, to redéeme mankind, was
made long before, yea, it was promiſed
by God the Father, euen in the firſt beginning
of the world, as I haue already
declared vnto you. And therfore in hope

of the performance of this promiſe, many
a godly man did put his affiance in
Chriſt, and long before his comming
had a fixed truſt in the merits of his paſſion.
The Patriarches, the Prophets,
and all ſuch as liued vnder the old law,
had the ſame Law and Teſtament that
wée now haue, they had the ſame doctrine,
the ſame faith, the ſame prayer,
the ſame Sacraments that wee now
haue: wée drinke of Chriſt, and ſo the
Iewes dranke of Chriſt:1. Cor. 10. 
               Bibebant de petra,
petra autem erat Chriſtus, They drank
of the rocke, ſaith Saint Paul, and the
rocke they dranke of was Chriſt.
                They
were circumciſed, and ſo are we: for,
ſaith Saint Paul,
               Colloſſ. 2. 
               We alſo are circumciſed,
but with circumciſion without hands:
We are circumciſed, but we are circumciſed
in heart by the power of the holy
ghoſt. The Patriarches and the Prophets
knew well, and beléeued, that by
Chriſt they ſhould be redéemed, that by
his only blood, ſhed on the croſſe all the
world ſhould bee ſaued: but this they
knew, this they ſaw, only by faith, & in
ſpirit, for then was not Chriſt borne: we

haue the lamb of God offered vp for vs,
& ſo had they the ſame lambe offered vp
for them. For S. Iohn ſaith,Apocal. 13 
               Agnus oblatus
a principio mundi, Chriſt was the lambe
offered vp from the beginning of the
world.
               
               1. Pet. 1. And now therefore, foraſmuch as
the Patriarchs, the Prophets, & the holy
men in old time, had the ſame 
                  ••••
               ament,
the ſame doctrine, the ſame faith,
the ſame prayer, the ſame Sacraments
that we haue: foraſmuch as they drank
of Chriſt, as we do: foraſmuch as they
were circumciſed, and ſo are we: foraſmuch
as they did beléeue that they
ſhould be ſaued by the death of Chriſt,
as we doe, ſhall wee thinke that they
were not bleſſed? that their eyes were
not as happy as ours? that they ſaw
not as much as we do? Shall we think
that Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, Ioſeph, and
diuers other ſuch good men, lackt any
part of their felicitie? Or if they were
bleſſed, why ſaid Chriſt onely to his
Apoſtles, Bleſſed are the eyes which ſee
that yee ſee? When our Sauiour Chriſt
ſaid thus, bleſſed are your eyes, and the
eyes which ſée that yée ſée, he meant not

and peculiar bleſſing giuen vnto them
alone, but he ſignified the bleſſing of that
time: as if he ſhould haue ſaid, bleſſed is
this time, bleſſed are the dayes that you
ſée. For there is in times and ſeaſons a
great difference and diuerſitie. Some
one time is bleſſed, another is accurſed.
The time of the wicked king Manaſſes,
               4. Reg. 21.
wherin the Teſtament and law of God
was burnt, Baals altars reedified, and
Idols ſet vp, was a miſerable time: this
time, I ſay, of Manaſſes raigne, was an
accurſed time.4. Reg. 23. But the time of Ioſias,
wherein the law of God was reſtored
againe, Baal caſt out of the Temple, the
Idols pulled downe, and all good orders
againe ſet vp in their former eſtate, was
a bleſſed time, a time moſt happie; and
bleſſed was he that liued to ſée that time.
So likewiſe the time of the birth of
Chriſt was a bleſſed time, and the time
of Antichriſt a time accurſed. And therfore
Chriſt oftentimes wept ouer Ieruſalem,
and ſaid,Luke 19. 
               O Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem,
thou that killeſt my Prophets, and ſtoneſt
them that are ſent vnto thee, O that
thou kneweſt the time of thy viſitation:
               
O that thine eyes would once ſée, thine
eares heare, and ſo thou wouldſt know
when God hath ſent his ſonne vnto
thee.Rom. 13. Saint Paul ſaith, Nunc tempus eſt
nobis à ſomnis ſurgere, Now is the houre
for vs to ariſe from ſleepe. Nox praeceſſit,
dies autem illuxit, The night is paſt, and
the day now beginneth to ſhine: and
therefore in concluſion, he ſaith,
               1. Cor. 6. 
               Ecce
nunc tempus acceptabile, Behold now is
the acceptable time, behold now is the
time of ſaluation.
                Theſe were bleſſed
times, theſe were acceptable times, that
Chriſt our Sauiour and S. Paul ſpake
of,Iohn 12. 
               Dum habetis lucem, ambulate in luce,
Whiles you haue light, walke in the light
               
ſaith Chriſt, receiue the light, and ſo ſhal
you be the children of light. And ſo that
time was a bleſſed time: becauſe Chriſt
was borne in that time, becauſe the force
and power of the diuell was by Chriſt
then deſtroyed, becauſe the dominion &
kingdome of ſathan was then throwne
downe, therefore was it a bleſſed time.
But as touching the bleſſing of the men
in times long before, men were as bleſſed
as they were then: Abraham, Iſaac,

Iacob, Ioſeph, and ſuch other, were as
bleſſed as the Apoſtles. They had the
ſame Chriſt, the ſame Sauiour and redéemer
that the Apoſtles had. For ſaith
S. Paul,
               Hebr. 13. 
               Ieſus Chriſtus, heri, hodie, & ſemper,
Chriſt, is for yeſterday, this day, and
for euer.
                One Chriſt ſerued for all the
world. Otherwiſe moſt miſerable were
we, & in moſt wretched condition were
all ſuch as either now liue, or haue liued
ſithence the time of Chriſt. For we neuer
ſaw Chriſt in the fleſh, we neuer beheld
his bodie, wee were neuer conuerſant
with him on the earth. But Chriſt
hath told vs by S. Thomas,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               Beati qui non
vident & credunt, bleſſed are they that beleeue
and haue not ſeene,
                bleſſed are they
that ſée not, and yet beléeue. Theſe
things bée for our great comfort. For
although we neuer ſaw Chriſt with our
eyes, though he was neuer conuerſant
with vs, as he was with his Apoſtles,
yet haue wée through him the ſame ſaluation
that the Apoſtles had, wée haue
him our redéemer and Sauiour as they
had him.
            Now let vs compare this ſaying of

Chriſt vnto our ſelues and our time: let
vs ſée whether this that Chriſt then
ſpake to his Diſciples, may not be ſpoken
of vs, and our time. For thus ought
wée to read Gods word, to this end we
ſhould read the Scriptures of God.
Now therefore, good brethren, let vs
conſider well, and ſée whether the
Church of God hath not béene ſo diſordered
before our time, yea, and in our
time, that wée may now well ſay, bleſſed
are our eyes, and the eyes which
ſée that wée ſée: for many a good and
godly man would ſayne haue ſéene that
wee ſee, and could not ſée it. I will be
ſhort, I will not long trouble you in
this thing, I will not vſe many words
vnto you herein. The errors that haue
beene taught and preached in the
church of Chriſt, haue béene (good brethren)
ſo groſſe, that ſuch as could not
ſée them with their eyes, might haue
felt them euen with their fingers: ſo
horrible, and ſo groſſe were the errors
in the church: ſo were all things confounded,
and ſcarcely the forme of the
Church left vnto vs. But that this

ſhould ſo come to paſſe, Chriſt himſelfe,
S. Paul, S. Peter, and Daniel the Prophet,
long time before gaue warning to
the world, and propheſied it ſhould ſo
be. And euen as they ſpake, ſo hath it
come to paſſe, looke what they ſaid, the
ſame haue we ſéene fulfilled. For Chriſt
himſelfe openly ſhewed, that the time
ſhould come,Math. 24. 
               that deſolation ſhould
ſtand in the holy place. And againe hée
ſaid, When the ſonne of man ſhall come
to iudge the earth, thinke you that hee
ſhall find any faith vpon the earth? As if
he ſhould haue ſaid, when he ſhall come
to iudge, there ſhall be no faith on the
earth, no fidelitie and truſt among men,
ſo ſhall all things be confounded, and no
faith ſhal be found. Saint Paul likewiſe
ſaith,2. Theſ. 2. 
               The time ſhall bee, that Antichriſt
ſhall neſtle himſelfe in the Temple of
God, in the conſciences of men, in the
place of Chriſt, and ſhalbe exalted aboue
all that is called God, or Gods ſeruice.
And he ſaith further,3. Tim. 4. 
               Erit tempus cum ſanam
doctrinam aſpernentur, The daies ſhal
come, when men ſhall deſpiſe and caſt away
all wholeſome doctrine:
                the time

ſhall be (ſaith he) that they ſhall not ſuffer
this Goſpell that I haue preached,
theſe Epiſtes, and letters which I haue
ſent vnto you, But they ſhall turne their
eares from the truth, and ſhall bee giuen
vnto fables. This S. Paule aforehand
told vs, and indéed wee haue found his
tale moſt true.2. Pet. 2. S. Peter alſo ſaith; Erunt
magiſtri mendatiorum, There ſhall
come Preachers and teachers of lyes;
there ſhall come falſe teachers, which
priuily ſhall bring in damnable ſects. Daniel
               
likewiſe that Prophet of God,Dan. 9. long
before the comming of Chriſt, propheſied
and ſaid, Antechriſt ſhall come, there
ſhall bee an abhominable deſolation in
the Temple, it ſhall be deſtroyed al, and
the truth ſhall be caſt flat to the ground.
            Now, good brethren, conſider well
with your ſelues, where ſhould this deſolation
be, which Chriſt ſpake of? Amongſt
whom ſhall ſo ſmall faith bee
found? Where ſhould Antechrist neſtle himself? Where should good Doctrine be deſpiſed? where ſhould there be preachers and teachers of lyes? Where
ſhold the truth be caſt flat to the groūd?

where ſhould all theſe things come to
paſſe? Amongſt the Turkes, the Saraſins,
the Heathen, the Infidels? amongſt
ſuch as neuer heard of Chriſt,
nor his Goſpell? ſhould theſe things,
that Chriſt, that S. Paule, that S. Peter,
that Daniel propheſied to come to
paſſe, ſhould they (I ſay) be fulfilled amongſt
them? Let not vs deceiue our
ſelues, good brethren, Chriſt ſaid that
deſolation ſhould come into the holy
place, that ſuch as profeſſed God and his
name, ſhould haue little faith. S. Paule
ſaid that Antechriſt ſhould ſit in the holy
place, in the Temple of God: that amongſt
Chriſtians wholſome doctrine
ſhould be deſpiſed, and caſt away: S.
Peter alſo, that euen amongſt the profeſſors
of Gods Goſpel, ſome there
ſhould be that ſhould preach and teach
lyes: And Daniel likewiſe, that in the
Temple Antechriſt ſhould ſit, and there
al truth ſhould be caſt flat to the ground.
And this ſhould not come to paſſe among
the Heathen and Infidels, but
in the Church of Chriſt, euen in the very
Church of God. S. Hillarie, who was

an old father in the Church, ſaith: O you
will ſoone deceiue your ſelues if yee truſt
in the wals, know you not that Antechriſt
in the Church? Let vs not therfore
deceiue our ſelues, let not vs, good
brethren, deceiue our ſelues. And here
I pray you conſider with me, how that
God, for our better vnderſtanding, hath
in ſimilitudes opened and ſet forth vnto
vs the ſtate of his Church. For Chriſt
in the Goſpell compareth his Church
vnto a ſhip in the Sea, toſſed and tumbled
with perilous waues: and what
I pray you, betides vnto a Ship ſo toſſed
in the Sea, if there be no Lodes-man
to ſtir it, or if the Lodes-man doth not
his duetie, Chriſt hath likened his
Church to a vine:Eſay. 5. and what becomes to
a vine, if it be not ſhred and vnderpropped?
He doth alſo liken it to a flock of
Shéepe:Ioh. 10. and what becomes to a flock of
Shéepe, if there bee no Sheepheard to
guid and looke vnto them? And now
therefore conſider with mee, I pray
you, euen from the meane Prieſt, to the
Biſhop of Rome, conſider, I ſay, whether
they haue done their dueties: which

of them all hath done that which is required
in them, which of them hath fulfilled
that God gaue them in charge to
do. Chriſt to his Diſciples, and in them
to all ſuch as ſhould become Preachers,Mat. 16.
gaue this Commiſſion, ſaying, Ite, &
praedicate, Goe you & Preach:
                and what
is he that euer ſaw the biſhop of Rome
in a Pulpit? who hath heard a Cardinal
many times preach? Iudge you then
(my brethren) when ſhall the ſhip come
ſafe to the hauen, if the Lodes-man doth
not his duetie? When ſhall the Vine
bring forth any fruit, if the huſbandman
apply not his diligence to dung, to
ſhred, to vnderprop the ſame? What
ſhall become of the flocke, if the Shéepheard
ſheweth not his induſtry and earneſt
labour amongſt them? Now let vs
conſider a little further, what they were
what ſhould haue bin our Lodes-men:
what they were that ſhould haue plaied
the good huſbands in Gods vineyard:
what they were that ſhould haue looked
to the flock of Chriſt. Here will I declare
nothing of my ſelfe, I will not
here vtter vnto you any thing of mine

owne inuention; I will onely ſhew you
the minds of the auncient Doctors in
the Primitiue Church, and the ſayings
of old holy fathers, that haue written
of the Church of God. Saint Gregory
ſpeaking of the Church of God, ſaith,

                  Eccleſia Dei, ſi ab vno pendebit, corruet, If
the Church of God ſhall hang vpon one
man, if the whole ſway thereof ſhall depend
vpon one alone, that Church muſt
needs fall, ſaith S. Gregorie. Now let
vs conſider whither in times paſt it hath
bin ſo in the Church of god, whether we
haue knowne one man to haue called
himſelfe the head of the Church: and if
it ſo be, how can it then be otherwiſe,
but that the ſame Church muſt néeds periſh
and fall. Saint Barnard, an old
holy father writing of the Biſhops and
Prelates of the Church in his time,
ſaith; Non ſunt Paſtores, ſed Impoſtores,
non Doctores, ſed Seductores, non Praelati,
ſed Pilati: They are not
                (ſaith S. Barnard)
good Paſtors and feeders of Gods
flock, but they are impoſtors, ſuch as
deceiue Gods ſheepe, they are not Doctors,
but they are ſeductours, ſuch as
               
lead men out of the right way: They
are not Prelates, but they are verie
Pilates. And againe, the ſame Saint
Barnard, in the Councell holden at
Rhemes, where he made a Sermon
in the preſence of the Biſhops there
aſſembled, ſaid; Habemus iam non mercenarios
pro Paſtoribus, neque Lupos pro
mercenarijs, ſed in loco Luporum; Daemones
habemus, Wee haue not now,
               
ſaid this holy Father, hirelings in
ſteed of Sheepe-heards, nor Wolues
in ſteed of hirelings, but in place of
Wolues, wee haue verie Deuils. This
ſpake Saint Barnard of the Preachers
and Paſtors in his time. But O
miſerable is that Church, wherein are
hirelings in ſtéed of good Shéepeheards,
more miſerable, where are
Wolues in place of hirelings, and moſt
miſerable, where Deuils in roome of
Wolues. For then all goeth to ruine
and decay, then muſt néeds all goodneſſe
in Gods Church bee ouerthrowen.
            And ſo was it then, ſo was it in his
time, ſaid this old Father S. Barnard.
               
So Platina alſo an auncient writer;
Defecit tum maiestas Imperatoris, & ſanctitas
Epiſcopi, When the Biſhop of
Rome,
                ſaid hee, tooke ſo much vpon
him, when hee would bee called, Vniuerſall
Biſhop, and head of Gods
Church, then decayed the Maieſtie of
the Emperour, and the holineſſe in the
Biſhop. Saint Hillarie likewiſe ſaith;
The Church wherein Gods word is
not preached, muſt needes run againſt
the rocke. Tertullian alſo, Miremur ſi
fides deficit, cum non ſit inſtructio? Doe
wee maruaile (ſaith hee) if faith faile,
if faith bée not found amongſt men,
ſithence there is no Preaching, no
teaching, no inſtruction? Euen ſo anotherold
writer ſpeaking of his own
time, ſaith, Calamitoſa eſt deſolatio in
Domo Dei, There is an horrible deſolation
in the Church of God.
                And
therefore alſo hee ſaith further, Nos
ſumus, in quos feces terrae deuenerunt,
Wee are they, vpon whom all the
dregs of the earth are fallen.
                So Chriſoſtome:
If you (ſaith hee) perceiue it
to wax darke in the vale, you ſay

it is towards night, if you ſee it begin to
be darke on the hils, you ſay it is nigh
night: but if you ſee it once darke in the
ſkie, you ſay it is high night: So if you
ſée ignorance in the people, you may
ſay it i
                  •
                towards night, if you ſée ignorance
in the Prieſts, it is almoſt night,
but if you ſée ignorance and little learning
in the Biſhops and Prelates,
then may you well ſay, it is high
night.
            
               Barnard that holy father in another
place ſpeaking of the Prieſts of his
owne time, ſaith, Nothing is now ſafe
amongſt the Clergie, all things are confounded,
all things out of order; and
therefore there is now nothing left, but
that Antechriſt be reuealed. I recount
here nothing vnto you, my brethren,
but onely the ſayings of the auncient
Doctours and holy Fathers which haue
written of Gods Church in times herebefore,
and therefore I truſt you will
beleeue them the better. The ſame S.
Barnard of whom I ſpake before, ſaith
alſo: It appeareth now that there is
no perſecution, no Martyrs done vnto

death: Nay not ſo, ſaith he, it is not
ſo, for now euen they that ſit higheſt in
the Church of God, they that beare the
greateſt ſtroke therin, they begin to perſecute
and deſtroy Gods ſeruants. And
again, ſpeaking of the Prieſts and Prelates,
They would ſeeme to be Gods
friends, yet they are his enemyes they
would be Chriſts kinſmen, yet they are
his aduerſaries, they would be ſeruants to
Chriſt, and yet they ſerue Antechriſt.
And thus, (Good Bretheren) it hath bin
in our time, and you your ſelues haue
ſéene it, you your ſelues haue ſéene that
the whole Church hath hanged on one
man alone: that ſuch as ſhould haue bin
Paſtors, haue bin deceiuers: ſuch as
ſhould haue bin teachers of the right
way, haue bin ſeducers and guydes into
blind wayes: ſuch as ſhould haue bin
Prelats, haue bin Pilates. You your
ſelues haue ſéene in the Church of God
hyrelings in ſtéed of good Shepheards,
wolfes in place of hyrelings, and verie
deuils in the roome of wolfes. All theſe
things haue bin ſpoken of afore, That
the Maieſtie in the Emperor, and holineſſe

in the Biſhop ſhould decay: that
where Gods word is not preached, there
muſt the Church néeds run againſt the
rocke: that it is little marueile if faith
faileth, where good inſtruction wanteth:
that pityfull deſolation is come
into the houſe of God: that wée are they
vpon whom the dregs of the whole
Earth are come: that it is then high
night, when ignorance raigneth in the
Biſhops: and laſtly, that there is nothing
now left, but that Antechriſt be
reuealed. All theſe things haue béen ſpoken
of before, and are now come to paſſe,
and you your ſelues haue ſéen them, you
your ſelues, I ſay, haue ſéene all theſe
things fulfilled. You haue ſéene ſuch ſit
higheſt in Gods Church, that haue perſecuted
God & his Church: ſuch as haue
martyrd the ſeruants of Chriſt, ſuch as
would ſéeme Gods friends, and yet are
his enemies: ſuch as would be Chriſts
kynſmen, and yet are his aduerſaries:
ſuch as would be ſeruants to Chriſt,
and yet doe ſerue Antechriſt: ſuch as
Eſaie ſpeaketh of, ſaying, They haue
broken downe my vine, and deſtroyed

my wine preſſe: ſuch as Chriſt himſelfe
ſpeaketh of, and ſaith,Math. 21. 
               They haue made
my Church a den of theeues. Therefore
(good Bretheren) let not vs deceiue our
ſelues, let vs not ſay all things were wel
in the Church, there needed no reformation,
all things were as they ſhould
be, there néeded nothing to be amended.
For, alas, all things were out of order,
all things out of ſquare, all things ſo
confounded, that all things néeded to be
amended. I ſpeake herein only generally,
I ſpeake not here of the particular
things amiſſe in Gods Church, for then
ſhould time faile mée, if I ſhould recount
them vnto you particularly. In time
paſt, if any one man would haue ſought
comfort for his afflicted conſcience, where
ſhould he haue ſought it? whether ſhould
he haue gon for comfort? where ſhould he
haue craued conſolation? what comfort
could we haue of our owne merits,
what help by our owne deſerts, and good
déeds? what conſolation of the Popes
Bulls and Pardons? Alas, no comfort,
no conſolation, no helpe at all.
And yet vnto thoſe were wée taught

to run, in thoſe were we taught to ſéeke
comfort, and at them to craue conſolation.
In the Church, before time, it
hath béen both ſaid & ſung vnto the people,
Tu per Thomae ſauguinem, fac nos aſcendere
vbi Thomas nunc eſt, Thou Chriſt,
by the blood of thy Martyr S. Thomas,
make vs worthie to aſcend thither, where
Thomas now is.
                This, I ſay, as a praier
hath béen vſed and ſung in the Church of
God. The Mother alſo, that bleſſed
Mother of our Sauior Chriſt, hath bin
openly blaſphemed in the Church: ſhée
was called, Spes, vita, dulcedo, Our hope,
our life, and our ſweetneſſe;
                and further,
Salua omnes ſperantes in te, Saue all
them that truſt in thee.
                Thus haue men
openly prayed vnto her, to the great
blaſpheming of her holie name. But O
Chriſt, O thou that ſuffredſt for the
whole world, where was then thy Paſſion,
where was then that precious
blood of thine that waſhed awaie the
ſinnes of Man, where was then the
Lambe of God that redéemed all mankind?
Loath I am to ſpeake of theſe
things, loath and ſorie I am to repeat

them here vnto you, but I am inforced
ſo to do, ſomewhat the more plainly to
open vnto you the great abuſes, the
wonderfull Errors that long time haue
raigned in the Church of God. We had
Prayers, but, alas, as they were vſed,
they were no prayers: we had the Sacraments,
but we knew not to what end
thoſe Sacraments were left vnto vs.
We had Baptiſme, but we knew not
what Baptiſme ment. The Teſtament,
and holie Goſpell of God, was burnt,
caſt downe, and trod vnder foot. And
in one word, in one word for all, there
was in Chriſts Church nothing but a
heap of wickedneſſe, nothing but a verie
heap of confuſion and wickedneſſe.
Ieremie the prophet ſaid, That all men,
               Ier. 31.
(after Chriſt once appeared) ſhould
haue ſuch knowledge, ſuch perfit knowledge
of God, that no man ſhould ſay to
his neighbor, know the Lord, for all men
ſhould know him, euen from the higheſt
vnto the loweſt. Baruch alſo the prophet,Baruch. 4:
ſaid, O bleſſed art thou Iſrael, how happie
art thou, ſeeing God hath ſhewed
vnto thee all ſuch things as are pleaſant

vnto him; what euer God would haue
knowen, that is reuealed vnto thée. O
then, what may we ſay of our ſelues,
and the blind time that is now paſt,
wherein we neither knew God, nor had
Gods word reuealed vnto vs? what
may we ſay of that time? O we may
well ſay, miſerable were wée, and curſed
was that time wherein wée then
lyued.
            And thus (Good Bretheren) I haue
in few words laid open before you, both
the miſerable eſtate that Gods Church
hath ſtood in, and the great ignorance,
error, and blindneſſe that you haue béen
led in: to the end, that you may now
become the more thankfull for Gods
great mercie ſhewed vnto you. For now
hath it pleaſed Almightie God to reueale
vnto you his holie Goſpell, his
trueth, and veritie. Now we know
that what euer we doe, when we haue
done all things that we can doe, yet, we
are vnprofitable ſeruants.
               Luk. 17. Now wée
know that all our comfort, all our conſolation,
all our helps, is to be ſought for
at Gods hands alone: Now we know,

that Chriſt is only our Sauior, our Redéemer,
and that his blood alone, as S.
Iohn ſaith, hath waſhed away our iniquities:
               1. Ioh. 1.
Now we know what we pray:
Now we know wherefore, and to what
end the Sacraments were left vnto vs;
what our Baptiſme meaneth: Now
haue we Gods Teſtament and his helie
word reſtored vnto vs: Now we néed
not to ſay to our neyghbor, know the
Lord; for we all are, or may be, ſufficiently
inſtructed to know God, to know
Chriſt, to know the holie Ghoſt. Now
may we ſay, as Baruch to the Children
of Iſrael, O happie are we, for all things
that God would haue knowen are reuealed
vnto vs. And therefore bleſſed are our
eyes, and the eyes which ſée that we ſée;
And on the other part accurſed are thoſe
eyes which will not ſée that we ſée, accurſed
are the eares which will not heare
that we heare, & accurſed are thoſe harts
that will not beléeue God, & his Goſpell.
My Bretheren, conſider the miſerable
eſtate that the Church of God long time
hath ſtood in, and conſider againe, the
ſpéedie redreſſe thereof, which God now

hath ſent vnto vs. The kingdome of
God is come vpon vs, Gods kingdome
(my Bretheren) is euen now come vpon
vs. Chriſt ſaid, O Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem,
thou that ſtoneſt my Prophets, and
ſuch as are ſent vnto thee, O that thou
wouldeſt know the time of thy viſitation.
We are that Ieruſalem, Chriſt
hath called, Chriſt hath cryed vnto vs:
O therefore let vs now ſée and conſider
the time of our viſitation. O how manie
of our Bretheren which haue ſuffred
perſecution for Chriſt and his Gaſpell,
how manie of them, I ſay, would faine
haue ſéene the things that we ſée, and
heare that which we heare, and could
not ſée it. O let vs not deſpiſe our Brothers
blood, let vs not deſpiſe the calling of christ, let vs not despise the bleſſing
of God, the greateſt that may be. Alas,
if we conſider the miſerable eſtate that
we haue ſtood in, and the great goodneſſe
and mercie of God now ſhewed vnto vs,
doubtleſſe we cannot deſpiſe this great
mercie of his, vnleſſe we will be too vnthankfull,
we cannot neglect this merueilous
worke, and goodneſſe of his,

vnleſſe we will be counted too much ingratfull.
            Let vs therefore make our ſelues new
harts, new ſoules, new minds, let vs
ioyfully imbrace God and his Goſpell,
let our eyes, our eares, and our harts
ſay, Bleſſed are the eyes which ſée that
we ſée, and eares which heare that we
heare: for manie Kings and Prophets
haue deſired to ſée that we ſée, and
could not ſée it. And thus if we doe, then
ſhall we be bleſſed, then ſhall our eyes,
our eares, our harts, be bleſſed; and
God the father of light, and giuer of all
goodneſſe, ſhall bleſſe vs, and remaine
with vs for euer. Amen.
         
         
            
            THE SIXT
Sermon.
            
               2. Cor. 6. verſ. 1. 2.
               
                  1. We therefore as helpers, exhort you
that ye receiue not the grace of God
in vaine.
                  2. For he ſaith, I haue heard thee
in an acceptable time, and in the
day of ſaluation I haue ſuccoured
thee, &c.
               
            
            
               SAint Paul, after he firſt began
to preach the glad tydings
of the Goſpell, and
teſtifie the name of Chriſt
vnto the whole world, as he was much
troubled with falſe Prophets, falſe Teachers,
and ſuch as ſeduced the people
from God; euen ſo he found a number
of them among the Corinthians, to
whom he wrot this Epiſtle, or Letter.
Some of them, to diſcredite Paul, and
bring an euill opinion of him among the

people, ſaid he was an enemie vnto
Moyſes, one that ſought to aboliſh the
Law giuen by Moyſes, and ſuch a one
as deſpiſed and brake the ſame. Some
other ſaid that he was a teacher of falſe
doctrine, a ſeducer of the people, one that
diſſented cleane from the reſt of the Apoſtles,
yea, and ſuch a one as diſquieted
the whole Church of Chriſt. All theſe
things were reported by S. Paul, thus
was he ſlaundered, thus was he euill
ſpoken of: and this was done euen by
ſuch as profeſſed the name of Chriſt.
Therefore he féeling himſelfe herewith
touched, and perceiuing alſo that this
not only touched him, but God him
ſelfe, thought good by his Letters to auoyd
this ſlaunder ſo riſen, and to cléere
himſelfe vnto the Corinthians, among
whom this euil brute firſt ſprang of him.
And therefore in the Chapter before, he
ſaid, Chriſt hath committed vnto vs the
preaching of the attonement, & ſo what
euer we doe, what euer we teach, or
preach vnto you, is only to this end,
to ſhew our ſelues inſtruments of the
reconciliation betwéene Chriſt and you.
            
               
Now then are wee meſſengers in the
roome of Chriſt, and therefore, euen as
though God did beſeech you thorough
vs, ſo pray we you, that ye be at one
with God; and further we exhort you,
that ye receiue not the grace of God in
vaine.
            Almightie God perceiuing the frailtie
and weakneſſe of this nature of ours,
euen at the firſt beginning of the world
pronounced thus,Gen. 6. and ſaid, Pronum eſt
cor hominis ad malum, à inuentute ſua
The hart of man is prone and readie vnto
euill, euen from the cradle.
                This God
himſelfe ſaw well in our weake nature,
and therefore he ſpake thus of it. So
dull are wée of our ſelues, to learne any
good, and ſo quicke are we to forget the
ſame, ſo readie are we to fall vnto vice,
and ſo hard are we to incline vnto vertue.
And this hath béene ingraffed in
vs, this hath béen grounded in this nature
of ours, euen from the beginning,
and this will ſo continue in vs whiles
the world laſteth. The hart of man hath
alwayes béen readie to fall from God,
and decline vnto vice, alwayes prone

vnto euill, and hard to be won vnto
good. And therefore it behooueth all
ſuch as are Preachers, all ſuch as are
meſſengers ſent from God, and will
ſhew them ſelues as truſtie and faithfull
ſeruants, it behooueth them not only
to ſhew their meſſage, to declare their
commiſſion, but they muſt alſo incourage
them to whom they are ſent, they
muſt improue, rebuke, exhort, and controul
them, and that in time and out
of time, in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, that
their meſſage may be fruitfull, and they
found faithfull. So Paul to Timothe
ſaith, Insta oportunè, importunè,
               2. Timo. 4. 
               Preach
the word, be feruent, be it in ſeaſon, or
out of ſeaſon, Do the worke of a Preacher,
be earneſt, call vpon them, both
in time, and out of time. And euen
this thing that he willed his Scholler
Timothe to doe, the ſame performed he
in him ſelfe;1. Theſs. 
                     •
                  . 
               I haue not ceaſed, ſaith he,
to Preach vnto you, to teach you both
day and night. So likewiſe in another
place, he ſaith,Act. 20. 
               Mundus ſum ego à ſanguine
omnium veſtrorum, I am cleane from
the blood of you all,
                I am pure from

the blood of all men: For I haue kept nothing
backe, but haue ſhewed you all the
counſell of God. So in like, he ſaith,
Quis infirmatur,
               2. Cor. 11. 
               & ego non infirmor? Who
is weake, and I am not weake? Who is
hurt in the faith, and my hart burneth
not?
                As who would ſay, there is none
of you all, no not the leaſt of you, that
is gréeued, but I alſo am gréeued, none
of you troubled, but I alſo troubled,
none of you made weake, but I alſo
am made weake with him.Gal. 4. So Paul
againe ſaith, Filioli mei, quos iterum parturio,
My litle children, of whom I trauaile
in byrth againe, vntill Chriſt be faſhioned
in you.
                Thus was S. Paul alwayes
carefull for the ſaluation of the
people: thus was he continually mindfull
of the ſafegard of his Bretheren, &
what euer griefe or diſquietneſſe fell to
any of the flocke of Chriſt, the ſame
was a griefe and diſquietneſſe vnto
him. And thus muſt euery good Preacher
doe, thus muſt all ſuch doe, as are
ſent meſſengers from God, and will
ſhew them ſelues faythfull ſeruants,
and true workmen in Gods vineyard.

We muſt doe that which longeth vnto
vs, and then will God doe that longeth
vnto him. Wée muſt admoniſh the people
outwardly, and God will moue their
hearts inwardly. Saint Paul ſpeaking
of him ſelfe, of Apollo, of Cephas, and
other ſuch,1. Cor. 3. notable in the miniſtrie of
God, ſaith, Paulus plantauit, Apollo rigauit,
at Dominus dedit incrementum, Paul
planted, Apollo watered, but God
gaue the increaſe.
                God it was, yea, God
alone that gaue the increaſe.
            Theſe things, I ſpeake now to them
which haue taken vpon them the miniſterie
of Gods word, to them that haue
taken vpon them to be guides vnto the
flocke of Chriſt, to them I ſpeake this,
to put them in remembrance, that they
neuer forget their meſſage, that they
forget not their duetie, that they improue,
rebuke, exhort, and controul
the people, that they be earneſt and feruent,
calling ſtill vpon them, both in
time & out of time, in ſeaſon & out of ſeaſon,
that they fulfill the office whereunto
they are called, that their conſcience
may be found without ſpot: and in concluſion,

that they may plant, that they
may water, and God may giue the increaſe,
that they may both reforme the
vngodlie, and incourage the godlie.
And this haue wée in our commiſſion,
this is our duetie, this will be required
of vs; and this if we doe not, we
ſhall be found faultie: for, we are debtors
vnto all men,
               Rom. 1. aſwell vnto the Page,
as vnto the Prince, vnto the poore, as
vnto the rich, vnto the fooliſh, as vnto
the wiſe, vnto the bad, as vnto the
good. And therefore, (my Bretheren)
euen for this cauſe alone, all good and
godlie Preachers, and ſuch as were
ſent from God, haue euer béen ſo zealous,
and ſo much deſired the ſaluation
of Gods people. Moyſes, when he ſaw
the people of Iſrael after their deliuerance
from Captiuitie by the mightie
hand of God, fall from God, forſake
him, and forget the wonders that he
had wrought for them, he cried out vnto
God,Exod. 31. and ſaid, O domine, me potius
de leas de libro vitae, Sooner then that theſe
periſh, O Lord, wipe me out of the
Booke of life,
                let my name be ſtriken

out of it. So Paule,
               Rom. 9. 
               Cupio Anathema eſſe
pro fratribus meis, I wiſh my ſelf to bee
accurſed from Chriſt for my brethren,
               
I would that I might be caſt away, ſo
they might be ſaued.
            O my brethren, conſider theſe harts,
conſider, I ſay, the zealous hart that
Moſes, the zealous affection that Paule
had vnto the ſaluation of the people.
What thinke you is it to be ſtriken out
of the booke of life? What thinke you
is it to be a man accurſed, and haue portion
among reprobates? Moſes was
content to be blotted out of the booke of
life, ſo that the people of Iſraell might
be ſaued. S. Paule was content to bée
accurſed and caſt from the face of God,
ſo that Gods people might not be caſt to
perdition. Thus they of an earneſt heart
and zealous loue they bare to the congregation
of God, wiſhed their owne
deſtruction for the ſafegard of others.
Therefore alſo it behooueth you, my brethren,
you that are temporall men, it
behooueth you on the other part not to
deſpiſe Gods meſſengers, not to ſet light
by them that preach you the Goſpel and

glad tydings of your ſaluation. For this
is the onely meanes whereby it pleaſeth
God that we ſhould be ſaued, this onely
is it whereby the people is won vnto
Chriſt. God might haue ſent an Angel
vnto the chamberlaine of the Quéene
Candace,
               Acts 8. and ſo haue conuerted him:
but he ſent Philip, he ſent Philip, I
ſay, a poore and meane man, that thorough
his preaching he might bee won
to the faith and ſo brought to ſaluation.
God might haue ſent an Angell to Cornelius,
               Act. 10.
but he ſent Peter, who inſtructed
him in the faith, and wan him to the
Goſpell of Chriſt. God might haue ſent
an Angell vnto Paul to haue mollified
his heart, and ſo turned him from perſecution
of Gods Saints: but it pleaſed
God to ſend Ananias,
               Act. 9. that thorough
the putting on of his hands the ſcales
ſhould fall from his eyes, that by him
he ſhould receiue his ſight, and be baptiſed,
and ſo by meanes of a man hee
might be brought home vnto God, and
made a member of his flocke. Therefore
whenſoeuer we heare the word of
God preached, notwithſtanding the

preacher beare no pompe of eloquence or
ſhew of great learning, notwithſtanding
he be a ſimple and poore man: yet
if he bring vnto vs the rule of Chriſts
Goſpell, if hee teach vs the will of
GOD, and the glorie of his word,
let vs not deſpiſe him, let vs conſider
that hee is Gods meſſenger, and appointed
by God to helpe vs to ſaluation.
            
               I beſeech you, ſaith Saint Paule, that
yee receiue not the grace of God in
vaine. This onely Boun I aſke of
you, this is onely the requeſt that I
make vnto you, that yee take not the
grace of God in vaine. A great matter
it were if any one man would miſuſe
the grace of his Prince, a great
matter it were for a man to deſpiſe the
friendſhip of his friend, or the gentleneſſe
of his enemie: but a greater matter
it is, yea a farre greater matter, to
take the grace of God in vaine. For
what auaileth it vs, what ſhould it
profit vs, if GOD once deliuer
vs from our ſins, and we turne againe
to our old wickedneſſe?
            
               
What gained wee, if the couenant of
God, and Teſtament of our Sauiour
Chriſt be broken vnto vs, if we receiue
the ſame in vaine?Luk. 11. 
               Bleſſed are they
(ſaith Chriſt) which heare the word of
God, and keepe it. The Scribes, the
Phariſies, the Iewes, Annas, Caiphas,
and Pilate heard the word of God, heard
Chriſt himſelfe ſpeak & preach amongſt
them, and yet they receiued this word
of God in vain, they receiued this grace
of God in vain. Chriſt likened his word
to a ſower that went forth and ſowed his
ſeed, whereof ſome fell by the way ſide,
and ſo wast troden with mens feet and deſtroyed,
ſome on the ſtone, which tooke
roote, but yet ſoone withered away becauſe
it lacked moiſtneſſe, ſome fell among
thornes, and the thornes ſprung
vp with it and choked it. So the poore
huſbandman loſt in maner his whole
coſt and labour, for of all that he ſowed,
little fell into the good ground & brought
any increaſe. And euen thus ſtandeth
it with Gods Goſpell now a daies: for
preach we neuer ſo oft, teach wee neuer
ſo much, few, yea verie few are found

that receiue the ſame, & continue therin,
and ſo bring forth fruits of ſaluation.
When Moſes the ſeruant of God, was
but a little time departed from the people,Exod. 32.
and gone vp into the mount there
to talke with God, and aſke councell of
him, the people by and by made themſelues
a golden Calfe, and fell to the
worſhipping of that Image. And this
did they becauſe they receiued the grace
of God in vaine. When Moſes was
dead, and Ioſua ſuccéeded into his roome,
ſtraight-waies the people worſhipped
Baal and Aſtaroth, they forſooke the liuing
Lord who had deliuered them, and
in ſtéed of him they worſhipped verie
Diuels. And this did they becauſe they
receiued the grace of God in vaine. Saul
though he once was the ſeruant of God,
and inſpired with his ſpirit, yet at the
length he fell from God and perſecuted
Dauid the choſen of God, and ſo in the
end miſerably ſlew himſelfe.1. Reg. 28. And this
did he, becauſe he receiued the grace of
God in vaine. Iudas being one of the
Apoſtles, and the ſeruant of Ieſus
Chriſt, yet he not only betraied his maſter

Chriſt, but alſo became himſelfe a
verie deuill:Ioh. 6. for ſo ſaid Chriſt, Vnus veſtrum
Daemon eſt, One of you is the Deuill.
               
And this did he becauſe he receiued
the grace of God in vaine. And therefore
S. Paule in this place willed the
Corinthians that they ſhould not receiue
the grace of God in vaine, as the
people did in Moſes time: that they
ſhould not receiue it as they did which
liued in the time of Ioſuah: that they
ſhould not in ſuch ſort take it as Saule
did: and laſtly that they ſhould not ſo receiue
it in vaine as Iudas did, and worke
their owne deſtruction. This was his
requeſt, this thing he onely deſired, that
they wold not receiue the grace of God
in vaine.
            For God ſaith, In an acceptable time
haue I heard thee, and in the day of ſaluation
haue I ſuccoured thee. Theſe
words are written in the propheſie of
Eſay, and pronounced they were by him
of the apparance of Chriſt our Sauiour,
and his comming into this world. And
theſe words thus ſpoken by the Prophet,
S. Paule here fitly applyed to the

preaching of Chriſts goſpell. For like as
our Sauiour came into the world at
ſuch time as Chriſt was borne; ſo when
the Goſpell is truely preached, and
Gods holy word ſincerely taught vs,
then is Chriſt opened vnto vs, then is
the acceptable time, and our ſaluation,
is wrought thereby. Therefore S. Hierom
that holy father and old Doctour
of the Church, ſaith; Quotiescunque audimus
Euangelium Chriſti, toties caro &
ſanguis Chriſti funduntur in aures noſtras.
As often as we hear the Goſpel of Chriſt
preached vnto vs, ſo oft the fleſh and
bloud of Chriſt is powred into our eares,
               
ſaith S. Hierom. And theſe words of
his do plainly and moſt euidently ſhew
vs, how we ſhould vnderſtand the eating
of Chriſts body, & drinking of his
moſt holy bloud in the Sacrament;
theſe words, I ſay, may ſufficiently
teach vs what is meant by the eating &
drinking of Chriſts body & bloud. This
is it that S. Paule here ſpeaketh of, that
they receiue not the grace of God in
vain. And whenſoeuer the goſpel of God
is truly & ſincerely preached, and it receiued

accordingly, then is the acceptable
time, then is the time of grace and ſaluation.
O what a comfortable ſaying is
this; whenſoeuer we heare the Goſpell
taught vs, whenſoeuer we heare Gods
holy word preached vnto vs, then is the
gate of ſaluation ſet open vnto vs, and
then is the time of grace. And on the
contrarie part, when Gods word is taken
from vs, and the light of his Goſpel
hidden from our eyes, then is the gate
of ſaluation ſhut vpon vs, and then is
the time of perdition. But alas, the time
of grace, the acceptable time, the time of
mercie and ſaluation hath oftentimes
but little continuance among vs, oftentimes
it hath ſmall time of abiding with
vs. For before Chriſt appeared, and
was borne into this world, for the ſpace
of foure hundred yeares, the whole
world, the Iewes onely excepted, was
in ignorance and altogether blindneſſe.
And when Chriſt was borne, when hee
once appeared, then was the acceptable
time, then was the time of grace, then
was the time of ſaluation. Here ſome
man will peraduenture ſay; Why did

God ſuffer the whole world ſo long to
be in blindneſſe? why would he in that
long time haue no reſpect to any other
nation, but onely to the nation of the
Iewes? This caſe is déepe, and paſſeth
our capacitie to reaſon, it is aboue the
reach of mans wit, and therefore
herein wee haue onely to ſubmit our
ſelues, to humble our hearts and our
minds, and ſay with Paul the Apoſtle,
O homo quis tu qui Deum arguis? O man,
what art thou that findeſt fault with
God?
                What art thou that reprooueſt
the almightie? As God of his prouidence
and good wiſedome hath appointed
for vs both Sommer and Winter,
the ſpring, and likewiſe the fall of the
leafe againe: So hath hee ordained a
time of light, and a time of darkeneſſe,
a time of ſaluation, and a time of deſtruction.
And no man may ſay vnto
him, Why doeſt thou thus? Theſe
things ſéeme good in his eyes, and therefore
what art thou,Rom. 9. O man, that wilt
call God to account why hée doth this,
or why he doth that? Thus it pleaſeth
God, and ſtandeth with his good will,

oftentimes to ſhew vs his light, and
the glorie of his goſpell: and oftentimes
againe to take the ſame from vs, and
leaue vs altogether in blindneſſe, altogether
in ignorance, altogether in vtter
darkeneſſe.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   8. For ſo hée hath ſaid by Amos
his Prophet, I will ſend an hunger
vpon the earth, not the hunger of bread,
nor the thirſt of water, but an hunger to
heare the word of the Lord: ſo that they
ſhall goe from one Sea to the other, yea,
from the 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto the Eaſt, running
about to 
                     ••
                  ke the word of the Lord,
and ſhall not find it. Chriſt himſelfe
alſo in the Goſpell,Math. 21. ſayeth, The kingdome
of God ſhall bee taken away from
you.
            
            And yet, when hée hath thus done,
when hée hath ſent an h
                  •
               nger and thirſt
of his wor
                  •
                into the 
                  •
               arth, when hée
hath taken Gods kingdome from amongſt
vs; yet I ſay, hée oftentimes
powreth downe his t
                  •
               ueth into the
earth, hée diſtilleth his grace from heaheauen,
that it may ſinke into the
hearts of men: For ſo ſayeth God by
his Prophet Malachie,
               Malach. 1. 
               
                  Abortu ſolis, vſque

ad occaſum, magnum eſt nomen meum
inter Gentes: My name is great, euen
from the ryſing of the Sunne to the fall
thereof, amongſt all Nations. I am a
great King (ſayeth the Lord) and my
name is feareful amongſt the Heathen.
This is the time that the Prophet Eſay
calleth The acceptable time. And what
néedeth moe examples? the whole
Scriptures, both the old and the new
Teſtament, are full of theſe and ſuch
like other.
            There are times that are times of
knowledge, there are times againe that
are times of ignorance. And who is
there now, what man ſo old, or child ſo
young, but may well remember the
blindneſſe that hath béene in our time,
and our fathers times before vs? Who
is ſo blind, who ſo farre paſt knowledge,
but may both well ſée and remember the
darke ignorance that hath béen in times
paſt, and the great grace that God hath
now powred down vpon vs in theſe our
dayes? Therefore as Saint Paul gaue
the Corinthians warning that they
ſhould not receiue the grace f
                  •
                God in

vaine: euen ſo now he warneth vs, and
biddeth vs beware that wee take not
this grace of God in vaine, that wee
turne not to our old vanitie againe, that
wée returne not to our former wickedneſſe,
that wée defile not the Goſpell of
God by our euill and corrupt liuing.
And therefore in another place hée ſaith,
Giue your members as inſtruments of
righteouſneſſe vnto God,
               Rom. 6. 
               and let not
ſinne haue power ouer you. Herein is
ſet out vnto vs, and as it were painted
before our eyes, our whole office and
duetie, and how that wée as well by
our workes, as our words, ſhould bée
an example and paterne for other men
to follow, and that wée giue no cauſe
of offence or ſlaunder of the Goſpell of
God. I ſpeake this not onely to the
Preachers and Miniſters of Gods
word (though chiefly to them indéed)
but I ſpeake it generally to all you my
brethren, that profeſſe Gods Goſpell,
and beare the name of Chriſt. For S.
Paul indifferently to all men ſaith,1. Theſſ. 5. 
               Yee
are not the children of darkeneſſe, but
the c
                     ••
                  i
                     •
                  ren of light, walke you therefore

as becommeth the children of light.
And againe in another place, hée ſayth,
Giue no man occaſion of euill, offend
no man,2. Cor. 6. 
               that in your office yee bee not
found faultie. And ſuch was in old time
the life of all good & godly men, ſuch was
their liuing that profeſſed Gods Goſpell,
and the name of Ieſus Chriſt.
            But if it ſo happen (as oftentimes it
chaunceth) that men will néeds bée offended
with vs, liue wée neuer ſo vprightly,
walke we neuer ſo circumſpectly
(as Chriſt, notwithſtanding he was
the Sauiour of the world, notwithſtanding
hée was without ſpot, and one
that neuer tranſgreſſed the law, yet
was called the Stone of offence:)1. Pet. 2. If it
thus happen, I ſay, that wée bée ill reported
of without cauſe, then may wée
ſay, as Chriſt himſelfe to the Scribes
and Phariſies ſaid, Sinite illos, caeci ſunt,
duces caecorum:
               Math. 15. 
               Let them alone, they are
blind, the leaders of the blind. This is
the comfort that wee haue, this is all
the comfort that is left vnto vs, if any
man wilfully be offended with vs, if any
man iudge of vs other than we deſerue:

for ſo it behooueth vs to line, ſo
ought wée to direct our liues, that if any
man accuſe vs, if any man find fault
with vs, our vpright liuing may be a teſtimonis
againſt him, and be able to confound
him.
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 6. S. Paul ſayeth, it is our part
to take away occaſion of offence. When
Christ by procurement of his enemies,
(the Scribes and Phariſies) was
brought be
                  •
               ore Pilat to bée condemned
and adiudged to death, the innocencie
of his 
                  〈◊〉
                was ſuch, that hée was cléered
and a
                  •••
               i
                  •
               ed euen by the mouth of his
verie enemie: For when Pilate had
heard all that was laid againſt him, and

                  〈◊〉
                whole accuſations wherewith they

                  〈◊〉
                him, he pronounced openly,
and ſaid, I find 
                     〈◊〉
                   fault in this man.
The Scribes when they had nothing
to accuſe Chriſts Diſciples of, nor nothing
wher
                  ••
                they might intrap them,

                  〈…〉
                of their Law, they came
vnto our Sauiour Chriſt▪ and ſaid, Quare
non obſeruant Diſcipul
                     •••
                   traditiones 
                     〈…〉
                  ?
Why doe not thy Diſciples
obſerue the traditions of our fathers?
               
Why keepe they not the cuſtomes of our

elders? ſaid they. And vpon this place
of the Goſpell, Saint Chryſoſtome an
old Doctor of the Church, ſaith thus:
That the Diſciples of Chriſt in all points
ſo exactly fulfilled the law, that the
Scribes could find no fault in them as
touching the ſame: and therefore they
controlled them for breaking their owne
traditions, and the traditions of their
forefathers. Traianus that Emperour
of Rome, and moſt cruell perſecutor of
the Chriſtians in his time, when hée had
vſed al kind of extremity towards them,
and indéed put a wonderfull number
vnto death, and heard ſay, that they all
ſuffered merueilous patiently, and willingly
went ſo execution, and that notwithſtanding
th
                  ••
               , they dayly encreaſed
and grew more and more: hée sent abroad
into all parts of his dominion, to
vnderſtand what manner of men they
were, of what 
                  〈◊〉
               , and in
what ſort they liued, that 
                  〈◊〉
               
the name of Chriſt: And 
                  〈…〉
               
ha
                  •
                from 
                  〈…〉
               
Gentleman of 
                  〈◊〉
                and a Magiſtrat in that Citie; 
                  〈◊〉
               
ſayd, That they were men without 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
               
and liued without offence, as touching
the lawes, ſauing that in the morning
they vſed to reſort together, and ſo make
their prayers, and call vpon the name of
Ieſus. Tertullian alſo, an old father of
the Church, ſayth, that in his time this
report went of one Scianus, a Chriſtian,
and was amongſt all men ſo common
a ſaying, that in maner it became
a prouerbe: Marcus Scianus, vir bonus, ſi
non Chriſtianus. This was all the fault
they could find in him, That hee was a
Chriſtian man, and one that profeſſed
the name of Chriſt. So the ſame Tertullian
in another place ſpeaking of the
Chriſtians in his time, ſaith, Vide, appellant
ſe fratres & mori volunt pro inuic
                     •
                  m:
Loe, they call themſelues brethren, and
one will die for another. This was the
only fault they found in them, that they
loued ſo together, that one would
vouchſafe to die for the other: this was
I ſay, the greateſt fault, that they could
find no fault in them.
            Thus was it amongſt Chriſtians in
the beginning of Chriſts Church, and
thus ought it to bée amongſt vs: ſo

ſhould wee liue, that we may be found
vnreproouable and vnſpotted in the
ſight of all men. And therefore Saint
Paul here ſaith, that wée ſhould walke
in ſuch honeſtie, in ſuch vprightneſſe of
life, That wee giue no man occaſion of
euill, that in our office there be found no
fault: that if any man would accuſe vs,
hée might be controlled by our vertuous
life: that our enemies haue nothing to
lay to our charge, nothing to accuſe vs
withall; but that euen their owne
mouthes ſhould acquit and diſcharge
vs: that in our ſelues and our liues,
there ſhould none other fault bee found,
but onely this, that wée are called Chriſtians:
that we ſhould in ſuch loue liue
together, that one of vs would willingly
dye for the other: And laſtly, that this
onely fault ſhould bée in vs, that wee
are cleane and without fault, that both
our words, works, and déeds may teſtifie
vs to be profeſſors of God, and his
holy goſpell.
            Good people, let vs conſider that God
of his goodneſſe hath ſent vnto vs this
acceptable time, the time of mercie and

grace: that hée hath deliuered vs from
the horrible thraldome that wée ſometimes
liued in: that God hath put away
the blindneſſe, and diſperſed that
great darkeneſſe where under the whole
word was ſometime whelmed: that we
may now worſhip him in ſpirit and holineſſe,
without ſuperſtition or idolatrie:
that wée may now walke in the
light, without any error or wandring.
And this great bleſſing of his, who ſo
ſeeth not, I pray God open his eyes that
he may both ſee and vnderſtand it.
            Let vs not, good brethren, let vs not
take this grace of God in vaine, let vs
not deſpiſe this Goſpell of Chriſt, wherby
the whole world is ſaued. God
knoweth how long this acceptable time,
this time of grace, this time of ſaluation,
ſhall laſt and continue amongſt vs.
And what knoweſt thou▪ O thou man,
whether by one onely Sermon many
may bée conuerted, and wonne to the
faith of Ieſus Chriſt?Acts▪ 4. Saint Peter by
one onely Sermon conuerted fiue thouſand
people, 
                  •
               s it appea
                  ••
               th in the Acts
of the Apoſtles.
            
               
Saint Hierome hath a ſaying worthie
to bée noted, and it is this: I know not
ſaith Saint Hierome, whether that ſoule
may bee ſaued, that is negligent in hearing
the word of God, and the Goſpell
of his ſaluation preached: I know not,
ſaith he, whether ſuch a ſoule may be ſaued.
Alas, good brethren, wée are not
able to ſaue you, God is your onely Sauiour
and redéemer: wee are but Gods
meſſengers ſent vnto you, wee are
but helpers appointed to exhort you to
the Goſpell of God, and to open vnto
you the glorie of your ſaluation. If
you then will wilfully refuſe to heare
Gods holy word, and will not embrace
the ſame, wée cannot ſaue you, wee
are not able to worke your ſaluation.
I my ſelfe roſe vp euer betimes to warne
my people,
               Ier. 7. ſaith God by his Prophet
Ieremie, I my ſelfe ſtand all the day at
the gate crying vnto them to commune
with them, yet would they not heare, I
called vnto them, yet would they not
anſwere me.
            O my deere brethren, God knocketh,
let vs open the gates of our hearts vnto

him: hée calleth, let vs heare him: hee
cryeth, and willeth vs to come vnto
him; O therefore let vs runne, let vs
make haſt,Eſay 65. let vs flye vnto him. I haue
euer ſtretched out my hands to an vnfaithfull
people, ſaith God by his Prophet
Eſay: all the day long haue I ſtretched
out mine armes vnto a people that
will not heare me: all the day long haue
I ſtretched out my hands vnto them,
and yet they will not know me: I haue
ſent you the acceptable time, I haue giuen
you the dayes of grace, the dayes
of mercie, the dayes of ſaluation. O
then let vs not receiue this acceptable
time in vaine, let vs not take this grace
of God in vaine: Let vs remember how
many thouſands of people periſh this
day for want of the goſpell of God, and
knowledge of his holy word. Wée are
they whom God hath called to bee his
children, whom hée hath appointed to
bée ſaued, whom he hath receiued to his
grace and mercie. If wée haue any great
policie, if wée haue any great wit, if wée
haue any learning, riches wealth, and
felicitie in this world: let vs conſider

that we haue them from God alone, that
God giueth vs our policie, that God giueth
vs our wit, that God giueth vs our
learning, that hée alone giueth vs our
riches, our wealth, and all other felicitie
that wée haue in this life. O then let
vs not take theſe great gifts of God in
vaine, let vs not take theſe graces of his
in vaine. Let our liues ſo ſhine before
men, that they may ſée our good
works, and glorifie our father
which is in heauen.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTH
Sermon.
            
               Rom. 12. verſ. 16. 17. 18.
               
                  16. We deſire you, that ye thinke all one
thing, that yee haue like affection
one to another. Be not high minded:
be not wiſe in your owne opinion.
                  17. Recompence to no man euill for euill.
                  18. If it bee poſsible haue peace with all
men.
               
            
            
               DEerely beleued in our Lord
and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt,
This Epiſtle, or letter of
Saint Paul, written vnto
the Romans, is diuided into two ſeuerall
parts.
            In the firſt part, Saint Paul inſtructeth
and telleth them of the beginning
of their religion, of the foundation of
their faith, of the grace whereunto they

are called by the merits and death of Ieſus
Chriſt. And, for becauſe he ſaw and
well perceiued, that euen ſuch of the
Romans, who had receiued the faith,
to bée farce from the works of the faith,
and the profeſſion of the goſpel of Chriſt,
therefore he inſtructeth them that they
know the teſtament of Chriſt, that they
know the couenant of their ſaluation:
and that they ſhould remember, that
where before time they were ſtrangers
from God, cleane without any promiſe
of grace, enemies vnto God, and the
children of perdition, were now called
vnto God, were become the ſons of Abraham,
Gods deere friends, and the children
of adoption: and this not of any
deſert of theirs, not by any merit of
their owne, but onely through the great
grace, and méere mercy of Ieſus Chriſt.
For the whole world was couered vnder
wickedneſſe, the whole world, I
ſay, the Iewes onely excepted, was ouerwhelmed
in ſinne, and had no promiſe
at all of any ſaluation by God.
But yet when Chriſt Ieſus the Sauiour
of all the world appeared, and the

Iewes would not acknowledge him
their redéemer, it pleaſed God by him to
ſaue the whole world, and call vnto his
grace aſwel the Gentile as the Iew, the
vncircumciſed as the circumciſed: and
this did he onely of his infinit and great
goodneſſe. And therefore Saint Paul in
the concluſion hereof, crieth out, and
ſaith,Rom. 11. 33 
               O the deepneſſe of the aboundant
wiſedome and knowledge of God, how
vnſearchable are his iudgements, and
his wayes paſt finding out! Who knoweth
the mind of the Lord? who was his
Counſellor? Who hath giuen vnto him
firſt, that hee might bee recompenſed againe?
And therefore hée concludeth
thus:Rom. 11. 36 
               Quia in illo, ex illo, & per illum
omnia, illi omnis honor & gloria: For of
him, through him, and for him are all
things: to him therefore bee glorie for
euer.
                Thus doth Saint Paule conclude
the firſt part, to know the couenant
of their ſaluation, to know the
greatneſſe of Gods mercie, whereunto
they are called, and to giue the
prayſe and thankes therefore to him alone.
            
               
In the ſecond part, which I now
handle, hee inſtructeth them of a vertuous
life, of honeſt conuerſation, and vpright
liuing among all men. For it is
not enough to change our Religion, it
is not ſufficient to alter our faith, but
we muſt alſo change our old life, wee
muſt walke in newneſſe of life, we muſt
walke in holineſſe, wee muſt walke as
becommeth the profeſſors of a new Religion,
as becommeth them that are of
a right faith, as becometh all ſuch as
confeſſe God and his Goſpel. And therfore
S. Paul writing vnto the Hebrews
ſaith;Heb. 10. 19. 
               Seeing that we by the means of the
bloud of Ieſus haue libertie to enter into
the holy place, let vs draw nigh with a
true heart in a ſure faith, let vs prouoke
vnto loue and to good workes. So in another
place he ſaith; You were ſometimes
darkneſſe,
               Ephe. 5. 8. 
               but now ye are light in
the Lord, walke therfore as becommeth
the children of light: So God himſelfe
when he had choſen the Iewes to be his
people, and them alone amongſt all other
Nations to worſhip him, ſaid;Deut. 10. 
               O
Iſrael, what is it that I require or ſeek for

at thy hands, but that thou loue mee, and
keepe my commandements: This is the
onely thing that I would haue you to
doe, that you kéepe my Law and walke
in my Precepts.
            Therefore Saint Paule himſelfe alſo,
after hee had declared and ſet
forth at large, the great goodneſſe and
mercie of God, he ſaid, I beſeech you,
that yee make your bodies a quicke and
liuely Sacrifice, holy and acceptable vnto
God, which is, your reaſonable ſeruing
of God. Renew your ſpirits,
make your ſelues new harts, that it
may ſhew and appeare in you, that
you are reconciled vnto GOD,
that you are the children of adoption,
and profeſſours of Gods holy
name.
            Therfore bee not high minded, bee
not wiſe in your owne opinions: recompence
no man euill for euill: prouide aforehand
things honeſt in the ſight of all
men: and if it bee poſſible, haue peace
with all men. Marke well my brethren
theſe words by the way, If it be poſſible
haue peace with all men. Chriſt, though

hee was the author ſo peace, and the
true peace it ſelfe, yet could he not haue
peace with all men. Non veni pacem mitt
                     •
                  re
in terras, ſed bellum,
               Luk. 12. ſed diſcordiam,
I am not come (ſaith Chriſt) to ſend
peace into the world, but war and diſſention:
for from hence forth there ſhall be
fiue in one houſe diuided, three againſt
two, and two againſt three. The Father
againſt the Son, and the Son againſt
the Father. The mother againſt
the daughter, and the daughter againſt
the mother. The peace of the world
is no peace with God: the loue of this
world is no loue before God.
            So the Patriarches and the Prophets,
though they were men of peace,
yet could they haue no peace in this
world. And therefore Saint Paule
here ſaith, If it bee poſſible, as much
as in you ſhall lye, haue peace with all
all men, bee in vnitie and loue with all
manner of men. This thing, my brethren,
I haue put you in remembrance
of by the way.
            But that S. Paule ſhould thus doe,
that he ſhould exhort the Romanes,

as he here doth, that they become not
high minded, nor wiſe in their owne opinions,
nor recompence no man euill for
euill, and that they ſhould, if it were poſſible,
haue peace with all men, good cauſe
there was, there was, I ſay, good cauſe,
why he ſhould thus doe. For there were
at the ſame time in Rome, a great number
both of Iewes and Gentiles, and
amongſt them there was great ſtrife
and diuiſion. The Iewes on the one
ſide eſtéemed not the Gentils: the Gentiles
on ye other ſide deſpiſed the Iewes.
Thus betwéene them the people were
diuided, and rent into diſſention: thus
betwéene them the whole people oftentimes
were readie to fal together by the
eares: and thus thorough them, were
they at ſuch great contention and ſtrife
that they that were brethren would not
vouchſafe to commune, & talke together:
they that before were linked in ſuch loue
and vnited together, that one would die
for the other, could not then one abide
another: and ſuch as were friends, became
open enemies. And this came to
paſſe onely through pride. Pride was

the cauſe that ſuch as were brethren fell
out one with another: pride was the
cauſe that ſuch as ſhould haue died one
for another, could not one abide another:
pride was the cauſe that ſuch as beforetime
were friends, became then open enemies.
The Iewes on the one part
were proud, for that they were the children
of Abraham,
               Rom. 9. for that they were
vnder the Law and promiſe, for that
they had knowledge of Gods wil by Oracles,
for that God had oftentimes
both ſent his Angels vnto them, and
ſpoken by his owne mouth vnto them;
and the Gentiles had none of all theſe:
they were not of the ſéed of Abraham:
they were not vnder the promiſe: they
neuer had knowledge of Gods wil, neither
by Oracle, nor viſion: God neuer
ſpake vnto them, nor neuer ſent his
Angels vnto them. The Gentiles on
the other ſides, were as proud as the
Iews: they ſaid that they had wiſe men
amongſt them, men of great learning
and knowledge: they had Philoſophers,
they had Aſtronomers, they had Geometritians,
and great Orators; and ſo

had not the Iewes amongſt them:
They had no men of great wiſdome,
they had no men of any high learning,
they had no Philoſophers, no Aſtronomers,
no Geometricians, nor Orators;
they were men ignorant, and
without any great knowledge at all.
Saint Paule therefore to ſet an vnitie
betweene theſe two which were thus
farre at diſcorde, exhorteth them that
They all thinke one thing, that they
bee of like affection one towards another:
that they bee not high minded,
nor wiſe in their owne opinions. For
pride it is that breaketh all loue, and
pride it is that breedeth all diſſention.
There was neuer yet diuiſion, there
was neuer any diſcord or diſſention, but
Pride was the firſt cauſe and authour
thereof.
            
               Lucifer, that ſometime was an Angell
of GOD, ſet himſelfe againſt
GOD, and ſaid; Exaltabo me ſuper
Aquilonem, & ero ſimilis Altiſſimo, I
will get mee vp aboue the North Pole,
I will ſit aboue the clouds, and I will
bee like vnto the moſt higheſt.
                And

this did hee, for that hee ſwelled with
pride. And therefore was he throwen
downe, onely for this great pride of his
was hee caſt into vtter darkneſſe, and
déepe dungeon of hell.
            
               Coral
                     •
                  ,
               Num. 16. 
               Dathan, and Abiram, being
puffed vs with pride, conſpired againſt
Moſes and Aaron: but God cauſed the
earth to open, and ſwallowed vp both
them, and all ſuch as then were in the
Tents with them.
            The Iewes themſelues, which had
profeſſed the Goſpell of Chriſt in
Saint Paules time, were diuided; and
ſome of them ſaid; I ſtand with Paule,
ſome other ſaid;1. Cor. 1. 
               I hold with Apollo,
and ſo were drawen on either
ſide.
            And this did they onely thorough
pride. But alas, ſaith Saint Paule, Is
Chriſt diuided? both Paule and Apollo
preach one and the ſame Chriſt vnto
you, they teach you all one Goſpell,
is Chriſt then diuided amongſt
you? So likewiſe ſome of them,
which profeſſed Chriſts Goſpell (becauſe

all meats & drinks were indifferent
vnto them,Rom. 14. becauſe they could with
ſafe conſcience indifferently eat of all
meats and drinke of al kinds of drink)
were proud, and thought themſelues
more perfit than other men. On the other
ſide, ſuch as had a conſcience therin,
ſuch as could not for conſcience ſake indifferently
vſe all kinds of meats and
drinkes, were likewiſe proud, and
thought themſelues more holy than other
men.
            And thus pride, euen amongſt ſuch
as profeſſed Chriſt and his Goſpell,
brake the loue and vnitie which ſhould
haue béene amongſt them that liued vnder
the Goſpel. Pride it was that cauſed
the Iewes to hate the Gentiles, and
the Gentiles to deſpiſe the Iewes.
Pride it was that cauſed Lucifer ſo
much to exalt himſelfe, and make himſelfe
egall with God. Pride it was
that cauſed Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
to conſpire againſt Moſes and
Aaron. Pride it was that cauſed ſuch
as could indifferently eate all meats, to

thinke them ſelues more perfit than ſuch
as could not ſo do. Pride it was againe,
that cauſed the other which could not indifferently
vſe all meats, to thinke them
ſelues more holie than the reſt. Therefore
in this place S. Paul willeth the
Romans for auoyding of all diſſention,
firſt to put away all pride, which is the
verie roote and mother of all diſcord.
Be not high minded, ſaid he, for ſo ſhall
you abate this rancour and malice among
you, but humble your ſelues,
humble your courage; be not proud of
your wit, of your great learning, of your
eloquence, but make your ſelues egall
to them of the lower ſort. This is the
golden chaine of humilitie. For like as
pride is the mother of all wickedneſſe,
ſo is humilitie the mother of all vertue:
like as pride maketh vs like vnto Lucifer,
ſo humilitie maketh vs like vnto
Chriſt. Therfore Chriſt him ſelfe, when
he firſt gaue his Diſciples charge for to
preach, when he firſt gaue them in commandment
vpon the mount, to publiſh
abroad his Goſpell,Luk. 6. 
               Beati pauperes, ſaid
he, and why ſo? quoniam ipſorum eſt regnum

caelorum,Math. 5. 
                  Bleſſed are the poore, for
theirs is the kingdome of God.
                And again,
Beati mites, and why ſo? quoniam ipſi poſſid
                     •
                  bunt
terram, Bleſſed are the meeke, for
they ſhall inherite the earth.
                So again, to
his Diſciples he ſaid,Math. 11. 
               Diſcite ex me, quia
ego mitis ſum, Learne ye of me, for I am
meeke,
                I am gentle, learn this of me ſaid
Chriſt.Philip. 2. So Paul, Hic ſenſus ſit in vobis, qui
fuit in Christo, Let the ſame mind be in
you, that was alſo in Chriſt Ieſus: which
when he was egall with God, yet neuertheleſſe
made himſelfe of no reputation,
& humbled himſelf vnto death, euen the
death of the Croſſe. So Dauid, notwithſtanding
he was a King, a Prophet,
and a man choſen, euen according to the
heart of God, yet he humbled himſelfe, &
ſaid,Pſal. 131. 
               Non ambulaui in magnis, nequè in mirabilibus
ſuper me▪ 
                  I am not high minded,
I haue no proud lookes, I do not exerciſe
my ſelfe in great matters, which are too
high for me.
               
               1. Cor. 1. So Paul, God hath choſen
the fooliſh things of this world, that by
them he may be able to confound the
wiſe: he hath choſen the weake things,
that thorough them he may ſubdue the

ſtrong. Thus God vſeth humble & lowly
things,Pſal. 8. ſaith S. Paul, Ex ore infantium et
lactantium perfeciſts laudem tuam: Out of
the mouth of verie babes & ſucklins haſt
thou made perfit thy praiſe, euen by the
mouths of infants & ſucking babes thou
haſt ordeined ſtrength, and ſpred abroad
the glory of thy name. So Paul, notwithſtanding
he was a great learned man,
and ſkilfull in the Lawes among the
Iewes, yet he bragged not, nor boaſted
of his great knowledge he had, but he
humbled himſelfe,1. Cor. 
                     •
                  . and ſaid, Ego me arbitror
nihil ſcere niſi Chriſtum, & eum quidem
crucifixum: I thinke thus of my ſelfe, that
I know nothing, ſaue Ieſus Chriſt, euen
the ſame that was crucified, other knowledge
haue I none to auaunt my ſelfe of
ſaid S. Paul.
                And vpon this foundation
of humility, it pleaſed almightie God, at
the firſt to erect & build his holie Church,
vpon his Apoſtles, I ſay, who were the
very paterns of méekneſſe, it ſéemed good
vnto God to build his holy Church. And
after them ſuch as were of the congregation
of Chriſt, ſuch as profeſſed the name
of Chriſt, were not proud men, were

not men of haut courage, nor high minded.
And therefore, as we read in the
Acts of the Apoſtles,Act. 4. 
               Erat illis cor vnum,
& anima vna, They were all of one
heart, and one mind together.
                So at the
beginning, the Diſciples of Chriſt were
poore in ſpirit, and therefore were they
méet to inherite the kingdome of Heauen:
they were méeke in heart, & humble
of mind, and therefore were they
méet to poſſeſſe the earth: they learned
at Chriſt to be méeke and lowlie, they
had the ſame ſence in them that was in
Chriſt, and therfore they humbled them
ſelues vnto death: they were counted
the fooliſh things of the earth, therefore
were they méet inſtruments to confoūd
the wiſdome of the world: they were
counted the weake things, & therefore
were they méet to ouercome the mightie.
The Babes were méeke & lowlie, and
therefore were they méet to ſpred abroad
the glorie of God. Saint Paul of all his
learning thought that he knew nothing,
ſo much he humbled himſelfe: and therefore
was he méete to be an Apoſtle of
Chriſt, and Preacher of his Goſpell.

There is a ſtorie, or rather a fable, writen
of S. Anthonie; whether you take
it as a ſtorie, or a fable, I much recke
not, but it ſerueth well for this purpoſe,
it is thus. Saint Anthonie on a time lay
in a traunce, and as he ſo lay, he looked
downe from Heauen, (as he thought)
& ſaw all the whole earth ſo thicke couered
with ſnares, that poſſible it was not
for any man to tread vpon the earth, and
not be intangled therewithall: and this
when he beheld, ſuddeinly he cried out,
and ſaid, O Lord, and who can then
walke on the earth, and not be intrapped?
with that he heard a voice that anſwered
him, and ſaid, Sola humilitas,
Only humilitie
                it is, ſaid that voice, that
may go, and not be intangled; only Humilitie,
and nothing elſe. Who ſo is
Humble, he may walke without daunger,
he may go and not be taken. This
is written that S. Anthonie ſhould ſée,
and heare in his traunce. But Dauid,
the prophet of God, ſaith in déed, Sacrificium
Deo ſpiritus contritus, The contrite
and humble heart, is a ſacrifice vnto
God,
                the méeke and lowlie heart is a

ſwéet and acceptable Sacrifice vnto
God, ſaith the prophet Dauid. So againe,
in another place,Pſal. 138. he ſaith, Deus
humilia respicit, & alia à longè proſpicit,
God hath regard to the humble
and lowlie, and as for the proud,
he beholdeth them a far off. Eſaie
                alſo,
or rather God by his Prophet Eſaie
ſaith,Eſa. 
                     •
                  5. 
               Super quem r
                     •
                  quieſcet ſpiritus
meus, niſi ſuper humilem? Vpon
whom ſhall my ſpirit reſt,
                ſaith God,
But vpon the humble and meeke? for
otherwiſe,Tytus 3. ſaith Saint Paul, Qui inflatur,
cadit, He that is puffed vp with
pride, falleth into the hands of the Deuill.
            
            Thus, (good Bretheren) humilitie
preſerueth the Church of God, humilitie
vphouldeth all good Common
weales. Pride it is that ſcattereth the
Church of God, pride ouerthroweth
all good Common weales. There was
yet neuer pride in any Citie without
diſſention, nor diſſention that continued
without deſtruction of the whole
Common weale. Ye ſhall neuer read
in any record, eyther of Citie, Kingdome,

or Common weale, but that, if
pride raigned therein, there conſequentlie
followed diſſention, and of diſſention
inſued the ouerthrow of the ſame.
In the Citie of Rome, which was called
the Ladie of the whole world, there
were two that tooke vpon them the gouernance
of the Empire, Iulius Caeſar,
and Pompey. Iulius Caeſar was a man
of ſo haught courage, that he could abide
no péere, Pompey was of ſuch an high
mynd, that hée could ſuffer no man to
be his egall. And thus for dominion,
ſtroue theſe two together: and thus
thorough their diſſention, was not onlie
the whole Citie, but the kingdome
it ſelfe brought to deſtruction. The
ſtate of the Gretians, which then chiefly
aboue other floriſhed, becauſe it
was diuided, came to vtter confuſion.
But what ſpeake I of theſe? what
ſpeak I of Rome, and the ſtate of the
Gretians. Who is there that hath not
heard of Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem I ſay,
that great City, that ſame Towne that
God had choſen to him ſelfe, euen
that ſame Towne wherein God would

haue his Temple erected, and his holie
name honored, after that the Rulers
thereof began to be diuided, after that
the Magiſtrats fell to diſcord, and each
man would be a Captaine, and no man
would be ruled: then came the enemies
in, then was it beſieged, then was the
Mother for verie famine conſtreined to
eat her owne childe, then was it vtterly
deſtroyed, and no one ſtone left vpon
an other; and which was moſt miſerable,
there were ſlaine in that Citie
xj. hundred thouſand people, and the
verie chanels in the ſtréets ran all with
blood. Thus miſerably was it ouerthrowen,
and in ſuch wretched eſtate were
the whole people thereof: and this only
came to paſſe, thorough pride and diſſention.
And this was it that Eſaie long
time before propheſied of, and ſaid,
Then ſhall the whole Countrey be ſcattered,
               Eſa. 3. 14.
               when the people once conſpire againſt
their Princes. And therefore alſo
an old writter, Petrus Lilius ſaith, Diſcord
is the only cauſe of the ouerthrow
of Kingdomes; Diuiſion is the onlie
cauſe that great Empires can not ſtand;

Diſſention maketh two kingdomes of
one; Diſſention maketh of two Cities
one, and at length it maketh of two kingdomes,
no kingdome, of two Cities, no
Citie. This writeth Petrus Lilius, of
Diſſention, this is the end of Diſcord
ſayth he, and in déed experience hath
taught that this is moſt true.
            But wherefore ſpeake I of theſe
things? wherefore do I here repeat vnto
you theſe old and auncient hiſtories?
why recount I vnto you the ouerthrow
of Rome? the deſtruction of the Gretians?
the deſolation of Ieruſalem? which
all hapned thorough Diuiſion. I would
to God I ſaw nothing euen now before
mine eyes, that cauſeth mée thus to
ſay; I would to God, I ſay, that I ſaw
now nothing preſent before mine eyes,
that cauſeth me thus to ſay. But theſe
examples, (my Bretheren) God hath
placed before our eyes, that we might
take heed by them, that we might the
better looke to our ſelues, and beware of
our owne deſtruction. Chriſt hath ſaid,
Chriſt that is the author of Trueth, and
trueth it ſelfe,Luk. 1
                     •
                  . hath ſaid, Ciuitas diuiſa,

deſolabitur, The Citie that is diuided,
                be
it neuer ſo rich, neuer ſo ſtrong, neuer
of ſo great force, yet, ſhall it be deſtroied,
it ſhall be brought to vtter deſolation.
Rome, that ſometime was the wealthyeſt
Citie in the world, & called therefore
the Ladie of the whole world, fell to
diuiſion: and therefore was ſhée ouerthrowen,
and vtterly deſtroyed. The
Gretians, which were a people of greateſt
force, fell to diſſention: and therefore
was their whole eſtate pulled down,
and caſt flat to the ground. Ieruſalem,
that holie Citie, that Citie that was ſo
ſtrong, fell a ſunder, fell at diſcord within
it ſelfe: and therefore was ſhée ſpoiled
of her enemyes, and brought to deſolation.
            Remember, (good Bretheren) remember
with your ſelues, how can that
Ship which ſaileth in the Sea, be ſafe in
the middeſt of the waues, if the people
within the ſame boore holes thorough it,
or rent vp the ribs of the ſame? How
can that Citie be preſerued, where no
man will heare counſell, where no man
careth for the publike ſtate, where no

man paſſeth for other, where God is not
in the middeſt?1. Ioh. 4. 
               
                  Deus charitas eſt ſaith S.
Iohn, & qui in charitate eſt, in Deo man
                        •
                     t,
God is charitie, and he that dwelleth in
charitie, dwelleth in God. O, ſaith
Salomon, Turris fortiſſima nomen Domini,
The name of the Lord is a ſtrong
Tower: The name of God ſaueth the
Citie.Pſal. 127. 
               Dauid alſo the prophet of God
ſaith, Niſi Dominus cuſtodierit ciuitatem,
in vanum laborant qui cuſtodiunt eam: Except
the Lord keep the Citie,
                except the
Lord defend it, ſaith he, they labour
in vaine, they watch in vaine that are ſet
to defend it.
            
            Theſe things, (good Bretheren) appertaine
both to our office that are Miniſters,
and appointed by God to inſtruct
the people, and they appertaine alſo
vnto all Magiſtrats, yea and vnto the
whole people. As for vs that are Gods
Miniſters, and meſſengers ſent vnto
you, we do ſtand vpon the Tower to
crie, and giue you warning that the enemies
are comming, to ſhew you before
hand that your foes are approching: our
part is to declare vnto you, that your

fight is not againſt King, nor Caeſar, is
not againſt any Prince or power of this
world, but againſt ſpirituall enemyes,
againſt the Deuill and his adherents:
our part is to diſſuade you from diſſention,
to diſſuade you from diſcord and
diuiſion. This muſt we do aſwell to
the Magiſtrat, as to the reſt of the people:
aſwell to him that beareth office, as
to him that beareth none. For, we are
debtors vnto all men,
               Rom. 1. aſwell to the rich,
as to the poore, to the wiſe, as to the fooliſh,
to the good, as to the bad. This is
alſo the Magiſtrates office, this is likewiſe
his duetie. Therefore hath God
ſet him vp, therefore hath God exalted
him aboue the reſt of the people, that he
ſhould guid them in peace, & lead them in
loue and vnitie together. Thus did Dauid,
that good king; he found the whole
kingdome left by Saul his predeceſſor
in diſſention and diuiſion within it ſelfe,
he found, I ſay, the whole countrey at
variance and great debate: but by his
great wiſdome and good gouernance together,
hée reduced the ſame into good
order againe, and ſuch as before were

enemyes, he made faithfull friends,
and the whole Countrey he brought to
quietneſſe, peace, and mutuall vnitie.
And therfore, when he had this brought
to paſſe, for ioy that he had thus of mortall
foes, made louing friends, he ſung,
O quàm bonum,
               Pſal. 133. 
               & quàm iocundum, habitare
fratres in vnum, O how ioyfull a
thing is it, for Bretheren to dwell together
in vnitie.
                So much it comforted
him, ſo glad was he when he ſaw his
people agrée together. Therefore in the
Scriptures the Magiſtrates are called
Shepheards,
               Pſal. 78. for that they ought ſo
to guid the people committed to their
charge, as the Shepheard doth his
flocke. Therefore they are called alſo
Captaines,
               Ioſua 1. for that they ought to haue
ſuch reſpect to Gods people, as the good
Captaine hath regard to his Souldiers.
Therefore likewiſe are they called
the Heads,
               1. Pet. 2. for that, like as the head gouerneth
the whole bodie, ſo ſhould they
rule and gouerne the people, as members
of their bodie. Therefore in like
are they called Fathers, for that the people
are ſo in ſubiection vnto them, as

the childe is in obedience vnder his father.
But chiefly it is required in them,
it is chiefly, and aboue all other things
required in ſuch as are Magiſtrates,
that they them ſelues know God, that
they them ſelues, I ſay, aboue all other
men, haue perfit knowledge of
God, and his Lawes; ſo that the people
by that meane may follow him,
and they altogether may follow God.
Therefore in the Booke of Deutronomie,
God himſelfe gaue in charge to
all ſuch as ſhould become Magiſtrates,
ſaying, He that is called to beare Office,
what euer hee be that is appointed
to be a Ruler, ſhall firſt write out
all this Booke of my Law with his
owne hand. And againe, he ſaid, Non
recedet liber iſte ab ore tuo,
               Ioſua 1. 
               This Booke
of mine ſhal not dcpart from thy mouth,
this Booke of mine ſhall not be out of
thy hand. This is Gods charge to all
them that beare office, this is his charge
and commaundment giuen vnto them.
Therefore that good king Dauid, when
God had appointed him to be king and
chiefe Ruler of his people,Pſal. 132. he ſaid, Si

dedero oculis meis ſomnum, aut palpebris
meis requiem antequàm inn
                     •
                  uero domum
Domino meo, & Tabernaculum Deo Iacob.
If I ſhall giue my ſelfe vnto ſleepe, or
mine eye lids any reſt, before that I find
out a houſe for my God, and a Tabernacle
for the God of Iacob &c.
                as who
would ſay, I will neuer ſtudie myne
owne matters, I will neuer go about
mine owne buſineſſe, before I haue
eſtabliſhed the matters of my God, and
the buſineſſe of the God of Iacob. Therfore
in like maner Ezechias,
               2. Chro. 29. that vertuous
king, when he was called by God
to beare office, would not go home to his
owne affaires, before he had purged the
Church of God. Iuſtinian alſo, that good
and godlie Emperor was wont to ſay,
That he aſmuch cared for the preſeruation
of Gods Church, as he did for the
ſafegard of his owne Soule. And thus,
look what care Dauid the prophet of God
had ouer Gods people: looke what care
that vertuous king Ezechias had: looke
what care that good and godlie Emperor
Iuſtinian had, the ſame, and the like
ought euery good Magiſtrate to haue:

as Dauid, Ezechias, and Iuſtinian did,
ſo ſhould euery good and godlie officer
doe: hée muſt not giue himſelfe vnto
ſléep, nor his eye lids vnto reſt, before
he hath prouided a Temple for the God
of Iacob: he muſt not go home vnto his
owne houſe, before that he hath purged
Gods Church: he muſt haue as great
reſpect to the ſaluation of Gods flocke,
as he hath regard to the ſafegard of his
owne Soule: he muſt remember that
his chaire is Gods chaire, that his
ſword is Gods ſword. Now (good Bretheren)
it behooueth you of your part, to
put away all hatred, to aboliſh from him
all pride, diſſention, all diſcord, and to
honor the Magiſtrate, to follow you
your Shepheard, as the ſhéepe do their
ſhepheard: to ioy in him your Captaine,
as the Souldiers reioyce in their
Captaine: to be gouerned by him your
head, as the members of the bodie are
ruled by the head: and laſtly, ſo to be
in ſubiection vnto him, as the childe is
in obedience and ſubiection to his father.
And ſo ſhall there then be, both a
godlie Magiſtrat, ſo ſhall there be godlie

people, and ſo ſhall there be a godlie
Realme.
            Now let vs here thinke that Saint
Paule ſpeaketh theſe words vnto vs
(as indéed he ſpeaketh them vnto vs, if
we are, or will be called Chriſtians) vnto
vs, he ſaith; Bee not high minded,
vnto vs he ſaith; Bee not wiſe in your
owne opinions: vnto vs he ſaith; Recompence
no man euill for euill: vnto
vs he ſaith, If it bee poſſible haue peace
with all men. O then, why are wee of
ſuch proud hearts? Why are wee high
minded? Why are we wiſe in our own
opinions? Why recompence wee euill
for euill? Why ſéeke we reuengement?
why agrée not we together? O by whoſe
name ſhall I cal you? I would I might
call you brethren: but alas, this heart of
yours is not brotherly. I would I might
call you Chriſtians: but alas, you are
no Chriſtians. I know not by what
name I ſhall call you: for if you were
Brethren, you wold loue as Brethren:
if you were Chriſtians, you would agrée
as Chriſtians. Chriſt ſaid vnto his diſciples,
and ſo by them to all ſuch as profeſſe

his name;Ioh. 13. 
               Mandatum nouum do vobis,
vt diligatis mutuo, ſicut & ego dilexi
vos, I giue you a new commandement,
               
ſaid Chriſt, that you loue together euen
as I haue loued you. By this token, by
this cognuſance of mine ſhal men know
you to be my Diſciples, if you loue together
as I haue loued you. Let vs looke
well vpon our ſelues, let vs behold our
ſelues well: alas, this badge, this cogniſance
is gone, this peace that Chriſt
left vnto vs, is not to be found amongſt
vs.
            O yée that ſometime were brethren,
but now mortall enemies, ye that ſometime
ware this Badge, this cogniſance
of Chriſts peace, which now yée haue
caſt from you, O how long will you follow
vanitie, how long will yée dwell in
diſſention? I haue done my part, I haue
called you to peace, I haue called you to
loue, I haue called you to vnitie: doe
you now your parts, do you enſue after
peace, loue you each other, continue yée
in vnitie together. I haue not the
keyes of your hearts, I am not able to
looſe and open thoſe ſtonie hearts of

yours: God make you al one, God mollifie
you hearts, God make you friends,
God graunt you to loue as brethren together.
            Let vs lay aſide this pride of our
heart, let vs not bee wiſe in our owne
opinions, let vs not requite euill with
euill, let vs, as much as may bee, haue
peace with all men. Alas, it is no
great thing that I require of you: I
require onely your loue, I require your
friendſhip one towards another, I aſke
no more but that your hearts bee ioyned
in mutuall loue and vnitie together.
Alas, it is a thing that ſoone may
bee granted of ſuch as pray together
of ſuch as haue one heauenly Father,
of ſuch as are partakers of Chriſts holy
Sacraments, of ſuch as profeſſe
Chriſt, and will bee called Chriſtians.
            O how can we pray our Heauenly
father to forgiue vs, if we will not forgiue
our brother wherein hee treſpaſſeth
againſt vs. How can wee with
cleere conſcience come vnto the holy

Communion, and bee partakers of
Chriſts moſt holy bodie and bloud, if
wee are not in charitie with our owne
neighbour? Let vs therefore lay aſide
all diſcord without hipocriſie, let vs
lay apart all malice without diſſimulation,
let vs all ioyne together in brotherly
loue, let vs all be of like affection
one towards another, let vs not bee
high minded, but let vs make our
ſelues equall to them of the lower ſort.
So ſhall wee make our bodies a quick
and liuely Sacrifice, ſo ſhall wee make
them holy and acceptable vnto God, ſo
ſhall we bee reconciled vnto God, and
God reconciled vnto vs: and finally, ſo
ſhall we which are called Chriſtians, be
knowne to be Gods ſeruants and ſuch
as profeſſe the name of Chriſt, if wee
ſhal be found to haue this peace and brotherly
loue, which is the badge and cogniſance
of Chriſt. And ſo ſhall
God be ours, and remaine
with vs for euer.
            Amen.
            
         
      
   