
      
         
            
            
            Certaine Orations and Anſweres
made by Iohn Caſimire
Countie Palatine of Rhyne, Duke
of Bauier &c. and his Embaſſadours,
vnto the French King
& his Embaſſadours in defence
of ye maintenance
of his Peace, and
chriſtian Religion.
‡
            ¶Tranſlated out of
French. 1579.
            ❀Imprinted at London.
            1579.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ❀The Charge of the Lord of Villiquier
as he deliuered the ſame in vvrighting
vnto my Lord the Duke Caſſimir.
            
               
                  MY Lord, as touching
the requeſt which it
pleaſed your highnes this
mornīg to make vnto me,
namely yt I ſhould in writing
deliuer vnto you the charge which I
haue receiued of my Maiſter ye moſte Chriſtian
King, I am not minded to deny you,

                  〈◊〉
               , for that by woord of mouth, I haue
not opened to you any other then ye trueth,
which his Maieſtie willeth, and is minded
to let you knowe.
            His Maieſtie therfore béeing ſory to heare
of the deceaſſe of my Lord the Countie Palatine
your Father, dooth neuertheleſſe
much reioyce and prayſe God for that ſo
wiſe a Prince as my Lord, at this preſent
Elector, hath ſucceded him in the ſaid Electorall
Dignitie, for the viſitation of
whome, his Maieſtie hath now ſent mée:
commaunding mée by the way to ſée your
Highneſſe, to the end to aſſure the ſame

that hée deſireth nothing more then to
looue you, as in effect he hath alredy, euen
to this time giuen, you to vnderſtand.
            Alſo the more to confirme the goodwill
which he beareth you: hée thought good by
mée to giue you to vnderſtād of his newes
togither with the eſtate of his affaires,
which are as followeth.
            His Maieſtie hauing ſummoned the
generall Eſtates of his Realme vnto his
Towne of Bloys, after many and large
conferences among them holden within
theſe thrée Months, they haue with one generall
aſſent in ful aſſembly, (whethery
ſelf was preſent) requeſted his Maieſtie
no longer to permit within his Dominions
any other then the exerciſe of the Catholick,
Apoſtolick and Romain Religion,
whervnto at my departure his Maieſtie
was determined to condiſcend. Firſt
therby to diſcharge ye duty of his conſciēce,
which mooueth him after the example of
other Kings his Predeceſſors ſo to doo,
whotherby haue peaceably enioyed their
eſtates. Next by reaſon that hetherto hée
hath perceiued that the diuerſitie of Religions
haue with them brought into all

partes of his Kingdoome where they haue
béen cſtabliſhed new, occaſions of diſcention
among his Subiects, yea euen amōg
the quieteſt of them, and haue béen the only
meanes to maintain them in deuiſions
and perticuler hatred: moreouer that it is
to manifeſt that they haue not ſo much requeſted
ye exerciſe of their ſaid pretended
reformed Religiō
                for any ſatiſfiing or contenting
of their conſciences, as for the
maintenaunce of factions, practices, and
drifts, ordinarily deuiſed againſt ye autotie
of his ſaid Maieſtie, to whome by all
meanes they endeuour to make them ſelues
in power equall, by dayly more and
more fortifying them ſelues, therby vpon
euery occaſion and oportunitie to diſobey
him, and ſo to ſhake of the Yoke of obedience
wher vnto naturally they are bound,
as the effects in each reſpect dooth make
ſufficiēt proofe, notwithſtandīg in woords
they would ſhowe them ſelues deuoid of
all ſuch matter. As euen of late theire
new ſupplying of la Charitie with freſh
men of warre, contrary to the agréement
made, to the end wholy to apropriate the
ſame to thē ſelues doth manifeſtly declare

as alſo their ſeazing vppon ſundry towns
and Caſtels, in the Countries of Poictou,
Xantoigne, Guyen, Daulphine, and Lan
guedoc, togither with diuers murders &
cruelties practiſed againſt the Catholicks
doo ſhowe the ſame. Againe his Maieſtie
on the other ſide, ſettīg before his eyes
one thing woorthy conſideration, which
is, that hauing ſince the graunt of the laſt
Edict taken all order poſſible to cauſe the
tolleration of the exerciſe of the ſaid pretendid
reformed Religion in ſūdry towns
and places within his Dominios, he hath
not béen able to bring the ſame to paſſe, by
reaſō of the oppoſitions of the Catholicks
who could not ſupporte the folly wherwt
they haue endeuoured to procéed.
            And indéed perceiuing by all their déeds
and demenures that they ſought to encreaſe
and multiply them ſelues to ye ruin
and ouerthrowe of them and their Catholicke
Religion, they haue among them
ſelues made Fraternities, Aſſotiations,
and leagues one with an other for the
conſeruation bothe of them ſelues & their
ſaid Catholick Religiō, alſo ye therby they
may the better prouide for their owne affaires

               
               
Alſo where as it pleſed you my Lord this
morning to aleadge vnto me, yt in aſmuch
as the exerciſe of the afore ſaid Religion
was not fréely permitted in Fraunce, it
was an vtter breaking, & preuentīg of the
Edict of pacification whervnto his Maieſtie
hath ſo ſolēnly ſworne, I doo aunſwere
that contrarywiſe for the ſatiſfiing to one
of the Articles therof this aſſembly of Eſtates
was ſummoned, to the end that after
the hearing of the complaints and
greeuances of his Subiects, they might be
prouided for as ſhould ſéem requiſit whervnto
he could not better ſatiſfie then in vſing
this determination which is correſpondent
vnto the vniuerſall requeſt of
the Deputies of the thrée orders of this
Realme, namely the Church, the Nobilitie
& the third Eſtate, agréeing alſo with
the iudgement of his owne Conſience, againſt
the which he ſhould think him ſelf
dooing otherwiſe to erre. Wherfore to
conclude, this is it which he thīketh may
beſt ſerue and profit the generall common
welth of his Realme and of all his Subiects.
            Thus ſubſcribed Villiquier.
            
         
         
            
            ❀The Anſwere of my ſaid
Lord the Duke, vnto the afore
ſaid Chardge.
            
               
                  THe Lord Duke Ihon
Caſſimire hauing heard of the
Lord of Villiquier what ſo euer
hee had to ſay to him in the behalfe of
the King his Maiſter, did requeſt his Maieſtie
to take in good parte this anſwere
from poinct to poinct, and the ſame to receiue
with as good a will as the ſaid Lord
Duke is affectionate to the aduancement
cōmoditie and ſeruice of his Maieſtie and
the Crown of Fraunce.
            
            Firſt the ſaid Lord the Duke moſt humbly
thāketh his maieſtie for ye gréef which
he ſéemeth to perticipate in for the death
of his late Lord and Father, aſſuring his
Maieſtie that he hath great cauſe ſo to doo
in reſpect of the zeale, care and ſinguler afection
whiche he alwayes hare euen to
the laſt gaſpe of his life, vnto the aduancement
and preſeruation of his Maieſties
perſon, togither with the comoditie

and quietneſſe of the whole Realme of
Fraunce.
            
            The ſaid Lord Duke hopeth alſo that his
Maieſtie ſhall finde that my Lord the Elector
his brother hath ſuccéeded not only,
in the Electorall Dignitie, but alſo in like
goodwil and affection, wherin hée the ſaid
Lord Duke dooth alſo aſſure his Maieſtie
that for his parte he wil follow the ſteps
of his late Lord and Father, ſo néere as
poſſible he may, and will alwaiſe by Gods
help profeſſe ye ſame, not only to his Country,
but alſo to his Maieſtie with as good
a wil as euer hée did.
            Wherfore as his Maieſtie dooth the ſaid
Lord Duke ſo much honor, as by the way
to cauſe ye Lord of Villiquire, to viſit him
and to comunicate vnto him of his newes
can hée not alſo forget as wel moſte humbly
to thank his maieſtie, as alſo plainly
to declare vnto him, that vnderſtanding
his intent to be ſuch as the ſaid Lord of
Villiquire hath both giuen him to vnderſtand
and left with him in writing, is vnto
him newes indéed.
            Firſt becauſe that this his Maieſties pleſure
is vtterly repugnant vnto the promiſes,

othes, and aſſurances, wherwt his
Maieſtie hath alwaies proteſted bothe by
mouth and wrighting, that he would maī
               tain
his Edict of Pacification, concluded,
and ſealed by the autoritie of his Maieſtie
the Queene his mother, the Prīces of his
blood, and his priuie counſail, at ſuch time
as his Maieſtie had ſuch ſtore of his power
about him, that eaſely he might haue
doon what he had pleaſed, and this he did
to the end for euer to teſtifie that hée did
conclude, ſweare and ſolemply confirme
the ſame, of his owne pure, méere, frée and
liberall goodwil, for the proffit, and quietneſſe
of his Kingdome, and Subiects, as
not onely the ſaid Lady Queene his Mother,
the Princes and other Lords haue
by woord of mouth proteſted vnto the ſaid
Lord Duke at the concluding of the ſaid
peace, whervnto for the greater cōfimation
of the ſame they alſo requeſted the
ſaid Lord Duke to ſubſcribe, as indéed hée
did: but alſo his Maieſtie him ſelf hath
bothe ſent him woord and confirmed the
ſame.
            More ouer this his Maieſties intent ſéemeth
ſo much the more ſtraunge to

the ſaid Lord Duke, as that to his great
gréef he therby forſéeth the finall perditiō
whervnto his Maieſtie for the putting of
his determination in executiō, dooth hedlong
caſt his owne perſon and whole Realme,
wherof togither with the preſent eſtate
of his affaires and the generall ruin
to come, the ſaid Lord with the reſt of the
Princes of Germany who doo wiſh the preſeruation
of the French Monarchie, béeing
dayly truely aduertiſed, as the ſaid Lord of
Villiquier may by them ſelues vnderſtand,
and ſhall ſée the writings bothe written
and printed which the ſaid Lord Duke
truſteth wilbe ſufficient to reuoke his ſaid
Maieſtie from his reſolution, and wherby
hée ſhall perceiue the malice of his Seruāts
hired héervnto, who vſurpīg the title
of the Eſtates in ye name of all his ſubiects
haue made this requeſt wherof they neuer
receiued commiſſion of his Subiectes, either
were by them advowed, as the ſaid Lord
of Villequier ſhall at his return very well
vnderſtand.
            The ſaid Lord Duke may (thanks he to
God) plainly teſtifie, that hée hath of moſte

faithful and ſincere affection aduertiſed
his Maieſtie aſwel by letters and Embaſſadours
as by his Maieſties Meſſenger.
            Firſt béeīg in Fraunce, hée warnded him
of the holy league, the frutes wherof, hée
may now euidently perceiue to be vtterly
contrary to the faith and reputation of
his Maieſtie and quietneſſe of his Subiects.
            After being come, home by Prayllon him
ſelf (who is now héer preſent) hée gaue his
Maieſtie to vnderſtand of the true aduertiſmēts
which hee had receiued of ye drifts
and practiſes prepared for prouiding and
corrupting in each parte, and bringing
to the deuotion of thoſe whome wée doo
perceiue, ſuche as ſhould enioy the title
of the Eſtates: that is to ſay, to prouide
that no Eſtates ſhould be holden fréely▪
lawfully and without reſpect of Religion,
where at might be preſent (as at all
times aunciently they haue béen accuſtomed)
the Princes of the blood, togither
with all ſuch as haue wherof to complain.
Moreouer the ſaid Lord Duke hath truely
aduertiſed his maieſtie after what maner
the Edict of peace hath béene executed

nothing is doon: that ye Eſtates haue béen
ordered in ſuch wiſe as already hée hath
béen aduertiſed: that the Princes of the
blood haue thervnto béen called to the end
to intrap them. How ſuch men haue béen
fauoured, as haue offered to lay houlde vppon
their Parſons, and to ſurpriſe thoſe
Townes where the Edict is lawfully and
fincéerely executed, togither with the places
where thoſe of the Religion haue béen
forced to kéep them ſelues, and not to forſake
the ſame by reaſon of the euil execution
of the Edict. Hée hath béen moreouer
truely aduertiſed of the othe lately made
to his Maieſtie, the Copye wherof was
ſūmarely deliuered to ye ſaid Lord of Villequier,
a matter, to ſay trueth, horrible to
be knowen among men, and ſo ſtraunge
that ye ſaid Lord Duke could neuer haue
beléeued it, had not the continual and late
contrauenſions againſt the Edict moſte
manifeſtly declared ye ſame, & the Kings
propoſition made by the ſaid Villequier
fully confirmed it, as alſo the ſaid matters
doo ioyntly cauſe the ſaid Lord Duke to
beleeue that his Maieſties determination
is correſpondent to the declaration of the

aforeſaid Lord of Villequier.
            
            Howbeit the ſaid Lord Duke truſteth
that in aſmuch as it is a month ſince the
departure of the ſaid Lord of Villequier,
God hath otherwiſe inſpired his Maieſtie
and cauſed him to ſmel out this poyſoned
counſail, togither with the vanitie of
the offers of theſe pretended Eſtates, to
the end to put his Maieſtie in minde, yea
to cauſe him, euen as it were with his finger
to touch that which héertofore wiſely
and ripely, hée hath had in woorthy
conſideration, which alſo his faithfull and
truely affected Seruants and Fréends not
only in F
                     •
                  aūce, but alſo through out Chriſtendome,
haue manifeſted vnto him,
which alſo finally neceſſitie it ſelf hath giuen
to vnderſtand, not only to his Maieſtie,
but to his Predeceſſors, by ſo much
experience when they haue endeuoured
(but euer in vain) to root out the reformed
Religion, and all exerciſe of the ſame by
warres, perſecutions, and other meanes,
euen horrible to be reherſed, which the
ſaid Lord Duke could not ouer paſſe, by
reaſon of the ſincere affection which he bereth
to the conſeruation of the mightines

of his Maieſtie: And to the end to ſée him
at peace wt his Subiects, the way is, to ſet
before his Maieſties eyes this litle which
followeth.
            Firſt, that it may pleaſe his Maieſtie to
call to minde the coūſail of Gamaliel that
againſt that which commeth of God, no
power or practiſe of man can preuaile: alſo
that whatſoeuer is not of God: waſteth
and periſheth of it ſelf.
            Secondly yt in matters of eſtate that is
good, which is neceſſary, wherin his Maieſtie
may looke in the looking glaſſe of
Germany, Poland, Hungary, Boheme,
Suiſſerland, and the lovv Country, not
as things are cloked: but according to the
trueth, as him ſelf hath ſéen, for to compare
a Prince of Germany with his maieſtie
or with all Fraunce is an abſurde
thing, but to compare Fraunce, with all
Germany: is an equall proportion.
            Thirdly, that his Maieſtie perceiueth
that all the ſame Contries doo flooriſh, becauſe
they haue found meanes to content
the conſciences of their ſubiects, by which
Examples his maieſtie may knowe yt
not the permiſſion of the Religion, but the

hinderaunce of the exerciſe of the ſame,
hath engendred the miſchéefs and calamities
which now he beholdeth through all
his Realme.
            Fourthly, that his Maieſtie not béeing
able to confirme the laſte peace without
his Edict of Pacification, and not béeing able
to kéepe that without maintaining the
ſame and putting it in execution: hée may
plainly ſée that, the maintenance of his
Edict is the only fundation, and meanes
of peace, yea it is the very peace it ſelf.
            Fiftly, like as the vpholding therof is a
meane of peace and auoiding warres, ſo
is it the only way wherby his maieſtie
may recouer the obedience of his ſubiects:
for it is a thing moſt certain ye a King becoming
Captain of any faction among his
ſubiects, can neuer be wel obeyed, for it is
requiſite yt hée ſhould ſhew him ſelf a common
Father to all his Subiects, in endeuoring
to reconſile them one to an other.
            Alſo ſixtly to deale and ſweare againſt ye
vpholdīg therof, is the only meane to brīg
his maieſties ſubiects in greater miſtruſt
then before, and ſo to areare more cruel
warre then before time.
            
               
Seuenthly to alleadge ye ſoueraigne autoritie
of a King for the dooing or ſwering
to ſuch matters, to bring his maieſtie vnto
a perpetuall rebuke among all the world,
wherby he ſhall be accoūted a Prince void
of all faith, lawe, honor and vertue. For
his maieſtie may call to minde how often
he hath bothe by woord and writing profeſſed
himſelf to be a true Prince, ſuch a
one as wil promiſe nothing but what he
entende
                  •
               h to performe, yea and mindeth
rather to promiſe nothing, ſo that no man
of honour can otherwiſe conclude but that
either he ought not to haue made the contents
of ye edict: or elſe he ought to obſerue
it, as his maieſtie in his owne perſon hath
vſed to ſay.
            For ye eighth eſpecially the Lord Duke
aſſureth him ſelf that his maieſty may wel
perceiue that with any man who would obſerue
the coutēts of their othe, or folow the
counſail of theſe pretended ſtates which is
no other then the othe it ſelfe, notwithſtanding
it had neuer béene ſworne: it
would be vnpoſſible to haue any trafique,
becauſe that neither worde, promiſe, othe,
obligation, ſeale, or other thing whatſoeuer

ordinary and lawfull for the aſſurance
of faith among men, eſpecially betwéen the
Prince and his ſubiects, conſidering the
imbecilitie of the ſaid ſubiects, would be of
any more force, but contrariwiſe ſhould
ſerue only for nets and ſnares wherwith
to entrap eche other.
            Ninthly his Maieſtie ought to conſider
that neighbours and ſtraungers cannot
aſſure them ſelues of that Prince, whoſe
ſubiects cannot truſt him, as they of the
Religion, who haue ouermuch béene perſwaded.
For to ſhowe that they began not:
we néede no other argument then the propoſition
of the ſaid Lord of Villequier,
namely that the King is not minded to obſerue
the principall point of his Edict.
            
            As touching the example of the Quéene
of England, it is ſufficiently knowen that
that Ladyes hart is ſuch, as if ſhée had among
her ſubiects found ſuch numbers of
Princes, Lordes, gentlemen and others of
the Romaine Religion within her dominions,
who ſhould as his Maieſties ſubiects
haue doon, ſo oftē haue requeſted her,
rather than to haue incurred ſuch ſpoyles,
and once onely falſifyed her faith and promiſe,

her maieſtie would haue permitted
them the exerciſe of their Roomiſh Religion.
            Tenthly that his maieſtie ſhould beare
at the leaſt aſmuch affection vnto his owne
Subiects, as he hath ſhewed vnto the eſtates
of the lowe Countryes, in reioyſing
with them for the determination that they
haue taken, for the recouery of their libertie,
hauing alſo béene a mediatour to the
ſaide Eſtates for the reſtoring againe of
the Countie of Egmonde into his eſtates
and honours, wherin he hath the more to
conſider of the pollicie of the Spaniarde,
who ſéeketh nothīg but to continue warres
in Fraunce, to the end thereby to turne away
the tempeſt from his owne Countryes
after his good and vſuall maner.
            Finally, whereas his Maieſtie alleageth
that willingly hée would leaue his
Subiects the libertie of their conſciences:
that were much more to be miſtruſted becauſe
it is moſte vndoubted, that hée who
can liue without exerciſe of his Religion,
is vtterly deuoyd of all conſcience, ſo that
it is as much as if his maieſtie ſhould ſay,
I will graunt my ſubiects their liues, but

in the meane time he ſhould take frō them
their foode, wherein the Papiſts doo ſhowe
a ſufficient argument that they cannot
liue without Maſſe, ſo that the ſaid Lord
Duke cannot giue his Maieſtie any better
counſaile, except that if hée minde to remaine
a King, and to ſhow him ſelf ſuch a
Prince that a man may deale and trafique
and truſt to his maieſtie, that thē he maintaine
his Edict, and obſerue his faith in
procuring the abuſes of theſe pretended Eſtates
(wherof his maieſtie ſpeaketh) to be
refourmed by ſuch meanes as ſhall be
thought reaſonable, for the ſaid aſſembly
cannot be taken for true, frée, and lawfull
Eſtates, but rather for traytors to his maieſtie
& his crowne, neither are they ye perſons
promiſed by the Edict, for they ſhould
be kept for the maintenaunce and confirmation
of the peace, but not for the ſubuerting
thereof, to which end they haue moſte
vilanouſly béene ſubbourned, as many
times his Lordſhip hath aduertiſed his maieſtie.
The rehearſall of all which things
the ſaid Lord Duke could very well forbeare,
were he not conſtrayned as well by
the plaineſſe of his conſcience and honour

which is engaged in the ſubſcription of the
peace, as alſo by reaſon of the ſingular affection
which he beareth to the commoditie,
aduauncement and ſeruice of his maieſtie,
in which minde he will continue all his life
time, hauing nothing in more recōmendatition
then to bring to the crown of Fraunce,
and the tranquilitie of his maieſties ſubiects,
what ſo euer meanes or counſaile
God ſhall euer giue him without ſparing
ought, which the ſaid Lord Duke moſte
humbly deſireth his maieſtie to beléeue, and
for ſuch a one to account him, placing him
in the number of his moſte faithfull and affectionate
fréends and ſeruants.
            This is all which the ſaid Lord Duke
can imparte to his maieſtie, in ought that
appertaineth to his perſon. But as concerning
his armie that was in Fraunce,
the ſaid Lord Duke, his Colonels, Reyſtremaiſters
and Captains, hauing héeretofore
thought it ſtraunge that his maieſtie kept
not with them the promiſes which he had
bothe made and ſo often reitreated vnto
them, as well at Francfort as at Strasbrough
touching their payment and hoſtages,
doe now thincke it muche more

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
ſtraunge, and a matter almoſte impudent,
that ſuch a Lord as the Lord of Villequier
comming into theſe partes as Embaſſador
for his maieſtie, hath not onely not brought
any aſſuraunce of the ſame: but alſo not ſo
much as is ſpoken thereof ſauīg by the way
yea and which is more, that the effect of
his meſſage is vtterly repugnaunt vnto
the Obligations and promiſes of his maieſtie.
            Therfore the ſaid Lord Duke, not in his
owne name only: but alſo in the name of his
whole armie requireth his maieſtie to haue
regarde to his honour and to kéep faith and
promiſe wherby at the next faire at Francforte
aſwel the ſaid Lord Duke, as alſo his
Colonels, Reiſtremaiſters, and Captaines,
may be ſatiſfied, who in the name of the
whole armie, will méete at the ſaid Citie of
Francforte, there to determine of their affaires,
according as the Lord Beuterich and
the other Captaines ſent with him, may
more amply aduertiſe his maieſtie.
            All this dooth the aforeſaid Lord Duke
moſte hartely requeſt the ſaid Lord of Villequier
to let his Maiſtie, fully, openly,
and at large vnderſtande, together with

what ſoeuer he hath aunſwerd by woord
of mouth, without any circumſtances▪
or difficultie, with like plaineſſe,
affection, and good will, as the
ſaide Lord Duke in making
this anſwere hath
procéeded and deſireth
euer to procéed
toward his
Maieſtie.
            ❀Thus ſubſcribed
I. Caſſimire.
            
         
         
            
            The Oration of the Lord of Buterich
Embaſſadour from the moſt noble
Prince, Iohn Caſſimir, Countie Palatine
of Rhine, Duke of Bauier, &c.
pronounced before the King in his
tovvne of Bloys.
            
               SIr we haue our commiſſion
on the behalfe of my
Lord ye Duke Iohn Caſſimire,
Countie Palatine of
Rhine, Duke of Bauier &c.
aſwell in his owne name
as alſo in the name of all the Lords, Colonels,
Rheyſtremaiſters, & Captains, and
generally of all his men of warre, who in
his ſecond voyage into Fraunce accompanyed
him, after their moſte humble commendations,
to beſéech your maieſtie to fulfill
that which you haue promiſed, ſigned,
ſealed, & oftentimes confirmed, as wel by
mouth as letters, touching the pay and aſſuraunce
of the ſaid men of warre, whiche
is the cauſe of our ariuall in your Court.
            Truely it would cauſe vs to bluſh if
particularly we ſhould rehearſe all that is

wanting of the performance of the promiſes
made vnto vs bothe before and after our departure
out of this Realme. The place
whereof we doo claime our ſelues, would
ſéeme to make this matter much more odious,
were it not on the one parte the neceſſitie,
wherevnto we are bound by the
commaūdement of them that haue ſent vs,
and on the other parte the aſſurance which
all they whome this matter concerneth
haue conceiued, that your Maieſtie knowing
the ground of this caſe, how it goeth and
what dependeth therof, will take ſo good and
ſpedy order, that beſides the increaſe of your
reputation, we ſhall receiue ſuch ſatiſfaction,
as bothe we doo promiſe our ſelues, and
ought to hope for of a King of Fraunce, who
hath made a ſolemne promiſe to a forraine
nation, eſpecially vnto ours.
            Firſt your maieſties Obligation bearing
date the 27. of Iuly 1576, doth expreſſy importe
that at the faire of Francfort in September
laſt paſt, the third, fourth and fifth
moneths ſhould haue bene paid. That the
100000. francks which my Lord the Duke
Iohn Caſſimire lent to your Maieſtie for
the ſupplying of the payment of the two

firſt moneths ſhould at the ſame faire haue
béene diſcharged.
            That your maieſtie before the ſame
terme ſhould haue ſent Commiſſioners to
take order for that which yet reſteth due
vnto my ſaid Lord the Duke Iohn Caſsimir
ſince his firſt voyage, together with that alſo
which yet is behinde of the voyage of my
late Lord the Duke of Deux ponts or two
bridges.
            That your Maieſtie would with all expedition
accompliſh the promiſed number
of hoſtages and that before our departure
out of Fraunce.
            Theſe Articles together with many others
are promiſed and ſigned by your Maieſtie,
conter-ſigned by one Secretary of eſtate,
and one Secretary of your treaſury
and ſealed with your brode ſeale, the effect
wherof or accompliſhment we haue not hetherto
found.
            Leauing the reſerch of the botome of theſe
matters (as the firſt agréement which my
Lady your Mother made at Cheſteau neuf)
immediatly after that my Lord had receiued
the money of your maieſtie ſhewing in
effect by ye law of an C. thouſand franks of

his owne for the ſupplying of the pay of
two moneths, how affectionate he was
vnto your crown, how he departed with al
ſpéed out of Fraunce (which all Beyſtres
would not haue doon) not minding by wayting
for the perfect accompliſhment of your
promiſes to be gréeuous or trubleſō to your
people, ſo that what ſo euer aduertiſment
he receiued, as aſſuredly he had many, and
thoſe from the beſt, that there was ſome
hidden miſtery, yet could they not ſo much
win him, as to cauſe him to ſhewe any token
of miſtruſt ſo much did he aſſure him
ſelfe in your worde.
            Afterwarde your Maieſtie gaue him
to vnderſtand by ſundry letters, that you
could not according to promiſe ſatiſfie him
at the fair of September, by reaſon of the
aſſembly of the Eſtates, who (beſides the
confirmation of the Edict made by your
owne abſolute and royall power) as we
were promiſed, ſhould entreate vpon ſome
meanes how to diſcharge your Maieſtie
towarde ſtraungers, and ſo to content vs,
alſo that at Chriſtmas this fault ſhould be
amended.
            Immediatly after Chriſtmaſſe and before

Newyéeres day, your maieſtie ſent my
Lord woord that the Eſtates had put a dout
and let in the behalf of Caſtelas, which could
not ſo ſoone be decided, alſo that in ye meane
time your Maieſtie would cauſe to furniſh
at the faire of Straſbrough which was holden
at the ſame ſeaſon, the partes of my
Lord the Duke of Lorreine, and my Lord
the Duke of Vaudemont.
            
            Sir wée are ſory to ſay ſo much: but the
trueth is, there wanteth 250000. which is
in manner the one half which yet wée haue
not receiued of thoſe two parts, and in the
meane time my ſaid Lord was perſonally
at Straſbrough, where were alſo ſundry
Colonels, Reiſtremaiſters, Captaines, and
Souldiers at the leaſt xv. dayes and more,
to their great coſts, charges, labour & trauaile,
procured by the delay of the ſaid
payment.
            Now is Eaſter fair, which is to be holden
at Francfort at hand, at the which your
maieſties promiſe ſhould take place.
            Firſt concerning the former dets dewe
vnto bothe my Lord the Elector Palatine,
next to my aforeſaid Lord the Duke Iohn
Caſsimire.
            
            
               
Item touching the ſixt and ſeuenth moneths
pay for the armie.
            Which articles, we can if néed be, ſpecifie
vnto your maieſtie. Hauing cōmiſſion and
expreſſe commandement to deſire your maieſtie
to ſatiſfie the ſame at this next faire at
Fancfort, which is to be holden at. Eaſter
next, vnto eche and euery of them, aſwel for
the time paſt, as yt which is to come, which
amounteth almoſt to 4. Millions of franks,
beſides coſts and domages. The payment of
which ſum within ſuch a tearme, would go
hard with any flouriſhing eſtate, not indetted,
turmoyled, or ſacked with continuall
wars, for the ſpace of xv. or xvi: yéers, wheras
if all had béene quiet and in reſte all
things might haue abounded, ſo that now it
cannot be but we muſt néedes much doubt
therof. And that that moſte troubleth vs is
that before our eyes we ſée that you ſéek not
the meanes ſo to doo, as is euident euen by
practiſe, thereby to fruſtrate vs of all hope of
receiuing any thing out of Fraunce into
Germanie, either at this fair or any other, or
of long time héerafter, notwithſtanding that
by your obligation no troubles ſhould impeach
the effect of your promiſes, which procedeth

of I wot not what league. This (to be
bréef) is the final breaking of the Edict of pacification,
required (ſay they) by them who
ought to buy the firme eſtabliſhment thereof
with their owne blood, which cānot be other
then accompanied with the moſte cruell and
lamentable war that euer was. Theſe vndoutedly
wil be ye laſt ciuil troubles of your
Realme, we are no French men, this matter
toucheth vs not ſo néere. We be men and
Germaines endewed with humanitie, which
moueth vs to compaſſion in reſpecte of the
ſlaunder that is like to enfue of this warre,
ſo far are we voyd of any deſire to kindle the
wars, neither are we much practiſed in matters
of Eſtate, and yet doe wée aſſuredly
knowe that there was neuer any league
but hath béene domageable to a Monarchie,
in the eſtate and among Subiectes.
            We haue no commiſſion (for your maieſtie
lately ſent vs woord, that it was not
your pleaſure, although oftentimes your
ſelfe haue requeſted vs) to deale in your
affaires, either in the affaire of your eſtate,
as with any your meanes, either to examine
ſuch dealing as haue paſt, neither haue
we héeretofore doon it without the purchace

and inſtaunce of thoſe which doo touch your
perſon very nigh, or els at the ſoliciting of
other Kings your predeceſſors. Well haue
we bothe charge and expreſſe commaundement
to open vnto you the preſent neceſſitie
of our affaires, and to propounde the ready
meanes to reléeue the ſame, the which are ſo
conioyned with the generall and ſuperficiall
conſideration of your eſtate: that we cannot
ſpeake of our owne matters, but we muſt
therewithall ſomewhat touch yours.
            Séeing therefore that my Lord the Duke
Iohn Caſimire a Prince and your neighbour,
beſides all auncient bonds wherwith
he is bound to wiſh the welth of this crown,
hath in declaration of his goodnes towarde
you, béen honoured with goodly lands, a pention,
a charge of a hundred men of armes, &
an eſtate of Colonel, which dignities he yet
inioyeth, he findeth him ſelfe ſo much bounde
to your maieſtie that he thinketh he ſhould
doo iniury to his deputie, if he ſhould diſſemble
the inconueniences like to inſue.
            At ſuch time as Fraunce was repleniſhed
with forraine Souldiers, euery one bothe
great and ſmall cryed for peace, and ſuch as
ſuppoſed vs not to be ſo attentiue thereto, as

in effect we haue declared our ſelues, ſaide
that the ſame was the onely way to collect
money for our payments, becauſe ſay they
that the charges of war were infinite and
incredible, whereby it muſt néeds followe
that the breaking of the peace dooth cut of &
take away all meanes of our ſatiſfaction, ſo
as we gather that we haue therin as great
intereſt, or more then many great Lords of
your ſubiects, and therefore that it is our
duetie moſt humbly to exhorte your maieſtie
to the entertayning and aſſured obſeruing
of the ſame, yea although neither the
duetie of Chriſtian charitie, the ſimpatie
that is in one only faithful body, or our affection
to the wealth and quietneſſe of your
dominions & crown, ſhould driue vs therevnto,
either the deſire yt we haue that your
maieſties credite might remaine in his full
force among all forraine Princes, and that
the confidence which your Subiects ought
to repoſe in your ſhould in no wiſe be deminiſhed.
There is none but knoweth (it is
ſo freſh in minde) what time, labour, & trauail
firſt your ſelfe my Lord, then my Lady
your mother, my Lords ye Princes of your
blood, my Lord ye Duk Iohn Caſimire, your

Counſaile and others did ſuſtaine and indure,
what ruine, yea and how much money
it coſt before you could attain to this peace.
            All good Frenchmen wiſhed it, or iudged
it moſt profitable and neceſſary for your eſtate,
your people accepted it and ioyfully
receiued it, it was ſigned, ſealed, ſworne,
and publiſhed throughout all the Courts,
Bayliwickes, Townes, and places of this
Realme, and notified vnto ſtraungers by
your Embaſſadors, vnto the ſingular contentation
of ſuch as wiſhed the wealth of
your Eſtate. Finally no neceſſary ceremony
was ommitted. We haue, enioy and poſſeſſe
the lands, commodities and honours
which you haue conferred vnto my ſaid L.
the Duke Iohn Caſimire, for vnder any other
title, he neither would receiue thē, neither
accept of your hoſtages, we haue alſo
parte of the iewels of your Crown, & which
we eſtéeme more then all, we haue your
royall woord.
            Now that we ſhould reape the frutes of
this peace, and receine that which is promiſed
& dew vnto vs, alſo yt all men ſhould
congratulate with your maieſtie for ye quietnes
yt you ſhould finde, we muſt chaunge

ſuch ſpéeches into a bewayling of the miſeryes
aryſing of warres.
            At the leaſt if the deſtenie of Fortune be
ſuch, either of royall and abſolute authoritie,
either for certaine conſiderations to vs vnknowen,
as we yt be Germains are to rude to
vnderſtand them, and our ſelues not open inough
to comprehend that your maieſtie wil
not that your ſubiecte ſhould inioy the frute
of the Edict of pacification, then let it remain
cloſed within the boundes of your Realme,
and not be diſperſed in all corners of Germany,
and in moſt parte of Svvizerland, for we
cannot, but muſt néedes receiue much gréefe
and intollerable damage thereby.
            This conſideration togither with infinite
others, which to this purpoſe might be alleaged
by ſuch as would enter into the view of
your eſtate, doo to vs ſéem ſufficient to extinguiſh,
or at the leaſt ſuſpend this aboliſhment
of the Edict, vntill we be ſatiſfyed, and then
might you more iuſtly alledge that we haue
not to doo to meddle therein, for now we deal
with that that concerneth our ſelues, our honour
and credit, togither with the reputation
of our whole nation.
            Yet if it were but a matter of fiue or ſix

moneths labour, the end whereof we might
then finde, and that it might ſo be eaſely compaſſed,
then were there ſome hope as touching
our particular intereſt. But we now are
certaine and well aſſured, that if we be once
entred aborde this warre: we be all ready ouer
olde to ſee the end.
            It is no ſmall matter when a man is reduced
to theſe extremities, that he wil rather
ouerthrowe him ſelfe and others, then with
his goods to looſe both Countrie, honour, and
life, when a man procéedeth ſo farre, it is
doon, all reſpect and all duetie of one ſide, and
other vaniſheth away. The politike perſon,
and the refourmed, each of them forgetteth
him ſelfe, whatſoeuer tendeth either to
the one or other end ſéemeth lawful. Such as
haue abidden theſe extremities the ſpace of
xv. or xvj. yéeres, will not be daunted with
ſuch beginnings, hauing ſo many intelligences
and good aduertiſements from all partes,
we know it: for we haue frequented it. There
muſt be a whole ſtorehouſe of money, beſides
the ſhedding of the French blood. There will
enſue a ſtiffe determination of irreconſiliable
war, while in the meane time what will
become of our payments, the wayting for

which, will be vnto vs as gréeuous & intollerable,
as it wil be harde to ſend the ſame
into Germany (ſo long as the warre dooth
laſt) or eaſy to ſubdue the Huguenots.
            
            What wil our Reyſtres and ſouldiers,
who are determined to méete at the next
faire of Francfort, ſay. I wil leaue to ſuch as
knowe what maner of men they be in matters
touching payments due. What will be
the general iudgemēt of our forrain neighbours?
The ſobereſt will ſay that Fraunce
which in all ages hath borne away ye price
of humanitie towarde ſtraungers, is now
become impatible to it ſelfe, neither able to
abide peace, neither to maintaine war.
            To conclude we doo beſéech your maieſtie
on the part of my Lord the Duke Iohn Caſimire,
who hath in his owne behalfe togither
with the behalfe of the body of his army
ſent, vs hether, to cauſe to furniſh & ſatiſfie
at this next fair at Francfort, the whol
contents of the Obligation which we haue
of your maieſtie, according as is afore ſet
downe,
            This Sir is (without ſpeaking any farther
in your affaires, thē they concerne vs)
the effect of all that we are commaunded to
ſhowe vnto your maieſtie at this preſent,

whome we doo moſte humbly beſéech to
take the ſame in good parte. We are Germaines
& therfore doo want copie of French
phraſes. The commandement of thoſe that
haue ſent vs, dooth lay vpon vs the neceſſity
of acquitting our ſelues, whereto we hope
your maieſtie wil haue reſpect, for it tēdeth
onely to our ſatiſfaction, & the peace which
mainteineth & preſerueth all eſtates. The
hazardes of warre haue often diſpearſed,
waſted & ſubuerted in one day, yea in one
houre, great Monarchies, how wel ſo euer
they haue béene ordered or eſtabliſhed. God
for his grace, preſerue yours in full perfection.
            At Bloys the 23 of February.
1577.
            
            
               ¶This béeing ended he procéeded
on this wiſe.
               
                  SIr, I am to ſpeke for my Lord
the Duke Iohn Caſſimire who
gaue me perticuler inſtructions
to requeſt your Maieſtie in his
behalf, that you would not permit your ſelf
to be led by ſuch as doo endeuour to procure
you to breake the peace whiche was ſo
harde to be made. Alſo that if there be any

Article conteined therein which troubleth
your Conſcience, or yt ſéemeth to rigorous,
he wiſheth that it might pleaſe you rather
to procure ſome tollerable moderatiō of the
ſame, then again to areare warres by the
breaking of the ſaide Edict.
               
               To which end he hath commaunded mée
to offer vnto you whatſoeuer credit he may
haue with the King of Nauarre the Prince
of Conde, the Marſhall of Anuile and the
Churches, wherin he hath ſufficiently authoriſed
me to procure any thing tollerable,
rather then to ſubuert all, namely to conferre
with ye King of Nauers Deputie: wherfore
it is in your Maieſtie to conſult and deuiſe,
what I may doo therin wherto I doo
moſte humbly offer my Perſon.
            
            
               ❀To the King.
               SIr I doo moſt humbly requeſt your maieſtie
not to miſlike that this day may
finiſh and cut of all ſuch ſlaunders as haue
béene ſowen and ſpread throughout Germanie,
Fraunce, and other places againſt
my Lord and maiſter the Duke Iohn Caſſimire
to the great preiudice of his honour
and reputation. Namely that the conſideration

and reſpect of his perticular profite
held him ſo intangeled and brideled, that
the ſame was periuditial vnto the publique
and particular commoditie of his ſouldiers
which followed him. In reſpect wherof: his
excellencie hath charged me before my departure,
to remit into your maieſties hands
all ſuch lands and eſtates wherwith it hath
pleaſed you of late to gratifie him, whiche
are the Duchie of Eſtampes, the nine Lordſhips
ſituated within the Duchie of Burgundie,
the pention, the Captainſhip ouer
a hundred men of armes, together with the
eſtate of Colonell ouer 4000 Reyſtres.
               The poſſeſſion and inioying of all whiche
things and of euery of them, his excellency
hath and héere dooth renounce, not willing
heerafter to pretend any right in the ſame,
neither minding at this preſent to reape any
commoditie therof. He dooth alſo render
vnto your maieſtie, all letters and déedes
concerning the ſame, except ſuch as are depending
of the aforſaid lands ſituated with
in the Duchy of Burgundy, the which the
chamber of accounts hath deteyned, the arreſt
wherof is héerunto adioyned. Alſo in
caſe his excellencie hath reciprokely promiſed

or ſworne vnto your Maieſtie any
kinde of duetie, if he hath bound him ſelfe in
any reſpect whatſoeuer, by woord of mouth,
letters, or procter, his intent and purpoſe is
by this reſtitution to be fully and perfectly
diſcharged, as of matter graunted in conſideration
of the landes & eſtates aboue mentioned,
héerein reuoking all duetie or Obligation
whatſoeuer, except of good agréement
and neighbourhood, which at all times hath
béene maintained betwéene the Kings of
Fraunce, and the famelies of the Palatine
Princes, beſides the earneſt zeale which he
beareth to the welth of this Crowne, from
the which this reſtitution ſhall in no wiſe
alienate his minde.
               I haue no Commiſſion otherwiſe to diſcend
to the particular occaſions, but to ſhow
your maieſtie that in caſe you be any thing
deſirous to knowe the ſame, his excellency
immediatly after my returne wil not much
ſtick to declare it.
               In reſpect of our ſelues, who vnder the
aſſurance of publique faith and the ſafe conduct
which it pleaſed you to ſende vs, are
come euen to your Court, I haue expreſſe
charge of his excellencie, moſte humbly to

requeſt your Maieſtie to giue leaue to two
of vs with all ſpéede to returne into Germanie,
and me Buterich to departe into
England according to my maiſters commaundement
about ſundry his excellencies
weightie affaires of
importaunce, graunting
vs to the ſame ende
two ſeuerall Paſports
and ſafe
conducts.
(?)
            
            
               At Bloys the 7. of March. 1577
               
            
            FINIS,
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   