
      
         
            
            
            The nine Worthies of London Explayning the honourable
exercise of Armes, the
vertues of the valiant, and the
memorable attempts of
magnanimious minds. PLEASANT FOR GENTLEmen,
not vnseemly for Magistrates,
and most profitable for
Prentises.
            Compiled by Richard Iohnson.
            
            Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Humfrey
Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop at
the west doore of Paules. 1592.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honourable sir William
Webbe Knight, Lord Maior
of the famous Citie of London, Richard
Iohnson, wisheth health,
with increase of
honour.
            
               BEING not altogether
(right honorable) vnacquainted
with the fame
of this wel gouerned citie,
the heade of our
English florishing common
wealth: I thought
nothing (considering it somewhat touched
my dutie) could be more acceptable
to your Honour, then such principles
as first grounded the same as well by domesticall
policie of peace, as forraine excellence
in resolution of warre. This caused
me to collect from our London gardens,
such especiall flowers, that sauoured
as well in the wrath of Winter, as in the
pride of Sommer, keeping one equiuolence
at all kinde of seasons. Flowers of
chiualrie (right honorable I meane) some
that haue sucked honie frō the Bee, sweetnesse

from warre, and were possessed in
that high place of prudence, wherof your
Lordship now partaketh. Other some that
haue beene more inferiour members, and
yet haue giuen especial ayde to the head,
beene buckler to the best, and therby reached
to the aspiring toppe of armes: If
your Lordship shall but like of it, proceeding
from the barren braine of a poore
apprentice, that dare not promise moulhils,
much lesse mountaines, I shall thinke
this by-exercise, which I vndertooke to
expell idlenesse, a worke of worth, whatsoeuer
the gentle cauld kind, that are vngently
inkindled, shall with ostentation
inueigh. These (right Honorable) the nine
VVorthies of London, now vnable to defend
themselues, seeke their protection vnder
your gracious fauour: and the Authour
pricked on by Fame, to be patronagde for
his willing labour, whereof not misdoubting,
I humbly commit your Honour to
the defence of heauen, and the guider of
all iust equalitie:
            
               Your L in all humble dutie to be commaunded.
Richard Iohnson.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Gentlemen Readers, as well
Prentices as others.
            
               AL is not gold (Gentlemen)
that glisters, nor all drosse
that makes but a darke
shew: so should copper some
time be currant, & pearles
of no price. Aesope for all
his crutchback, had a quick
wit. Cleanthes, though in the night he caried
the watertankard, yet in the day would dispute
with Philosophers. A meane man may look vpon
a king, and a wren build her nest by an Egle.
In the games of Olympus, any man might trie
his strength: and when Apelles liued others
were not forbid to paint: So gentlemen, though
now a dayes many great Poets flourish (from
whose eloquent workes you take both pleasure
and profite) yet I trust inferiours (whose pens
dare not compare with Apollos) shall not bee
contemned or put to silence. Euery weede hath
his vertue, & studious trauaile (though without
skill) may manifest good will. Vouchsafe
then intertainment to this new come guest, his
simple truth shewes he is without deceyte, and
his plaine speech proues, he flatters not. He can

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
not beast of Art, nor claime the priuiledge of
scholasticall cunning: what he sayth is not curious,
being without any great praemeditation,
or practise, more then his necessarie affaires
would permit. If his vnpollished discourses
may merit the least motion of your good liking,
let the enuious fret, and the captious malice
melt themselues, neither the obiection of Mechanicall,
by such as are themselues diabolicall,
whose vicious basenesse in a selfe conceyte
presuming aboue the best, is in deede but
the dregges and refuse of the worst, nor the reproch
of prouerbiall scoffes as (Ne sutor vltra
crepidam) shall discorage me from proceeding
to inuent how further to content you. And so
trusting to my fortune, and ending in my hap,
neither dispairing of your censures, nor
fearing what the maleuolent
can inflict.
            
               Yours to commaund as he may.
Richard Iohnson.
               
            
         
         
            
            A Catalogue or briefe Table, declaring
the names of these worthie men,
and when they liued.
            
               First. SIr VVilliam VValworth Fishmonger, in the
time of Richard the second.
               Second. Sir Henrie Pitchard Vintener, in the time
of Edward the third.
               Third. Sir VVilliam Seuenoake Grocer, in the time
of Henrie the fift.
               Fourth. Sir Thomas VVhite Marchant-tailer, in the
time of Queene Marie.
               
               Fift. Sir Iohn Bonham Mercer, in the time of Edward
the first.
               Sixt. Sir Christopher Croker Vintener, in the time
of Edward the third.
               Seuenth. Sir Iohn Haukwood Marchant-tailer, in
the time of Edward the third.
               Eight. Sir Hugh Cauerley Silke-weauer, in the time
of Edward the third.
               Ninth. Sir Henrie Maleueret Grocer, in the time
of Henrie the fourth.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Gentlemen Readers.
            
               GEntlemen, being incouraged through your gentle
acceptance of my Cynthia, I haue once more aduentured
on your Curtesies: hoping to finde you (as I
haue done hertofore) friendly. Being determined to
write of somthing, & yet not resolued of any thing, I
considered with my selfe, if one should write of Loue (they will
say) why, euery one writes of Loue: if of Vertue, why, who regards
Vertue? To be short, I could thinke of nothing, but either
it was common, or not at all in request, At length I bethought
my selfe of a Subiect, both new (as hauing neuer beene written vpon
before) and pleasing (as I thought) because Mans Nature (commonly)
loues to heare that praised, with whose pressence, hee is
most pleased.
            
               Erasmus (the glory of Netherland, and the refiner of the Latin
Tongue) wrote a whole Booke, in th
                     •
                   prayse of Folly. Then if so
excellent a Scholler, writ in praise of Vanity, why may not I write
in praise of that which is profitable? There are no two Countreys
where Gold is esteemed, lesse than in India, and more then in England:
the reason is, because the Indians are barbarous and our Nation
ciuill.
            I haue giuen Pecunia the title of a Woman Both for the termination
of the Word, and because (as Women are) shee is lov'd of
men. The brauest Voyages in the World, haue beene made for
Gold: for it, men haue venterd (by Sea) to the furthest part of the

Earth: In the Pursute wherof, Englands Nestor and Neptune (Haukins
and Drake) lost their liues. Vpon the Deathes of the which
two, of the first I writ this:

                  The Waters were his Winding sheete, the Sea was made his Toome;
                  Yet for his fame the Ocean Sea, was not sufficient roome.
               
Of the latter this:

                  
                     England his hart; his Corps the Waters haue:
                  And that which raysd his fame, because his grave.
               
            
            
               The Praetorians (after the death of Pertinax) in the election of a
new Emperour, more esteemed the money of Iulianus, then either
the vertue of Seuerus, or the Valour of Pessennius. Then of what
great estimation and account, this Lady Pecunia, both hath beene
in the Worlde, and is at this present, I leaue to your Iudgement.
But what speake I so much of her praise in my Epistle, that haue
commended her so at large, in my Booke? To the reading wherof,
(Gentlemen) I referre you.
         
      
      
         
            
            The nine worthies of London,
explaying the honourable exercise
of Armes, the vertues of the valiant, and the
innumerable attemptes of Magnanimious
mindes.
            
               WHat time Fame began to feather
her selfe to flie, and was winged
with the lasting memorie of martiall
men, the Oratours ceast perswasiue
Orations, the Poets
neglected the pleasures of their
Poems, and Pallas her self would
haue nothing painted vpon her
shield but Mottoes of Mars, and
short emblemes in honour of noble atchiuements. Then
the ashes of auncient Uictors without scruple or disdaine
had sepulture in rich and golden monuments: and they that
reacht the height of honour by worthie déedes, had their
former basenesse, shadowed by deserts. Fame then fearing
that her honour would faint, and her armour rust (for
though she fauoured all professions, yet she chiefly dignified
armes) on a sodaine, mounted into the ayre, and neuer
stayed the swiftnesse of her flying course, vntill she pitched
her feete vpon Parnassus forked toppe, whose springing
Lawrels gaue shade, & shelter to her wearinesse. This was
the fruitfull place where she plotted her flowrie garlands,
to crown the temples of vertuous followers, and wreathes
of renowme to illustrate vndaunted courages. Here likewise
remained her chiefe secretaries the ix. Muses, as in a
seate of most pleasure best befitting their diuine perfections,
whose necessarie aydes she alwayes craued, when occasion

ministred any thing worthy record: and though the
wholesome freshnesse of the ayre, the gréenenesse of the
valleys, the comfortable odours of sundry sorts of flowers,
the pride and bewtie of the trées, the harmonious layes of
Nightingales & other birds, the variable delights of artificiall
bowers, and the musicall murmures of Christall running
fountaines, might wel haue inchaunted the roughest
Cyaink, or crabbedst Malecontent to cheare vp his spirits,
and banish melancholy passions, yet this Goddesse pretending
businesse of importance, had such a care to effect it, as
that she would not be ouercome with pleasure, nor yeeld to
ease, (though in reason her laborious trauell did require
rest) but painfully passing vp and downe, was not moued
with the one, nor maistred with the other. At last as her
busie eye pried euery way, she espied a path of Uiolets,
whose tops were pressed downe with the steps of such as
had lately passed that way: by this she coniectured the
Nymphes were not farre off, and therefore following the
tract their féete had made vpon the flowers, she was quickly
brought to the head of Hellicon, where, in an arbour of
Eglantine, aud damaske Rose trees, one twisted so cunningly
within another, as hard it was to iudge whether
nature or arte had bestowed most to the bewtifying of that
bower. She found the Muses euery one seriously applying
their seuerall exercises, whom when they saw (hauing saluted
her with a dutifull reuerence) stoode attentiue (being
well assured her comming was not without cause) what
charge she would giue, or what shee would commaund to
be registred. To whome Fame, to the intent they might
not long bee in suspence about her sodaine approch, as
well for that her businesse was impatient of delay, as
to resolue their earnest expectation, spake in this maner.
            You néed not muse (gracious nurces of learning) at my
presence in this place, because I vse not oftentimes to visit
you, nor trouble your minds wt ambiguous imaginations
concerning my purpose, since I seldome craue your furtherance

but for memorable accidents: notwithstanding, for
the varietie of matter requires not alwayes one forme, and
still with processe of time as mens maners change, our method
alters, you shall perceyue I am not now to begin: but
to reuiue what ignorance in darknes seemes to shadow, &
hatefull obliuion hath almost rubbed out of the booke of honour.
It is not of Kinges and mightie Potentates, but
such whose vertues made them great, and whose renowne
sprung not of the noblenes of their birth, but of the notab
                  •
               e
towardnesse of their well qualified mindes, aduaunced not
with loftie titles, but praysed for the triall of their heroycal
truthes: of these must you indite, who though their states
were but meane, yet dooth their worthie prowesse match
superiours, and therefore haue I named them Worthies.
Nine were they in number, their Countrie England, the
Citie they liued in famous London, famous in deede for
such men, and yet forgetfull to celebrate the remembrance
of their names, and negligent, (I may say) in performing
the like attempts, hauing for imitation such goodly presidents
as these to supplie them that want, with wisedome,
and with better instruction. I am determined to discourse
againe what I haue often bruted, thereby to stirre vp
sluggards, and to giue secure worldlings to vnderstande
(who extends no further then for wealth, and whose hearts
suppose a heape of coine the greatest happines) that the censure
of honour ought to increase, when as by substance they
arise to authoritie, and none so abiect but may be made a
subiect of glorie and magnanimitie, if so thereunto they
will bend their endeuours.
            For performance hereof, I knowe my theame so large,
and copious, as all your wits might ingenerall be imployed
to dilate and expresse the same, yet onely Clio shall be sufficient,
whome alone I make choise off, the rather because
it chiefly concernes hir, and so beckning towards her with
her head, made an end of her speach.
            She had no sooner sayd, but all the rest as satisfied in
that they desired to know, presently cast down their lookes,

that were before stedfastly fixed vpon the browes of Fame,
and began to turne to their labours, which all this while by
reason of her talke they had intermitted, onely Clio clasping
vp her booke of famous hystories, and taking her golden pen
in hand, rose from the seate where she sate, and leauing her
sisters with due reuerēce, was readie to folow Fame where
so euer she would conduct her.
            At the doore of the enterance into the Arbour, there stoode
a siluer chariot drawne by the force of Pegasus, which Fame
of purpose had prouided, because Clio therein might the better
keepe wing with her. Into the which she was no sooner
mounted, but straightway as swift as the burning dartes
of Iupiter, they made their passage through the subtle ayre,
vntill they soared ouer the hollow vault, through which the
way leadeth down to the rule of vnder earth: there Clio pulled
her rayne, and with a headlong fall (according to her
guides direction) neuer staied vntill the stéely house of Pegasus
did beate against the gates of Tartara, where being
receyued in, they left the crooked thornie way smoking with
sulpher, and neuer ceasing contagious vapours, and kept
directly on the other side, which delighted their eyes with so
many glorious sights, that before they knew it, they were
arriued vnder the Elesian shades: where when the Goddes
had remained a while, discoursing with her companion the
seuerall habitations, as that of louers in swéete groues of
muske she spide at last the place where Electrum growes,
swéetned continually with burning baulme boughes, with
which braue souldiours, and warlike cauilliers cured their
ranck scatres. There did shee shake her bright immortall
wings, and with the melodious noyse, and with the sweet
breath was fanned frō those Phoenix feathers she awaked
nine comely knights, yt arme in arme vpon a greene banke,
strewed with Rose buddes, had laid their conquering heads
to rest in peace.
            This, quoth she is the farthest end of our iourney, here
must we take our stations for a while, and those whom thou
seest eleuating their bodies from the ground, from whose

browes sparkle gleames of immortall glorie, are the nine
worthy Champions I told you of, whom, as by my power
I haue awaked: so will I cause to speake and declare their
owne fortunes, onely be thou attentiue, and set down with
thy pen, what thou shalt heare them speake: and so cōming,
to the first, which was a tall aged man, his haire as white
as snow, vpon his backe a scarlet robe, his temples bound
about with baulme, and in his hand a bright shining blade:
she toucht his lippes with her finger, and straightway his
tongue began to vtter these words.
            
               Sir William Wallworth Fishmonger,
sometime Maior of London.
               
                  WHat I shall speake, suppose it is not vaine,
                  Nor thinke Ambition tunes my sounding voyce;
                  It bootes not clay to stand on glorious gayne,
                  An other place bereaues vs of that choyce:
                  For when the Pompe of earthlie pleasures gone,
                  Our goasts lie buried vnderneath a stone.
               
               
                  Nor when I liu'd carpt I at Phoebus light
                  My deeds did passe without comparing pride,
                  Who shone the least (mee thought apear'd more bright)
                  I wisht it secret what the world discride,
                  Nor would now shewe (fayre Goddesse but for thee,)
                  The charge beseemes an other and not mee.
               
               
                  To ouerpasse then how I was instaul'd
                  To weare the purple robe of Maiestrate,
                  It shall suffice I su'de not, but was calde,
                  Of Fortunes gifts let baser minds relate:
                  
                     
In such a time it was my chaunce to sway,
                  When riches quaild, and Vertue wonne the day.
               
               
                  In Richards Raygne the second of that name
                  Of Londons weale Liefetenant to his Grace,
                  
                     Wallworth was chose vnworthie of the same
                  Within his hand to beare the Cities mace:
                  To Fishmongers the honour did redownd,
                  Whose brotherhood was my preferments grownd.
               
               
                  These were not dayes of peace but broyling warre,
                  
                     Dissention spred hir venom through the land,
                  And stird the Prince and subiect to a iarre
                  Hated loue, Rigor dutie did withstand:
                  In such a tempest of vnbridled force,
                  As manie lost their liues without remorse.
               
               
                  For by a taxe the King requirde to haue,
                  The men of Kent and Essex did rebell,
                  Their first Decree concluded none to saue
                  But hauocke all, a heauie tale to tell:
                  And so when they were gatherde to a head,
                  Towards London were these gracelesse Rebels ledd.
               
               
                  What spoyle they made in Countries as they came,
                  How they did rob and tyrranize in pride,
                  The widowes cries were patterns of their shame,
                  And sanguin streames of infants blood beside:
                  For like the sea when it hath caught a breach,
                  So rusht these Traytors, past compassions reach.
               
               
                  So desperate was their rage as they preuailde,
                  And entered the Citie by the sword,
                  The towre wals were mightely assayld,
                  And prisoner there made headlesse at a word:
                  Earles manner houses were by them destroyd,
                  The Sauoy and S. Iones, by Smithfield spoyld.
               
               
                  
                  All men of law that fell into their hands
                  They left them breathlesse weltering in their blood,
                  Ancient records were turn'd to firebrands,
                  Anie had fauour sooner then the good:
                  So stout these cutthrotes were in their degree,
                  That Noblemen must serue them on their knee.
               
               
                  In burning and in slaughter long they toyld,
                  That made the King and all his traine agast,
                  Such rancour had their stomackes ouerboyld
                  They hopte to get the Soueraignitie at last:
                  In deede his Maiestie was young in yeares,
                  Which brought distresse to him and to his Peeres.
               
               
                  Yet with a loyall guard of bils and Bowes
                  Collected of our tallest men of trade,
                  I did protect his person from his foes,
                  Where there presumption trembled to inuade:
                  It yerkt my soule to see my Prince abusde,
                  In whose defence no danger I refusde.
               
               
                  In these extreames it was no boote to fight,
                  The Rebbels marched with so huge an host,
                  The King crau'd Parley by a noble Knight
                  Of sterne Wat Tiler ruler of the rost:
                  A countrie Boore, a goodlie proper swayne,
                  To put his Countrie to such wretched payne.
               
               
                  This Rustick scoft at first the Kings request
                  Yet at the last he seem'd to giue consent,
                  Aleaging he would come when he thought best:
                  T'is well (quoth he) is all their courage spent:
                  Ile make them on their bended knees intreat,
                  Or cast their bodies in a bloodie sweat,
               
               
                  Begirt with steele, our gownes were laid apart,
                  Age hindred not, though feeble were my ioynts.
                  
                     
T'would make a fearefull coward take a heart
                  When Prince opprest a Countries cause appoynts:
                  Who would refuse, and death or grieuous paine
                  To follow him that is his Souenaygne?
               
               
                  The place appoynted where to meete these mates
                  (That like audatious pessants did prepare,
                  As if their calling did concerne high states,
                  With brasen lookes deuoyd of awfull care)
                  Was Smithfeeld, where his Maiesty did stay,
                  An howre ere these Rebels found the way.
               
               
                  At last the leaders of that brutish rowt
                  
                     Iacke Straw, Wat Tiler, and a number more,
                  Aproacht the place with such a yelling showt,
                  As seldome had the like been heard before:
                  The King spake faire, and bad them lay downe armes,
                  And he would pardon all their former harmes.
               
               
                  But as fierce Lions are not tam'd with words,
                  Nor sauage Monsters conquered but by force,
                  So gentlenesse vnshethes a Traitors sword,
                  And fayre perswasions makes the wicked worse:
                  His clemencie prouoake, and not dismaide,
                  Because of them, they thought the King affraide.
               
               
                  And as a witnesse of their inward vice
                  Their tongues beganne to taunt in sawsie sort,
                  
                     Obedience blusht, and Honour lost her price,
                  A modest shame forbids the fowle report:
                  How Presumption made these Caitifes swell,
                  As if the Diuels did bellowfoorth of Hell.
               
               
                  Their loathsome talke inkindle, angers fire
                  And fretting passions made my sinewes shake,
                  T'was death to me to see the Base aspire:
                  Such woundes would men in deadlie slumber wake.
                  
                     
Yet I refrainde, my betters were in place,
                  It were no maners Nobles to disgrace.
               
               
                  But when I saw the Rebels pride encrease,
                  And none controll and counterchecke thier rage,
                  T'were seruice good (thought I) to purchase peace,
                  And malice of contentious brags asswage:
                  With this conceyt all feare had taken flight,
                  And I alone prest to the traitors sight.
               
               
                  Their multitude could not amaze my minde,
                  Their bloudie weapons did not make me shrinke,
                  True valour hath his constancie assignde,
                  The Eagle at the Sunne will neuer winke:
                  Amongst their troupes incenst with mortall hate,
                  I did arest Wat Tiler on the pate.
               
               
                  The stroke was giuen with so good a will,
                  It made the Rebell coutch vnto the earth,
                  His fellowes that beheld (t'is strange) were still
                  It mard the manor of their former mirth:
                  I left him not, but ere I did depart,
                  I stabd my dagger to his damned heart.
               
               
                  The rest perceiuing of their captaine slaine,
                  Soone terrified did cast their weapons downe,
                  And like to sheepe began to flie amaine,
                  They durst not looke on Iustice dreadfull frowne.
                  The king pursude, and we were not the last,
                  Till furie of the fight were ouerpast.
               
               
                  Thus were the mangled parts of peace recurde;
                  The Princes falling state by right defended;
                  From common weale all mischiefe quite abiurde,
                  With loue and dutie vertue was attended.
                  And for that deed that day before t'was night,
                  My king in guerdon dubbed me a knight.
               
               
                  
                  Nor ceast he so to honour that degree.
                  A costly hat his highnesse likewise gaue,
                  That Londons maintenance might euer be,
                  A sword also he did ordaine to haue,
                  That should be caried still before the Maior,
                  Whose worth deserude succession to that chaire,
               
               
                  This much in age when strength of youth was spent,
                  Hath Walworth by vnwonted valour gaind,
                  T'was all he sought, his countrey to content.
                  Successe hath fortune for the iust ordaind,
                  And when he died, this order he began,
                  Lord Maiors are knights their office being done.
               
               WOrthily had this father of his Countrie the formost
place in this discourse, whose valerous attempts
may be a light to all ensuing ages, to
lead them in the darkenesse of all troublesome times, to the
resurrection of such a constant affection as will not faulter
or refuse any perill to profite his Countrey and purchase
honour. Such was his desert, as euen then when good
men dispaired of their safetie, and the verie pillars of the
common wealth tottered: his courage redéemed the one,
and vnderpropped the other: Martialists and patrones of
magnanimitie, trembled at that which he beyond all expectation
aduentured. Let enuie therefore retract the malice of
her blistring tongue, which heretofore (and now not a litle)
striueth by her contentious and ripening nature to obscure
the brightnesse of their praise, and scoffe at their ingenious
dispositions, whose education promiseth small: But yet
when occasion hath required, haue performed more then
they whose brags haue vapord to ye clouds. I wish the like
mind, and the like loyaltie in all those that make the Citie
the Nurse of their liues, and subiect of their fortunes, that
London may continue stil that credite to be called the great
chamber of her kings, and the key of her Countreys blisse.
But to procéede, Fame hauing marked the grauitie, eloquence,

and orator-like gesture of this good knight during
the continuance of his talke, was so well pleased as shee
vowed to erect his stature, where in spight of al contrarious
and maleuolent blasts of vertues carpers, it should stande
immoueable: and Clio that had pend his speach, grieued she
had not leysure (as she desired, and he deserued) to set down
his actions in better and more ample maner: for alreadie
another of the knightly crew stood vp readie to delate what
Fame expected: therefore she was forced to let it somewhat
rawly passe, hoping that the excellency of the matter, would
excuse the rudensse of the rime.
               The next being a man whom nature had likewise bewtified
with the colour and badge of wisedome and authoritie,
as one on whom a greater power then Fortunes faigned
deitie had bestowed, the fulnesse of worldly treasure,
and heauens perfection, beganne accordingly to frame
his tale.
            
            
               Sir Henrie Pitchard Knight.
               
                  THe potter tempers not the massie golde,
                  A meaner substance serues his simple trade,
                  His workemanship consistes of slimie molde,
                  Where any plaine impression soone is made:
                  His Pitchards haue no outward glittering pompe,
                  As other mettels of a finer stampe.
               
               
                  Yet for your vse as wholsome as the rest,
                  Though their beginning be but homely found,
                  And sometime they are taken for the best,
                  If that be precious that is alwayes sound.
                  
                     
From gould corrupting poysons do infect,
                  Where earthen cups are free from all suspect.
               
               
                  So censure of the Pitchard you behould,
                  Whose glorie springes not of his lowlie frame,
                  Though he be clay he may compare with gould
                  His properties nere felt reproachfull shame:
                  For when I first drew breath vpon the earth,
                  My mind did beawtifie creations byrth.
               
               
                  I dare not sing of Mars his bloodie scarres,
                  It is a stile too high for my conceipt,
                  Yet in my youth I serued in the warres,
                  And followde him that made his foes entreat:
                  
                     Edward the third the Phoenix of his time,
                  For life and prowes spotted with no crime.
               
               
                  From France returnd, so well I thriu'd at home,
                  As by permission of celestiall grace,
                  I rose by that men termd blind Fortunes dome
                  To such a loftie dignitie of place:
                  As by election then it did appeare,
                  I was Lord Maior of London for a yeare.
               
               
                  I vsde not my promotion with disdaine,
                  Nor suffred heapes of coyne to fret withrust,
                  I knew the ende of such a noble gaine,
                  And saw that riches were not giuen for lust:
                  But for reliefe and comfort of the poore,
                  Against the straunger not to shut my doore.
               
               
                  I could repeate perhaps some liberall deedes,
                  But that I feare vaine-glories bitter checke,
                  His plenties want, his haruest is but weedes,
                  That doth in wordes his proper goodnesse decke:
                  It shall suffice he hath them in recorde,
                  That keepes in store his stewards iust reward.
               
               
                  
                  Yet for aduauncement of faire Londons fame,
                  I will omit one principall regarde,
                  That such as heare may imitate the same,
                  When auarice by bountie shall be barde:
                  Rich men should thinke of honour more then pelfe,
                  I liu'd as well for others as my selfe.
               
               
                  When Edward triumpht for his victories,
                  And helde three crownes within his conquering hand,
                  He brought rich Trophies from his enemies,
                  That were erected in this happie land:
                  We all reioyc'd and gaue our God the praise,
                  That was the authour of those fortunate dayes.
               
               
                  And as from Douer with the prince his sonne,
                  The King of Cypres, France, and Scots did passe,
                  All captiue prisoners to this mightie one,
                  Fiue thousand men, and I the leader was,
                  All well preparde, as to defend a fort,
                  Went foorth to welcome him in martiall sort.
               
               
                  The riches of our armour, and the cost▪
                  
                  Each one bestowd in honour of that day,
                  Were here to be exprest but labour lost,
                  Silke coates and chaines of golde bare little sway.
                  And thus we marcht accepted of our King,
                  To whom our comming seemd a gracious thing.
               
               
                  But when the Citie pearde within our sights,
                  I crau'd a boune submisse vpon my knee,
                  To haue his Grace, those Kings, with Earles and knights,
                  A day or two to banquet it with me:
                  The king admirde, yet thankefully replide,
                  Vnto thy house both I and these will ride.
               
               
                  Glad was I that so I did preuaile,
                  My heart reuiud, my parts (me thought) were young,
                  
                     
For cheare and sumptuous cost no coine did faile,
                  And he that talkt of sparing did me wrong:
                  Thus at my proper charge I did retaine
                  Foure kings, one prince, and all their royalltraine.
               
               
                  Yet lo this pompe did vanish in an houre,
                  There is no trusting to a broken staffe,
                  Mans carefull life doth wither like a flower,
                  The destenies do stroy what we do graffe:
                  For all his might, my gold wherewith I pleasde,
                  Death tooke vs both and would not be appeasde.
               
               
                  Of all there now remaines no more but this,
                  What vertue got by toyling labours paine,
                  To shrine our spotlesse soules in heauenlie blisse,
                  Till to our bodies they returne againe.
                  What else we find is vaine and worthlesse drosse,
                  And greatest getting but the greatest losse.
               
               AFter that Clio had writ what this famous knight had
tolde, shee no little wondred at his modest audacitie.
Therefore she sayde this to Fame, Renowmed Goddesse
enemie to the fatall sisters, aud onely friend to the good deseruers:
it were beséeming thy excellencie to procéede altogither
with the honourable acts of these memorable men,
and onely touch their vertuous endeuours, whereunto the
Goddesse condiscended: and séeing another lift vp his head,
as if he were desirous to speake: Fame heartned him on
with smiling countenance to say as followeth.
            
            
               
               Sir William Seuenoake.
               
                  MY harmelesse byrth misfortune quite contemd,
                  And from my pappe did make my youth a pray,
                  So scarcely budd, my branches were vnstemd;
                  My byrth howre was Deathes blacke and gloomie day:
                  Had not the highest stretched forth his might
                  The breake of day had beene the darkest night.
               
               
                  Some Monster that did euie Natures worke
                  (When I was borne in Kent) did cast me foorth
                  In desert wildes, where though no Beast did lurke
                  To spoyle that life, the Heauens made forwoorth:
                  Vnder seauen Oakes yet mischiefe flung me downe,
                  Where I was found and brougha vnto a towne.
               
               
                  Behold an ebbe that neuer thought to flowe;
                  Behold a fall vnlikelie to recouer;
                  Behold ashrub, a weed, that grew full lowe;
                  Behold a wren that neuer thought to houer:
                  Behould yet how the highest can commaund,
                  And make a sand foundation firmelie stand.
               
               
                  For when my infants time induste more yeares
                  After some education in the schoole,
                  And some discretion in my selfe appeares
                  With labor to be taught with manuall toole:
                  To learne to liue, to London thus being found,
                  Apprentise to a Groser I was bound.
               
               
                  To please the honest care my master tooke,
                  I did refuse no toyle nor drudging payne,
                  
                     
My handes no labor euer yet for sooke
                  Whereby I might encrease my masters gayne:
                  Thus Seuenoake liud (for so they cald my name,)
                  Till Heauen did place mee in a better frame.
               
               
                  In time my prentise yeares were quite expirde,
                  And then Bellona in my homelie brest,
                  My Countries honour with her flames had firde,
                  And for a Souldior made my fortune prest:
                  
                     Henry the fifi my King did warre with France,
                  
                  Then I with him his right to readuance.
               
               
                  There did couragious men with loue compare
                  And striue by armes to get their Prince renowne,
                  There sillie I like thirstie soule did fare
                  To drinke their fill, would venter for to drowne:
                  Then did the height of my inhaunst desire,
                  Graunt me a little leasure to aspire.
               
               
                  The Dolphyne then of Fraunce a comelie Knight,
                  Disguised, came by chaunee into a place,
                  Where I well wearied with the heare of fight,
                  Had layd me downe (for warre had ceast his chace)
                  And with reproachfull words, as layzie swaine,
                  He did salute me ere I long had layne.
               
               
                  I knowing that he was mine enemie
                  A bragging French-man (for we tearmd them so,
                  Ill brookt the proud disgrace he gaue to me,
                  And therefore lent the Dolphyne such a blow:
                  As warmd his courage well to lay about,
                  Till he was breathlesse (though he were so stout.)
               
               
                  At last the noble Prince did aske my name,
                  My birth, my calling, and my fortunes past,
                  With admiration he did heare the same,
                  And so a bagge of crownes to me he cast:
                  
                     
And when he went away he saide to mee,
                  
                     Seauenoake be prowd the Dolphyn fought with thee.
               
               
                  When English had obtainde the victorie,
                  We crossed backe the grudging seas againe,
                  Where all my friends supposed warre to be
                  For vice and follie, virtues onelie bane:
                  But see the simple how they are deceaude,
                  To iudge that honour, Honour hath bereaud.
               
               
                  For when my Souldiors fame was laid aside,
                  To be a Grocer once againe I framde,
                  And he which rules aboue my steps did guide,
                  That through his wealth Seuenoake in time was famde
                  To be Lord Maior of London by degree,
                  Where iustice made me sway with equitie.
               
               
                  Gray haires made period vnto honours call,
                  And frostie death had furrowed in my face,
                  Colde Winter gashes, and to Sommers fall,
                  And fainting nature left my mortall place:
                  For with the date of flesh my life decayde,
                  And Seuenoake dide: (for euery flower must fade.)
               
               
                  By Testament in Kent I built a towne,
                  And briefly calde it Seuenoake, from my name,
                  A free schoole to sweete learning, to renowne
                  I placde for those that playde at honours game:
                  Both land and liuing to that towne I gaue,
                  Before I tooke possession of my graue.
               
               
                  Thither I bare my flesh, but leaue my fame,
                  To be a president for London wights,
                  And you that now beholde faire Vertues maime,
                  Thinke he is happie for his Countrey fights,
                  For, for my guerdon to this pleasant field,
                  My carkas did my dying spirit yeeld.
               
               
                  
BY that time this famous man had thus innobled his
name by telling his nature, the pitifull and louely
Muse had delated at large his eternall honour, hauing
in no part béene nigardly of his prodigall prayse: but Fame
dismissing him to his former rest, hard by a still siluer
streame that beate warbling Ecchoes into the vaultie
bankes, whereas deceassed Sea-nymphes vse to sport, pressing
his manlike paulme vpon the ground, hee bent his
comely bodie to the earth: where not as possessed with
heauinesse, but with Paradice-like ioy he safely and swéettly
reposed his comely limbes: like as the woonted Martialists
of former memorie were accustomed to doe, when returning
from hot encountred broyles, they vnbuckled
their steeld enclosures to enioy the fresh and delightsome
breath of peace. There they yt woonted to be of Pans musical
Parliament, fayre Forresters and carrolling shéepheards,
delighted, and almost inchaunted with this Champions
storie, thought to present him with some short recreation,
therefore vpon a bush of Iuniper brambles where Philomelie
had set her speckled breast, they all at once did beate
with siluer wings: then from this swéete sauouring thicket
rowsed the tripping Deare, and after them the nimble
footed Fawne, wrestling together, once ouertaken with
pleasing and delectable sport, rubbing their horned
browes vpon their sweete twined bowers, this did they do
in fauour of his birth, being cōmitted to their gouernments
before his mothers milke had made him blithe.
               This pastime put the famous Seuenoake in minde of his
beginning, how Nature first had inniciated her worke in
miserie, and ended it in miracles, not arguing herein her
vnconstant kinde, but her prouident foresight to withstand
the mischiefe of all misfortunes: and whilest Fame with
her admiring Muse was busied in posing the rest, this meritorious
man did please himselfe with this Poem.
               
                  WHere Fortune had her birth the Sunne sate downe,
                  Yet gaue no liuing glorie to the childe,
                  
                     
She grew and gaue the God a golden crowne,
                  It pleased him not, for he was euer milde:
                  Yet drew she disposition from his throne,
                  That without her no wight can moue alone.
               
               Then he betooke him to his former meditation, from
whom he was first awaked: when another knight of that
aduaunced crew, was by Fame assigned to speake, called sir
Thomas White, the Goddesse cleaped him, who lifting vp
his aged limmes, yet not decayed, sayd as followeth.
            
            
               Sir Thomas White.
               
                  
                     WHyte is my name, and milke white are my haires,
                  
                     White were my deedes, though vaine is proper praise,
                  White for my countrie were my kind affayres,
                  White was the rule that measurd all my dayes:
                  Yet blacke the mould that coutcht me in my graue,
                  By which more pure my present state I haue.
               
               
                  I cannot sing of armes and blood-redwarres,
                  Nor was my colour mixt with Mars his hew:
                  I honour those that ended Countrey iarres,
                  For therein subiects shew that they are trew.
                  But priuately at home I shewde my selfe,
                  To be no louer of vaine worldly pelfe.
               
               
                  My deedes haue tongues to speake though I surcease,
                  My Orator the learned striue to bee,
                  Because I twined paulmes in time of peace,
                  And gaue such gifts that made faire learning free:
                  My care did build them bowers of sweete content,
                  Where many wise their golden time haue spent.
               
               
                  
                  A noyse of gratefull thankes within mine eares,
                  Descending from their studies (glads my heart)
                  That I began to wish with priuate teares,
                  There liued more that were of Whites desert:
                  But now I looke and spie that time is balde,
                  And Vertue comes not, being seldome calde.
               
               
                  But sith I am awaked not to waile,
                  But to vnfolde to Fame my former life.
                  I must on forward with my single tale,
                  For sorrow will but breake the heart with strife,
                  
                     White is no warriour (as I sayd before,)
                  Nor entred euer into daungers doore.
               
               
                  The English Cities and incorporate townes,
                  Doe beare me witnesse of my Countreys care,
                  Where yearely I doe feede the poore with crownes,
                  For I was neuer niggard yet to spare,
                  And all chiefe Burrowes of this blessed land,
                  Haue somewhat tasted of my liberall hand.
               
               
                  He that did lend to me the grace of wealth,
                  Did not bestow it for to choake with store,
                  But to maintaine the needie poore in health,
                  By which expence my wealth encreased more,
                  The oyle of gladnesse euer chear'd my hart,
                  Why should I not then pitie others smart.
               
               
                  Lord Maior of London I was cal'd to bee,
                  And Iustice ballance bare with vpright hand:
                  I iudg'd all causes right in each degree,
                  I neuer partiall in the law did stand:
                  But as my name was White so did I striue,
                  To make my deedes whilest yet I was aliue.
               
               
                  But my prefixed fate had twinde my thread,
                  And White it was, and therefore best she like it,
                  
                     
She set her web within a loome of lead,
                  And with her baulme of grace she sweetly dight it:
                  And with consent her sisters gaue this grace,
                  That White should keepe his colour in this place.
               
               WHen this aged knight had peaceably (obseruing decorum
with his passed state) tolde his plame and vnpolished
tale, in all points like himselfe, clothed with the
fashion of his minde, vpon a bed of Lillies hee layde him
downe, whose colour answerable to his snowie beard, made
them take especiall delight in the simpathie of their qualitie.
Then sayde Clio, thou faire and swift foote Goddesse,
winged with the Doue, and eyed with the Eagle, let me
bee boldned (with thy fauour) to demaunde one question,
which of all this noble companie, shall next dilate his life.
Sweete Muse (quoth Fame) this knight, pointing to sir
Iohn Bonham, sometimes apprentice to a Marchant in London.
Your deitie, sayde Clio then (vnder correction) will
mistake the placing. For this gallant liued in England in
the time of Edward the first, & we are alreadie come downe
so farre as Quéene Marie. Therein, sayde Fame, wee doe
preferre their age, and the honour of their calling, before the
obseruation of time which derogates from no other course
then that which sometimes our Poets haue vsed, placing euer
the worthiest formost, as to induce the rest by example,
not to be starke for want of courage. Therefore it shall not
be vncomly or preposterous when the yonger knights shall
speake after those that bare the honour of the Maioraltie.
               This excuse wel contented the labouring Muse, who framing
her golden pen in her fingers, fixed it ready to her memoriall
leaues, whilest Fame did rouse this worthie from
his rest. A man of stature meane, in countenance milde, in
speach man-like, and in performance couragious: his beard
Abron, and his bodie bigge, and thus he began, when Fame
had giuen him caueat to speake.
            
            
               
               Sir Iohn Bonham knight.
               
                  LEt them that pull their quils from Griffons wings,
                  And dippe them in the bloud of Pagans bane,
                  Let them describe me from the brest that sings,
                  A Poem of bloudie showers of raigne:
                  And in my tale a mournefull Eleagie,
                  To such as do the lawes of God denie.
               
               
                  A gentleman I am of gentle blood,
                  A Knight my Father was, yet thought no scorne
                  To place his sonne within a prentise hood,
                  For nature will appeare as she was borne:
                  A Deuonshire man to London loe I came,
                  To learne to traffique of a Marchant man.
               
               
                  Shortelie from thence to Denmarke was I bound,
                  Well shipt with ware my master gaue in charge,
                  I deemd the water better then the ground,
                  And on the seas a man might see at large:
                  Me thought that Fortune there might flie her fill,
                  And pitch and light vpon what place she will.
               
               
                  Ariud at last, in Denmarke was I sett,
                  Where Bonham did demeane himselfe sowell,
                  That though some strangers there had pitcht a nett
                  To catch my feete, themselues therein soone fell:
                  And such dishonour dropt vpon their head,
                  As they their natiue Countrie quicklie fled.
               
               
                  My worthlesse Fame vnto the King was brought,
                  Who shewd himselfe both mild and debonare,
                  
                     
A cause of gracious kindnes still he sought,
                  And for my Countrey did commend my care:
                  And though I say it, that might better cease,
                  
                     Bonham did purchase fame, and loues encrease.
               
               
                  A vertuous Ladie, and a curteous prince,
                  This famous king vnto his daughter had,
                  Hir countenance did the baser sort conuince,
                  Yet did she bare her gently to bad:
                  Such was her beautie, such was her grace and fauour,
                  That watchfull Enuy no way could depraue her.
               
               
                  Excepting still the praise of Proserpine,
                  
                  I may a little glance vpon her grace,
                  The words shee spake did euer seeme diuine,
                  And Nature chose her alters in her face:
                  Where in the day her golden flames do burne,
                  And they that gaze shall frie except they turne.
               
               
                  There bodies once consum'd, loue tooke their soules,
                  And there satte binding them within her haire,
                  She neede not frowne, her smoothest lookes controles,
                  See how shee slayes, yet dooth the guiltlesse spare:
                  Guiltlesse they are that dare not stay so long,
                  To heare the musick of inchaunting song.
               
               
                  Should I but speake the words vnto her face,
                  Perhaps you would suppose I flatter her,
                  If so I haue too long vpheld the chace,
                  And negligentlie spard the pricking spurre:
                  In whose sweete praise I end not yet begunne,
                  Because my lame conceipt wants feete to runne.
               
               
                  Who will not iudge the brauest Denmarke Knights,
                  Will cracke their Lances in her proud defence,
                  And now by this a troope of worthie wights
                  Prepared Iustes, her beawtie to incence:
                  
                     
And vnto me vnworthie me she gaue,
                  A fauour to adorne my courage braue.
               
               
                  I know your ielouslie will iudge me nowe,
                  And say I prais'd her for her fauours sake,
                  Alas he lookes not vp, is bound to bowe,
                  A Ceader neuer springeth from a Brake:
                  
                  It pleasd her well age not displeased mee,
                  Why then should Enuie still with Honour bee.
               
               
                  They that haue guiders cannot chuse but runne,
                  Their Mistresse eyes doe learne them Chiualrie,
                  
                  With those commaunds these Turneys are begunne,
                  And shiuerd Launces in the ayre do flie:
                  No more but this, there Bonham had the best,
                  Yet list I not to vaunt how I was blest.
               
               
                  Each Knight had fauour bound to his desart,
                  And euerie Ladie lent her loue a smile,
                  There boldly did I not my selfe insert,
                  Nor secret practise did my pride compile.
                  But of her selfe the gentle Princesse gaue
                  Rewarde of Honour vnto me her slaue.
               
               
                  In fine my Masters shippe with goods were fraught,
                  And I desirous to returne agayne,
                  For all the fauours that my Fortune wrought,
                  Vnto my Masters businesse was no mayne:
                  But so occasion trusty friend to time,
                  Prepard me steps, and made mee way to clime.
               
               
                  Great Solimon the Turkish Emperor,
                  
                  Made sodaine warres against the Danish King,
                  And most vnlike a noble Emperour
                  Did spoyle and ruine to his confines bring:
                  A thing vnlike, yet truth to witnesse call,
                  And you shall finde hee made mee Generall.
               
               
                  
                  A puissant armie then was le
                        •
                     ted straight,
                  And skilfull pilars sent to guide my ship,
                  Imagin but a Christians deadly hate,
                  Against the heathen that our blood doth sip.
                  Then thinke how Bonham bent against the Turke,
                  Wrought wonders by the high almighties worke.
               
               
                  Halfe of his armie smouldred with the dust,
                  Lay slaughtred on the earth in gorie blood,
                  And he himselfe compeld to quell his lust,
                  By composition for his peoples good
                  Then at a parlie he admirde me so,
                  He made me knight, and let his armie go.
               
               
                  He gaue me costly robes, and chaines of golde,
                  And garded with his Gallies sent me backe:
                  For Fame vnto the Danish King had tolde,
                  My gotten glorie, and the Turkish wracke:
                  He gaue me gifts in guerdon of my fight,
                  And sent me into England like a knight.
               
               
                  How I was welcomd there t'were vaine to tell,
                  For shortly after life had runne his race,
                  And hither was I summoned to dwell,
                  My other fellow Worthies to embrace:
                  Thus gently borne, a Marchant by my trade,
                  And in the field Bonham a knight was made.
               
               
                  CLio with the straungenesse of this report, was wrapt so
much into admiration (both in respect of his feature,
fortune and faire tongue) as she séemed cast into a traunce,
neuer remoouing her eyes from of his youthfull face, till
Fame perceyuing her déepe cogitations, put herforth of
her dumps, by asking her why she pawsed so long, her chast
eyes (it appeared) hauing all this while séene no other but
such, whose countenance resembled winters frosts, began
now with the chearefull heate of this flowring spring, to

waxe warme with secrete working of some amorous passion
to excuse with suspition (for it stoode with her credite
not to bée faultie in any such idle toy) shee answered,
it was not the inticement of any misbeseeming phantasie
that allured her to that sodaine silence, but onelie a
kinde of conceyte shee fostered, howe it coulde be possible
that the Turke being a man of nature barbarous and cruell,
and especially towardes Christians) should nowe bee
so much mollifyed, and brought from his wonted fiercenesse,
to fauour and honour one, whome by by nature hee
loathed and detested. For what though Bonhams valour
had gotten that aduantage, as by reason and law of armes
he might inforce the Turke confesse, the safegarde of his
life depended on his clemeneie, yet since the brutishnesse
of that nature esteemeth of vertue but to serue their owne
lust and profite, I sée no argument of likelihoode, why
the Turke hauing his aduersarie in his Court, that a
little before had made him bowe, not with gentle perswasions,
bue with downe-right strokes, should not rather
bée incensed to cutte off his head, then doe him the
least good in the world: so seuere is the regarde of honour,
as rather then it will be vpbrayded with disgrace (though
that disgrace were cause of many incomparable pleasures)
no hatefull, vnnaturall, or vngratefull practise shall
be attempted, til the eyesore of their grudging heart be remoued,
and Princes if they cannot heare words, much lesse
will put vp wounds, and that was it (quoth she) that troubled
my serious Muse.
               
               As these wordes Fame began to frowne, her pacience
was prouoked, that one so well instructed in the knowledge
of such matters as shée was (her whole studie consisting
of nothing else but of ciuill discipline) should make
a doubt in so slender a contrarietie, yet to cutte off further
protraction of time, shee replyed her this resolution:
that shee was sure shée could not be ignoraunt, howe that
it was the affect of vertue that wrought such an alteration
in the Turke, which, as it is diuine, descended from

the Goddes: so it worketh beyonde the expectation of
men. And for proofe thereof, alreadie sundrie authorities
were alledged, as that of Dyonisius whose murtherous
minde coulde not but reuerence Plato, although hee
continually inueighed bitterly agaynst his tyrannie, and
that of Alexander, who loued Darius for his fortitude,
although hee was his enemie. Therefore it ought not
seeme miraculous vnto her, when vsually such accidents,
as those followe Vertues fauourites: But (quoth she) I
rather thinke you were amazed to heare such rare exploits
procéede from a Prentice, and one of no more experience:
but let not that seeme straunge, hee spake no more then
truth, nor all that might be sayd concerning his ha
                     •
                  htie
endeuours: the other foure whom you see on his left hand,
will (if you seeme incredulous) confirme a possibilitie in
his speaches: they are of the like condition and qualitie as
he was, prentices that purchased estimation by the sworde.
Clio blushed that shee had beene so inquisitiue: but as it
may be coniectured, it was not so much for her owne satisfaction,
as to take away hereafter all controuersie, and
néedlesse cauillation as might concurre by the curious view
of such as shoulde fortune to haue the reading of her
lines. By this sir Iohn Bonham had coucht himselfe againe
in the bedde of his secure rest, when another gay knight,
sterne in his lookes, and strong set in his limmes, carying
in his browes the picture of Mars, and in his maners the
maiestie of a Prince, with a lowe salutation made himselfe
knowne by this briefe oration.
            
            
               Sir Christopher Croker knight
of London Vintner.
               
                  IT is not birth that makes a man renownde,
                  Nor treasures store that purchaseth our fame,
                  
                     
Bigge words are but an emptie vessels found,
                  And death is better then a life with shame.
                  This proueth Croker in his trauailes made,
                  Of London once a Vintner by his trade.
               
               
                  In Gracious-streete there was I bound to serue,
                  My masters name hight Stodie in his time,
                  From whom in dutie I did neuer swarue,
                  Nor was corrupted with detested crime:
                  My education taught me so to liue,
                  At by my paines my maisters purse might thrine.
               
               
                  My fellow seruants lou'd me with their hearts;
                  My friends reioyc'd to see me prosper so,
                  And kind Doll Stodie (though for small deserts)
                  On me vouchsaft affection to bestow:
                  Whose constancie was such that for her sake,
                  No toyle was grieuous I did vndertake.
               
               
                  Such was my state as I my selfe could wish,
                  Deuoid of care, not toucht with egr
                        •
                      want,
                  My sleepe secure, my foode choise bewties dish,
                  Onely in this my pleasure seemed scant,
                  That I vnable was her state to raise,
                  That was the lengthner of my happie dayes.
               
               
                  Whilst thus I was perplexed owth that thought,
                  Behold how Fortune fauourde my desire,
                  Of sodaine warres the ioyfull newes was brought,
                  And Edward ayde of Souldiers did require,
                  Amongst the rest it fell vnto my chaunce,
                  That I was prest to follow him to Fraunce.
                  
               
               
                  My master would haue sewd for my discharge,
                  His daughter with her teares gan me assaile,
                  On euery side they prayd and promist large,
                  But nothing could in that respect preuaile:
                  
                     
Such thirst of honour spurd my courage on,
                  I would to warres although I went alone.
               
               
                  My forwardnesse perceyu'd, my valour knowne,
                  Ouer a band of Souldiors I was chiefe,
                  Then sproute the seedes that were but lately sowne,
                  My longing soule had quickly found reliefe:
                  I sparde no cost, nor shrunke for any paine,
                  Because I ment my Loue should reape the gaine.
               
               
                  To proue my faith vnto my Countries stay,
                  And that a prentice (though but small esteemd,)
                  Vnto the stoutest neuer giueth way,
                  If credite may by triall be redeemd:
                  At Burdeaux siege when other came too late,
                  I was the first made entrance through the gate.
               
               
                  And when Don Peter driuen out of Spaine,
                  By an vsurping Bastard of his line,
                  He crau'd some helpe his crowne to reobtaine,
                  That in his former glorie he might shine:
                  Our king ten thousand seuerd from his host,
                  My selfe was one, I speake it not in boast.
               
               
                  With these Don Peter put the Bastard downe,
                  Each Citie yeelded at our first approch,
                  It was not long ere he had got the crowne,
                  And taught his wicked brother to encroch:
                  In these affaires so well I shewd my might,
                  That for my labour I was made a knight.
               
               
                  Thus labour neuer looseth his reward,
                  And he that seekes for honour sure shall speed,
                  What crauen mind was euer in regard?
                  Or where consisteth manhood but in deed?
                  I speake it that confirmd it by my life,
                  And in the end Doll Stodie was my wife.
               
               
                  
This Worthie hauing finished his taske sette downe by
Fame, to confirme the order of his first honour, reposed
himselfe amongst the rest, where he found a sweete murmuring
of priuate and secrete conference what had passed
by the seuerall annotations of euerie ones prayse, where
they beganne (contemning the order of enuie) to colaude
the endeuours of one anothers actions, none particularly
arrogating in arrogancie the prayse of himselfe, to him that
did most, they gaue most applause, and so swéetly concorded
in simpathie, that all the Elesian harmonie might haue
liberally commended their conditions: the hushing riuers
were caulme without murmur or contempt: the leaues stood
still to admire these famous enterprises, and excellent atchieuements:
the windes bound themselues vp in the contentation
of voluntarie stilnesse, that they might be at libertie
to hearken to these meritorious men, and yeelded them
praise condescending to their paines. The Goddesse of
darknesse (for enuie approched not the place, so that it was
by that meanes continually day) whereby the Sunne was
euer glorious in the pride of his height without grudging
or any shew of declining: the bright shining of whose alluring
countenance inticed another up, called sir Iohn Haukwood,
or sit Iohn Sharpe, from the Italians, Iohn Acute, and
from thence indéed he brought backe into England both his
name and his noblenesse. The pictures of his renowne, for
as an emblem of endlesse honour, the Venecians wrought
vnderneath his stature, set vp in the citie, Giouanno Acuto
Caualiero. This Iohn Haukwood knight, he liued likewise
in the time of Edward the third, that Prince of famous memorie:
when he plesantly looked about him, being a man
of a most couragious countenance, and an ingenious nature,
thus he beganne to speake, as who should say he had
wrong to be deferred so long.
            
            
               
               Sir Iohn Haukwood knight.
               
                  WHo knowes my ofspring, doth not know my prime,
                  Who knowes my birth, perhaps will scorne my deedes,
                  My valour makes my vertue more then slime,
                  For that suruiues though I weare deaths pale weedes:
                  Ground doth consume the carkas vnto dust,
                  Yet cannot make the valiants armour rust.
               
               
                  After that eighteene yeares had toucht my head.
                  Being a Printice boy in Lumbard streete,
                  
                  A Taylor by my trade, and I had lead
                  A few wilde yeares for striplings farre vnmeete:
                  A Souldior I was prest to serue in Fraunce,
                  
                  The Prince of Wales mine honour to inhaunce.
               
               
                  I serude as priuate souldiour for a while,
                  Till courage made me greedie of renowne,
                  And causde me giue a noble man the foile,
                  That though with sturdie Launce did beare me downe,
                  On foot that day my selfe did keepe in chace,
                  Some worthie knights that feard to shew their face.
               
               
                  That day the Prince of Wales surnamde the blacke,
                  Did mount me on a gallant English steed.
                  Where I bestirde me so vpon his backe,
                  That none incountred me that did not bleed,
                  It was not I, nor Fortune, nor my fate,
                  His hand it was that seldome helpes to late.
               
               
                  His be the honour then, and his the prayse,
                  Yet haue I leaue to speake what Haukwood did,
                  When noble Edward had disperst the rayes,
                  And by his prowes of the French was rid.
                  
                     
Three more then If my selfe did make the fourth)
                  The gentle Princes then du
                        ••
                      knights of worth.
               
               
                  His knights he tearmd 
                        •
                     s still amongst the rest,
                  And gaue vs honour fitting our estate,
                  For England to be bound it seemd him best,
                  Because the French had swallowed Edwards baite:
                  I tooke my leaue, and begged on my knee,
                  That I might wander other parts to see.
               
               
                  The Prince inkindled with my honours heate▪
                  
                  Discharging me, bestowde on me a chaine,
                  For still fresh courage on my heart did beate,
                  Which made me loue, and womens acts refraine▪
                  
                  Hearing the Duke of Millaine was distrest,
                  To Italie my voyage their was prest.
               
               
                  The Seas I quickly past, and came to shore,
                  With me were fifteene hundred English men,
                  We marcht to Millaine walles, where we had more
                  Of other nations to conioyne with them,
                  There did the Italians tearme me Iohn Acute▪
                     
                  
                  Because I had their foes in such pursute.
               
               
                  Castels and towers I had for my reward,
                  And got enough to pay my men withall:
                  But I to hired pay had no regarde,
                  That prickt me on which climbs the highest wall,
                  
                     Honour and Fame, whereof they gaue me store,
                  Which made me more audacious then before.
               
               
                  
                     Millaine thus peac'd, the Pope oppressed Spaine,
                  
                  Then thither was I sent to quell his pride:
                  Which being done I did returne againe,
                  And stoopt with age, in Padua Palace did▪
                  
                  And he that yet will heare of Iohn Acute.
                  
                  In Millaine shall not find the people 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  All warres you see do ende as well as peace,
                  And then remaineth but a tumbe of dust,
                  A voyce of Fame, a blacke and mourning hearce,
                  To what then may we like this worldly lust:
                  It is an euill vapouring smoke that fumes,
                  Breaths in the braine, and so the life consumes.
               
               WHen sir Iohn Haukwood had boldly presumed by
Fames authoritie to speake, be layde him dawne like
one that wreaked no guerdon for this grace, but as if Nature
brought him foorth of dutie to performe these deedes.
So ought euery martiall minde imagine, that he is borne
for his Countrey, as the custome of the ancient and famous
Romains was in all their actions, to studie to redounde the
honour of their déedes to their Countrey. If this were ambition
and pride, it would be laid flat in the dust, magnanimitie
extolled to the highest tip of dignitie, and such a sweet
concord and vnitie amongst men, that be would be counted
most happie that liued longest, for the profite of his friend:
when sit Iohn Haukwood of this perfection of minde had
layde him downe againe, another of the same stampe called
sir Hugh Caluerley, as little ambitious as his fellowe,
and as resolute in euerie degrée, arose, looking about him,
being ignoraunt what to doe: but Fame iogging him on
the elbowe soone awaked him from his maze, whose suppose
was his desert, which made him couet to bee obsurde.
Therefore the Goddesse was faine to antimate him
on further, before he would be perswaded to speake. Gentle
he was and full of humanitie, insomuch that hee might
haue wunne all the powers of that place to admire the
basenesse of his profession being a weauer. But they that
haue honour harbouring in their breasts, cannot but giue
him the right of his due, except the traine of enuie see vpon
the traine of honour, as commonly it doth if it do see he that
shal for himselfe, and appeale to the most precise, whose
wits being more busie then beautified with moral maners,
thrust boldly, yet ignorantly vpon the well trained sort, approching

famous perswasion he began as sodainly as hee
arose sodainly, as if now life had newly reuiued, began to
breath this gentle breath from out his mouth.
            
            
               Sir Hugh Caluerey knight.
               
                  WHo feares to swim a riuer dreads the sea,
                  But he that's best resolu'd dare venture both,
                  The greatest lumpe doth not the greatest die,
                  Base mettals to compare with golde are loth:
                  And why my quiet wit refraines to speake,
                  Is this because the tallest ship may leake.
               
               
                  In England late yong Cauerley did liue,
                  Silke-weauers honour merited by deedes,
                  In forraine broyles continually I striue
                  Of lasting memorie to sow the seedes:
                  As by experience they in Poland may
                  Expresse my English valour euery way.
               
               
                  After my Princes seruice done in France,
                  
                  I was entreated to the Polish King,
                  Where as the Frizeland horse doth breake the launce,
                  And tamelesse beasts a valiant race doth bring:
                  There Maximilian hunted with his Lords,
                  Entangling mankind Beares in toyling cords.
               
               
                  There did I bring a Boare vnto the bay,
                  That spoyld the pleasant fields of Polonie,
                  
                  And ere the morning parted with her gray
                  The foming beast as dead as clay did lie:
                  The Ladies cheekes lookt red with chearefull blood,
                  And I was much commended for that good.
               
               
                  
                  Some sayd I looked like Olympian Ioue,
                  
                  When as he crackt in two the Centaurs bow,
                  As swiftly footed as the God of Loue,
                  Or greene Syluanus when he chast the Roe:
                  They brought me crownes of Lawrell wreathd with gold,
                  The sweet and daintiest tongues my prayses told.
               
               
                  These fauours fronted me with courage frowne,
                  That like the yong Alcides I did looke,
                  When he did lay the greedie Lion downe.
                  No beast appeard when I the woodes forsooke,
                  So that the King supposd I was some wight,
                  Ordaind by heauen to expell their flight.
               
               
                  In scarlet and in purple was I clad,
                  And golden buskins put vpon my feete,
                  A casket of the richest pearles I had,
                  And euery Noble gently did me greete.
                  So with the King I rode vnto the court,
                  Where for to see me many did resort.
               
               
                  At Iustes I euer was the formost man,
                  In field still forward, Fame can witnesse it,
                  And Cauerley at tilt yet neuer ran,
                  But foming Steed so champed on the bit:
                  But still my horse his masters valour shewd,
                  When through my Beavir I with heat had blood.
               
               
                  Yet men of armes, of wit, and greatest skill,
                  Must die at last when deaths pale sisters please,
                  But then for honour Fame remaineth still,
                  When dead delights in graue shall find their ease:
                  Ye long to know the truth in Fraunce I d
                        ••
                     e,
                  When from the valiant Polands I did ri
                        ••
                     .
               
               
                  Now honour let me lay me downe againe,
                  And in thy pillow rest my wearie head,
                  
                     
My passed prayse commaunds my soule remaine,
                  Wheerin these rosie bowers, with sweet dew fed:
                  Though I was valiant, yet my guiltlesse blood,
                  In crueltie of warre I neuer stood.
               
               THus this aduenturous Martialist hauing exprest the
zeale of his conscience towards his Countrey, the toyle
and labour hee sustained to better the tredite of his first calling,
and the perils he waded through to patronage the ancient
name of Citizens, he reposed himselfe againe downe
by the sides of his noble warre-fellowes.
               Thus Fame and Clio (the one hauing marked his amiable
partes and knightly gesture, the other delineated with her
pen the eloquence of his oratour-like Oration) questioning
togither some fewe poynts, concerning the force of valour,
& the vertuous inclination of many obscure persons,
that although they like sepultured (as it were) without regarde,
yet if oportunitie fitte them to reuiue their courage,
will (like the Diamond racked out of clay) excell, or at least
compare with the brightnesse of glories. Rarest iewels
concluded that there was no pernition but by vertue, no
climbing to honour but by Fortitude, and none base, abiect
and ignoble but the vicious slouthfull, & faintharted milkesops.
They were not wearyed, nor séemed these former
knights tales tedious vnto them, although many would
thinke it a paine to bee tied to the hearing of so large a circumstance,
and verie few but would exclaime it were plaine
slauerie to write such and so many seuerall conceytes from
the mouthes of the speakers. Yet such was their desire to
publish these mens deserts, and the delight they tooke to sée
the increase spring of the seedes of vertue, for they would
not take the finallest recreation, till euery one of the nine
had fully finished their discourses, and therefore they attended
when the last would breath the secrets of his breast.
               This was a Printice as the rest, and a Grocer, sometime
dwelling in Cornehill, his face was not effeminate, or his
parts of a slender or weake constitution, but by his lookes

be seemed couragious, and in the height, strength▪ and faire
proportion of his body, victorious. Thus being in al points
armed like a champion, the verie aspect of his outwarde abite,
made semblance both of manhood and curtesie, wisedome
and valour, knit in such a simpathie of opmyeration, that
be séemed as much to bee loued for peace, as praysed for
prowes: and thus with a voyce neyther too meane like a
child, nor too big like a gyant, but indifferent betwixt both,
he spake as followeth.
            
            
               Henry Maleueret Grocer, surnamed
Henrie of Cornhill.
               
                  
                     A Precious cause hath still a rare effect,
                  And deedes are greatest when the daungers most,
                  It is no care that trauels dooth neglect,
                  Nor loue that hath respect to idle cost:
                  A Bramble neuer bringeth forth a Rose,
                  Where fields are fruitfull there the Lillie growes.
               
               
                  By this coniecture what may be the end,
                  Of his defensiue force that fought for Christ,
                  It is no common matter if we spend
                  Both life and goods in quarrell of the hiest:
                  The least desert dooth merit his reward,
                  And best employde should haue not worst regard.
               
               
                  No vaine presumption followes my deuise,
                  For of my actions t'is in vaine to boast,
                  Yet with the Pagans I encountred twise▪
                  
                  To winne againe faire Sion that was lost:
                  Vnto which warre I was not forst to go,
                  T'was honours fire that did incense me so.
               
               
                  
                  For when the Iewes opprest with heathens pride,
                  Of Christian princes craude some friendly ayd,
                  In euery Countrey they were flat denide
                  Saue that in England here their sute preuailde:
                  Such was the furie of intestiue strife,
                  All Europe sought to spoyle each others life.
               
               
                  And as in London there was order tane
                  To make prouision for the holy land,
                  My youthfull mind that fearde no forraine bane,
                  Was so admirde by might of conquering hand:
                  As for a single combate they did see,
                  Th'ambassadours made speciall choyse of mee.
               
               
                  Then for the Tankerd I did vse to beare
                  And other things belonging to mine art,
                  Mine hand did weeld Bellonas warlike speare,
                  For I was armde in steele to play my part:
                  A long we went to beard our daring foes,
                  That soone were queld with terrour of our blowes.
               
               
                  I neuer left the field, nor slept secure,
                  Vntill I sawe Hierusalem regainde,
                  To watch and labour I did still endure,
                  What ist that diligence hath not obtainde?
                  Yet grudging enuie valour to deface▪
                  
                  By treasons malice brought me indisgrace.
               
               
                  The good that I had done was cleane forgot,
                  Ingratitude preuailde agaynst my life,
                  And nothing then but exile was my lot,
                  Or else abide the stroke of fatall knife:
                  For so the ruler of the Iewes concluded,
                  His Grace by 
                        〈◊〉
                      reports was much deluded.
               
               
                  There was no striuing in a forraine soyle,
                  I tooke it patient though t'were causelesse done,
                  
                     
And to auoyde the staine of such a foyle,
                  That slaunderous tongues had wickedly begunne,
                  Where to the holy well of Iacobs name,
                  I found a caue to shroude me from their blame.
               
               
                  And though my bodie were within their power,
                  Yet was my minde vntouched of their hate.
                  The valiant faint not, though that fortune lower,
                  Nor are they fearefull at controlling fate:
                  For in that water none could quench their thirst,
                  Except he ment to combate with me first.
               
               
                  By that occasion for my pleasures sake,
                  I gaue both Knights and Princes heauie strokes,
                  The proudest did presume a draught to take
                  Was sure to haue his passeport seald with knocks:
                  Thus liu'd I till my innocence was knowne,
                  And then returnde, the king was pensiue growne.
               
               
                  And for the wrong which he had offerd me,
                  He vowde me greater friendship than before,
                  My false accusers lost their libertie,
                  And next their liues, I could not chalenge more:
                  And thus with loue, with honour, and with fame,
                  I did returne to London whence I came.
               
               THis valerous champion (hauing here made an end)
bowed himselfe. Then Fame with her owne hand gently
laid his head vpon a soft downy pillow wrought with
gold, and set with pearle, and so leauing him and the rest
to the happinesse of their swéete sléepe, commanded Clio to
claspe vp the booke, wherein she had wri
                     •••
                   the deedes of
these nine Worthies, and as her leysure 
                     〈◊〉
                   her 
                     〈◊〉
                   publish
it to the viewe of the world, the 
                     〈…〉
                   read
their honourable actions, and take exam
                     •••
                   vp them to follow
vertue, and aspire to honour, and the rather (quoth she)
because I would haue malicious mindes that enuye at the

deserts of noble Citizens, by proofe of these mens worthinesse
to repent their contempt, and amend their captious
dispositions, séeing that from the beginning of the world,
and in all places of the world, Citizens haue flourished and
béene famous, as in Rome, Caesar, in Athens, Themistocles,
and in Carthage, Hannibal, with an infinite number more,
that were by byrth Citizens, vp nature martiall, and by industrie
renowned: and so they departed from Elisian:
and within a while after, Clio according to the
charge was giuen her, sent forth
this pamphlet of her
Poems.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   