
      
         
            
            
            A
Remembrance of the
Honors due to the Life and Death
of ROBERT Earle of Salisbury,
Lord Treasurer of England, &c.
            
            Imprinted at London for Iohn Wright, and are to
be sold at his shop neere Christ
Church doore. 1612.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧To the honoured belouers of
the well deseruing worth of the late
deceased Robert Earle of Salisbury, Vicount Cranborne,
Baron of Essindon, principall Secretary to
his Maiestie, Maister of the Court of wardes and
Liueries, Chancelor of the Vniuersity of Cambridge,
Knight of the noble order of the Garter,
and one of his Highnesse most honorable priuy
Councell.
            
               IN the height of admiration (which
my thoughts conceiued of the deserued
worth of this late deceased
nobleman) I imagined many deseruedly
boūd to offer to his name, signes of loue
and duty in a high measure, which I now find
contrary: Schollers I see (in these euill dayes)
giue no luster to Nobillity, but neclegently
suffer their renownes to consume with
their bodies, the pens of long lasting poesie,
writes not in times fore-head, vertues records
to posterity, but carelesly giues way to enuy
(that canker-worme to greatnesse) to eate out
all remembrance of mortallitie: some (I

know) will controulingly censure, and giue
sentence of this my ouer-bold presumption,
a taske more befitting a most excellent Artist,
but the reason of this my bold aduenture
is, because I see the Muses lippes lockt
vp, and all loath to enter into the discription
of his honorable liues pilgrimage: be as it bee
will, I stand patiently armed against the biting
scoffes of selfe-conceited wits, with this reasonable
excuse, I confesse ignorance, and with
all giue them thus to vnderstand, I neuer tasted
one drop of Parnassus fountaine, but yet
care added to industrious trauells is able to
performe matters of importance, your high
worth may Iudge of my meaning, my loue to
the deceased begot this boldnesse, therefore
for his sake (whom you honored in life time)
daine to affoord one cheerefull countenance
to my humble affection, for I stand like poore
blind Irus before the worlds lottery, casting in
my lots either of good or euill fortune, where
if I chance to light but vpon any reasonable
prize of good liking, I haue my desire, but if

all happen blankes, I depart ouer-loaden with
burthens of discontent to my rustick cell, and
their pining lye consum'd away in penance
for this my presumption: so in duty I kisse
my hand, and humbly take my leaue.
            
               Richard Jhonson.
            
         
         
            
            To the world.
            IF in the depth of my intyre affection, long borne
to the honored house of the Cecils, I take vpon me
plainely to set downe, according to my simple vnderstanding,
the honorable augmented dignities of
the late deceased Earle of Salisbury, and therin offend
some peremtory censurers, I lay the fault vpon my
presuming loue, and make it my priuiledge of excuse.
The temporizing world (I know) full of enuy, ingratitude
& vnkindnesse, hath nursed vp fame-killing
falshood (the greatest enemy to naked truth) (not valewing
true worth) clamerously to wrong this desertfull
statist, by detracting from his honor, times
applauding graces, a cankering deisease (after death)
subiect to greatnesse: but let blacke mouthed enuy be
of a more fauorable carriage, for inocent truth before
the worlds broad eye stands combatant, and will asuredly
defend, his honorable deseruings from his greatest
disparrages, Fame I see stands ready prest to giue
the world notice of his worlds late aduancements,
first, he had a time, a happy time, I may say, when desert
in his prime of youth, won him a multitude of honorable
friends, to continew to his age: for beeing
(euen but in the bloome) of a vertuous inclination,
he so tyed his Princes affection to his succeeding preferments,
that hee obtayned by instruction of his father
the Lord William Burleigh the perfect rules of a
well gouerned Statist. Now heare to make a short
florish how by degrees hee climbed to the top of all
these his high dignified titles and places of honour,
he thus fortunatly proceeded: first vnto the age of sixteene
yeares, he was onely tutord vnder his father and
in his fathers house, without any other education: at

which time of his age, by his virtuous mothers will
and free guift, of thirty pounds yearely giuen to a colledge
in Cambridge, he was sent in person to carry it,
and be the presentor of the same him-selfe, where at
that young age he commenced, according to the order
of schooles, and was made maister of Art, after
this, in short time, by the fauour of Queene Elizabeth
hee was in the presence of the state royall, created
Knight at Theobalds, and immediatly to his greater
aduancements, in the yeare of our Lord. 1588.
hee was sent ouer into France to accompany our
then English Ambassador, Henry the great Earle of
Darby, a grace fitting so noble a spirit as he was like
to be, Englands buisinesse there ended, hee returned
and in short time after, merited by his wel deseruing
indeuours, many court honours, as vnder Secretary to
Queene Elizabeth then principal Secretary of Estate,
then one of the Queenes Maiesties most honorable
priuy Councell, these dignified places, in the eye of
his honored father, were put vnto his charge, which
hee so wisely caried, that hee obtained euen the common
grace of the multitude, in which authorities he
bore himselfe in the worlds equall balance, till the
death of his father, and then it pleased his gratious
Mistresse Queene Elizabeth, to bestow vpon him the
office of the Maister of Wards and liueries, which hee
inioyed with the rest, till the death of his said Soueraigne:
but our now royall King, comming to this
his Imperiall kingdome, and looking into the worth
of this man, weakned not any of these his aduancements,
but added more strength to the same, by creating
him, first, a Barron, next a Vicecount, then an

Earle, then Knight of the honorable order of the Garter,
one of the Councell of Estate, and lastly Lord
High treasurer of England, the greatnesse of which
places, planted His renowne in the feelds of succeeding
times. I must not ouerpasse his Chancellorship
of the Vniuersity of Cambridge, that nurse of witdecking
schollors, whose learned pens might let the
world know all his fame worthy actions, but time I
see proues vngratefull, and would haue his memory
buryed in forgetfulnesse. Awake sluggish muses, awake!
In his life might thousands of noble obiects befound
wherein your noble spirits might towre high:
It is a task onely fitting rare pens, and not for me, the
worst of many thousands, to giue him that immortallity,
which the basenesse of this worthlesse time will
hardly afford, honour him, kind schollers, with some
sonnets that liuing honored you, and cause him to
liue, in dispight of repining fate, This is the richest
Epithite my loue can bestow vpon him, he was borne
honorable, experience made him wise, educatiō learned,
and these were his honors, yet his cares were
great to maintaine them. He alwaies tooke nerest into
his fauours such as were best aquainted with wisdoms
secrets, I am loath to be long in my induction,
least you grow weary, therefore I heare make my period,
Wishing you to be contented, with my willingnesse
to please.
            
               Richard Ihonson.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Commemoration and Rights,
due to the life and death, of the Right
Honourable, Robert, Earle of Salisbury,
late deceased, Lord high Treasurer of
England, and one of his Maiesties
most honorable priuie
Councell.
            
               THe originall of Nobility, may well bee
compared to a small spring of water,
whose good desert makes a gratefull
King to inlarge to a great Riuer, for
the which hee is bound to pay duty to
the said King his Ocean, not vnfitly aplyed
to the late deceased noble personage,
Robert Earle of Salisbury, for that all his Springs
and currants were so well ordered, that they paid their
full due to the royall Ocean of his two Soueraignes,
Quéene Elizabeth of famous memory, and our now liedge
Lord and monarch King Iames of great Brittain: For euen
both of them by a singular Judgment, inspired from God
aboue, cast not onely an eye-sight but an in-sight into the
behauiour and carriage of this man, vpon whom God had
bestowed in all his actions a deseruing wisdom, in regard
whereof they both gratiously bestowed vpon him many
roomes of honor, but especially our now suruiuing & oueraigne,
who being a most prudent prince, retayned an inward
examination of the strength and habillitie of his
Judgment, concerning publick causes, wherewith he was
plentifully inriched, and indued with the treasure of state-vnderstanding,
as for example, he is a right Noble man,
that ascends to the titles of Nobilitie, by vertuous actions

merited, which is the calling that dignifieth greatnesse: It
is not the rich reuenues, faire possessions▪ pleasant houses,
many Lordships, and infinite riches, that can make a noble
man, (all are externall actions, and subiect to the sodaine
change of fortune▪) but to be wise, temperate, and discréete
in all the actions of his life and conuersation: One vertuous
exploit is not sufficient to make a m
                  •
               n to be accompted
euer after noble, but a cont
                  •
               nuance in the same nor is euery
one that liueth vertuously, forth-with a Noble man, or
a Gentleman: but he onely whose vertue is profitable to
his King and countrey, and th
                  •
               se and such like men, his
Maiesty, by a secret in-sight of knowledge, estéemeth worthy
to beare coates of armes, and in his meere affections
vouchsafeth to giue them the inioy
                  •
               ng of diuerse honorable
priuiledges, for seruices done to his highnesse and
the kingdome: coates of armes▪ thus gamed, rema
                  •
               ne
vnto their off-spring, to incite them, neuer to be weary of
well deseruing, and doth not only teach to follow ancestors
but also to guide successors; for William Lord Burleigh,
Lord Treasurer to Quéene Elizabeth, and Father to this
Honorable Earle deceased, was the first spring of this
house graced, on whose life, spent in the benefit of his country,
may bee a subiect for all writers to excercise their
pregnant wits on, and imploy their learned hands. The
second assay of this houses honor, was partly by imitation,
for vnder the wise, and state-experienced tutelage of the
famous Councellor William Lord Burleigh before named,
the late deceased Earle (his sonne) had his education,
and vnder his wing sucked the Milke of deepe vnderstanding:
by which helpe he so temp
                  •
               red himselfe, that all his
actions seemed to tend to nought but honor, vertuou
                  •
               ly
snatching at it, euen in his infancie: and as the vertuous
children of Nobility, are the hopefull plants of a commonweale,
so his youth (by his Fathers carefull instructions)
tempered with wisdome, promised succesfull honor, for
hauing attained scarce to the yeares of man, and newly

entred into the world but his quality drew him into the
knowledge of the world, his noble towardnesse begot him
estimation and that estimation extended into the assured
hope of succéeding greatnesse: for by a secret instinct of nature,
helpt by continuall practise, taken from the councell of
his Father, became so ready and apt in state imploiments,
that he séemed to be like fish in the sea, in propper place: by
which meanes, his wise-regarding Princesse Quéene Elizabeth,
in her time, and in his Fathers dayes gaue him
the first step to aduancement, made him her principall Secretarie,
and a Counceller of estate, a burthen of high
charge, but eased with the swéet imbracements of dignity:
Béeing setled in this his first honorable place, his opinion
began to haue some scope and liberty, and by the generall
consent of the wisest States-men, obserued conuenient
for this calling and office, in the managing of publick businesses,
which was not dispatched without much care
and contemplatiue study: but héere marke the protection
of heauen ouer this man, whose forward spring had béene
mixt with times biting malice, had not an equality in carriage
guided him, for in his first grace he was not onely depriued
of his fathers helpe by death, which was the conducter
of his nature and fortunes, but also lost his deare
and gratious Mistresse Quéene Elizabeth, in whose life
consisted all his honors and earths happinesse. Those two
great losses had béene sufficient euen to haue curbd the forwardnesse
of all these his noble preferments, by the deuouring
téeth of enuy, which vpon sundry supposit
                  •
               ons, was
(euen then) whetted to make hauock of all his fortunes,
here was his wisdom tride vpon the tutch, the world & time
grew vnconstant, began to pick quarrels, misdeemd honest
actions, and inuented false informations, yet was his
cares so watchfull, that he saued himselfe from the subtilest
snare of secret enuy.
            At this time the good Phisition, and saluer of all sores,
our most gracious and prudent King possessing his royall
rights, the whole state of England, and the gouernment

thereof, came to this his owne Kingdome with such magnificence,
as all Christendome admired if, here being setled
with peace to the great ioy of vs all, with his cléere and
pure shining iudgement, he qualified all occasions of discontent,
seuering drosse from pure gold, sollid pearles from
liquid hailestones, manacles from bracelets, businesses of
trouble, from imployments of honor, and like a perfect
Phisition applied precious salues to euery sore of the common
wealth, adding honor vppon honour according to desert
and calling: Amongst many others in the ranke of nobility,
graced by time and fortune, this late deceased Earle
of Salisbury, by his wise carriage and honorable accomplishments,
(which here we omit) begot such an entier respect
and inducing opinion of worth in the Kings regardfull
mind, that his honors of estate, by degrées came to the
height, first (not disparaging his former graces giuen by
Quéene Elizabeth (but adding more luster to his bright
spreading fortunes) it pleased the Kings Maiesty, whose
wise and gentle disposition is to aduance the desertfull,
first to giue him the honorable title of a Uiscount, then of an
Earle, with many other promotions and offices of greatnesse
and charge, of the which he returned contentfull satisfaction
to his King and his contry, and likewise being
a councellor of estate to his highnesse, attending neere his
royall person, offered vp his hearts trust in professed and
true loyalty, as the secrets of many court businesses can
verifie: processe of time, and his highnesse fauour, lifted him
higher in his contries graces, for at last he was created
Knight of the honorable order of the Garter, and to conclude
greatnesse was made Lord high Treasurer of England,
an Office of Estate answerable to his ingenious
iudgment.
            It was the Lord which gouernd all those his actions, & stil
instructed his mind in the right way of preferment, it was
the Lord that plast him in authority, in these honored offices,
to do right vnto all men without respect of persons,

which waighty burthens thus laid vppon him, he carefully
discharged, and with great wisedome dispatched all
state businesses put vnto him, to the great ease of his royall
soueraigne, and comfort of his contry: he still remembred
what he was, wher he was, & what he should come to
be, & hauing a continuall care of his high establisht honors,
with the eyes of wisdome he gouerned his family, and retainers
about him, where if hee saw sheltred vnder his
wing any deceitfull Parasite, any male-contented mutener,
any murmuring whisperer, any infringer of honesty,
ambitious oppressor, or vnmercifull briber: if hee found
any such about him, he swept them away like Cob-webs,
because they were consuming cankers to his honours,
bloud-suckers of his estate, and betrayers of his prosperitie.
            Thus purging his house of these pestiferous 
                  •
               uilr, hee
intertained men of truth, and placed about him such in office,
as feared God and loued the King: Oh thou mirror
to succéeding times, thou hast left thy well gouerned quallities
an example to posterity, and a neuer decaying ornament
to all thy off-spring: But againe to our purpose: vertue
was his lifes guide, and in his brest both Artes and
law reposed, all his chiefest and principall indeuors were
exercised in such actions, as aduanced the glory of Gods
truth, the peace, the quiet, and the prosperity of the common-wealth,
and surely, that Nobleman, thus affected to
his coun
                  •
               ries good, is in a right way to the attaining of a
good estimation, grace and fauour with all men, as well
Prince and Péeres, as the common sort of people.
            In like sort, this ground-worke of our subiect, I
meane, this deceased Councellor of estate, fixed his whole
resolution in the like purchase, vsing no indirect meanes,
but confined himselfe within the bounds of reason and
wisdom, from the which hee did not start nor stray, either
for the loue of his owne priuate profit or pleasure, nor for
the feare of purchasing any other subiects displeasure, hee

neuer vsed sinister meanes, to wring and wrest away other
mens estates, nor deuised too gréedy taxations to impouerish
the country, he enuyed no mans prosperity, nor
maligned the honorable purchasers of his Princes fauours
neither pr
                  •
               ed into any mens fautes such as hurt not, or disturbd
not the quiet of the state, but was sorry when any
traytorus plot was wrought against his Princes safety,
or the peace of the common-wealth, and had an honorable
regard to men of high place and calling: Not-with-standing
all this there be some ignoble spirits, I meane the
common monster with many heads, which seekes by scandalous
speeches, to moue all his former fame, and to mipe
the remembrance of his credit from the br
                  •
               w of the kingdome,
but surely in my mind it can be no other but the poysonous
plots and deuises of rebellious Papists to take away
the deserued honors of his name: The deuouring téeth
of such wicked Uipers, the Papists I meane, which seeks
to eate out the bowelle of this their natiue country, long
hath his 
                  •
               illigence labored to beat forth, and many of them
hath his wisdome and god-speeding pollicy discouered,
abating the swelling pride, enuy, and sedition of these hatchers
of vnnaturall treasons, and brought them all to a
swift distruction, giuing them titles of the worlds scandals,
wh
                  •
               n their liues were smothered vp in a helples repentance:
These in my opinion be the asured libellors, but
l
                  •
               t enuy spit her gall, malice her poyson, and hell it selfe open
her gates to let out furies for this accursed sla
                  •
               der, vertue
and time will outweare it, and con
                  •
               ecrate his noble
life to lasting memory, for the opinion of the world is setled
in his deserued commendation, England his natiue
country, the seate of his aduancements, can witnesse the
contrary: w
                  •
               o can but aplause his wisdome? Neighboring
France affords him high deserued praise, whereas in Ambasage
in the raigne of Quéene Elisabeth hee performed the
honorable actions of a wise and well gouerned states man:
for the good of Holland, Zeland Brabant, and those low

country prouinces, Englands associats, hath his perswasions
with his prince preuailed, & they obta
                  •
               ned men & mony.
Ierland ouer-burdened with vntam
                  •
               d rebells, hath beene
like-wise succored through his councells, and cherisht in
the lowest ebb, which country now blest with peace, liues
in quiet subiection vnder our heauen▪ blest soueraine▪ whom
God preserue. What shall I speake of Spaine and Italy,
the one feard him, the other admired him and to locke vp al
descriptions of worth, his name retayned a generall opinion
of the worlds loue. I neede not speake much of the
excelent buildings and workes of great magnificence he
adorned England with, as well in the country as h
                  •
               are about
this wonder-famed citty of London, now fresh in memory,
and visible in this age, all subiects of honored bounty,
worth, and beauty, remayning to the inheritance of his
noble posterity.
            Yet let me a little speake of his Godly deuotion, charity,
& compassion on the poore: who tasting of his annuall bounty
are witnesses of his Christian conuersation, amongst all
others, the guifts and yearely pensions, bestowed at Theohalls,
vpon aged, and ouer-worne Captaines, gentle-men
by birth and calling, stands gratious in the worlds eye, for
their lost blood, spent in the seruice of their Prince and
country, hath he most honorably recompenced with sufficient
mayntenance, with soft beds to rest their mained limbs
vpon.
            Many other memorable guifts haue proceeded from his
liberality, to his eternall fame, and liues grace▪ which I
leaue to the worlds consideration, to be a patterne to suruiuing
greatnesse.
            But now I am to forsake the remembrance of these
his aduanced honors and wade into an Ocean of deepe sorrows,
lamentable sorrows for this generall losse, this deare
losse of his worlds-beloued life: yet are we not to contemplate
thereon, it was diuine prouidence to haue it: Time
hath a sweet course, and begets sodaine changes, he liu
                  •
               d

not to the period of nature, but was taken away, euen in
his midle age, euen in the fulnesse of promotions, which seuerity
of death, when I thinke vpon, brings to my heart,
ouer-ruling passions, and constraines me sighingly to say.
            
               Ah me things pretious, and of purest prize:
               For-sake the Earth, to mount aboue the skies.
            
            And now I am to satisfie the world of his Magnanimity
sh
                  •
               wed at his liues last hower, as it was credibly reported
in open audience, by a man of spiritual calling, and neere to
him both in life and death: this man of worth liuing in al liberty
of pleasures, inuironed with all earthly contentment
at that dreadfull hower feared not death: the memory of
death had no bitternesse; no disquietnesse troubled his mind,
he gréeued not to leaue his beautifull buildings, his rich
and curious Architectures, his faire alurements and his
many pleasures, his courtlike traines, gallant attendants
and bare-headed petitioners. It was no sorrow to his
heart to depart, and leaue them all behind, neither feared
he the voyce of the world, mixed with scandall, which still
makes misconstrued suppositions of great mens liues,
the which commonly they are taxed with, but his pure
white innocency dreaded not this putrifiing canker that
créepes about the tombes of Nobility: reason and nature
told him he must néeds goe, and appeare before that great
King of all Kings, and receaue the reward of his liues passages
vpon Earth: Thus ran out his glasse, and faded his
liues-sunne, being ouer-shaddowed with the Sable clouds
of Death. When vpon this mouldy stage of the Earth, he
acted the last part of his life before the eyes of the world;
his departing-iesture moued sad compassion, his words
seasoned with deadly sighes, bathed the hearers chéekes
with distilling teares, making confession of his secret sins,
calling for helpe of prayer, and like a hungar-starued Pilgrim,
cryed to that honorable, heauenly houshoulder, saying,

               Oh good God, open the gates of thy mercies, to the
greatnesse of my miseries, vnfould the ports of thy vnspeakable
pitty to my wearied spirit: receaue my soule into thy
hands, and anoynt hir festred wounds with the blood of thy
imaculate Lambe Christ Iesus▪
                  
                so yeelding vp the ghoast, hee
left this world for a better.
            
               Vncertenty of state, may well seeme strange,
               When great men seated vp in high renowne,
               By time and death, with vnexpected change,
               Are thus from all their glories tumbled downe.
               Then what are we but fooles of selfe conceat,
               When our best ioyes stands in a wauering state.
            
            
               Dull earthly drosse, wherein consistes thy pride,
               Thy state, and greatest glory goes to ground,
               Thy bed of wormes wherein thou shalt abide
               Will be corrupted, and thou filthy found.
               Our sun-shine hopes, thus time sweepes fast away,
               This night we liue, but die before next day.
            
         
         
            
            A Mourners passion, for the losse
of the aforesaid Nobleman
deceased.
            
               THe world (I see) is waxt vnkinde,
               And time forgets what time hath done:
               And spightfull spight weares out of minde,
               The doubtfull race great men doe run.
            
            
               Where are our late world wondring Kings,
               Those sheapheards of our English heard:
               Which wonne by conquest famous things,
               (In darke obliuion all inter'd)
            
            
               This Age giues grace to few or none,
               By princely tombes, or blasts of prayes,
               To mouldy graue no sooner gone,
               But all their worlds renowne decayes.
            
            
               
               Though fames arch enemies do striue,
               To canker greatnesse with times rust:
               Yet spiritfull Poets may reuiue,
               Their true deseruings from the dust.
            
            
               Faire heauen, some supreame wit inspire,
               Aford him grace and guift of pen:
               To light a lampe at honors fier,
               And memorize worlds worthy men.
            
            
               Come Sol
                        •
                     n-Cicill take thy place,
               Thou art inrich't by vertues gaines:
               The world adornes thy name with grace,
               Being honor'd in two Princes raignes.
            
            
               Let Neighboring France & Bellgia speake,
               With new-tamd Ireland, blest with peace:
               What cares his laboring mind did take,
               Their Romaine bondage to release.
            
            
               A thunderboult to Englands foes,
               A scurge to euery new-found sect:
               A states-man whome our King had chose.
               His highnesse safety to protect.
            
            
               
               On studious lawes (oh happy man)
               For countries good he plast his heart,
               So worship, wealth, and honor wan,
               By diligence and due desert.
            
            
               His learned councels purchast grace,
               Where men of greatest wisdome were:
               And where he sat in Iustice place,
               The law infringers, quakt with feare.
            
            
               His presence promis'd good successe,
               To all affaires he tooke in hand:
               A cheerefull comfort in distresse,
               A worthy States man of our land.
            
            
               Most graue of words: most stout of mind,
               In goodnesse constant, firme, and fast:
               Not turn'd with euery fickle wind,
               Nor sturd by threatning storme or blast.
            
            
               A Target to the publick state,
               Of Iudgment reaching, deepe and great:
               That could of countries weale debate,
               A learned Sage in Senate seat.
            
            
               
               A Cicero for speech and lookes,
               Wherein the pregnant world might spye:
               The eloquence of Wisdomes bockes,
               Perswading both by toung and eye.
            
            
               His seruice for his Prince declar'd,
               How wise a Councellor he was:
               Whose worth was of as great regard,
               As fined siluer is from glasse.
            
            
               His wise behauiour, kinde and meeke,
               His hearts true humblenesse did show:
               No vertue was in him to seeke,
               That might to his high honours grow.
            
            
               By friendship, faith, and dealings Iust,
               Hee purchast loues aplause in Court:
               His vpright word, and speciall trust,
               Gain'd loue likewise of meaner sort.
            
            
               But what auaileth due deserts,
               To liue in worldly fauours heere:
               When life is mixt with ouer-thwarts,
               Wee, earthly honours buy too deare.
            
            
               
               O England thou hast many such
               Rich Iems, thy state to glorifie:
               We cannot praise them ouer much,
               If we should write eternally.
            
            
               Faier gold and pearle brought home from far,
               In time consumes and wastes away:
               Proud fame ataind by peace or war,
               Doth quickly in this world decay.
            
            
               The loue of friends, and fauours won,
               Of noble, wise, and worthy wight:
               Steales hence like shaddows of the sun,
               Or gliding starres in moone-shine-nights.
            
            
               Sat I not vnder honors hill,
               Lately in calmy vailes below:
               Safely from bitter tempestes still,
               How ere the churlish winds did blow.
            
            
               What sodaine storme then troubles me,
               That had of late so sure a seate:
               Hath winters blast blowne downe my tree,
               That feard no peircing sommers heat.
            
            
               
               Oh tell hard destynies, why you did,
               Thus enuy my most happy state:
               In fury now, (oh heauen) forbid,
               I should cry out on partiall fate.
            
            
               Or braule, and childe with churlish death,
               Considering, hence we all must goe:
               What beareth life or draweth breath,
               Are surely borne to die we knowe.
            
            
               Earle Cicills gone: The passing bell,
               Hath rung his liues last rufull end:
               The graue (God wot) we see full well,
               Hath closed vp my fortunes friend.
            
            
               Not I alone, lament this losse,
               For many mourners more there be,
               That beares this all too heauy crosse,
               Of vnrecured griefe with me.
            
            
               Life is vn-certaine, life must die,
               Both high, and low, of life takes leaue:
               What comes from earth, in earth must lie,
               Or fondly we our selues deceaue.
            
            
               
               Then worldlings waile the dead no more,
               His soule liues pure, and mounts the sky:
               Lord Cicell did but goe before,
               To learne vs all the way to dye.
            
            
               Nor muse to see this man intomb'd,
               All flesh (by course) to ground must goe:
               Death calls for life, and we are doom'd,
               To pay the det to earth we owe.
            
            
               He left the world with worlds good will,
               Though world did hould his honors deare:
               For whome his friends sit mourning still,
               With cheekes bedewd with many a teare.
            
            
               But yet before his leaue he tooke,
               And death made conquest of lifes end:
               To heauens high throne his eies did looke,
               And thither did did his soule commend.
            
            
               When the sharpe paines of death arose,
               And sicknesse fury did increase:
               He held vp hands, and eyes did close,
               And lamb-like went away in peace.
            
            
               
               Me thinkes I heare heart mouing cries,
               Where sadnesse to a fullnesse growes:
               Me thinkes I see how blobred eyes,
               Pasions of pining sorrow showes.
            
            
               Be still, and mute, each house of ioy,
               Ope wide your doores, giue griefe some place:
               Turne solace into sower anoy,
               And let teares staine, each cheerful face.
            
            
               Let gladsome mirth goe where it please,
               Make bitter moane your welcome guest:
               Let all delights, and wished ease,
               Deny to tutch one trubled brest.
            
            
               Let sports, and pleasures silent be,
               And name no word of earthly blisse:
               For heauy hearts doe best agree,
               Where death, distresse, and dollor is.
            
            
               In saddest sort, prepare to heare,
               Of wo, that did through death befall:
               This tale perchance, may change your cheare
               And make your hearts to mourne withall.
            
            
               
               Honor lies dead who late aliue,
               Did purchase fame and Lordlike praise:
               And still for honors gaine did striue.
               By sundry duties many wayes.
            
            
               What want of him haue we the while,
               To loose this high priz'd Iewell now:
               Whose wisdome shonne amidst this Ile,
               Like pearles vppon a Princes brow.
            
            
               Come Schollers all ope sorrowes doore,
               With clasped hands true signes of woe,
               Your Muses patrons losse deplore,
               For greefe ore reasons bankes do flow.
            
            
               Come Soldiers and with Drum and fife,
               Sound out his deare but last adew:
               The balme of your decayed life,
               By death hath changd to deathes pale hew.
            
            
               Cold death hath wrought vs all this wrong,
               By wronging nature thus to soone,
               With vs he might haue liued long,
               Had not Deathes Tyrany beene showne.
            
            
               
               Thus we behould how times doe passe,
               All Adams sonnes such ends must haue:
               We fade away like sommers grasse,
               To day on foote, to morrow in graue,
            
            
               Best hopes of him, when people had,
               Came sickenesse and his life imbrast:
               Death followed, and with mould him clad,
               And so in Heauen his soule is plast.
            
            
               And now full low, in earth he lies,
               (Which late sat high, and bore great sway)
               Till he, and we, (made pure) shall rise,
               To heare our doomes at Iudgement day.
            
            
               So, ending here with ioy at last,
               His soule on earth we could not keepe:
               In Paradice is Cicill plast,
               And there in Abrahams brest doth sleepe.
            
            Death is the doore to life, therefore let all men so liue,
that they may driue death out at the same doore, and so
liue eternally.
         
         
            
            The funeral of the said Earle of
Salisbury holden at Hatfield in June
last, is heere described in a short formall
proceeding order.
            BEing at Hatfield in Hartfordshire in Iune last,
my eye presented to my heart, the worlds last
farewell giuen to the right honorable the late
Earle of Salsbury, A due, that blood, consanguinity,
and affinity customably bestowes vpon the deceased,
the sight whereof settled within me many priuate
sorrowes for the losse of so great a subiect, whose late
liuing honors carried such a sway in his contry, that
in a sad passion it made me accuse deathes partiallity,
in taking of his life, but smothering griefe for a time
in silence, I stood amazedly beholding a traine of
noble personages, in sable habits trayling on the
ground, witnesses, and presenters of Englands heauinesse,
for so general a losse: black cloudy garments
outwardly equalized their inward sorrowes, and this
following (as neere as I can remember) was the order
of the mourning passengers.
            First, diuers Marshalls to make roome,
            Next certaine poore men and woemen.
            Then seruants of Gentlemen, Esquires & Knights.
            Then Standerd-bearers with banners of armes.
            Then messengers of the Chamber.
            Then some of the Kings Maiesties groomes.
            
            Then Noblemens seruants.
            After them diuerss officers of the Court,
            Then Heralds of Armes with other Ensignes of
honor.
            Then followed my Lords owne seruants,
            Then Knightes and Gentlemen his retainers,
            Then the Kings Solicitor, Councell, and Atturney
generall.
            Then Barrons of the law with some Iudges.
            Then the sonns of Noble men and Earles.
            Then Lord Barons allied to this deceased Earle,
            Then Earles of his affinity and Kindred.
            Then principall Herralds with Banners of his coat
of armes.
            Then his Hearse couered with black veluet, his
Helme and Crest with diuers Scutchions belonging
to his honorable house.
            Then after the Hearse as principall mourner the
Right honorable William now Earle of Salisbury the
only sonne to the deceased noble-man.
            Being thus with honor carried to his graue, declared
the greatnesse of his estate, how much fauored
of his prince, esteemed of his equalls, and beloued of
his followers. Time, out of my remembrance, can
neuer put away his high worth, whom I will honor
the longest day of my life, and in the closet of my
heart place his perfections to my priuate consideration,
and now to make a conclusion of all these my
loues labours, (as duty binds me) I end.
         
         
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
                all subiect to change and times enuie.
            
            
               The misery of Pollicie.
               
                  MAn hath his time, whom fortune will aduance,
                  Where sodain falls, in gilty harts breeds doubt:
                  Some rise aloft by others hard mischance,
                  Thus fortunes restlesse wheele runs still about,
                  True wisdome sees how times of men do passe,
                  When fortunes change turnes back promotions glasse.
               
            
            
               The misery of Greatnesse.
               
                  Enuie, attends vpon a great mans state,
                  Where in his brest ambitious bellows blow:
                  And then he climbes aboue his wits conceate,
                  Disdaining much to cast his eyes below.
                  Yet all he hath is vpon hazard set,
                  When mounting high, he falls in dangers net.
               
            
            
               The misery of Schollers.
               
                  The Scholler, if but poore, hees thought a wretch,
                  His good desert is held in high disdaine:
                  The grosest foole is wise, if he be rich,
                  And wisdom flowes from his dull-sotted braine.
                  The rarest spirit, hath here but credit small,
                  And he most grast that plots his neighbors fall.
               
            
            
               The misery of Lawyers.
               
                  
                  The Briberous mind makes still a God of Gould,
                  He scornes to plead without a good reward,
                  Thus poore-mens sutes are bought and sould,
                  Whilst sillken avarice hath best regard,
                  He hath no feare of Gods consuming curse,
                  That pulls with paines, gould from the poore mans purse.
               
            
            
               The misery of Time-pleasers.
               
                  Ingratitude thou ill, ill fauored ill,
                  In vpstart thoughts thou buildest Castles strong:
                  Whilest shame deuoures thy temporizing will,
                  And shewes the fillthy vilenesse of thy wrong,
                  That mind wherein ingratitude doth dwell,
                  For illnesse coequalls the ills of hell.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   