
      
         
            
            
            The second Part of the famous History of the seauen Champions of Christendome.
            Likevvise shevving the Princely provvesse of Saint Georges three Sonnes, the liuely Sparke of Nobilitie.
            VVith many other memoriall atchiuements worthy the golden spurres of Knighthood.
            
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON, Printed for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be solde at his shop, vnder the Royall Exchange 1597.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDE WILIAM HOWARD, Richard Iohnson wisheth encrease of all prosperity.
            
               AS it hath, Right Honorable, of late pleased your most noble brother in kindenes to accept of this history, and to grace it with a fauourable countenaunce. So am I nowe embouldened to dedicate this second part vnto your honour, vvhich here I humbly offer to your Lordships handes, not because I thinke it a gift worthy the receauer: but rather that it should be, as it were a witnes of the loue and duety vvhich I beare to your

Right Noble House.
            And when it shall please you to bestowe the reading of these my rude Discourses, my humble request is, that you would thinke I I wish your Honor as many happy dayes, as there be letters contayned in this Historie.
            Thus praying for your Honors chiefe happynes, I end.
            
               Your Honors in all dutifull loue to his poore power. R. I.
            
         
         
            
            To the Gentle Reader.
            
               I Haue finished the seconde part of the seuen Champions of Christendome, onely for thy delight, being thertoo incouraged by thy greate curtesie in the kinde acceptation of my first part. I haue no eloquent phrases to inuite thy willingnes to read, onely a little barren inuention, wherof I haue no cause to boast, so excellently the wits of many in these daies in that kinde exceed. Onely thy curtesie must be my Buckler, against the carping malice of mocking iesters, that being worst able to doe well, scoffe commonly at that they cannot mend, censuring all thinges, doing nothing, but (monkey like) make apish iests at any thinge they see in Print: and nothing pleaseth them, except it sauor of a scoffing or inuectiue spirite. Well, what those say of me I doe not care, thy delight onely is my desire: And accept it and I am satisfied, reiect it and this shall bee my penaunce neuer againe to come in Print. But hauing better hope, I boldly leade thee to this maine from this doubtfull floude of suspition where I rest. Walke on in the historie, as in an ouergrown & ill husbanded garden: if among all the weedes thou finde one pleasing flower I haue my wish.
            
               Thine Richard Iohnson.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The second part of the most honourable Historie of the seauen Champions of Christendome.
            
               How Sa. Georges three sonnes were entertained into the famous Cittie of London, and after how their Mother was slaine in a wood with the prickes of a thornie brake, her blessing she gaue her sonnes, S. Georges lamentation ouer her bleeding bodie: and likevvise of the Iourney the seuen Champions intended to Ierusalem to visit the Sepulcher of Christ.
            
            
               AFter Saint George with the other six Champions of Christendom (by their inuincible conquests) had brought into subiection, al the Easterne Parts, and by dint of bloodie warres yoaked the stubborne Infidels euen to the furthest boundes of India, where the golden Sunne beginneth to arise, as you heard discoursed in the former Part of this Historie, they returned

with the conquest of Imperiall Diadems, regall crownes and kingly scepters to the rich and plentifull Country of England: where in the famous Citie of London they manie a day soiourned, a place not onely beautefied with sumptuous buildings, but grac'd with a number of valiant Knights and gallant Gentlemen of courtly behauiour, and therewithal adornd with troopes of Ladies, of diuine and celestiall beauties, that trip it vp and downe the stréetes like to the Grecian Quéenes, when as they tyed the Phrigian Warriers in the silken snares of loue: whereby it séemed rather a paradice for heauenlye Angels, than a place for earthly inhabiters.
            Here the Christian Champions laide their Armes aside, here hung they vp their weapons on the bowers of peace, here their glistering corslets rusted in their Armories, here was not heard the warlike sound of drums nor siluer trumpets, heere stood no Centinells nor Courts of guard, nor barbed stéedes prepared to the battaile, but all things tended to a lasting peace, They that had wont in stéeled coates to sléep in champion fields, lay dallying now in beds of silke: they that had wont with wearie armes to wéeld the warlike fawchions, sate now embracing louely Ladies on their knées: and they whose eares had wont to heare the rufull cryes of slaughtered souldiers, were now orecloyd with musickes pleasant harmonie.
            In this delicious manner liued these Champions in the Cittie of London, burying the remembrance of all theyr former Aduentures in the lakes of obliuion, and spending their times in honorable Tiltes and courtly Turnaments: wher S. George performed manie atchiuements in honor of his beloued Ladie, & the other Knights in honor of their Mistresses.
            But at last Saint Georges thrée Sonnes, Guy, Alexander and Dauid, being all three borne at one birth, as you heard before in the wildernesse, and sent into thrée seuerall Kingdomes by their carefull Father to be trained vp:

the one into Rome to the warlike Romanes. another vnto Wittenberg to the learned Germanes, the third into Brittaine to the valiant English. But now being growne to some ripenes of age and agilitie of strength, they desired much to visit their parents, whom they had not séene from their infancies lying in their cradles: and to craue at hys hands the honor of true Knighthood, and to weare the golden Spurre of Christendome.
            This earnest & princely request so highly pleased theyr Tutors, that they furnished them with a stately traine of Knights, and sent them honourably into England where they arriued all thrée at one time in the famous Cittie of London, where their entertainments were most princely, and their welcomes so honorable, that I want arte to describe and memorie to expresse.
            I omit what sumptuous Pageants and delightfull Showes the Cittizens prouided, and how the stréetes of London were beautefied with tapestrie, the solemne bels that rung them ioyfull welcomes, and the siluer strained instruments that gaue them pleasant entertainment. Also I passe ouer their fathers ioy, who prized their sightes more precious in his eyes, than if hee had béen made sole Monarch of the golden mynes of rich America: or that euerie haire that grew vppon his head had been equalled with a kingdome, & he to giue as manie golden diademes in his Armes. Also the Mothers welcomes to her Sons, who gaue them more kisses than shee breathed foorth groanes at their deliueries from her painful womb in the wildernesse.
            The other Champions curtesies were not the least nor of the smallest in account to these thrée yong Gentlemen: but to be short, Saint George (whose loue was deare vnto his Children) in his owne person conducted them vnto their lodgings, whereas they spent that day and the night following in royall banquetting amongest theyr Princely Frend.
            
               But no sooner appeared the Mornings Sunne vppon the Mountaine tops, and the cleare countenaunce of the Elements made motion of some insuing pastime, but S. George commaunded a solempne Hunting for the welcome of his Sonnes.
            Then began his knights to arme themselues in troops, and to mount vpon their nimble Iennets, and some with well armd Boare-speares in their handes, prepared for the game on foote: but S. George with his Sonnes clad in gréen vestments like Adonis, with siluer hornes hanging at their backes in scarffes of coloured silke, were stil the formost in this Exercise. Likewise Sabra (intending to sée her Sonnes valours displaied in the field, whether they were in courage like their Father or no) caused a gentle Palfray to be prouided, whereon she mounted her Princely Person to be a witnes of these Siluane sportes: she was armd with a curious brest-plate wrought like to the scales of a Dolphin, and in her hand she bare a siluer bow of the Turkish fashion, like an Amazonian Queen, or Diana hunting in the groues of Arcadie.
            
            Thus in this gallant manner rode forth these Hunters to their Princely pastimes, where after they had ridden some sixe miles from the Cittie of London, fell from Sa. Georges nose thrée drops of purple blood, whereat hée sodainly started, and there withall he heard the croaking of a Flight of night Rauens, that houered by the Forrest side, all which he iudged to be dismall signes of some insuing stratagem: but hauing a princely mind he nothing discouraged thereat, nor little mistrusted the wofull accident that after happened, but with a noble resolution entered the Forrest, accounting such foretelling tokens for olde wiues ceremonies. Wherein they had not passed the compasse of halfe a mile, but they started a wilde & swift Stag, at whom they vncoupled their Hounds, and gaue bridle to their horses, and followed the game more swifter, than Pirates that pursue the Merchants vppon the

seas. But now behold how frowning Fortune chaunged their pleasant pastimes to a sad and bloodie tragedie: for Sabra proffering to kéepe pace with them, delighting to behold the valiant incounters of her yong sonnes, and being careles of her selfe thorough the ouer swiftnes of her Stéede, shee slipped beside her saddle, and so fell directly vpon a thornie brake of brambles, the prickes whereof more sharpe than spikes of stéele entered to euerie part of her delicate bodie: some pierced the louely closets of her starre bright eyes, whereby (in stead of christall pearled teares) there issued drops of purest blood: her face before that blushed like the mornings radiant countenance, was now exchanged into a crimson red: her milk white hands that lately strained the yuorie Lute, did séeme to weare a bloodie scarlet gloue: and her tender paps that had so often fed her Sonnes with the milke of nature, were all berent and torne with these accursed brambles: from whose déep wounds there issued such a streame of purple gore, that it conuerted the grasse from a liuely gréen to crimson hicu, and the abundance of blood that trickled from her breast, began to inforce her soule to giue the world a wofull farewell. Yet notwithstanding, when her beloued Lord, her sorrowfull Sonnes, and all the rest of the wofull Champions, had washed her wounded bodie with a Spring of feares, and when she perceiued that she must of force commit her life to the furie of imperious death, shee breathed foorth this dying Exhortation.
            Deare Lord (said she) in this vnhappie Hunting must you loose the truest Wife that euer lay by Princes side: yet mourne you not, nor gréeue you my Sonnes, nor you braue Christian Knights, but let your warlike drummes conuay me royally vnto my Toombe, that all the world maye write in brazen Bookes, how I haue followed my Lord (the Pride of Christendome) thorough many a bloodie field, and for his sake haue left my Parents, Frends, and Countrey, and haue trauelled with him through manie

a daungerous Kingdome: but now the cruell Fates haue wrought their latest spites, and finished my life, because I am not able to performe what loue he hath deserued of me. And now to you my Sonnes, this blessing do I leaue behinde: euen by the paines that fortie wéekes I once indured for your sakes, when as you lay enclosed in my wombe, and by my trauels in the wildernes, whereas my grones vpon your birth day did (in my thinking) cause both trées and stones to drop downe teares, when as the mercilesse Tygers & tamelesse Lyons did stand like gentle Lambes, and mournd to heare my lamentations: and by a Mothers loue that euer since I haue borne you, imitate & follow your Father in all his honorable attempts, harme not the silly Infant, nor the helplesse Widdow, defend the honour of distressed Ladies, and giue fréely vnto wounded Souldiers: séeke not to stain the vnspotted virgins with your lusts, and aduenture euermore to redéeme true Knights from captiuitie: liue euer professed enemies to paganisme, and spend your liues in the quarrel and defence of Christ, that Babes (as yet vnborne) in time to come may speake of you, and record you in the Bookes of fame to be true christian Champions. This is my blessing, and this is the Testament I leaue behinde: for now I féele the chilnesse of pale death closing the closets of my eyes: Farewell vaine world, déere Lord farewell, swéet Sonnes, you famous fellowes of my George, and all true Christian Knights, adieu.
            These words were no sooner ended, but with a heauie sigh she yéelded vp the ghost: whereat Saint George (being impatient in his sorrowes) fell vpon her liuelesse bodie, rending his haire, and tearing his Hunters attyre from his backe into a thousand péeces: and at last when his griefes somewhat diminished, he fell into these bitter lamentations.
            Gone is the Starre (said he) that lightned all ye Northerne world, withered is the Rose that beautefied our

Christian fields, dead is the Dame that for her beautie stained all Christian women: for whom Ile fill the aire with euerlasting moanes. This day hencefoorth be fatall to all times, and counted for a dismall day of death. Let neuer the Sunne shew foorth his beames thereon againe, but clowdes as blacke as pitch couer the earth with fearfull darknes. Let euerie Trée in this accursed Forrest, hencefoorth be blasted with vnkindly windes: let brambles, hearbs and flowers consume and wyther, let grasse and blooming buds perish and decay, and all things néere the place where shee was slaine, bee turned to a dismall, blacke and sable colour, that the Earth it selfe in mourning garments may lament her losse. Let neuer Birde sing cherefully in top of trées, but like the mournfull musicke of the Nightingale, fil all the aire with fatall tunes: let bubling riuers murmure for her losse, & siluer Swans that swim thereon sing dolefull melodie: let all the dales belonging to these fatal woods be couered with gréene bellyed serpents, croaking toades, hissing snakes, and sightkilling cockatrices: in blasted trées let fearfull Rauens shrike, let howlets crye, and crickets sing, that after this it may be called a place of dead mens wandring ghosts. But fond wretch, why doo I thus lament in vaine, and bathe her bléeding bodie with my teares, when gréefe by no meanes will recall her life? Yet this shall satisfie her soule, for I will goe a Pilgrimage vnto Ierusalem, & offer vp my teares to Iesus Christ vpon his blessed Sepulcher, by which my stained soule may be washt from this bloody guilt, which was the causer of this sorrowfull dayes mishappe.
            These sorrowfull words were no sooner ended, but hée tooke her bléeding limmes betwéene his fainting armes, and gaue a hundred kisses vpon her dying coloured lips, retayning yet ye colour of Alablaster new washt in purple blood, and in this extasie a while lying, gaue waye to others to vnfold their woes.
            
               But his Sonnes whose sorrowes wer as great as his, protested neuer to neglect one day, but duly wéepe a sea of teares vpon their Mothers graue, till from the Earth did spring some mournfull flower, to beare remembrance of her death, as did the Uiolet that sprung from chast Adonis blood, when Venus wept to sée him slaine. Likewise the other sixe Champions (that all the time of their lamentations stood like men drownd in the depth of sorrow) began now a little to recouer themselues: and after protested by the honour of true Knighthood, and by the Spur and golden Garter of S. Georges leg, to accompanie him vnto the holy Land, bare footed without either hose or shoo, onely clad in russet gaberdines, like the vsuall Pilgrimes of the world, and neuer to returne till they haue payd their vowes vpon that blessed Sepulcher.
            Thus in this sorrowful manner wearied they the time away, filling the woods with Echoes of their lamentations▪ and recording their dolors to the whistling windes: but at last, when blacke Night began to approach, and with her sable mantles to ouer-spred the christall firmament, they retyred (with her dead bodie) backe to the Citie of London, where the report of this tragicall accident, drowned their friends in a sea of sorrow: for the newes of her timelesse death was no sooner bruted abroad, but the same caused both olde and young to lament the losse of so swéete a Ladie. The siluer headed age that had wont in scarlet gownes to méete in Councell, sat now at home in discontented griefes: the gallant youths and comely virgins that had wont to beautefie the stréetes with costlye garments, went drouping vp and downe in blacke and mournfull vestures: and those remorcelesse hearts that sildome were opprest with sorrow, now constrained their eyes like fountaines to distill a floud of brinish and pearly teares.
            This generall griefe of the Citizens continued for the space of thirtie dayes, at the ende whereof Saint George
               
with his Sonnes and the other Champions interred her bodie verie honourably, and erected ouer the same a 
                  •
               ith and costly Monument (in sumptuous state like the toomb of Mausolus, which was called one of the Wonders of the World: or like to the Pyramides of Greece, which is a staine to all Architectures): for thereon was portrayed the Quéene of Chastitie with her Maydens, bathing themselues in a christall Fountaine, as a witnesse of her wondrous Chastitie, against the lustfull assailements of manie a Knight. Thereon was also most liuely pictured a Turtle-doue sitting vpon a trée of gold, in signe of the true loue that she bore to her betrothed husband. Also a siluer coloured Swan swimming vpon a Christall riuer, as a token of her beautie: for as the Swan excelleth al other fowles in whitenes, so she for beautie excelled all Ladies in the world.
            I leaue to speake of the curious workmanship of the pinacles that were framed all of the purest 
                  •
               eat, the pummels of siluer and Iasper stones. Also I omit the Pendants of gold, the Scutchions of Princes, & the Armes of Countreyes that beautefied her Toombe: the discourse whereof requires an Oratours eloquence, or a penne of golde dipt in the dew of Hellicon or Pernassus Hill, whereas the Muses doo inhabit. Her Statue or Picture was carued cunningly in alablaster, and layd (as it were vppon a pillow of gréene silke, like vnto Pigmal
                     •
                  ons yuorie Image, and directly ouer the same hung a siluer Tablet, whereon in letters of golde was this Epitaph written.
            
               Here lies the vvonder of this vvorldly age
               For beautie, vvit, and princely maiestie,
               Whom spitefull death in his imperious rage
               Procurde to fall through ruthlesse crueltie:
               
                  In leauie sports within a fragrant wood,
               Vpon a thornie brake she spilt her blood.
            
            
               Let Virgins pure and Princes of great might,
               With siluer perled teares imbalme this tomb,
               Accuse the fatall sisters of despight,
               For blasting thus the pride of natures bloom:
               For here she sleeps within this earthly graue,
               whose worth deserues a golden tomb to haue
            
            
               Seauen yeares she kept her sweet Virginitie,
               In absence of her true betrothed Knight,
               When thousands did perceiue her chastitie,
               Whilst he remaind in prison daye and night:
               But yet we see that things of purest prize,
               Forsakes the earth to dwell aboue the skies.
            
            
               Maidens come mourne with dolefull melody
               And make this monument your setled bower
               Here shed your brackish teares eternally,
               Lament both yere, month, week, day, hower:
               For here she rests whose like can nere be foūd
               Her beauties pride lyes buried in the ground.
            
            
               
               Her woūded hart that yet doth freshly bleed,
               Hath causd seuen knights a iourny for to take
               To faire Ierusalem in Pilgrimes weed,
               The furie of her angrie ghost to slake:
               Because their siluane sports was chiefest guilt,
               And onely cause her blood was timeles spilt.
            
            Thus after the Toomb was erected, and the Epitaph ingrauen in a siluer Tablet, and al things performed according to Saint Georges direction, he left his Sonnes in the Cittie of London vnder the gouernment of the English King: and in companie of the other sixe Champions, he tooke his iourney towards Ierusalem.
            
            They were attired after the manner of Pilgrimes, in russet gaberdines downe to their foote, in their hands they bore staues of Ebon wood tipt at the endes with siluer, the pikes whereof were of the strongest Lydian stéele, of such a sharpnes that they were able to pierce a target of Tortoys shell: vppon their breasts hung Crosses of crimson silke, to signifie that they were Christian Pilgrimes, trauelling to the Sepulcher of Christ.
            In this manner set they forward from England in the Spring time of the yeare, when Flora had beautefied the earth with Natures tapestrie, and made their passages as pleasant as the Gardens of Hesperides, adorned with all kinde of odoriferous flowers. When as they crossed the seas, the siluer waues séemed to lye as smoothe as christal yce, and the Dolphins to daunce aboue the waters, as a signe of a prosperous iourney. In trauelling by land, the wayes séemed so short and easie, and the chirping melody of birdes made them such musique as they passed, that in a short season they arriued beyond the borders of Christendome, and had entred the confines of Africa.
            
            
               There were they forced in sted of downie beds nightly to rest their wearie limmes vpon heapes of sun burnt messe: and in sted of silken curtens and curious canopies, they had the clowdes of heauen to couer them. Now their naked legs and bare feet, that had wont to stride the stately stéedes, and to trample in fields of Pagans blood, were forced to clyme the craggie mountaines, and to endure the torments of pricking briers, as they trauayled thorough the desert places and comfortlesse solitarie wildernesses.
            Manie were the dangers that hapned to them in theyr Iourney, before they arriued in Iudea, and most princely their atchieuements, and honourable their aduentures: which for this time I passe ouer, leauing the Champions for a time in their trauell towards the holy Sepulcher of Christ, and speake what happened to Sa. Georges thrée Sonnes in visiting their Mothers Tombe in the Cittie of London.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Of the strange giftes that S. Georges sonnes offered at their Mothers Toombe, and vvhat hapned thereupon: hovv her Ghost appeared to them, and counselled them to the pursute of their Father: also, hovv the Ki. of England installed them with the honor of knighthood, and furnished them vvith abiliments of vvarre.
               
               
                  THe swift foote stéedes of Titans fierie Carre had almost finished a yere, since Sabraes Funerall was solemnized: in which time Saint Georges thrée Sonnes had visited their Mothers Tomb oftner than there were dayes in the yeare, and had shed as manie teares thereon in remembraunce of her loue, as there were starres in the glistering veyle of Heauen: but at last these thrée yong Princes fell at a ciuill discord and deadly strife, which of them should beare the truest loue vnto their Mothers dead bodie, and which of them should be held in greatest estéeme. For before manie dayes were expired, they concluded to offer vp thrée seuerall deuotions at her Tombe: and he that deuised a gift of the rarest prize and of the straungest qualitie, should bee held in the

greatest honour, and accompted the noblest of them all. This determination was spéedily perfourmed, and in so short a time accomplished, that it is wonderfull to discourse.
               The first thinking to excéed his brothers in the strangenes of his Gift, made repaire vnto a cunning Inchauntresse, which had her abiding in a secret caue adioyning to the Cittie, whom he procured (through manie rich giftes and large promises) by arte to deuise a meane to get the honor from his Bretheren, & to haue a gift of that strange nature, that all the world might wonder at the report thereof.
               The Inchauntresse (being won with his promises) by her artes and magicke spells, deuised a Garland contayning all the diuersitie of flowers that euer grew in earthly Gardens: and though it were in the dead time of winter, when as the siluer ysicles had disroabd both hearb and flower of their beauties, and the Northerne snow lay fréezing on the mountaine tops, yet was this Garland contriued after the fashion of a rich Imperial Crowne, with as manie seuerall Flowers as euer Flora placed vppon the downes of rich Arcadia: in diuersitie of colours lyke the glistering Raine-bow, when as it shineth in her greatest pride: and casting such an odoriferous sent and swéete sauour, as though the Heauens had rained downe showers of Campheere, Bisse, or Amber-gréece.
               This rare and excéeding Garland was no sooner framed by Inchauntment, and deliuered into his hands, but he left the Inchauntresse sitting in her Ebon chaire vpon a blocke of stéele (practising her fatall artes), with her hair hanging about her sholders, like wreaths of snakes or inuenomed serpents: and so retourned to his Mothers tombe, where he hung it vppon a pillar of siluer that was placed in the middle of the Monument.
               The second Brother likewise repaired to the Tombe, and brought in his hand an yuorie Lute, wheron he plaid

such inspiring melodie, that it séemed like the harmony of Angels, or the celestiall musique of Apollo when hee descended heauen for the loue of Daphne, whom hee turned into a Bay trée. The musicke being finished, he tied! ys Lute in a damaske scarffe, and with great humilitie hee hung it at the west ende of the Tombe vppon a knobbe of Iasper stone.
               Lastly, the third Brother likewise repaired with no outward deuotion or worldly gift: but clad in a vesture of white silke, bearing in his hand an instrument of death, like an innocent Lambe going to sacrifice: or one readie to be offered for the loue of his mothers soule.
               This strange manner of repaire, caused his other brothers to stand attentiuely, and with vigilant eyes to behold the conclusion.
               First, after he had (submissiuely and with great humilitie) let fall a shower of siluer teares from the cesternes of his eyes, in remembrance of his Mothers timeles tragedie, he prickt his naked breast with a siluer bodkin, the which he brought in his hand, from which there trickeled downe some thirtie drops of blood, which he after offered vp to his Mothers Tombe in a siluer bason, as an euident signe that there can be nothing more dearer, nor of more precious price, than to offer vp his owne blood for her loue. This ceremonious gift caused his two other Brothers to swell in hatred like two chased Lions, and with furie to run vpon him, intending to catch him by the haire of the head, and to drag him round about their Mothers Tomb, till his braines were dasht against the marble pauement, and his blood sprinkled vppon her graue: but this wicked enterprize so mooued the Maiestie of heauen, that ere they could accomplish their intents, or staine their hands in his blood, they heard (as it were) ye noyse of dead mens bones ratling in the ground. And thereupon (looking fearfully about) the Toombe seemed of it selfe to open, and thereout to appeare a most terrible and ghastly shap
                     •
                  ,

pale, like vnto ashes, in countenance resembling theyr Mother with her breast besmeard in blood, and her bodie wounded with a hundred scarres: and so with a dismall & rufull looke she spake vnto her desperate Sonnes in thys manner.
               Oh you degenerate from Natures kinde, why doo you séeke to make a murther of your sel
                     •
                  es? can you indure to sée my bodie rent in twaine, my heart split in sunder, and my wombe dismembred? Abate this furie, staine not your hands with your owne bloods, nor make my Tombe a spectacle of more death. Unite your selues in concord, that my discontented soule may sléepe in peace, and neuer more be troubled with your vnbridled humours. Make hast I say, and arme your selues in stéeled corslets, and follow your valiant Father to Ierusalem, for he is there in danger and distresse of life. Away I say, or els my angry ghost shall neuer leaue this world, but haunt you vp and downe with gastly visions.
               This being said, she vanished from their sight, lyke to the brictl
                     •
                   ayre, whereat for a time they stood amazed and almost distraught of their wits, thorough the terrour of her words: but at last recouering their former senses they all vowed by the eternall Maiestie of Heauen, neuer to proffer the like iniurie againe, but to liue in brotherly cō
                  cord and vnitie till the dissolution of their earthly bodyes. So in all hast they went vnto the King, and certefied him of all things that had happened: and falling vpon theyr knées before his Maiestie, requested at his hands the honour of Knighthood, and leaue to depart in the pursute of their Father and the other Champions, that were fallen in great distresse.
               The King purposing to accomplish their desires, and to fulfill their requests, presently condiscended, and not onely gaue them the honour of Knighthood, but furnished them with rich abiliments of warre, answerable to their magnanimious mindes. First he frankly bestowed vppon

them thrée stately Palphryes, bred vpon the bright mountaines of Sardinia: in collour like to an Irone gray, bewtifyed with siluer hayres, and in pace more swifter then the Spanish Ginets, which be a kinde of horse ingendred by the winds vpon the Alpes, that be certaine craged mountaines that deuide the Kingdomes of Italy and Spaine: in bouldnes and courage, they were like to Beucephalus the horse of Macedonian Alexander, or to Caesars steedes that neuer daunted in the field, for they were trapped with rich trappings of golde after the Moroco fashion with Saddels framed like vnto Irone chaires with backs of Stéele, and their foreheads were beautified with spangled plumbes of purple feathers, whereon hung many golden pendants: the king likewise bestowed vpon them thrée costly swoords wrought of purest Lidian stéele, with Launces bound about with plates of brasse, at the toppes thereof hung silken Streamers beautified with the English Crosse, being the crimson b
                     •
                  dge of Knight hood and honor of aduenterous champions: Thus in this Royall manner rode these thrée young Knights from the City of London in companie of the King with a traine of Knights and gallant Gentlemen which conducted them vnto the Sea side, where they left them vnto their future fortunes and returned backe to the English Cou
                     •
                  t.
               Now is Saint Georges sonnes noting 
                     〈…〉
                   of the Seas, making their first aduentures in the world, that after 
                     •
                  ges might aplaude their atchiuement, and inrole theyr fames in the records of honor, heauen prosper them succesfully, and gentle fortune smile vpon their trauailes, for thrée brauer knight
                     •
                   did neuer crosse the seas, nor make their aduentures into straunge Countries.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  How Saint Georges sonnes after they vvere knighted by the English King, trauailed towards Barbarie, and how they redeemed the Dukes Daughter of Normandie from rauishment, that was assayled in a vvood by three tavvnie Negroes: and also of the tragicall tale of the Virgins strange miserie, vvith other acdents that happened.
               
               
                  MAny daies had not these thrée magnanimous knights indured ye dangers of the swelling waues, but with a prosperous and succesfull winde, they arriued vpon the territories of France: where beeing no sooner safely set on shoare, but they bountifully rewarded theyr Marriners, & betooke themselues to their intended trauells.
               Now began their costly trapped S
                     •
                  eeds to pace it like the scudding Windes and 
                     •
                  ith their warlike hooues to thunder on the beaten passages: now began true honour to florish in their princely brests, and the renowne of their Fathers atchieuements to incourage their desires. Although but tender youth sate bunding on their chéekes, yet portly manhood triumpht in their harts; and althogh their

childish armes as yet neuer tried the painfull aduentures of Knighthood, yet b
                     •
                  re they high and princely cogitations in as great est
                     •
                  eme, as when their Father 
                     •
                  lewe the burning Dragon in Aegypt, for preseruation of their mothers life.
               Thus trauelled they to the further Parts of the Kingdome of France (guided onely by the direction of fortune) without anie aduenture worth the noting, till at last ryding through a mightie Forrest standing on the Borders of Lusitania, they heard (a farre off as it were) the rufull cryes of a distressed woman: which in this manner filled the ayre with the Eccho of her moanes.
               Oh heauens (sayd shee) bee kinde and pittifull vnto a Maiden in distresse, and send some happy passengers that may deliuer me from these inhumans monsters.
               This wofull and vnexpected noyse, caused the Knights to alight from their horses, and to sée the euent of this accident. So after they had tied their Stéeds to the bodie of a Pine trée by the reynes of their bridles, they walked on foote into the thickest of the Forrest with their weapons drawne, reaeie to withstand anie assailment whatsoeuer: & as they drew néerer to the distressed Uirgin, they heard her breathe foorth this pittie moouing lamentation the second time.
               Come, come, some curteous Knight, or els I must forgoe that precious Iewell, which all the world can neuer againe recouer.
               These words caused them to make the more spéed, and to run the néerest way for the Maidens succour. At last, they approached her presence, where they found her tyed by the locks of her owne haire to the trunke of an orenge trée, and thrée cruel and inhumane Negroes standing readie to despoyle her of her chastitie, and with their lusts to blast the blooming bud of her sw
                     •
                  ete and vnspotted Uirginitie.
               But when Saint Georges Sonnes beheld her louelye

countenance besmeare
                     •
                   in dust, that before was as beautifull as roses in milke, and he
                     •
                   christall eyes the perfed patternes of the Lampes of heauen, inbrewd in floods of teares, at one instance they ran vpon the Negroes, and sheathed their angry weapons in their loathsome bowels, the leachers being slaine, their bloods sprinckled about the Forrest, and their bodies cast out as a pray for rauenous beastes to féede vpon: they vnbound the Mayden and like curteous Knightes demaunded the cause of her captiuity, and by what meanes she came into that solitarie Forrest? Most Noble Knights quoth shée, and true renounded men at armes, to tell the cause of my passed miseries were a pricke vnto my soule, and the discourse thereof will burst my heart with griefe, but considering your Nobilities the which I perceiue by your Princely behauiours, and your kinde curtesies extended towards me, being a Uirgin in distresse, vnder the hands of these lustfull Negroes, whom you haue iustly murdred, shall imbolden me, though vnto my hearts great griefe, to discourse the first cause of my miserable fortune.
               My Father (quoth shee) whilst gentle fortune smilde vpon him, was a Duke and sole commaunder of the state of Normandy, a countrie now scituated in the kingdom of Fraunce, whose lands & reuenewes in his prosperitie was so great that hee continually kept as stately a traine, both of Knights and gallant gentlemen as any Prince in Europe, whereat the King of France greatly enuied, and by bloody warres deposed my Father from his princely dignitie, who for sauegard of his life in company of mee hys onely heire and daughter, betooke vs to these solletarie woods, where euer since we haue secretly remained in a poore 
                     •
                  ell or hermitage ye which by our industrious paines hath béen builded with plants of Uines and 
                     •
                  aken bows, and couered ouer head with cloddes of earth, and turffes of grasse, seauen yeares we haue continued in great extreamitie sustaining our hungers with the fruites of

trées, and quenching our thirstes with the dewe of heauen, that falleth nightly vpon fragrant flowers héere in stéede of Princely attyre, imbrothered garments and damaske vestures, we haue béene constrained to cladde our selues in flowers, the which we haue cunningly wouen vp together.
               Héere insteade of musicke, that had wont each morning to delight our eares; we haue the whistling windes resounding in the woods: our clockes to tell the minutes of the wandring nights, are snakes and toades that sléep in rootes of rotten trées, our cannopeies to couer vs, are not wrought of Median silke, the which the Indian Uirgins weaue vppon their siluer loombes, but the sable cloudes of heauen, when as the chéerefull day hath clos'd her christall windows 
                     •
                  p.
               Thus in this manner continued wee in this soletary wildernes, making both birds and beastes our chiefe companions, till these mercilesse Moores (whose hateful be
                     •
                  sts you haue made like watry fountaines to water the parched earth with streames of blood:) who came into our cell, or simple cabinet, thinking to haue found some store of treasure. But casting their gazing eyes vpon my beutie, they were presently inchaunted with a lustfull desire, onely to crop the swéete bud of my virginitie. Then with a furious and dismall countenaunce, more blacke than than the sable garments of sad Melpomine, when wyth her strawberie quill she writes of bloodie tragedies: or with a heart more crueller, than was Neroes the tyrannous Romane Emperour when he beheld the entrailes of his naturall Mother layde open by his inhumane and mercilesse commaundement: or when he stood vpon the highest toppe of a mightie mountayne to sée that famous and Imperiall Cittie of Roome set on fire by the remorselesse handes of his vnrelenting Ministers, that added vnhallowed flames to his vnholie furie.
               
                  These mercilesse and wicked minded Negroes with violent handes tooke my aged Father, and most cruellye bound him to the blasted bodie of a wythered oake, standing before the entrie of his Cell: where, neither the reuerent honor of his siluer haires, that glistered like the frozen ysicles vpon the Northerne Mountaines, nor the strayned sighes of his breast, wherein the pledge of wisedome was inthronized, nor all my teares or exclamations could anie whit abate their cruelties, but like grim dogs of Barbarie, they left my Father fast bound vnto the trée, and like egregious vipers tooke me by the tramells of my golden haire, and dragd me like a silly Lambe vnto this slaughtering place, intending to satisfie their lustes with the flower of my chastitie.
               Here I made my humble supplication to the Maiestye of Heauen, to bee reuenged vppon their cruelties: I reported to them the rewards of bloodie rauishments by the example of Tereus that lustfull King of Thrace, and hys furious Wife, that in reuenge of her Sisters rauishment caused her Husband to eate the flesh of his owne Sonne. Likewise (to preserue my vndefiled honor) I told them, that for the Rape of Lucrece the Romane Matron, Tarquinius and his name was for euer banished out of Rome: with manie other examples, like the Nightingale, whose doleful tunes as yet recordeth nothing but rape and murther. Yet neither the frownes of heauen, nor the terrible threates of hell, could mollifie their bloodie mindes: but they protested to perseuer in that wickednes, & vowd that if all the leaues of the Trées that grew within the Wood were turned into Indian Pearle, & made as wealthie as the golden Streames of pactolus, where Mydas washt his golden Wish away: yet shuld they not redéeme my chastitie from the staine of their insatiable and lustfull desires.
               This being said, they bound mee with the tramells of myne owne haire to this Orenge trée, and at the very instant

they proffered to defile my vnspotted bodie, but by the mercifull working of God, you happily approached, & not only redéemed me from their tyrannous desires, but quit the world from thrée of the wickedest creatures that euer nature framed. For which (most noble and inuincible Knights) if euer Uirgins prayers may obtaine fauor at the Maiestie of Heauen, humbly will I make my supplications, that you may proue as valiant champions, as euer put on helmet: and that your fames may ring to euerie Princes eare, as far as bright Hiperion showes hys golden face.
               This tragicall tale was no sooner ended, but the thrée Knights (whose remorcefull hearts sobbed with sighes) imbraced the sorrowfull Maiden betwixt their armes, & earnestlye requested her to conduct them vnto the place, whereas she left her father bound vnto the withered oke. To which shee willingly consented, and thanked them highly for their kindnes: but before they approched to the olde mans presence, what for the griefe of his banishment and the violent vsage of his Daughter, he was forced to yéeld vp his miserable life to the mercies of vnauoydable death.
               When Saint Georges valiant Sonnes (in companie of this sorrowful Maiden) came to the trée, and (contrarie to their expectations) found her Father cold and stiffe, both deuoyd of sense and féeling, also finding his hands & face couered with greene mosse, which they supposed to be done by the Roben red-breast and other little birds, who naturally couer the bare parts of anie bodie which they finde dead in the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , they fell into a new confused extremitie of griefe.
               But especially his Daughter séeming to haue lost all ioy and comfort in this World, made both heauen & earth to resound with her excéeding lamentations, and mourned without comfort like wéeping Niobe, that was turned into a rocke of stone, her griefe so abounded for the losse of

her children: but when the thrée young Knights perceiued the comfortless sorrow of the Uirgin, and how she had vowd neuer to depart from those solitary groues, but to spend the remnant of her daies in company of his deadly body, they curteously assisted her to burie him vnder a ches-nut trée, where they left her continually bathing his senceles graue with her teares and returned backe to their horses, where they left them at the entry of the Forrest tied vnto a lofty pine, & so departed on their Iorney.
               There we will leaue them for a time, and speak of the seauen Champions of Christendome, that were gone on Pilgrimage to the Cittie of Ierusalem, and what strange aduentures happened to them in their trauels.
            
            
               
               CHA. IIII.
               
                  Of the Aduenture of the Golden Fountaine in Damasco: how sixe of the Christian Champions were taken prisoners by a mightie Giant, and after how they were deliuered by Saint George: and also how he redeemed fourteene Iewes out of prison: with diuers other strange accidents that happened.
               
               
                  LET vs now speake of the fauourable clemencie that smiling Fortune shewd to ye Christian Champions in their trauells to Ierusalem. For after they were departed from England, and had iourneied in their Pilgrimes attire thorough manie strange Countreys, at last they arriued vpon the Confines of Damasco, which is a Countrey not onely beautefied with sumptuous and costly buildings framed by the curious Architecturie of mans deuice, but also furnished with all the precious gifts that Nature in her greatest liberalitie could bestow.
               In this fruitefull Dominion long time the Christian Champions rested their wearie steps, and made theyr abode in the house of a rich and curteous Iew, a man that spent his wealth chiefly for the succour and comfort of trauellers,

and wandring Pilgrims, his house was not curiously errected vp of carued timber work, but framed with quarries of blewstones, and supported by many stately pillo
                     •
                  s of the purest marble: The gates and entrie of his house were continually kept open in signe of his bountifull minde, euer the portall thereof hung a brazen table, whereon was most curiously ingrauen the picture of Ceres the Goddesse of plenty deckt with garlands of wheate, wre
                     •
                  thes of Oliu
                     •
                  s, bunches of Uines, and with all manner of fruitfull things, the chamber wherein these Champions tooke their nightly reposes and golden sléepes, was garnished with as many windows of Christall glasse, as there were daies in the yéere, and the wals painted with as many stories as there were yéeres since the world began: it was likewise built four square, after the manner of piramides in Gréece, at the east ende whereof was moste liuely portraied, bright Phoebus rising from Auroras golden bed, whose gli
                     ••
                  ering countenance at his departure, distaind the ellements with a purple colour. At the west side was likewise portraied how Thetis trippes vpon the siluer sands when as Hiperious carre driues to the watrie Ocean, and takes his nights repose vpon his louers bosome: on the North side was painted mountaines of snow whose 
                     •
                  ops did séeme to reach to heauen, & mightie woods ouer hung with siluer Isickles, which is the nature of the Northerne Climate.
               Lastly vpon the west side of the chamber satte the God of the seas riding vpon a Dolphins backe, with an hundred Mermaides following him, with their golden tramels floting vpon the siluer waues, there the Tritons séemed to daunce aboue the Christal streams with a number of other siluer scaled fishes that made the sea delightfull in pleasure.
               Ouer the roofe of the Chamber was most perfectly portraied the foure ages of the World, which séemed to ouerspred the rest of the curious workes.
               
                  First the golden age was pendant ouer the East: the second being the siluer a mettle somewhat hazer than the first, séemed to ouerspred the fréezing North. The thirde, which was the brazen age, beautifyed the westerne parts: The fourth and last being of Irone, being the basest of them all, séemed to bee p
                     •
                  ndant ouer the Southerne clymate.
               Thus in this curious Chamber rested these wearie Champions a long season, where their food was not delicious but wholsome, and their seruices were not curious, but comely: answerable to the braue mindes of such Heroycal Champions: the curteous Iew their friendly hoast whome nature had honored with seuen comely Sonnes dayly kept them company, and not only shewed them the curiositie of this habitation, but also discribed the pleasant scituation of his Countrie, how the townes & Cities were ornefied with all manner of delights, that they séemed like the immortall Pallaces of heauen, where celestiall Angelles doe record their Hermonies, and the fieldes and flowring medowes so beautified with natures gladsome ornaments, that they séemed for pleasure to excéede the paradice of Eliizum, where crowned soules doe liue in cudles glory.
               The dayes were spent away in such manner discourses to the excéeding pleasure of the Christian Knights, and euermore when darke night approched, and the wonted time of sléepe sommoned them to their silent and quiet restes, the Iewes children béeing seuen of the brauest and comlyest boyes that euer dame nature framed, tyred the Christian Champions eares wyth suche swéete inspiring Melodies which they strayned from theyr Iuory Lutes, that not Arion (when all the Arte of musique consented with his tune, voyce, and han
                     •
                  , when hee won mercy of the Dolphin, being forsaken of men) was comparable thereto. Whereby the Christian Champions

were inchaunted with such delights, that theyr golden sléepes séemed to be as pleasant as the swéete ioyes of Paradice.
               But vpon a time, after the curteous Iew had intelligence how they were Christian Knights, and those admired martiall Champions, whom fame had canonized to be the Wonders of the world for martiall discipline and Knightly aduentures: finding a fit opportunitie as hée walked in their companies vpō an euening vnder an arbour of vine branches, he reuealed to them the secretes of his soule, and the cause of his so sad and solitarie dwelling. So standing bareheaded in the middle of the Champions, with his white haires hanging downe to his shoulders in colour like to the siluer Swanne, and more softer than the downe of thistles, or Median silke vntwisted, he began with a sober countenance and gallant demeanour to speake as followeth vnto them, that setled them attentiuely to heare.
               I am sure (quoth he) you inuincible Knights, that yée meruaile at my solitarie course of liuing, and that you greatly muse wherefore I exempt my selfe from the companie of all worldlings, except my seuen Sonnes, whose sights be my chiefest comfort, and the onely prolongers of my life. Therefore prepare your eares to entertaine the strangest Discourse that euer tung pronounced, or ouerwearied aged man in the height of his extremitye delyuered.
               I was in my former yeres (whilst Fortune smilde vppon my happines) the principal Commaunder and chiefe Owner of a certaine Fountaine, of such a wonderfull & precious vertue, that it was valued to be worth the Kingdome of Iudea: the water thereof was so strange in operation, that in foure and twentie howers it wold conuert anie mettall, as of brasse, copper, yron, lead or tinne, into rich refined golde: the stonie flint it would turne into pure siluer, and anie kinde of earth into excellent mettal.

By the vertue thereof I haue made the leaues of Trées more richer than Indian Pearle, and the blades of grasse of more value than the Iewels that be found in the countrey of America.
               
               The richnesse thereof was no sooner bruted through the world, but it caused many forraine Knights to trie the aduenture, and by force of armes to bereaue me of the honor of this Fountaine. But at that time Nature graced me with one and twentie Sonnes, whereof seuen be yet liuing, and the onely comfort of myne age: but the other fourtéene (whom frowning Fortune hath bereaued me of) manie a day by their valiant prowesse and matchles fortitudes defended the Fountaine from manie furious assaylers: for there was no Knight in all the world that was found so hardie nor of such inuincible courage, that if they once attempted to incounter with anie of my valiaunt Sonnes, but they were either taken prisoners, or slaine in the combat.
               The fame of their valors, and the riches of the Fountaine rung through manie strange Countreyes, and lastly came to the eares of a furious Giant, dwelling vppon the Borders of Arabia: who at the report thereof came armed in his stéely coate with a mightie bat of yron on his necke, like to the furious Hercules that burst the brazen gates of Cerberus in twaine, and in state and bignes like the Sonne of Ioue that bore the mightie mountaine Atlas vpon his shoulders: he was the conquerour of my sonnes, and the first causer of my sodaine downfall. But when I had intelligence of the ouerthrow of fourtéen of my sons, and that he had made conquest of the wealthie fountaine, I with the rest of my Children, thinking all hope of recouerie to be past, betooke our selues to this solitarie course of life, where euer since in this mansion or hermitage we haue made our abode and residence, spending our wealth to the releefe of trauelling Knightes and wandering Pilgrimes▪ hoping once againe that smiling Fortune would

aduance vs to some better happe: and to bee plaine right worthy Champions my hope was neuer at the height of full perfection till this present time, wherein your excellent presences almost assure me that the hideous monster shalbe conquered, my fountaine restored, my Sonnes deaths (for dead sure they are) reuenged.
               The Champions with great admiration gaue eare to the strange discourse of this reuerent Iew, and intended in requitall of his extraordinarie kindnesse to vndertake this aduenture. And the more to encourage the other, Saint George began in this manner to deliuer his mind, speaking both to the Iew their hoast, and his valiant fellow Champions.
               I haue not without great wonder (most reuerent and curteous olde man) heard the strange discourse of thy admirable fountaine, and doe not a little lament that one of so kinde & liberall a disposition should be dispossessed of so excéeding riches, for that wealth to a liberal nature is alone conuenient: neither am I lesse sorry, that so inhumane a monster and knowen enemie to all curtesie and kinde should haue the fruition of so excéeding great Treasure: for to the wicked, wealth is the cause of their more wickednes But that which most grieueth me, is: that hauing so many valiant Knights to thy Sonnes, they all were so vnfortunate to fall into the handes of that relentlesse Monster. But be comforted kinde olde man, for I haue hope by the power of heauen we were directed hither to punish that hateful Giant, reuenge the iniuries offered to thine age, satisfie with his death the death of thy children if they be dead, and restore to thy bounteous possession that admirable rich fountaine.
               And nowe to you my valiant Companions I speake, that with mee through many dangers haue aduentured: let vs couragiously attempt this rare aduenture, wherein such honor to our names, such happines to our frends, such glory to God consistes, in recouering right to the wronged,

and punishing rightfully the wrongers of the righteous. And that there be no contention among vs who shall begin this aduenture, for that I knowe all of you thirtie after honor, let lots bee made, and to whome soeuer the théefe lot falleth let him be formost in assailing the Giant, and God and all good fortune be our guides.
               The excéeding ioy which the old Iew conceiued, at the spéeches of Saint George, had néere hande bereft him of the vse of sense, so aboue measure was he ouerioyed. But at length recouering vse of spéech, he thus thankfully brake foorth.
               How infinitely I finde my selfe bounde vnto you, you famous and vndoubted Christian Champions, all my ablenes is not able to expresse: onely thankfulnes from the exchequer of a true heart shall to you bee rendred.
               The Champions without more words disrobing themselues from their Pilgrims attyre, euerie one selected foorth an armor fitting to their portely bodyes, and in stéed of their Ebone staues tipt with siluer, they welded in their handes the stéeled blades, and their féete that had wont to indure a paineful pilgrimage vpon the bare ground, were now redy prest to mount the golden stirrop, but as I said, they purposed not generally to assaile the Giant, but singly euerie one to trie his owne fortune thereby to obtaine the greater honor, and their déeds to merrit the higher fame, therfore the lots being cast amongst themselues which of them should beginne the aduenture. The lot fell first to Saint Denis the Noble Champion of France, who greatly reioyced at his fortune, and so departed for that night to get things in readines, but the next morning no sooner had the golden Sunne displaide his bewty in the East, but Saint Denis arose from his sluggish bed, and attyred himselfe in costly armor, and mounted vpon a stéede of Irone gray with a spangled Plumbe of purple feathers on his burgonet, spangled with starres of golde, resembling the azure firmament beautifyed with starres.
               
                  After he had taken leaue of the other Champions, and had demaunded of the Iew where the Giant had his residence, he departed forward on his iourney: and before the Sunne had mounted to the top of heauen, he approached to the Giants presence, which as then sate vppon a block of stéele directly before the golden Fountaine, satisfying his hunger with raw flesh, and quenching his thirst wyth the iuyce of ripe grapes.
               The first sight of his vgly and deformed proportion almost daunted the valor of the French Champion, so as he stood in a maze, whether it were better to trie the aduenture, or to returne with dishonor backe to his other fellow Knights. But hauing a heart furnished with true magnanimitie, he chose rather to dye in the incounter, than to returne with infamie: so committing his trust to the vnconstant Quéene of chaunce, he spurred foorth his horse, and assayled the Giant so furiously, that the strokes of his sword sounded lyke weightie blowes hammered vpon an anuyle.
               But so smally regarded the Giant the puissant force of this single Knight, that he wold scarce rise from the place where he sate: but yet remembring a vision that a little before appeared vnto him in his sléepe, which reueald vnto him, how that a Knight should come from the Northerne clymates of the earth, which should alone 
                     •
                  nde the aduenture of the Fountaine, and vanquish him by fortitude: therefore not minding to be taken at aduantage, he sodainly started vp, and with a grim and furious countenaunce he ran vpon Saint Denis, and tooke him horse, armour, furniture and all vnder his left arme, as lightly as a strong man would take a sucking infant from his cradle, and bore him to a hollow rocke of stone, bound about with barres of yron, standing néere vnto the Fountayne, in a valley betwixt two mightie mountaines. In which prison he closed the French Champion, amongst fourtéen other Knights, that were al Sonnes to the curteous Iew

as you heard before discourse
                     •
                  , and being proud of this attempt he returned backe to his blocke of stéele, where we wil leaue him sitting, glorying in his own conceite, and speake of the other champions remaining in the Iewes house, expecting the French knightes fortunate returne: but when the sable Curtaines of darknes were drawne before the christall windowes of the day, and night had taken possession of the elements, and no newes was heard of the Champions successe, they iudged presently that eyther hee was slaine in the aduenture, or discomfited and taken prisoner.
               Therefore they cast lots againe which of them, the next morning should trye his fortune, and reuenge the French knights quarrel, but the lot fel to Saint Iames the Noble champion of Spaine, where at his Princelie heart more reioyced, then if he had béene made King of the Westerne UUorld.
               So vpon the next morning by the breake of day, he attyred himselfe in rich and costly armor like the other Champion, and mounted vppon a Spanish Ginnet, in pace more swifter then the winde, and in portly state like to Beucephalus the proud stéede of Macedonian Alexander: his caparison was in color like to the waues of the Sea, his Burgonet was beautified with a spangled plumbe of sable feathers: and vpon his brest hee bore the armes of Spaine.
               Thus in this gallant manner departed he from the Iewes habitation, leauing the other Champions at their deuine contemplations for his happie successe, but his fortune chanced contrarie to his wishes, for at the Giants first encounter he was likewise born to the rock of stone, to accompany Saint Denis.
               
               This Giant was the strongest and hardiest knight at armes that euer set foote vpon the confines of Damasko, his strength was so inuincible, that at one time hee durst encounter with a hundred knights: but now returne we

againe to the other champions, whome when night approached, and likewise missing the company of Saynt Iames they cast lots the third time, and it fel to the Noble champion of Italy Saint Anthony, whome on the next morning attyred himselfe in costly habiliments of war, and mounted vpon a Barbarian Palfrie as richly as did the valiant Iason when he aduentured into the Ile of Colcas, for the golden fleece: and for Medeas loue, his Helmet glistered like an Isie mountaine, deckt with a plumbe of ginger coloured feathers, and beautified with many siluer pendants. But his shining glory was soone blemished with a cloude of mischance, although hee was as valiant a knight as euer brandisht weapō in the fields of Mars, yet hee founde a disabilitie in his fortitude, to withstand the furious blowes of the Giant, that hee was forced to yeeld himselfe prisoner like the former Champions.
               The next lot that was cast, chanced to Saint Andrew of Scotland, a Knight as highly honoured for martiall discipline as any of the rest, his steede was of the breede of the Flemish Mares, clad with a caparison after the maner of the Brecians, his Armor varnished with greene oyles, like the color of the Somer fields vpon his brest he bore a crosse of purple silke, and on his burgonet a plumb of gréene feathers: but yet fortune so frowned vpon his enterprize, that he nothing preuayled, but committed his life to the mercy of the Giant, who likewise imprisoned him with the other Knights.
               The fift lot fell to Saint Pattricke of Ireland, as braue a knight as euer nature created, and as aduenterous in his atchiuements: I feuer Hector vpō the Phrigian steede Praunst it vp and downe the stréetes of Troy, and made that age admire his fortitude: this Irish knight might counter-uaile his valor.
               For no sooner had the siluer Moone forsooke the Azure Firmament, and had committed her charge to the golden

burnisht Sunne: But Saint Pattricke approached the sight of the Giant, mounted vppon his Irish hobby, cladde in a corselet of prooffe, beautified with siluer nayles: his plumbe of feathers, was of the color of Uirgins hayre, his horse couered with a vale of Orenge tawny silke, and his saddle bound about with plates of Steele, like to an Iron chayre.
               The sight of this valliant Champion so daunted the courage of the Giant, that hee thought him to bee the knight that the vission had reuealed, by whome the aduenture shoulde bee accomplished: therefore with no cowardly fortitude hee assayled the Irish knight, who with as Princely valor indured the incounter: but the vnkinde destinies not intending to giue him the honor of the victory, ecompelled the Champion to yéeld to the Giants forces, and like a Captiue to accompany the other imprisoned Champions.
               The next lot fell to Saint Dauid of Wales, who nothing discouraged at the discomfiture of the other Christian knightes, but at the mornings Suns vpryse into the azure firmament, glistered in his siluer Armor before the fountaine, with a golden Griffon shyning on his brest, where he endured long & daungerous combate with the Giant, making the skyes to resound with echoes of their stroakes, but at last when the Giant perceaued that Saint Dauid beganne to growe almost breathlesse, in defending the huge and mightie blowes of his stéeled batte, and chiefely through the long incounter, the Giant renewed his strength, and so redoubled his stroakes that Saint Dauid was constrayed lyke the other Christian Champions to yeeld to the Gyants mercies.
               But now the inuinsible and heroyecall Champyon of England Saint George, hee that is fames true knight, the mappe of Honour, and the worlds wonder,

remayning in the Iewes pauilion, and pondring in hys minde of the bad successe of the sixe Champions, and that it was his turne to try his fortune the next morning in the aduenture: he fell vpon his knées and made this humble supplycation to the Maiesty of God. O thou creator of this worldly Globe (quoth he,) O thou that hast fought for thy christian Knights in fields of purple bloud, and made the enemies of heauen to swim in streames of Crimson gore, O thou that hast giuen mee still the victory, graunt that I may confounde this bloudy and vnhumaine monster, that hath discomfited sixe of the brauest knights that euer nature framed, euen as thou wast my ayde when I slewe the burning Dragon in Egipt: and when I conquered the terrible Giant that kept the inchaunted Castle amongst the Amazonians, euen so let me accomplish this daungerous aduenture, that all christians and christian Knights may applaude thy name, and in thy defence and iust quarrell, may stil be honored with the golden pledge of knighthood.
               In this manner spent hee away the night in making his deuine orations to heauen, for the happy successe of the next daies enterprize, whereon he vowed by the honor of his golden Garter, either to returne a worthy conquerer, or to dye a faithfull Martir. And when the day began to beautifie the Easterne Elements with a purple color, he repayred to the Iewes armory, and clad himselfe in a blacke Corselet, and mounted vpon a pitchy coloured steede, adorned with a bloud▪ red caparison, in signe of a bloudy and tragicall aduenture, his plume of feathers was like a flame of fire quencht in blood as a token of speedy reuenge, hee arm'd himselfe not with a sturdy Launce, bounde about with plates of brasse, but tooke a Iauelin made of stéele, the one end far more sharper then the pointe of a néedle, the other end a ball of Iron in fashion of a mace of or club.
               
                  Being thus armd according to his wished desires, hee tooke leaue of the Iew and his seauen Sonnes, who sate attyred in blacke and mournfull ornaments, praying for his happie and fortunate successe: and so departed spéedily to the golden Fountaine, where hee found the Giaunt sléeping carelesly vpon his blocke of stéele, dreading no insuing dangers.
               But when the valiant Champion Saint George was alighted from his horse, and had sufficiently beheld the deformed proportion of the Giant: how the hair of his head stood staring vpright like to the bristles of a wilde Boare, his eyes gazing open like two blazing Comets, his téeth long and sharpe like to spikes of stéele, the nayles of hys hands like the tallants of an Eagle, yet ouer them was drawen a paire of yron gloues: and euerie other limme huge and strongly proportioned like to the bodie of some mightie Oake, the worthie Champion awakened him in this order.
               Arise (sayd he) thou vnreasonable deformed Monster, and either make deliuerie of the captiue Knights, whom thou wrongfully detainest, or prepare thy vgly selfe to abide the vttermost force of my warlike arme and death-prepared weapon.
               At which words the furious Giant started vp, as one sodainly amazed or affrighted from his sleepe: and without making anie reply at all, taking his yron Mace fast in both his hands, he did with great terror let driue at the most worthie English Champion, who with exceeding cunning nimblenes defended himselfe from certaine danger by spéedie auoyding the blowes violence, and withall returned on his aduersarie a mightie thrust with the pointed or sharpe ende of his Iauelin, which rebounded from the Giants bodie, as if it had béen runne against an Adamantine piller.
               The which the inuincible Saint George perceiuing, he turned the heauie round ball ende of his massie iaueline,

and so mightely assayled the Giant, redoubling his heauie blowes with such couragious fortitude, that at last he beate his braines out of his deformed head: whereby the Giant was constrained to yéeld vp his ghost, and to giue such a hideous roare, as though the whole frame of the Earth had béen shaken with the violence of some storme of thunder.
               This béeing done, Saint George cast his loathsome carkasse as a pray for the fowles and rauenous beastes to seaze vppon: and after verie diligently searched vp and downe, till he found the Rocke wherein all the Knightes and Champions were imprisoned: the which wyth hys stéely Iauelin he burst in sunder, and deliuered them presently from their seruitudes, and after returned most triumphantly backe to the Iewes Pauilion, in as great maiestie and roialtie as Vaspasian with his Romane Nobles and Péeres returned into the confines of flourishing Italy
                  ▪ from the admired and glorious conquest of Ierusalem and Iudea.
               
               But when the reuerend olde Iew sawe the English champion returned with victorie, together with his other sixe fellow champions, and likewise beheld hys fourtéene Sonnes safely deliuered, his ioy so mightely excéeded the bounds of reason, that he sodainly swonded, and lay for a time in a dead traunce, with the exceedingnes of plesure he conceiued.
               But hauing a little recouered his decayed senses, hee gladly conducted them into their seuerall Lodgings, and there they were presently vnarmed, and their woundes washed in white wine and new milke, and after banqueted them in the best manner hee could deuise. At which Banquet there wanted not all the excellencie of musique that the Iewes seauen yonger Sonnes could deuise, extolling in their sweete Sonnets the excellent fortitude of the English champion, that had not onely deliuered their captiued Bretheren, but restored by that vgly Giants deserued

death their aged Father to the repossession of his golden Fountaine.
               Thus after Saint George with the other sixe Champions had soiourned there for the space of thirtie dayes, hauing placed the Iew with his Sonnes in their former desired dignities, that is in the gouernment of the Golden Fountaine, they cloathed themselues againe in theyr Pilgrimes attyre, and so departed forward on theyr intended Iourney to visite the holy Sepulcher of our Sauiour Christ.
               Of whose noble Aduentures you shall heare more in the Chapter following.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Of the Champions returne from Ierusalem from the Sepulcher of Christ, and after how they were almost famished in a wood: and and how saint George obtained them food by his valour in a Giaunts House with other things that happened.
               
               
                  THe Champions after this neuer rested trauelling till they arriued at the holy Hill of Mount Sion, and had visited the blessed Sepulcher of Christ, the which they found most richly built of ye purest marble, garnished curiously by cunning Architecturie, with manie 
                     •
                  arbuncles of Iasper, and pillors of ieate. The Temple wherein it was erected, stood seauen degrées of staires within the ground, the gates whereof were of burnisht golde, and the portalles of refined siluer, cut as it dyd séeme out of a most excellent nature beautefied Alablaster Rocke.
               By it continually burned a swéet smelling Taper, alwayes maintained by twelue of the Noblest Uirgines dwelling in all Iudea, attending still vppon that blessed Sepulcher, clad in silken ornaments in colour like the Lillyes in the flourishing pride of Summer: the which

costly attire, they continually weare, as an euident signe of their vnspotted virginities: many daies offred vp these worthy Champions these ceremonious deuotions, to the sacred Tombe of Christ, washing the marble pauement with their vnfained teares, and witnessing their true and heartie zeales, with their continual vollyes of discharged sighes.
               But at last vppon an Euening, when Titans golden beames began to descend the Westerne Elements, as those Princely minded Champions in companie of those twelue admyred Maidens, knéeled before the Sepulcher offering vp their Euening Orizons, an vnséene voyce (to the amazement of them all) from a hollow vault in the Temple vttered these words.
               You magnanimous Knights of Christendome, whose true nobilities hath circled the earth vpon the wings of fame, whose bare féete for the loue of 
                     〈◊〉
                   swéet Sauiour, hath set more wearie steps vpon the parched earth, then there be stars within the golden Cannopy of heauen: returne, returne into the bloodie fields of warre, and spend not the honour of your times in this ceremonious maner: for great things by you must bee accomplished, such as in time to come shall fill large Chronicles, and cause babes as yet vnborne to speak of your honorable atchiuements.
               And you chast Maidens that spend your liues in seruice of your God, euen by the plighted promise you haue made to true Uirginitie, I charge you to furnish foorth these warlike Champions with such approoued furniture as hath béene offered to this blessed Sepulcher, by those trauelling Knights, which haue fought vnder the Banner of Christ. This is the pleasure of the Heauens great Guider, and this for the redresse of wronged Innocents in earth must be with all immediate dispatch foorthwith accomplished.
               This vnexpected voyce had no sooner ended, but the

Temple (in their conceites) séemed full strangely to resound like the melodie of celestial Angels▪ or the holy harmony of the heauenly Rubens, as a signe that the Gods were pleased at their procéedings: then the twelue Uirgins arose from their diuine contemplations and conducted the seauen Champions to the farther side of mount Syon, and there bestowed franklie vppon them, seauen of the brauest Stéedes that euer they beheld, with Martiall furniture answerable therunto, befitting knights of such estéeme: then the christian Champions beeing proude of their good fortunes, attyred them selues in rich and sumptious corselets, and after mounted vppon their warlike coursers, kindly bidding the Ladies adiew: they betooke them to the worlds wide iourney. This trauell began at that time of the yeare, when the Sommers quéene began to spread her beauteous mantles amongst the gréene and fresh boughes of the hye and mightie Cedars, when as all kinde of small birds flewe round about, recreating themselues in the beautie of the day, and with their well tuned notes, making a swéete and heauenlye melodye: at that time I say, these mightie and well estéemed knights the seauen Champions of Christendome, tooke the way from Ierusalem, which they thought to be most vsed: in which they had not many daies trauelled through the deserts and euer many a mountaine top, but they were meruailously troubled for lacke of their accustomed and dayly victuals, and could not hide nor dissemble their great hunger, so that the warre which they sustayned with hunger, was farre greater then the battels that they had fought against the enemies of Christ, as you heard discoursed in the first part of this Historye.
               So vpon a Sommers euening, when they had spent the day in great extreamitie, and night grewe on, being in a thicket of mightye trées, where as the siluer Moone with her bright beames glistred most cléerly, yet to them it séemed to bee as darke as pitch, for they were very sore

troubled for lacke of that which shoulde sustaine them: and their faces did showe and declare the perplexities of their stomackes.
               So they sate them downe vppon the gréene and freshe hearbes, very pensiue of their extreame necessitie, procuring to take their rests that night: but all was in vayne, for that their corporall necessities would not consent thervnto: but without sléeping they walked vp and downe for that night, till the next day in the morning that they turned to their accustomed trauell and iourney, thinking to finde some food for the cherishing of their stomackes, and had their eyes alwayes gazing about, to espye some Uillage or house, wherein they might satisfye their hunger and take their restes.
               Thus in this helplesse manner spent they away the next day, till the closing in of the euenings light, by which time they grewe so faint, that they fell to the ground with féeblenesse: Oh what a sorrowe was it to Saint George, not only for him selfe, but to sée the rest of the Champions in such a miserable case, beeing not able to helpe themselues, and so parting a little from them, he lamented in this manner following.
               Thou God of Iudea: in whose handes both life and death remaines, and at whose frownes the lowe foundation of the fastened will tremble and quake: the outragious Seas swell and rise aboue theyr boundes, the woods and wildernes rose with tempestious guses, and the fruitfull earth growe barren. Oh pitty mee thou most gratious God: thou mightiest amongst the powers of heauen: thou that hast giuen me so many victories: thou that hast made me conqueror of Kinges and kingdomes: and thou by whose inuinsible power I haue tamed the black-faste furyes of darke Cositus that maskte abroad the worlde in humaine shapes: looke downe I say from thy Imperiall seate, euen by my Pilgrimage vnto thy Sacred shrine: showe mee some fouor, and doe not

consent that I and my companie perish for hunger & want of victualls: make no delay to remedie our great necessitie: let vs not be meat for birds houering in the aire, nor our bodies cast as a pray for rauenous beasts ranging in th
                     •
                  se woods: but rather if we must néedes perish, let vs dy by the hands of the strongest warriers in the vniuersal world, and not 
                     •
                  asely to loose our liues with cowardlye hunger.
               These and such like reasons vttered this valiaunt Champion of England, till such time as the day appeared and the sable curtaines of coale blacke night were withdrawen. Then returned he to the rest of his Companie, where he found them verie weake and féeble: but he encouraged them in the best manner he could deuise to take their horses, and to trie the chaunce of their vtmost vnkinde fortune.
               Although Saint George as they trauelled was readie to dye by the way, and in great confusion of minde: yet rode he first to one then to another, comforting them, and making them ride apace: which they might verie well doo, for that their horses were not so vnprouided as theyr Masters, by reason of the goodly grasse that grew in those Woods, wherewith at pleasure they filled themselues euerie night.
               The golden Sunne had almost mounted to the top of heauen, and the glorious prime of the daye began to approch, when they came into a great field verie plaine, and in the middest of it was a little Mountaine, out of the which there appeared a great smoake which gaue them to vnderstand that there should be some habitation in that place.
               Then the Princely minded Saint George said to the other Champions: Take comfort with your selues, and by little and little come forward with an easie pace: for I will ride before to sée who shall be our hoast this ensuing night. And of this braue Knights and Companions, bée

all assured, whether hee be pleasde or no, yet shall hee giue vs lodging and entertayne vs like to trauelling Knights, and therewithall he set spurres to his horse, and swiftly scowred away like to a ship with swelling sailes vpon the marble coloured Ocean: his hast was so spéedy that in a short time he approached the mountaine, where at the furie & rushing of his horse in running, there arose from the ground a mightie and terrible Giant, of so great height, that he séemed to bee a bigge growne trée, and for hugenes like to a rocke of stone: but when he cast his staring eyes vpon the English knight: which seemed like two brazen plates or two torches euer flaming, he layde hand vpon a mightie club of Iron which lay by him, and came with great lightnesse to méete Saint George, but when he approached his presence, he thought him to bee a Knight but of small vallor and fortitude, he threw away his Iron bat, and came towards the champion, intending with his fistes and buffets to beat out his braines, but the courage of the English champion so exceeded, that he forgot the extremity of hunger, for like a couragious knight he raised himselfe in his stirrops, otherwise hee coulde not reach his head, and gaue him such a blowe vpon the forehead with his keene edged fauchion, that he cut his head halfe in sunder, and his braines in great aboundance ran downe his deformed bodie: so that amazed hee fell to the ground and presently dyed. His fall seemed to make the ground to shake, as though a stony tower had béene ouerturnd, for as he lay vpon the earth, he seemed to be a great oake blowne vp by the rootes with a tempestious whirlwinde.
               At that instant the rest of the champions came to that place, with as much ioy at that present, as before they were sad and sorrowfull.
               But when Saint Denis with the other knights, did sée the greatnes of the Giant, and the deformity of his body, they aduanced his valor beyond immagination, and déemed

him the fortunatest Champion that euer nature framed, holding that aduenture in as high honour, as the Grecians held Iasons prize when he turned from Colchos with Medeas golden Fléese: and with as great daunger accomplished as the twelue fearfull labours of Hercules: but after some fewe speaches passed, Saint George desired the rest of the Champions to goe and sée what store of victuals the Giant had prepared for them.
               Upon this they concluded, and so generally entred the Giants house, which was in the maner of a great Barne cut out of the hard stone, and wrought out of the Rocke: therein they found a mightie copper Chauldron standing vppon a treauet of stéele, the féet and supporters thereof, were as bigge as great Iron pillers: vnder the same burned such a huge flaming fire, that it sparkeled like the fierye Furnace in burning Acharon:
               
               Within the Chaldron were boyling the fleshe of two f
                     •
                  tte Bullockes, prepared onely for the Giants dinner: the sight of this ensuing banquet gaue them such comfort, that eueryone fell to worke, hoping for their trauel to eat parte of the meate: one turned the béefe in the Chaldron, another increased the fire, and some pulled out the coales, so that there was not anye idle in hope of the benefite to come.
               The hunger they had, and their desire to eate, caused them to fall to their meate before it was halfe readye as though that it had béene ouer-sodden; but the two knights of Wales and Ireland, not intending to dine without bread and drinke, searched in a secret hollow caue, wheras they found two great loaues of bread, as bigge in compasse as the circle of a well, and two great Flagons full of the best Béere that euer they tasted, the which with great ioye and pleasure, they brought from the caue, to the great and excéeding contentment of the other Champions.
               In stead of a knife to cut their victuals, Saint George
                  
vsed his Curtulaxe which lately had béene stayned with the hatefull Giants de
                     •
                  ested blood, and that had béene imbrewed with his loathsome braynes.
               Thus and after this manner qualified they the pinching paines and torments of hunger, whereof they tooke as ioyfull a repast as if they had banqueted in the richest Kings Pallace in the world.
               So giuing thankes to heauen for their good and happy fortunes, Saint George requested the Chompiens to take horsse, and mounted himselfe vpon his palfrey, and so trauelled from thence thorowe a narrowe path, which séemed to be vsed by the Giant: and so with great diligence they trauelled all the rest of that day, till night had closed in the beautye of the heauens: at which time they had got to the top of a high mountaine, from whence a little before night they did discouer meruaylous great and playnes, the which were inhabited with fayre Cities and townes, at which sight these Christian Champions receiu
                     •
                  d great contentment and ioy, and so without any staying, they made hast onwards on their iorney till such time as they came to a lowe valley lying betwixt two running riuers: where in the midst of the way they found an Image of fine Cristall, the picture & liuely forme of a beautiful Uirgin, which séemed to be wrought by the hands of some moste excellent worke-man, all to be spotted with blood.
               And it appeared by the woundes that were cunningly formed in the same picture, that it was the image of some Lady that had suffred torments, aswell with terrible cuf
                  
                     •
                  ings of yrons, as with cruel whippings: the Ladies legs and armes did seeme as though they had béene martyred and wrunge with cordes: and about the necke, as though shee had béene forceablye strangled with a napkin or towell: the cristall Picture laye vppon a rich adorned bed of blacke cloathes vnder an arbor of purple Roses: by the curious faire formed Image, sate a goodly aged man in a

chaire of cipresse wood, his attire was after the manner of the Arcadian sheap-heards not curious but comely, yet of a blacke and s
                     •
                  ble colour, as a sure signe of some deadly discontent▪ his hayre hung downe belowe his shoulders, like vntwisted silke, in whitenes like downe of thistles, his beard ouer growne dangling downe, as it were frozen Isickles vpon a hauthorne tree, his face wrinkled and ouerworn with age and his eyes almost blind in bewraying the greefes and sorrows of his heart.
               Which strange and woful spectacle, when the christian champions vigilantly behelde, they coulde not by any manner of meanes refraine from shedding some sorrowfull teares, in seeing before them that a woman of suche excellent beautie should be opprest with cruelty. But the pittifull English Knight had the greatest compassion, when he behelde the counterfeit of this tormented creature, who taking truce with his sorrowfull heart, he curteously desired the olde Father, sitting by this spectacle, the cause of his sorrow, and the true discourse of that maidens passed fortunes: for whose sake hee seemed to spend his daies in that solitary order, to whome the olde man with a number of sighes thus kindly replyed, braue knightes, for so you séeme by your curtesies and behauiours, to tell the storie of my bitter woes, and the causer of my endles sorrows, will constraine a spring of teares to trickle from the Conduits of my aged eyes, and make the mansion of my heart to riue in twaine, in remembring of my vndeserued miseries: as many drops of bloud hath fallen from my heart as there be siluer haires vpon my head, and as many sighes haue I strained from my brest as there be minutes in a yéere, for thrice seuen hundred times the mornings dew hath wet my siluer hayres, and thrise seuen hundred times the winters frosts hath nipt the mountaine tops since first I made these ruful lamentations, during all which time I haue set before this christall Image, howerly praying that some curteous

Knight would be so kinde, as to ayde me in my vowed reuenge, and now fortune I sée hath smild vpon me, in sending you hether to work a iust ceuenge for the inhumane murther of my daughter, whose perfect Image lyeth here carued in fine Christall, as the continuall obiecte of my griefe: and because you shall vnderstand the true discourse of her timeles Tragidie, I haue writte that downe in a paper booke with mine owne blood, the which my faintfull tongue is not able to reueale, and thereupon hee pulled from his bossome a golden couered booke with siluer claspes, and requested Saint George to read it to the rest of the kinghts, to which he willingly condescended, so sitting downe amongst the other Champions vpon the gréene springing grasse, hee opened the bloudy written booke and read ouer the contents, which contained these sorrowful wordes following.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  What hapned to the Champions, after they ha
                        •
                      found an Image of fine Crista
                        •
                     l, in the forme of a murthered Mayden: where Saint G
                        •
                     orge had a golden Booke giuen him, wherein was written in blood, the true Traged
                        •
                     es of two Sisters: and likewise how the Champions intended a speedy reuenge vpon the Knight of the blacke Castle, for the deaths of the two Ladies.
               
               
                  IN former times whilste Fortune smilde vpon me, I was a welthye Shéepheard, dwelling in this vnhappye Countrye, not onely held in great estimation for my welth, but also for two faire Daughters which nature had mad most excellent in beautie: in whome I tooke such excéeding ioy & delight, that I accounted them my chiefest happinesse: but yet in the end, that which I thought should most content me, was the occasion of this my endles sorrowes.
               My two Daughters (as I said before) were endued with wonderfull beauty, and accompanyed with no lesse

honestie: the fame of whose virtues was so blazed into many partes of the worlde: by reason whereof, there repayred to my Shéepheards Cottage, diuers strange and worthye Knights, with greate desire to marrie with my Daughters. But aboue them all, there was one named Leoger, the knight of the blacke Castle (wherein he now remayneth) beeing in distance from this place some two hundreth leagues, in an Island incompassed with the sea.
               This Leoger I say, being so entrapped with the beautye of my Daughters, that he desired me to giue him one of them in mariage: but 
                     •
                   little mistrusting his treason and crueltie that after followed, but rather considering the greate honor that might r
                     •
                  dounde thereof, for that he was a woorthy knight and of much fortitude: I quickly fulfilled his desire, and graunted to him my eldest Daughter in mariage: where after that H
                        •
                     meus holy rites were solemnized, in great pomp and state she was conducted in company of her new wedded Lord, to the blacke Castle, more li
                     ••
                  r a Princ
                     •
                  sse in estate then a shéepheards daughter of such degrée:
               But yet still I retained in my company the youngest, beeing of farre more beautie then her elder Sister: of which, this trayterous and vnnaturall knight was informed and her surpassing beauty so extolled, that in a small time he forgot his new maried wife, and swéet companion, and wholly surrendred himselfe to her loue, without consideration that he had maried her other sister So this disordinate and lustful loue, kindled and increased in him euery day more and more, and hee was so troubled with this new desire, that he dayly deuised with himselfe by what meanes he might obtaine her, and kéepe her in dispite of all the World: in the end he vsed this policie and deceipt to get her home into his Castle, for when the time grewe on that my eldest daughter his wife, should bee deliuered, hee came in great pompe with a stately traine of followers to my cottage, and certified me that his wife

was deliuered of a goodly 
                     •
                  oy, and thereupon requestest me with very faire and louing wordes, that I woulde let my daughter goe vnto her sister, to giue her that contentment which she desired, for shee did loue her more déer 
                     〈◊〉
                   then her owne soule: Thus his craftie and subtil perswations so much preuailed, that I coulde not frame any excuse to the contrarie, but muste néedes consent to his demaund, so straight way when hee had in his power, that which his soule so much desired, hee presently departed, giuing me to vnderstand that hee would carry her to hys wife, for whose sight she had so much desired, and at whose comming she would receiue great ioy and contentment, her sodaine departure bred such sorrow in my heart (
                     •
                  eing the onely comfort and stay of my declyned age) that the fountaines of my eyes rained downe a shewer of Salt teares vpon my aged brest, so deare is the loue of a father vnto his child: but to be short, when this lustfull minded catiffe with his pompious traine came in sight of his Castle, he commaunded his companie to ride forwards that with my daughter hee might secretly conferre of serious matters, and so staide lingring behinde, till hee sawe his company almost out of sight▪ and they two alone together, he found oportunitie to accomplish his lustful desires, and so rode into a little groue, which was hard at hande, close by a riuers side, where without any more tarying he caried her into the thickest part thereof, where he thought it most conuenient to performe so wicked a déede.
               When he behelde the branches of the thicke trées to withholde the light of heauen from them, and that it séemed a place ouerspred with the sable mantles of night, he alighted from his horse, and willed my welbeloued daughter that shee should likewise alight: shee in whose heart raigned no kinde of suspition, presently alighted, and sate her downe by the riuers side, and washed her faire white handes in the streames, and refreshed her mouth with the christall waters.
               
                  Then this dessembling Traitor coulde no longer refraine, but with a countenance like the lustfull King of Thrace when hee intended the rauishment of Progne, or like Tarquinius of Roame when he defloured Lucrecia, he let her vnderstand by some outward shewes, and darke sentences the kindled fire of loue that burned in his hart: and in the end he did wholy declare his deuilish pretence and determined purpose.
               So my louing daughter being troubled in minde with his lustfull assaylements beganne in manner to reprehend him, will you (said she defile my sisters bedde, and staine the honor of your house with lust: will you bereaue me of that precious Iewell, the which I holde more déerer then my life, and blot my true Uirginitie with your false desires: brought you me from the comfortable sight of my Father, to bee a ioy vnto my Sister, and will you florish in the spoile of my true chastitie? looke, looke, imoderate Knight, (I will not call thée brother) looke I say how the heauens doe blush at thy attempts, and see how chaste Diana sits vpon the winged firmaments, and threatens vengeance for her Uirgins sake: washe from thy heart these lustfull thoughts with shewers of thy repentant teares and séeke not thus to wrong thy mariage bed, the which thou oughst not to violate for all the kingdomes in the World.
               Then this accursed Knight, séeing the chaste and vertuous maiden, to stand so boldely in the defence of her Uirginitie, with his rigorus hand hee tooke fast holde by her necke, and with a wrathfull countenance hee deliuered these words: do not think stubbern damsel to preserue thy honor from the staine of my desires, for I sweare by the christall Towers of Heauen, either to accomplish my intent, or put thée vnto the cruel
                     •
                  est death that euer was deuised for anye damsell or maide: at which wordes, the most sorrowfull and disstressed Uirgin, with a shewer of Pearled teares, trickling downe her seemely blushing

cheekes, replyed in this order. Thinke not false Traytor (quoth she) that feare of death shall cause me to yéeld to thy filthy desires: no, no, I will accompt that stroak ten times happy, and more welcome to my soule, then the ioyes of wedlocke: then might I walke in the Elizian fields amongst those dames that dyed true virgins, and liue to behold the budde of my maydens glory, withered with the nypping frostes of thy vnnaturall desires.
               These wordes being well vnderstoode by the lustfull knight, who with a countenance more furious then the sauage Lyons in the Deserts of Libia, tooke her by the slender waste, and rigorously dasht her body against the ground, and therewithall spake these words. Understand s
                     •
                  id he, and be well perswaded, thou vnrelenting damsell, that either liuing or dead, I will performe my will and pretended purpose for in my hart there burnes a fire that all the water in the Seas can neuer quench, nor all the dri
                     ••
                  ing clouds of heauen, if they should drop eternal shewers of raine: but it is the water of thy swéet Uirginity that must quench my furious burning loue: and thereupon in a madnes he cut off a great part of the traine of her gowne, and bound it very fast to the hayre of her head, which glistered like to golden wyers, and drag
                     •
                  d her vp and downe the groue till the gréene grasse turned to a purple color, with the bloud that issued from her body: by which crueltie he thought to inforce her to hys pleasure, but she respecting not his wicked crueltie, and the more he procured to torment her, the more earnestly she defended her honor.
               When this cruell and inhumaine monster, saw that neither his flattering spéeches, nor his cruell threates were of sufficiencie to preuaile, hee beganne to forget all faith and loyaltie he ought vnto the honor of Knighthood, and the respect he should beare vnto women kinde, but bl
                     •
                  sphemed against heauen, and tearing her cloathes al to peeces, hee stripped her starke naked, and with the

haynes of the bridle of his horse, he cruelly whipped and scurged her white and tender bac
                     •
                  e, that it was full of blewe spo
                     •
                  tes, and horrible circles of blacke and settled bloud, with such extreame crueltie that it was a very gréeuous and sorrowfull sight to behold. And yet this did profite him nothing at all, for she continued in her former r
                     •
                  solution.
               He seeing that she still perseuerd in the defence of her honor, he straight waies like a bloudy monster, heaped crueltie vpon c
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  ltie: then he tooke and bound her wel pr
                     •
                  portioned legs and christeline armes▪ gréeuously vnto a withered trée (saying). Oh cruel and more cruell, then any woman in all the world hath euer béene: why dost then suffer thy selfe to bee thus tormented, and not g
                     •
                  ue cons
                     •
                  nt to procure my ease? Dost thou thinke it better to indure this marterdome, then to liue a moste louing, swéete and contented life: and therewithall his anger so increased that he stood staring on her face with his accu
                     •
                  sed eyes, fixed in such sort that he could not withdraw them backe.
               The which being perceiued by this distressed Uirgin, as one farre more desirous of death then of life, with a furious voyce she said: Oh thou traitor, thou wicked monster, thou vtter enemy to all humanitie, thou shamelesse creature more cruell then the Lyons in the desertes of Hercania: thou staine of Knighthood and the blondiest wretch that euer nature framed in the worlde, wherein dost thou contemplate thus thy self? thou fleshly butcher, thou v
                     •
                  mercifull Tyger, thou letcherous hogge, and dishonorer of thy progen
                     •
                  e: make an end (I say) of these my torments, for it is now too late to repent thee, gore my vnspotted brest with thy bloudy weapon, and send my soule into the bossome of Di
                        •
                     na, whome I behold sitting in the celestiall pallace of heauen, accompanied with numberles troops of vestal Uirgins, ready to entertaine my bleeding goast into her glorious Mansion.
               
                  This vnpitifull knight séeing the stedfastnesse that she had in the defence of her honor, with a cruell and infernall heart he tooke a silken scarfe which the Damsell had girded at her waste, and with a brutall anger doubled it about her necke, and pinched it so straight that her soule departed from her teresticall body.
               
                  O you valiant Knights that by your Prowes comes to the reading of this dismal Tragidy, and comes to the hearing of these bloudy lines, contained in this golden booke: consider the great constancie and chastitie of this vnfortunate maiden, and let the griefe thereof mooue you to take vengeance of this crueltie shewed without any desert.
               
               So when this infernall minded Knight sawe that shée was dead, he tooke his horse and rode after his company, and in a short time he ouer tooke them, and looked with so furious and Irefull a countenance, that there was none durst be so hardy to aske him where my daughter was, but one of his Squiers that bore me great affection for the kindnes and curtesie I ostended to him at his Ladyes and my daughters nuptials, hauing a suspition by the great alteration that appeared in his Master: and being very desirous to know what was become of the damsell for that he came alone without bringing the Damsell with him, neyther could he haue any sight of her: he then presently withdraw himselfe backe, and followed the footings of the horse, hee ceased not vntill hee came to the place where this crueltie was wrought, whereas he found the maiden dead, at the vewe whereof

he remained almost beside himselfe, in such sorte that hee had almost fallen to the ground: The sorrowfull Squire remained a good while before he could speake, but at last when he came againe to himselfe, he began with a dolorous complaint, crying out against the gods and fortune, because they had suffered so great a crueltie to be committed vpon this damsell.
               And making this sorrowfull lamentation, he vnloosed her from the trée, and layd her naked body vppon part of her apparell, the which hee found lying by, all besmear'd in blood, and afterwarde complained in this pitifull sort.
               O cruell Knight (quoth he) what an infernall hart remained in thy brest, or what hellish furie did beare thee company that thy hands hath committed this inhumane sacrifice? was it not sufficient that this her surmounted beauty might haue moued thée to pitty, when it is of power to moue the bloody Camibal to remorse, and constraine the sauage monsters to relent? so with these and other like sorrowfull words that the wofull Squire spake vnto the dead corpes, he cut downe branches from the trées, and gathered grasse from the ground for to couer the body, and left it lying so, that it séemed to be a mountaine of gréene grasse, or a thicket of springing trées, and then determined with himselfe in the best manner that he could, to dissemble the knowledge of the bloudy facte, hee tooke his horse and went the way towards the Castle, in which hee rode so fast that he ouertooke the Knight and his companie at the entring of the gates, whereas the lustfull tyrant alighted, and without speaking to any person, he entred into his closset, by reason wherof, this kinde and curteous Squire had time to declare all things hee had séene to the new maried Lady, and the dolorous end of the constant Damsell her Sister. This soddaine and vnlooked for sorrowe mixed with anger and wrath, was such in the Lady that shee caused the Squire not to depart from

the Castle, vntill such time as more occasion serued, and to kéepe all thinges in secret that he had séene, and she her selfe remayned, making meruailous and great lamentations to her selfe all in secret, for that she would not be perceiued, yet with a soft voyce she said.
               Oh vnfortunate Lady▪ borne in a sorrowfull howre, when some blazing and vnluckie Comette raigned: oh vnhappie Destenies, that made me wife vnto so cruell a knight, whose foule mis
                     •
                  déedes hath made the verye Elements to blush, but yet I know that Fortune will not be so far vnkinde, but that she will procure to take a strange reuenge vpon his purple-stayned soule: oh you immortall Gods, reuenge me on this wicked Homicide: if not, I do sweare that I will with mine owne hands put in practise such an enterprize, and so staine my vnspotted heart with wilful murther, that all the Gods aboue and all the bright celestiall powers of heauen, shall looke from their immortall Palace and tremble at the terror of my hate.
               This being said, she tooke in her hand a Dagger of the knights, and in her armes her younge sonne, being but of the age of fortie dayes (saying) now do I wish so much euill vnto the worlde, that I will not leaue the sonne of so wicked a fath
                     •
                  r aliue, but I will wash my hands in their accurssed bloodes, if they were in number to King Priams children: and so in this irefull order entred she the chamber where the knight her husband was, and finding him tumbling vpon his bed from the one side to the other, with out taking any rest, but in his furye renting and tearing the silken Ornaments, with a sorrowfull wéeping and terrible voyce she called him Traitor: and like a fierce Tigresse, with the Dagger that she brought in her hand, before his face she cut the throat of the innocent Babe, and threwe it to him on the bed, and therewithal said: take there (thou cruel Traitor) the fruite that thy wicked séed created in my bodye, and then threwe she the Dagger after him in hope to haue killed him: but Fortune would

not that it shoulde take effecte, for it strooke against the testerne of the bed, and rebounded backe vnto her handes, which when the Lady sawe that it nothing preuayled, she returned vppon her selfe her outragious furie: so taking the bloodye Dagger she thrust it to her heart, in such sorte, that it parted it in two péeces, and so she fell downe dead betwixt his armes, that was the occasion of all this bloody crueltie.
               The great sorrowe that this false and vnhappy knight receiued was so strange, that he knewe not what counsell to take: but thinking vppon a seuere vengeance that might succéede these cruell actes, he straight wayes procured that the body of the Lady, should be sec
                     ••
                  ely buryed, which beeing doone by him selfe in the saddest time of the night, in a solitarie garden vnder his castle-wall, where he heard a hollows voyce breath from the 
                     ••
                  epest vawltes of the earth, these manner of speaches fol
                     ••
                  wing.
               That for the bloody facte which he so lately had committed, his lyfe drewe néere to a shamefull end: and that his Castle with all his treasure therein, should be destroyed or fall into the handes of him whose Daughters he had so cruelly murthered.
               After this, he determined to vse a secret policie: which was,, to set watch and warde in euery passage néere vnto his Castle, and to arrest all such trauellers, as by aduenture landed vpon that Island, not suffering them to passe vntill such time as they had promised him by oath to ayde and assist him euen vnto death, against all his enemies:
               In the meane time, the aforenamed Squire which had séene and heard all the tragicall dealings that hath béene héere declared, in the best wise he could, returned againe vnto my cottage & tolde me all that you haue heard, which was vnto me very sorowful and heauy newes: iudge here then gentle knights and ye beholders of this woful tragedy, what sorow I vnfortunate wretch sustained, and what angwish I receiued: for at the hearing therof, I fell into a senceles

sounde, and being come againe vnto my selfe, I all to besmear'd my milk white hayre in dust, that before were as cleare as the tryed siluer, and with my teares being the true sings of sorrow, I bathed the bosome of my mother earth, and sighes pressed with such aboundance frō my tormented heart, that they staide the passage of my speach, and my tongue could not reueale the griefe that my wofull thoughts conceiued.
               In this dumbe silence and sorrow of minde I remained thrée daies and thrée nightes, numbring my silent passions with the minutes of the day, and my mightie griefes, with the starres of heauen, when frostie bearded winter hath cladde the elements with twinkling Diamons: but at last, when my amazed griefes were something abated, my eyes (almost blind with wéeping) required some sléepe thereby to mitigate the sorrows of my heart: I made my repayre into a pleasant meddow adioyning néere vnto my cottage, where amongst the gréen springing downes I purposed to take some rest, and to locke vp the closets of my tearfull eyes with golden slumbers, thinking it to be the greatest content my sobbing heart required: But before I could settle my sences to a quiet sléepe, I was constrained to breath this wofull lamentation from my oppressed soule: O vnhappie chaunce (quoth I) O cruell fortune: why didst thou not make me passe this bitter and sorrowful life in my childhood, or why did not the heauens permitte and suffer me to be strangled in my mothers wombe, or to haue perished in my cradle, or at my nursses pap? then had my heart neuer felt this sorrowe, my eares neuer heard the murther of my children, nor mine eyes neuer to haue wept so many helplesse teares.
               O you mountaines, you vntamed beastes: O you déepe Seas, you lustfull heauens, and you powers of reuengefull hell: come all I say and willinglie assist mee in this mortall Tragidie, that these my aged handes

which neuer yet practist any hainous crime, may now be stainde in his accursed bloud, that hath bereau'd me of the prop and stay of declined age, my daughters (I mean) whose bléeding goastes will neuer bee appeased, nor neuer sléep in quiet vpon the ioyful bankes of Elizian fields, but wander vp and downe the worlde, filling each corner of the earth with fearefull clamors of murder and reuenge, nor neuer shall the furies of my angry soule bee pacified, vntill my eyes beholde a streame of purple gore run trickling from the detestable brest of that accursed rauisher, and that the bloud may issue from his guiltie heart like a fountaine with a hundred springes, whereby the pauements of his Castle may be sprinckled with the fame, and the wals of his Turrettes colored with a crimson hew, like to the stréetes of Troy, when as her chanels ran with bloud
                     •
                   at the end of this sorrowfull lamentation, what for griefe, and what for want of natural rest, my eyes closed together and my sences fell into a heauy sléepe.
               But as I say: slumbring in the gréene meadowes, I dreamed that there was a great and fierce wilde man, which stood before me with a sharp faushion in his hand, making as though he would kill me, wherat me thought I was so frighted, that I gaue (in my troublesome dreams) many terrible shréekes, calling for succour to the emptie ayre. Then me thought there apperred before my face a company of curteous Knightes, which saide vnto mee, feare not old man, for we be come from the soules of thy daughters to aide and succour thée, but yet for all this, the wilde man vanished not away, but stroke with his faushion vppon my brest, whereat it s
                     ••
                  med to open, and howe that the wilde centaure put his hande into the wounde and pulled out my heart, so straight at the same instant mee thought that one of the Knightes lykewise layde hold vpon my hart, and stroue together with much contention who should pull it from the others handes,

but in the end each of them remained with a péece in his hand, and my heart parted in two.
               Then the péece which remained in the wilde mans power turned into a hard stone, and the péece which remained in the power of the Knight, conuerted into redde bloud, and so they vanished away.
               Then straight after this there appeared before my eyes the Image of my murthered daughter in the selfe same manner and forme as you behold her héere portrayed, who with a naked bodie all besmear'd in bloud, reported vnto mee the true discourse of her vnhappie fortunes, and tolde me in what place, and where her body lay in the woods dishonored for want of buriall: Also desiring me not of my selfe to attempt the reuengement, for it was impossible, but to intombe her corpes by her mother▪ and cause the picture of her body to bee moste liuely portraied and wrought of fine christall in the same manner that I found it in the woods, and after errect it néere vnto a common passage, where aduenterous Knights do vsually trauaile. Also assuring mee that thether shoulde come certaine christian Champions that should reuenge my iniuries and inhumane murther.
               Which words being finished, me thought she vanished away, with a gréeuous and heauie grone, leauing behinde her certaine droppes of bloud sprinkled vpon the grasse: Whereat with great perplexitie and more sorrow I awaked out of my dreame, bearing it in my greeuous minde, not reuealing it, not so much as to the brittle ayre, but with all expedition performing her bléeding soules request.
               Where euer since most curteous and noble Knights, I haue héere lamented her vntimely death and my vnhappie fortune, spending the time in writing her doleful Tragidy in bloud red lines, the which I knowe to your great griefe, you haue read in this book of gold.
               Therfore most curteous Knights if euer honor incouraged

you to fight in Noble aduentures, I now most earnestly intreate you with your magnanimious fortitudes to assist me to take reuengement, for the greate crueltie that hath béene vsed against my vnfortunate daughter. At the reading of this sorrowfull historie, Saint George with the other Champions did shed many teares, wherewith there did increase in thē a further desire of reuengement, and being moued with great compassion, they protested by their promisses made to the honor of Knighthood, to perseuer spéedily on their vowed reuenge and determined purpose: also calling heauen to be witnesse to their plighted oathes, protesting that sooner shoulde the liues of all the famous Romaines bee raised from death from the time of Romulus to Caeser, and all the rest vnto this time, then to be perswaded to returne from their promisses, and neuer to trauell backe into Christendome till they had performed their vowes, and thus burning with desire, to sée the end of this sorrowfull aduenture: Saint George clapped vp the bloudy written booke, and gaue it againe to the Shepheard, and so they procéeded forwards towards the Iland where the Knight of the black Castle had his residence, guided onely by the direction of the old man, whose aged limbes séemed so lusty in traueling that it prognosticated a luckie euent: In which iorney wee will leaue the Champions for a time, with the wonderfull prouision that the Knight of the blacke Castle made in his defence, the successe whereof will be the strangest that euer was reported, and returne and speake of Saint Georges thrée Sonnes in the persute of their Father where we left them (as you heard before) traueling from the Confines of Barbarie where they redéemed the Normaine Lady from the Tawny Moores.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  A wonderfull and strange aduenture that hapned to Saint George his Sonnes, in the persute of their Father, by finding certaine droppes of bloud, with Virgins hayre scattered in the fieldes, and how they were certified of the iniurious dealing of the Knight of the blacke Castle against the Queene of Armenia.
               
               
                  MAny and dangerous were the aduentures of the thrée valiant Princes in the persute of their father Saint George, and many were the Countries, Ilands, and Princes Courts, that they searched to obtaine a wished sight of his martiall countenance, but all to small purpose, for fortune neither cast them happilie vpon that coast, where he with his famous Champions had their residence, nor luckily sounded in their eares the places of their arriuals.
               In which persute I omit and passe ouer many Noble aduentures that these thrée Princes atchiued, as well vpon the raging ocians as vpon the firme Land, and wholie discourse vppon an accident that hapned to them in an

Iland bordering vpon the confines of Armenia, néere vnto the Iland where the Knight of the blacke Castle remained as you heard in the last Chapter, vpon which coast after they were arriued, they trauelled in a broad and straight path vntill such time as they came to a verie faire and delectable forrest, where as sundry chirping birdes had gathered themselues together, to refreshe and shrowd themselues from the parching heat of the golden Sunne: filling the ayre with the pleasures of their siluer tuned notes.
               In this Forrest they trauelled almost two howers, and then they went vp to a small mountaine which was at hand, from the which they discouered very faire and wel towered townes with Princely pallaces very sumptuous to behold: likewise they discouered from the Hill a fayre fountaine wrought all of marble like vnto a Pill
                     •
                  r, out of which did proceede foure spoutes running with water, which fell into a great Cesterne, and comming to it they washed their handes and ref
                     •
                  eshed their faces, and so departed.
               After they looked round about them on euery side, and toward their right handes they espied amongst a company of gréene trées, a small Tent of blacke cloth, towards which these yong Princes directed their courses with an easie pace, but when they had entred the Tent, and sawe no bodie therin, they remained silent a while, harkning if they could heare any sturing, but they could neither see nor heare any thing, but onely they found the print of certain little féete vpon the same, which caused them more earnestly to desire to know whose foote steps they were, for that they séemed to be of some Ladies or Damsels: so finding the trace they followed thē
                  ▪ and the more the knights followed, the more the Ladies séemed to hast: so long they persued after the trace, that at the end they approached a little mountain wheras they found scattered about, certaine lockes of yellow haire, which séemed to be thrids of

golde, and stooping to gather them vp, they perceiued that some of them were wet with spots of blood, whereby they wel vnderstood, that in great anger they were pulled from some Ladies head: lik wise they saw in diuers places how the earth was spotted with droppes of crimson blood: then with a more desire then they had before, they went vp to the top of that litle mountaine, and hauing lost the footesteps, they recouered it againe by gathering vp the hayre, where they had not traueled far vp the mountaine, but towards the waters side they heard a gréeuous complaint, which séemed to be the voice of a woman in great distresse, and the woordes which the knights did vnderstand were these: O loue, now shalt thou no more reioyce nor haue any longer dominion ouer me, for death I sée is ready to cut my thrid of life and finish these my sorowful lamentations how often haue I askt reuengement at the powers of heauen against that wicked wretch that hath bene the causer of my banishment, but yet they will not hear my request: how ofte haue I made my sad complaints to hell? yet hath the fatall furies stopt their eares against my woful cryes. And with this she held her peace, giuing a sorowful sighe: which being done, the thrée christian knights turned their eyes to the place from whence they heard this complaint, and discouered amongst certaine gréene trées a Lady who was endued with singuler beautie, being so excellent that it almost depriued them of their harts & captiuated their sences in the snares of loue, which libertie as yet they neuer lost: she had her haire about her eares, which hung defusedly downe her comely sholders, through the violence she vsed against her selfe, and leaning her chéeke vpon her delicate white hand that was all to be spotted with blood, which was constraind by the scratching of her nailes vpon her Rosie colored face: by her stood another damsel which they coniectured to be her daughter for she was clad in virgin colored silk mor whiter then the Lillyes of the fields: and as pleasante to beholde as the glistring Moone in a

cleare winters fréezing night: yet for all this delectable sight, the thrée princly knights wold not discouer thēselues but stood closely behinde the thrée pine trées which grew néere vnto the mountaine to heare the euent of this accident, but as they stoode cloaked in silence, they heard her thus to confer with her beautiful daughter. Oh my Rosana (quoth she) the vnhappie figure of him, that without pitty hath wounded my heart and left me comfortles with the greatest cruelty that euer knight or gentleman left Lady: how hath it béen possible that I haue had the force to bring vp the child of such a father which hath bereaud me of my libertie? O you soueraigne gods of heauen, grant yt I may establish in my minde the remembrance of the loue of thy adulterous father: oh girle borne to a further griefe, héere doe I desire the guider of thy fortunes, that thy glistring beautie may haue such force and power, whereby the shining beames thereof may take reuengement of the dishonor of thy mother: giue eare deare childe I say vnto thy dying mother, thou that art born in the dishonor of thy generation, by the losse of my virginity, héere doe I charge thée vpon my blessing, euen at my houre of death, & swear thée by the omnipotent God of heauen, neuer to suffer thy beauty to be enioyd by any one, vntill thy disloyal fathers head bee offered vp in a sacrifice vnto my graue, thereby somewhat to appease the furie of my discontented soule, and recouer part of my former glorie.
               These and such like words spake this afflicted quéene, to the wonderfull amazement of the thrée yong Knightes, which as yet intended not to discouer themselues, but to marke the euent, for they coniectured that her woful complaintes were the induction of some strange accedent: Thus as they stoode obscurely behinde the trées, they sawe the young and beautifull Damsell giue vnto her dying mother, paper, penne and Inke, the which shée pulled from her Iuorie bosome, wherewith the gréeued quéene subscribed certain sorrowful lines vnto him yt was

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
the causer of her banishment: and making an end of her writing, they heard her (with a dying breath) speake vnto her daughter these sorrowfull words following. Come daughter (quoth shee) beholde thy Mother at her latest gaspe, and imprint my dying request in thy heart as a table of brasse, that it neuer may be forgotten, time will not giue me longer respit, that with wordes I might shewe vnto thée my déepe aff
                     •
                  ctions, for that I féele my death approaching and the fatall sisters ready to cut my thrid of life a sunder betwéene the edges of their shieres, insomuch that I moste miserable creature do féele my soule trembling in my flesh, and my heart quiuering at this my last and fatal houre, but one thing (my swéet and tender child) doe I desire of thée before I dye: which is, that thou wouldest procure that this letter may bee giuen to that cruell knight thy disloyall father, giuing him to vnderstand of this my troublesome death, the occasion whereof was his vnreasonable crueltie: and making an end of saying this, the miserable Quéene fell downe, not hauing any more strength to sit vp, but let the letter fall out of her hand, the which her sorrowfull daughter presently tooke vp, and falling vpon her mothers brest, she replyed in this sorrowfull manner. O my swéete mother tell me not that you will dye, for it ads a torment more gréeuous vnto my soule then the punishments which Danaus daughters féele in hell, I would rather be torne in péeces by the fury of some merciles monster, or to haue my heart parted in twaine by the handes of him that is my greatest enemie, then to remaine without your companie, swéete mother let these my youthfull yéeres, and this my gréene budding beauty incourage you still to reuiue, and not to leaue me comfortles like an exile in the world, but if the gloomy fates doe triumph in your death, and abridge your breathing ayre of life, and that your soule must néedes goe wander in the Elizian shades with Trufas shaddowe and with Didoes ghost, héere doe I protest by the greate and tender loue I

beare you, and by the due obedience that I owe vnto your age, either to deliuer this your letter into the hands of my vnkinde father, or with these my ruthful fingers rent my heart in sunder, and before I will forget my vow, the siluer streamed Tygris shall forsake her course, the sea her tides, and the glistering Quéene of night her vsuall changes: neither shal any forgetfulnes be an occasion to withdraw my minde from performing your dying requestes: Then this weak Quéene whose power and strength was wholie decaied, and that her houre of death drew néere at hand, with a féeble voice she said. O you sacred & immortal Gods, and all you bright celestiall powers of heauen, i
                     •
                  to your deuine bosomes now do I commend my dying soule, asking no other reuengmēt against ye causer of my death, but that he may die like mée, for want of loue. After this the dead Quéene neuer spake word more, for at that instant, the cruell destinies gaue end vnto her life: but when Rosana perceiued her to be dead and she left to the world deuoide of comfort, shée began to teare the golden tramels from her head, and most furiouslye to beat her white and yuorie brest, filling the emptie ayre with clamors of her mones, and making the skies like an eccho to resound her lamentations, and at last taking her mothers letter in her hands, washing it with flouds of teares, and putting it next vnto her naked brest, she said: héer lye thou neare adioining to my bléeding heart, neuer to be remoued vntil I haue performd my mothers dying testiment. O work and the last worke of those her white and yuorie hands: heere doe I sweare by the honor of true Uirgins, not to part it from my bléeding bosom vntil such time as loue hath rent the disloyall heart of my vnkinde father, and in speaking this shée kissed it a thousand times, breathing forth millions of sighes and straight with a blushing countenance as radient as Auroras glistring beames, she arose & said: what is this Rosana, dost thou thinke to recall thy mothers life with ceremonious complaints and not performe that

which by her was commanded thée, arise, arise I say, gather vnto thy selfe strength and courage, and wander vp and downe the world till thou hast found thy disloyal Father as thy true heart hath promised to doe. These words being no sooner finished but Saint Georges Sonnes like men whose hearts were almost ouercome with griefe, came from the pine trees and discouered themselues to the Damsell, and curteously requested her to discourse the storie of all her passed mizeries, and as they were true christian knights they promised her (if it lay in their powers) to release her sorrows, and to giue end vnto her mizeries. This Rosana when shée behelde these curteous and well d
                     •
                  meanur'd knights▪ which in her conceit caried relenting mindes and how kindly they desired to be partners in her griefes, she stood not vpon curious tearmes, nor vpon vaine 
                     •
                  xceptions, but most willingly condescended to their requests: so when they had prepared their eares to entertaine her sad and sorrowfull discourse, with a sober countenance, shee began in this manner: Lately I was (quoth she whilst fortune smild vpon me the onely childe and daughter of this liueles Quéene that you beholde héer lying dead, and she before my birth whilst heauen graunted her prosperitie was the maiden Quéene of a Countrie called Armenia, adioyning neare vnto this vnhappie Iland whome in her yong yéeres when her beautie began to florish, and her high renowne to mount vpon the wings of fame, she was intrapped with the golden baite of blind Cupid, & so intangled with the loue of a disloyall knight, cal'd the Knight of the black Castle, who after he had florisht in the spoyle of her Uirginitie, and had left his fruitful seede springing in her womb grew wearie of his loue, and most discurteously left her as a shame vnto her Countrie, and a staine vnto her kindred, and after gaue himself to such lustfull and lasciuious manner of life, that hee vnlawfullie maried a shepheards daughter in a forraine land, and likewise rauished her own sister, and after committed

her most in humane slaughter in a solitarie woode: this being done, he fortified himselfe in his blacke Castle, onely consorted with a cunning Nigromancer, whose skill in magick is so excellent, that al the knights in the world can neuer conquere the Castle, where euer since hee hath remained in despight of the whole earth.
               But now speake I of the tragical storie of my vnhappy mother, when as I her vnfortunate babe beganne first to strugle in her womb, wherin I wold I had bene strangled: she heard newes of her knights ill demeanure, and how he had wholly giuen himself to the spoile of virginitie, and had for euer left her loue, neuer intending to returne again, the grief wherof so troubled her mind, that she could not in any wise desemble it, for vpō a time being amongst her Ladies, calling to remembrance her spotted Uirginitie, and the séede of dishonor planted in her wombe, she felt into a wonderfull and strange traunce, as though she had béen oppressed with sodain death, which when her Ladies and damsels beheld, they presently determined to vnbrace her rich ornaments, and to carrie her vnto her bed, but she made signes with her handes that they should depart and leaue her alone, whose commaundement they strait way obayed, not without great sorrow of them all, their loues were so déere. This afflicted Quéen when she saw that she was alone, began to exclaime against her fortune, reuealing the fates with bitter exclamations, O vnconstant Quéene of chance (said shee) thou that hast warped such strange webs in my kingdom, thou that gauest my honor to that tirants lust, which without al remorse hath left me comfortles, tis thou that didst constraine me to set my life to sale, & to sel my honor as it were with the crier, compelling me to do that which hath spotted my Princely estate, and stain'd my bright honor with blacke infamie: woe is me for my virginity, yt which my parents gaue me charge to haue respect vnto: but I haue carelessely kept it, & smally regarded i
                     •
                  : I will therefore so chastice my body, for

thus forgetting of my selfe, and be so reuenged for the little regarde that I haue made of my honour, that it shall be an example to all noble Ladyes and Princes of high estate.
               Oh miserable Quéene, oh fond and vnhappy Lady: thy spéeches be too too foolish, for although thy desperate hand should pull out thy dispised harte from thy bléeding brest, yet can it not make satisfaction for thy dishonour.
               Oh Heauens, why do you not cast some fiery thunderbolt downe vpon my head? or why doth not the earth gape and swallowe my infamous bodye? Oh false and deceiuing Lord, I would thy louing and amourous words had neuer béene spoken: nor thy quicke sighted eyes, neuer gazde vpon my beautie: then had I florisht still with glory and renowne, and liu'd a happy Uirgin of chaste Dianaes traine.
               With these and other like lamentations, this grieued Quéene passed away the time, till at laste she felte her wombe to growe big with childe: at the which she receiued dubble paine, for that it was impossible to couer or hide it, and séeing her selfe in this case, like a woman hated and abhorred, she determined to discouer her selfe publikely vnto her subiectes, and deliuer her body vnto them to be sacrificed vnto their Gods: and with this determination, one day she caused certaine of her Nobles to be sent for, who straightway fulfilled her commaundement▪ but when she perceiued her Lords, Knights and Gentlemen of honour came altogether before her, she couered her selfe with a rich robe and sate vpon her bed in her priuate chamber, being so pale and leane, that all them that sawe her had greate compassion vppon her sorrowe: beeing all set round about her bed and kéeping silence, she reuealed to them the cause of her griefe in this manner.
               My Lords (quoth she) I shame to intytle my selfe your Quéene and S
                     •
                  ueraigne, in that I haue defamed the honor of my Countrie, and little regarded the welfare of our

Common wealth: my glistering crowne me thinkes is shadded with a cloude of black disgrace, and my Princely attire conuerted into vnchaste habiliments, in which I haue both lost the libertie of my heart, and withall my wonted ioy, and am now constrained to indure perpetual paine, and an euer pining death: For I haue lost my honour, and recouered shame and infamie.
               To conclude, I haue forgone the liberty of a Quéene, and solde my self to a slauish sinne, onely mine own is the fault, and mine owne shall be the punishment. Therfore without making any excuse, I héere surrender vp my body into your powers, for that you may as an (euill quéen) sacrifize me vnto our Gods: also that within my accursed wombe, for now my Lords you shall vnderstand, that I am dishonored by the knight of the black Castle: he hath planted a Uine within my fruitful garden, and sowen a séede that hath made Armenia infamouse: heit is that hath cōmitted so many euils in the world: he it is that delights in virgins spoiles, and hee it is that hath bereau'd mee of my honor, but with my good will I must néedes confesse, and left me for a testimonie of this my euill déed, big with child, by which my virgins glory is conuerted to a monstrous scandall: and with this she made an end of her lamentable speach: And being gréeuously oppressed with the paine of her burthenous wombe, she sate her downe vpon her rich bedde, and attended their wils: but when these Earles, Lords and honorable personages that were present, had vnderstood all that the Quéene had saide vnto them, like men greatly amazed, they changed their cullors from red to white, and from white to red, in signe of anger, and looking one vpon an other, without speaking any worde, but printing in their hearts the fault done by their Quéen, to the great disgrace of their countrie, and so without any further considerati
                     •
                  n, they depriued her from all princely dignitie, both of her Crowne and regiment, and pronounced her perpetuall banishment from Armenia,
                  
like subiectes not to bee gouerned by such a defamed Prince, that hath grafted the fruit of of such a wicked trée within her wombe.
               So at the time appointed like a woman forlorne and hated of all companies, shée stored her selfe sufficient with tre
                     •
                  sure, and betooke her selfe to her appointed banishment, after whose departure the Armenians, elected them selu
                     •
                  s an other Prince, and left their lawfull Queene w
                     •
                  ndring in vnknown Ilands, big with child deuoide of succour and reliefe, where insteed of her Princely bed couered with Canopies of silk, shée tooke her nightly reposes vpon the gréen grasse, shadded with the sable curtaines of heauen, and the nurses that were prouided against her deliuerie were Nimphes and Faieries dauncing in the night by Proserpines commaundement: thus in greate griefe continued she many daies contenting her selfe with her appointed banishment, making her lamentations to the whispring winds, which séemed in her conceipt to reansweare her complaints: at length the glistering moone had ten times borrowed light of the golden Phoebus, and the nights cleare candle were now almost extinguished, by which time approached the houre of her laborsome trauell, wherein onely by the assistance of heauen shee was deliuered of me her vnhappy daughter, where euer since I haue béene nourished by the deuine powers of heauen, for many times when I came to yéeree of discretion, my wofull mother would discourse vnto me this lamentable story of both our mizeries, the which I haue moste truely delared vnto you.
               Likwise shée told me that many times in my infancie, when she wanted milke in her brestes to nourish me, there would come a Lionesse, and sometimes a shée Beare and gently giue me sucke, and contrarie to the nature of wilde beastes, they would many times sporte with, where by she coniectured that the immortall powers had preserued me for some strange fortune: likewise at my birth, nature had

pictur'd vpon my brest, directly betwixt my tender Paps', the liuely forme of a purple Rose, which as yet doth beautifie my bosome with a vermillion collour: and this was the cause that my mother named me Rosana, answerable to natures marke.
               After this we liu'd many a yéere in great distresse, penurie and want, soliciting heauen to redresse our woes, more oftner then we had liued houres: the aboundance of our teares might suffize to make a watry sea, and our sighes in number to countervaile the starres of heauen: but at last the fatal sisters listed to my mothers mones & to my great sorrow, depriued her of her life, where now I am left a comfortles Orphant to the world, attending the time vntill that heauen send some curteous Knight that may conduct me to that blacke Castle where my disloyall father hath his residence, that I might there perform my mothers dying will: these wordes being finished, Rosana stood silent, for that her extreame griefe hindred the passage of her tongue, and her eyes rained such a shewer of pearled teares vpon the liueles body of her mother, that it constrained Saint Georges Sonnes to expresse the like sorrow: but after they had let fall a few salt teares down from their sad eyes, and had taken truce for a time with 
                     •
                  riefe, they tooke Rosana by the hand, (which before that time neuer touched the body of any man) and protested neuer to depart from her company til they had safely deliuered her into the blacke Castle.
               After this when the Christian Knightes had pitifully bewailed the mizerie and vntimely death of her mother, they tooke their daggers and digged a déep graue vnder a Bay trée and buried her body, that hungry rauens might neuer seaze vpon it, or furious beasts teare it in péeces, nor rauenous Harpies deuour it: and after with the point of their daggers they in graued this Epitaph in the rinde of the Bay trée, which words were these that follow.
               
                  
                  The Epitaph ouer the graue of the vnfortunate Queene of Armenia.
                  Heere lies the body of a haples Queene,
                  Whose great goodwill to her, smal loue did bring:
                  Her faithfull minde requited was with teene
                  Though she deserud for loue a regall King.
                  And as her corpes inclosed heere doth lye,
                  Her lucklesse fate, and fame shal neuer dye.
                  So when they had made this Epitaph and couered her graue with gréene turues, they departed forward on their iorney towards the blacke Castle, where wee will leaue them in their trauels, and returne to the disloyal Leager, and howe hee fortified his Castle by magick arte, according to the learned skill of a cunning Nigromancer, and of the aduentures that hapned to Saint George with the other Christian Champions in the same Castle, therefore graunt you immortall powers of heauen, that my penne may be dipt in the waters of that learned fountain, where the nine sisters doe inhabite, that by the helpe of that swéet liquor my muse may haue a delightfull vaine, so that mixing the speach of Mercury with the prowesse of Mars, I may discourse of the strangest accident that euer hapned to wandring Knights.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Of the preparation that the Knight of the blacke Castle made by magick arte, to withstand his enemies, and how the seuen Champions entred the same Castle, where they were inchaunted into a dead sleep, so long as seuen Lamps burned, which coulde not bee quenched but by the vvater of an inchaunted Fountaine.
               
               
                  THe wicked Leoger as you haue read of before, being the knight of the blacke Castle, and one that for wealth and treasure surpassed the mightiest potentate of those countries, when he grew detested and abhorred in euerie companie, as well by noble Knights, as gallant Ladies, for the spoile and murther of those thrée comely Damsels, whose pittifull stories you heard in the two passed Chapters, and fearing a sodaine vengeance to fall vpon his head, hee fortified himselfe strongly in his Castle, and with his treasure hyred many furious Giants to defend it: likewise it they fayled, & shold chance to be ouercome, he consorted with a wicked Nigromancer that with charmes and spels should worke wonders

in his Castle, which magicall accomplishments we will passe ouer till a more conuenient time, because I purpose to explaine the historie in good order to the readers: first speake we of Saint George with the other christian knights that came in reuenge of the Shepheard and his vnfortunate daughter, who with good successe ariued vpon the shoare of the Iland, where this wicked Leoger and the Magician had fortified their blacke Castle: In which countrie the Christian Champions, like the inuinsible followers of Mars, fearing no danger nor the frowns of vnconstant fortune, but betooke themselues the readiest way towards the Castle, in which iorney they were almost rauished with the pleasures of the Iland, for entring into a broad and straight lane, garnished on both sides with trées of diuers sortes, wherein they heard howe the Sommer birds recorded their pleasant melodies, and made their swéet and accustomed songes without feare of any man to molest them, in which rowe of pleasant trées that delighted them on both sides: there wanted not the gréen lawrel, so much extéemed of learned scholers: nor the swéet mertel trée, loued by Ladies: nor the high Cipresse so much regarded of Louers, nor the stately pine, which for his flourishing height is called the prince of trées: wherby they iudged it to be a habitation for the Gods then any terestrial country, for that the golden Sun with his glistering beames did passe through those gréene and pleasant trées without any hindrance of black cloudes: for the heauens were as cleare as tried siluer, likwise the westerne winds did softly shake the shiuering leaues, whereby it made as swéet a hermonie as the celestiall Cherubins of heauen: a thousand little streamed brookes ran vpon the inamelled grounde, making sundry fine workes by their crooked turnings, and ioyning one water with another, with a very gentle méeting, making such siluer musicke, that the Champions with the pleasure thereof were almost rauished, and smally regarded whither their horses

went right or no: and trauelling in this sorte, they rode forward till they came into a meruailous great and wide meddow, beeing of so greate fairenes, that I am not able with any pen to painte out the excellencie there of: where as were féeding both wilde and tame Hartes, adorned with great and cragged hornes: likwise the furious wild Bore, the fierce Lyon and the simple Lambes were altog
                     •
                  th
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ féeding with so great friendship, as to the contrary by nature they were enemies:
               Wherat the noble Champions were almost ouercome in their owne conceites, and amazed in their imaginations, to sée so strange loue cleane contrarye vnto nature, and that there was no difference betwixt the loue of wilde beastes and tame: in this manner they trauelled, till vppon a sodaine they arriued before the buildinges of the blacke Castle: and casting their eyes towards the same, they beheld néere vnto the principall Gate, right ouer the Castle, twelue Marble Pinicles, of such an excéedinge height, that the Piramides of Egipt, were very lowe, in comparison of them: in such sorte, that whosoeuer would looke vpon them, was scant able with his sight to comprehend the height thereof: and they were all painted moste gorgiouslye with seuerall cullours.
               Downe belowe vnder the Castle there was an Arche with a Gate, which séemed to be of Diamondes, and all was compasse
                     •
                   about with a great meate or ditch, being of so great a depth, that they thought it to rea
                     •
                  h to the midst of the earth and it was almost two hundreth paces broad, and euery Gate had his Draw-bridge, all made of redde boordes, which séemed as though they had béene bathed all in blood.
               Then the Champions r
                     •
                  d to the other side of this goodly Castle, wondring at the curious and sumpteous workmanship, where they espyed a Piller of beautifull 
                     ••
                  sper stone all wroughtfull of precious stones of strange work, the which Piller was of great value, and was garnished

with chaines of golde, that were made fast vnto it by Magicks arte, at which Piller likewise hung a very costlye siluer Trumpet, with certaine letters carued about the same, the which contayned these wordes following.
               If any dare attempt this place to see,
               By sounding this, the Gate shall opened be.
               A Trumpet heere inchaind by magick arte
               To daunt with fear the proudest chāpiōs hart
               Looke thou for blows that entrest in this gate
               Returne in time, repentance comes too late.
               The which when Saint George beheld, and had vnderstoode the secrets of these misticall woordes, without anye more tarryinge, he sette the siluer Trumpet to his mouth, and sounded such a vehiment blaste, that it thundred in the elements, and séemed to shake the foundation of the Castle: whereat the principall Gate presently opened, and the drawe Bridge was let downe, without the helpe of any visible hand, which made the Champions to wonder, and to stand amazed at the strange accident, but yet intending not to returne like cowards daunted with a puffe of winde, they allighted from their warlike stéedes, and deliuered them vnto the olde shéepheards h
                     •
                  nds, to be fed vpon the fragrant and gréene grasse, till they had performed the aduenture of the Castle, the which they vowed either to accomplish or neuer to returne: so locking down their Beauers and drawing foorth their k
                     •
                  ene edged fawchions, they entred the Gates, and beeing safely within, the champi
                     ••
                  s looked round about them to sée if they could espye any body, but they saw nothing but a paire of winding stayres, whereat they ascended, but they had not gone many 
                     〈◊〉
                   therein, when as there was so great a darkenes,

that scarce they could sée any light, so that it rather séemed the similitude of hell, then any other worldly place, and so groping by the walles, they kept their going down those narrow and turning staires, which were very long, and of such length, that they thought they descended into the middle of the earth.
               They spent a great time in descending those stayres, but in the end they came into a very faire and large Court all compassed with Iron grates like vnto a prison, or a place prouided to keep vntamed Lyons, wherein casting their eyes vp to the toppe of the Castle they behelde the wicked knight walking with the Nigromancer
                  ▪ vpon a large gallerie, supported by huge pillers of brasse: likewise there was attending vpon them seuen Giants, armed in mighty Iron coates, holding in their hands bats of stéele: to whom the bolde and venterous Champion of England spake with a haughty courage and lowde voyce in this manner.
               Come downe thou wicked knight, thou spoyle of virginity, thou that art inuironed with those monstrous Giants, those the wondring worke of nature, whose daring lookes séemeth to scale the heauens, like vnto the pride of Nemrod when hee offered to builde vp Babels confused Tower.
               Come downe I say, from thy Brazen gallery, and take to thée thy armor, thou that hast a heart to commit a Uirgins rape, for whose reuenge we come: now likewise haue a courage to make thy defence, for we vow neuer to returne out of thy Castle til we haue confounded thée and all thy forces.
               At which words he held his peace, and expected an answere. But the wicked knight when hee heard these heroyicall spéeches of Saint George, began to fret & fume like to the starued Lyon▪ famished with hunger, or the ireful Tiger musling in humane bloud, with a great desire to satisfie his thirst: or like the wrath of dogged Cerberus
                  
when as he feasted with Alcides flesh euen so raged Leoger the Knight of the blacke Castle, threatning forth furie from his sparkling eyes: and in this vile manner he reanswered the noble Champiō of England: proud knight (said he) or peasant▪ whatsoeuer thou arte, I passe not the sm
                     •
                  llest haire of my head, for thus vpbrayding me with thy vn
                     •
                  uly tunge, I will returne thée speechlesse into hell, for the pauements of my Castle shal all be sprinkled with thy accurssed blood, and the bones of those thy vnhappy followers shall be buried in the sinkes of my channelles: if thou hadst brought the armie of inuincible Caesar, that made all landes to tremble where he came, yet were they but a blast of winde vnto my forces: Séest thou not my Giants which stand like oaks vppon this brazen gallery? they at my commaundment shall take you from the places where you stand, and throwe you ouer the walles of my Castle, in such sorte, that they shall make you flye into the ayre, more then tenne fathams high: and for that thou hast vpbrayded me with the disgrace doon vnto a virgin: I tell thée, if I had thy mother héere, of whome thou tookst first the ayre of life, my hand should split her womb, that thou mightst sée the bed of thy creation as Nero did in Rome: or if thy wife and children were héere present before thy face, I would abridge their liues that thy accurssed eyes might be witnesses of their bloodie murthers: so much wrath and ha
                     •
                  e now rageth in my heart, that al the blood in Asia cannot wash it thence.
               At which words, the Giants which he had hyred to defend him from his foes, came vnto him very strongly armed with sturdie weapons in their handes, and requested him to be quiet, and to abate his vnsufferable anger, and they woulde fetche vnto his presence, all those brauing knightes that were the occasion of his disquietnesse and anger: and so without tarying for any answer, they departed downe into the Courte, and left the knight of the Castle with the Magitian, standing still vppon the gallery

to beholde the following encounters:
               But when the Giants approched the Champions presence, and sawe them so well proportioned and furnished, and knightes of so mighty statures, they florished about their knotty clubbes, and purposed not to spend the time in wordes but in blowes.
               Then one of the fiercest and cruellest Giants of them all (which was called Brandamond) séeing Saint George to be the forwardest in the enterprize, and iudging him to be the Knight that had so braued his Lord, he began with asterne countenance to speake vnto him in this manner: Art thou that bolde Knight (said the Giant) that with thy witlesse woordes haste so angred the mighty Leoger the Lord of this Castle? if thou bée, I aduise thée by submission, to séeke to appease his furious wrath before reuengement be taken vppon thy person.
               Also I doe require thée (that if thou wilt remaine with thy life) that thou doost leaue thy armour, and yeilde thy selfe, with all these thy followers, with their handes fast bound behinde them, and goe and aske forgiuenes at his féete: to which Saint George with a smiling countenance answered, Giant (said he) thy councell I doe not like, nor his honor will I receiue, but rather we hope to send thée and all thy followers without tongues to the infernall King of fiery Plegethon: and for that you shall not haue any more time to speake such folly and foolishnes, eyther returne your waies from whence you came, and repent you of this which you haue said, or els prepare your selues to mortall battell.
               The Giants when they heard the Champions resolutions, and how slightly they regarded theyr proffers, without any longer tar
                     •
                  ance they fell vppon Saynt George and his company intending with their knotty bats of steele to beate them as small as flesh vnto the 
                     •
                  ot, but the Quéene of chaunce so smyled vppon the christian Champions, that the Giants smally p
                     •
                  euailed, for

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
betwixt them was fought a long and terrible battell, in such danger that the victory hung wauering on both sides not knowing to whome she should fall, the bats and faushions made such a noyse vpon one anothers armors, that they sounded like to the bl
                     •
                  wes of the Ciclops working vpon their fiery Anuils: and at euery blowe they gaue, fire flew from their stéeled Corselets, like sparkles from the flaming furnaces in hell, the skies resounded backe the ecchoes of their stroakes, and the grounde shooke as though it had béene oppressed with an earth-quake: the pauements of the Court was ouerspred with an intermixed colour of bloud and sweat, and the wals of the Castle was mightily battered with the Giants clubs: but by the time that glistering Apollo the daies bright Candle began to declare from the top of heauen, when the Giants (wearied in fight) began for to faint: whereat the Christian Knights with more courage, beganne to increarse in strength and with such rigor assayled the Giants that before the gold
                     •
                  n Sunne had diued to the westerne world, all the Giants were quite discomfited and staine, some lay with their heads dismembred from their bodies weltering in purple gore, some had their braines sprinkled against the walles, some lay in the channels with their intrals trayling downe in streames of bloud, and some ioynteles with their bodies cut in péeces, so that there was not one left aliue to withstand the Christian Champions.
               Whereat Saint George with the other sixe Knightes fell vpon their knées and thanked the immortall Rector both of heauen and earth for their victorie.
               But when the knight of the blacke Castle which stood vpon the gallerie during all the time of the incounter and saw how all h
                     •
                  s Giants were slaine by the prow
                     •
                  sse of those strang Knights, he raged against heauen and earth, wishing that the ground might gape and swallowe him, before he were deliuered into the handes of his enemies,

and presently would haue caste himselfe head-long from the top of the gallery, to haue dasht his braines against the stony pauements, but that the Nigromancer which stoode likewise by him beholding the euent of the incounter, intercepted him in his intended drift, and promised that hée would performe by arte, what the Giants could not do by force.
               So the Nigromancer fel to his magick spels & charms, by which the Chrstian Champions were mightily troubled and molestled and brought in dang
                     •
                  r of their liues, by a terrible and strange manner as shall bee héereafter showne.
               For as they stoode after their long incounters vnbuckling their armors to take the fresh ayre and to wash theyr bloudy wounds receiued in their last conflicte: the Magitian caused by his arte and angry spirit in the likenes of a Lady of a marualous and faire beauty, looking through an yron grate, who séemed to leaue her faire face vpon her white hand very penciuely, and distilled from her christal eyes great aboundance of teares, which when the Champions saw this beautiful creature, they remained in great admiration, thinking with themselues, that by some hard misfortune she was imprisoned in those yron grates, with that this Lady did séeme to open her faire and christeline eyes, looking earnestly vpon Saint George, and giuing a gréeuous and sorrowful sigh▪ she with drew her selfe from the grate, which sodaine departure caused the Christian Knights to haue a great desire to know who it should be, suspecting that by the force of some inchantment they should be ouerthrowne: and casting vp their eyes againe to see if they could sée her, they could not, but they saw in the very same place a woman of a great and princely stature, who was all armed in siluer plates, with a swoord girded at her waste, sheathed in 
                     •
                   golden scabberd, and had hanging at her necke an Iuory bowe and a gilt quiuer, this Lady was of so great beautie, that she seemed almost

to excell the other, but in the same sorte as the other did, vpon a sodaine she vanished away, leauing the Champions no lesse troubled in their thoughtes then before they were.
               The christian Knightes had not long time bewayled the a
                     •
                  sence of the Lady, but that without séeing any body they were stricken with such furious blowes vpon their backes, that they were constrayned to stoop with one knée vpon the ground, yet with a trice they arose againe, and looking about them to sée who they were that strook them, they perswaded them to be the likenesse of certain knights which in great haste séemed to runne into a doore that was at one of the corners of the Courte, and with the great anger that the Champions receiued, séeing them selues so hardly intreated, they followed with their accustomed lightnesse after the knightes, in at the same doore: wherein they had not entred thrée steps, but that they fell downe into a déepe caue, which was couered ouer in such subtill sorte, that whosoeuer did tread on it, straight way fell into the caue, except he was aduertised thereof before: with in the caue it was as darke as the silent night, and no light at all apeared: but when the Champions saw themselues so trecherously betrayed in the trap, they greatly feared some further mischiefe would follow, to their vtter ouerthrowes, so with their swords drawne, they stood readye charged to make their defence, againste what soeuer should after happen, but by reason of the great darkenesse they could not sée any thing, neither discouer wherein they were fallen, they determined to settle themselues against something, either poste, piller or wall: and groaping about the caue, they searched in euery place for some other doore that might bring them foorth out of that darkesome denne, which they compared to the pit of hell.
               And as they went groping and féeling vp and downe, they found that they troad vpon no other thinges but dead mens bones, which caused them to stand still: and not

long after, they espyed a secret windowe, at the which entred much cléerenesse, and gaue a great light into the den where they were, by which they espyed a bed moste richly furnished with curtaines of silke, and golden pendants which stoode in a secret roome of the caue, behung with rich tapestrie of a sable colour: which bed when the Champions beheld, and being somewhat weary of their long fight which they had with the Giants in the Court of the Castle, they required some rest and desired some sleepe vpon the bed, but not all at one instant: for they feared some daunger to bee at hand, and therefore Saint George as one most willing to be their watchman, and to kéep senternell in so daungerous a place, caused the other Champions to take their reposes vppon the bed, and he would be as wakefull as the cocke against all daungerous accidents: so the sixe Christian Knights repaired to the bed, whereon they were no sooner layde, but presently they fell into a heauy and dead sléep, in such sort that they could not be awaked by any manner of violence, not all the warlike drums in Europe if they were sounded in their eares, nor the ratling thunder claps of heauen were sufficient to recall them from their sleeps, for indéed the bedde was inchaunted by the Nigromancers charmes, in such manner that whosoeuer but sate vpon the sides, or but the furniture of the bed, were presently cast into as heauy a sléepe as if they had drunke the ioyce of dwaile or the séede of Poppie, where we will leaue them for a tyme like men cast into a traunce, and speake of the terrible aduenture that hapned to S. George in the caue, who little mistrusting of their inchantments, stoode like a carefull guard kéeping the furious wolfe from the spoile of the silly shéep: but vpon a sodaine his hart began to throb, & his hayre to stand vpright vpon his head, yet hauing a heart fraught with inuinsible corage, he purposed not to awake ye other knights, but of himselfe to withstand whatsoeuer hapned, so being in his princely cogitatiō, there appéered to him as

hee thought the shape of a Magitian with a visage leane, pale and full of wrinckles, with lockes of blacke hayre hanging downe to his shoulders like to wreathes of invenomed Snakes, and his body séemed to haue nothing vpon it but skin and bones, who spake vnto Saint George in this dispitfull manner: in an euill houre (said the Magitian) camst thou hether, and so shall thy lodging be, and thy entertainment worse, for now thou art in a place whereas thou shalt looke for no other thing, but to be meat vnto some furious beast, and thy surmounted strength shall not be able to make any defence.
               The English Champion whose heart was oppressed with extreame wrath: answered, O false and accursed charmer (said he) whome Gods confound for thy condemned artes, and for whom the fiends hath dig'd an euerlasting tomb in hell, what furie hath inconst thée, that with thy false and deuelish charmes thou dost practise so much euill against trauelling and aduenterous Knightes, I hope to obtaine my libertie in dispight of al thy mischiefe and with my stronge arme to breake all thy bones in sunder.
               All that thou dost and wilt do wil I suffer at thy hands replyed the Nigromancer, onely for the reuengement that I will take of thée for the slaughter of the seauen Giants, which as yet lyes murthered in the court, and that very quickly▪ and therewithall hee went inuisibly out of the Caue: so not long after at his backe hee heard a sodaine noise, and beheld as it were a window opening by little and little, where as there appeared a cleare light, by the which Saint George plainely perceaued that the wals of the Caue were washt with bloud, and likewise sawe that the bones whereon they treade at their first entry into the den were of humane bodies, which appeared not to be very long since their flesh was torne off with hard and cruell téeth, but this consideration could not long endure with him, for that he heard a great rumor▪ and looking what it

should be, he saw that there was comming forth out of an other den, a mightie serpent with wings, as great in body as an Elephant, he had onely two féet which appeared out of that monstrous body but of a span length, and each foote had thrée clawes of thrée spannes in length, she came with her mouth open of so monstrous and huge a bigne, and so deformed, that a whole armed Knight horse and all, might enter in thereat, she had vpon her Iawes twoo tuskes which séemed to be as sharpe as any néedles, and al her body was couered with hard scales of diuers colours, and with great fury she came with her wings all abroad, Saint George although he had a valiant and an vndaunted minde, yet could he not chuse but receiue some feare in séeing so monstrous a beast.
               But considering with him selfe, that it was then time, and great néed to haue courage, and to be expert and valliant for to make his defence, hee tooke his good cutting sword in his hand, and shrowded himselfe vnder his hard and stronge shéelde, and tarried the comming of that vgly monster.
               But when the furious beast saw that there was a pray whereon she might imploy her sharpe téeth, shee stroake with her inuenomous wings, and with her pearcing clawes she griped, and layd fast hold vpon Saint Georges hard shield, pretending to haue swallowed whole this coragious warrier, and fastning her sharp tuskes vpon his helmet, which when she found so hard, she let goe her hold and furiously pulled at his target, with such a strenght that shee pulled it from his arme: with that the English knight stroake at her head a most mighty and stronge blow with his swoord, but in no wise it could hurt her, by reason of the hard scales wherewith it was couered, and though he gaue her no wound, yet for all that shee felt the blow in such sort that it made her to recoile to the ground, and to fall vpon her long and hideous tayle, then this oppressed Knight made great hast to redouble his force

to strike her another blow: but all was in vaine, for that vpon a sodaine she stretched her selfe so high, that he could not reach her head: but yet kinde Fortune so fauoured his hand, that he stroke her vpon the belly, whereas shee had no defence with scales, nor anie other thing but feathers: whereout issued such abundance of blacke blood, that it besprinkled all the denne about.
               This terrible and furious Serpent, when she felt her selfe so sore wounded, stroke at Saint George such a terrible a blow with her taile, that if he had not séene it comming it had béen sufficient to haue parted his bodie in péeces. The Knight to cleare himselfe from the blow, fell flat vpon the ground, for he had no time to make any other defence. But that terrible blow was no sooner passed ouer him, but straight waies he recouered his féete, at such time as the furious Serpent came towards him. Here Saint George hauing a great confidence in his strength, performed such a valiant exployt, that all former Aduentures that hath béen euer done by anie Knight, may bee put in obliuion, and this kept in perpetuall memorie: for that he threw his sword out of his hand, and ran vnto the Serpent, and imbraced her betwixt his mightie armes, & did so squéeze her, that the furious Beast could not helpe her selfe with her sharpe clawes, but onely with her wings she beat him on euerie side. This valiant Champion and noble Warrier would neuer let her loose, but still remained holding her betwixt his armes, continuing this perillous and dangerous fight, till all his bright armour was imbrued with her bestiall blood, by which occasion shee lost a great part of her strength, and was not able long to continue.
               Long indured this great and dangerous incounter, and the infernall Serpent remained fast vnto the noble and valiant breast of the English Knight, till such time as he plainly perceaued that the Monster began to wexe faint, and to loose her strength. Likewise it could not be otherwise,

but Saint George wexed somewhat wearie, considering the former fight he had so lately with the Giants. Notwithstanding when he saw the great weaknes of the Serpent, he did animate himselfe with courage, and hauing opportunitie by reason of the quantitie of blood that issued from her wounds, he tooke his trustie sword & thrust it into her heart with such violence, that he cloue it in two péeces: so this infernall Monster fell downe dead to the ground, and carried the Christian Champion with her, for for that they were fast closed together, and by reason that the Serpent lacked strength, hée quickly cléered himselfe out of her clawes, and recouered his sword. But when he saw certainly that hee was cléere from the Monster, & that she had yéelded vp her detested life into ye brittle aire, he knéeled downe and gaue thankes to the immortal maiestie of God for his safe deliuerie. The venome was so great that the Serpent threw out to infect the knight, that if his armour had not béen of a precious vertue, hée had béen impoysoned to death.
               After the victorie was obtained and the Monster dead, he grew verie wearie and vnquiet, and was constrayned to sit and coole himselfe by a Well which was full of water, standing by in a corner of the Caue, from whence the monstrous Serpent first appeared and came foorth. And when he found himselfe refreshed, he repayred to the Inchaunted bed whereupon the other sixe Champions laye sléeping, dreaming of no such straunge accident that had happened to him: to whom he purposed to reueale the true discourse of all the dangers that had befalne him in that accident.
               But no sooner approached he vnto that inchaunted bed and had set himselfe downe vpon the one side thereof, and thinking to begin his discourse, but he presently fell into a heauie and dead slumber.
               There will we leaue them sléeping and dreaming vpon the inchaunted bed, not to be wakened by anie means,

and returne to the Nigr
                        •
                     om
                        •
                     ncer that was busied all the time of the Serpents incounters, with Leoger in burying of the dead Giants: But now he knew by his arte, that the Serpent was slaine, and likewise Saint George oppressed with a charmed sleepe, in companie of the other Champions vpon the inchaunted bed, from whence hee purposed that they neuer more should awake, but spende their followed fortunes in eternall sléeps.
               Then by his deuilish artes he caused seuen Lampes to burne continually before the entry of the Caue, the properties whereof were so strange, that so long as the Lampes continued burning, the Champions should neuer be awaked and the fiers should neuer be quenched but by the water of an inchaunted fountaine, the which he likewise by magick arte had erected in the middle of the court guarded most strongely with fearefull shapes, and the water should neuer be obtained but by a Uirgin which at her birth should haue the forme of a Rose most liuely pictured vpon her brest.
               These thinges being performed by the secrets of the Magitians skill added suth a pleasure to Leogers heart, that he thought himselfe eleuated higher then towers of heauen, for he accompted no ioy so pleasing vnto his soule as to sée his mortall enemies captiuated in his power, and that the Magitian had done more by his artes, then al the Knights in Asia could performe by prowesse: we will not now onely leaue the Champions in their sleeps dreaming of no mishap, but also the Magitian with Leoger in the blacke Castle, spending their time securely, careles of all insuing daunger, and speake now of the olde Shepheard whome the Champions at their first entring in at the gates of the Castle, where they left him to looke vnto their warlike palfries as they fed vpon the gréene grasse: but when this olde man coulde heare no newes of the Champions returne, he greatly mistrusted their confusion, and that by some trecherie they were intercepted in

their vowed reuengement, therefore he protested secretly with his owne soule, in that for his sake so many braue Champions had lost their liues, neuer to depart out of those fieldes, but to spend his daies in more sorrow then did the haplesse King of Babilon, that for seauen parching Summers, and as many fréezing Winters was constrained to féede vpon the flowers of the fieldes, and to drinke the dewe of heauen, till the haires of his heade grewe so stiffe as Egles feathers, and the nailes of his fingers like vnto birds clawes, the like extremitie he vowed to indure, vntill he either reobtained a wished fight of those inuincible knights (the flowers of chiualry) or else were constrained by course of nature to yéeld vp his loathed life, to the furie of those fatall sisters: In this déepe distresse will my wearie muse likewise leaue this old shepheard mourning for the long absence of the English Champion and the other Christian Knights, and returne vnto Saint Georges valiant Sonnes, whome we left trauelling from the Quéene of Armenias graue, with her vnvappy daughter Rosana: to take reuengement for her disloyal Lord, being the Knight of this blacke Castle, of whose vilanies you haue heard so much of before.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  How Saint Georges three sonnes after their departure from the Queene of Armenias sepulcher, in companie of her Daughter Rosana, met with a Wilde-man, with whom there hapned a strange Aduenture: and after how they entered the Blacke Castle, whereas they quencht the Lamps, and awakened the seauen Champions of Christendome, after they had slept seauen dayes vppon an inchaunted bedde, with other things that chanced in the same Castle.
               
               
                  THe budding Flowers of Chiualrie the valiant Sonnes of S. George to performe their Knightly promises, & to accomplish what they had protested to Rosana at the Quéene her Mothers graue, which was to deliuer her safely into the Blacke Castle, where her vnkinde father had his residence. First they bought her a Palfray of a silke colour of Spaine traynd in that Countrey, with certaine chaines and iewells that she wore about her necke and wrestes, which stéede was furnished with blacke Capparisons, in signe of her heauy and discontented minde, & his forehead beautified with a spangled plume of feathers.
               
                  Thus trauailed they day and night from the Confines of Armenia, with succesfull fortune, till they happily arriued vpon the Iland of the Blacke Castle: where they were constrained to rest themselues manie nights vnder the shaddowes of gréene leaued trées, where the melodie of siluer tuned birds brought them to their swéete sléepes: and in stéede of delicate fare, they were forced to satisfye their hungers with swéete Orenges and ripe Pomegranades, that grew verie plentifully in that Iland. But vppon a morning, when the skies appeared in theyr sightes verie cléere and pleasant, and at such time as when the Sunne began to spread his glistering beames vppon the loftie mountaines and stately Cedars, they set forward on their iourney, hoping before the cloasing in of the Dayes bright countenance, to arriue at the Blacke Castle, béeing their long wisht for hauen, and desired Port. But entering into an vnknown way and narrow path not much vsed, they were intercepted by a strange and wonderfull Aduenture. For as they trauelled in those vntroden passages, spending the time in pleasant conference, without mistrusting of anie thing that should happen to them in that pleasant Iland: vpon a sodaine (not knowing the occasion) their horses started and rose vp with their foreféet, and turned backward into the aire in such sort, that they had almost vnsadled their Masters: whereat the valiant Knights vppon a sodaine looked round about them, to sée who or what it was that caused so much feare: but when they perceiued nothing, nor could coniecture what should be the occasion of such terror, they grewe wonderfullye troubled in minde. Then one began to encourage ye rest, saying: Beléeue me Brethren, I muse what should bee the cause of this alteration in our horses? hath some spirit glided by vs, or lodgeth some deuill among these bushes? Whatsoeuer it be, let vs by the power and fauour of God attempt to know, and with our warlike weapons reuenge the frighting of our horses, for our mindes are vndaunted

by the porwes of men, nor feared with the furye of deuils.
               These woordes being spoken with greate courage and maiestie, caused Rosana to smile with a chéerefull countenance, and to imbolden her heart against all insuing accidents: so presently they came vnto a riuer which was both cléere and déepe, the which they iudged to runne quite thorowe the middle of the Iland: and so trauelling along by the riuers side, where within a little while their horses began againe to stagger and to be wonderfully affraide, and casting about their vigilant eyes, to sée if they coulde perceiue what it should be that made their horsses so timerous they espyed espyed a terrible Monster in the shape and form of a Satyre or a wilde man, which did crosse ouerthwarte the Iland, of a wonderfull greate and strange making, who was as bigge and broade as any Giant, for he was almost foure squa
                     •
                  re: his face was thrée foote in length and had but one eye, & that was in his forehead, which glistred like vnto a blazing Comet or a fierye Planet: his bodye was couered all ouer with long and shagged haire, like to the impoysoned stinges of Serpents: and in his breaste, there was as though it had béene a glasse, out of the which there séemed a great and shining light to procéed.
               This Monster directed his way towards certaine Rockes of stone which stood in the Iland, and by reason of the stragling and greate noyse that the horsses made, he cast his head aside and espyed the thrée Knightes trauelling in companie of the Lady: vpon whome he had no sooner cast his blazing eye, but with a deuilish furye he ran towards them, and in stéed of a Club, he bare in his hand a mighty great and knotted Maple trée.
               These valiant Knightes neuer dismaide at the sight of this deformed creature, but against his comming, they chéered vp their horsses, and pricked their sides with their golden spurres, giuing a great shoute as a signe of incouragement, and withall, drawinge foorth their sharpe cutting

swords they stood attending the furie of the Monster, who came roaring like a Bull, and discharged his knotted trée amongst the magnanimous Knightes, who with light leapes cléered themselues from his violent blowes, that his club fell downe to the ground with such a terrible fall, as thogh with the violence it wold haue ouerthrowne a Castle.
               With that the Knights presently alighted from theyr horses, thinking thereby more nimbler to defende themselues, and with more courage to assaile the Satyre. Manie were the blowes on both sides, and dangerous the incounter, without signe of victorie inclining vnto eyther partie.
               During the Battell, Rosana (through the griefe and feare that she receiued) swounded vpon her palfray, & had fallen beside his back, if she had not first closed her hands about the pummell of the saddle: and being come a little vnto her selfe, she made her humble supplication vnto the Gods, soliciting heauen, that she might rather be buryed in the Monsters bowells, thereby to satisfie hys wrathe, than to sée such noble Knights loose the least drop of blood, or to haue the smallest haire vpon their heads diminished: such was the loue and true zeale she bore vnto these thrée Knights.
               But Sa. Georges Sonnes so manfully behaued themselues in the Encounter, bearing the prowesse of their fathers minde, that they made manie déepe wounds in the Monsters flesh, and such terrible gashes in his body, that all the gréene grasse was couered with his blacke blood, and the ground all to besmeared & strewed with hys mangled flesh.
               When the diuelish Monster felt himselfe wounded, and saw how his blood stood vpon the earth like coniealed gore, hee fled from them more swifter than a whirlewinde, or like vnto an arrow forced from a musket, and ran in great hast to the Rockes that stood thereby, where presently he

threw himselfe into a Caue, pulling downe after him a Rocke of stone, which did close vp the entry, the which was done with so great lightnesse, that the Knights had no time to strike him, but after a while when they had blessed themselues to sée such a strainge and sodaine thing they assayed by strength to remoue the Rocke, and to cleare the mouth of the Caue, the which they did without any difficultnes.
               Yet for all that they coulde not finde which way they might enter in thereat, but like vnto Lyons fraughted with anger, fretting and chafing, they went searching round about the Rock to sée if they could espie any entry, and at last they found a great cliffe on the one side of the Rocke, and looking in thereat, they espyed the monster, lying vpon the floare licking of his bléeding wounds with his purple tongue.
               And séeing him, one of the Knights said: O thou traitor and distroyer by the high waies, O thou infernall deuill and enemy vnto the world, thou that art the deuourer of humane fleshe, and drinker of mans bloud, thinke not that this thy stronge and fast closing vp of thy selfe in this Rocke of stone shall auayle thee, or that thy deuelish body shall escape vnslaughtered out of our handes, no, no our bloudy weapons shal be sheathed in thy detested bowels, and riue thy damned heart asunder, and therewithall they thrust their weapons through the clift of the Rocke, and pearced his throat in such sorte that the monster presently dyed, the which being done they returned in tryumph like conquerers to Rosana, where they founde her halfe dead lying vpon her palfrie.
               But when shee sawe them returne in safetie like one new risen from death, with a ioyfull and lowde voice shee said, O God how hath it pleased thy deuine maiestie, to furnish these Knights with more strength and prowesse, then any other in all the world, else coulde they not haue choosd but haue béene ouercome by this remorceles monster,

which séemed to be of force to destroy kingdomes: therewithall she alighted in good state from her Palfray, and sate her downe vnder the shadow of a Pine-trée, where the thrée knights likewise sate downe, & laid theyr wearie heads vpon her soft lap to sléepe, vpon whose faces she fanned a coole breathing ayre, and wiped their sweaty browes with her handkercher, vsing all the meanes shee could to moue them contentment.
               Long had they not reposed themselues vpon Rosanaes lappe, refreshing their wearie bodies with a golden sléepe, but they awaked and mounted vpon their stéedes, and the next morning by breake of day, they approached the sight of the blacke Castle, before whose walles they found seauen portly stéedes, féeding within a gréene pasture, and by them an ancient father, bearing in his face the true picture of sorrowe, and caruing in the barke of trées the subiect of all his passed griefes: this man was the olde sheapheard which the seauen Champions of christendome (before their inchaunted sléepes in the Castle) lefte without the Gates to ouersée their horsses, as you heard before in the last Chapter.
               But Saint Georges sonnes (after they had a while beheld the manner of the sheapheards silent lamentations) demaunded the causes of his griefe and wherefore he remayned so néere the danger of the Castle? to whose demaundes, the curteous olde man answered in this manner.
               Braue Knightes (saide hee) for you séeme to be no lesse by your Princely demeanures, within this Castle remaineth a bloody tirant and a wicked homicide, called Leoger, whose tyrannie and lust hath not onely rauished but murthered two of my daughters, with whome I was honored in my yong yeares, in whose reuenge there came with me seauen christian knights of seauen seueral countries, that entred this accursed Castle about seauen daies since, appointing me to stay without the gates, & to haue a vigilent

care of their horses, till I heard either newes of the Tyrants confusion, or their ouerthrowes: but neuer since by anie meanes could I learne whether good or bad were betided them.
               These words strooke such a terror to their hearts▪ that for a time they stoo
                     •
                   spéechlesse, imagining that those seauen Knightss were the seauen Champions of Christendome, in whose pursutes they had traueled so many countreyes. But at last when Saint Georges Sonnes had recouered their former spéeches, one of them (though not intending to reueale what they imagined) sayd vnto ye olde Shepheard: that likewise they came to bee reuenged vpon that accursed Knight, for the spoyle of a beauteous and worthie Uirgine Quéene, done by the said lust inflamed Tyrant.
               Then the Ladie and the thrée Knightes alighted from their horses, and likewise committed them to the kéeping of the olde Shepheard: who courteously receiued them, & earnestly prayed for their prosperous procéedings. So the thrée Knightes buckled close their armours, laced on their helmets, and put their shields vpon their armes, and in companie of Rosana they went to the Castle gate, the which glistered against the Sunne like burnisht golde: whereat hung a mightie Copper King, wherewith they beate so vehemently against the Gate, that it séemed to rattle like a violent tempestuous storme of thunder in the Element.
               Then presently there appeared (looking out at a marble pillor
                     •
                  d window) the Magitian, newly risen from his bed, in a wrought shirt of blacke silke, and couered wyth a night gown of damaske veluet: and séeing the Knights with the Ladie standing before the gate, he thus discurteously gréeted them.
               You Knights of strange Countreys said he, for so doth it appeare by your strange demeanours: if you desire to haue the gates opened, and your bones buried in the valts

of our Castle, turne backe vnto the Iasper piller behinde you▪ and sound the siluer Trumpet that hangs vpon it, so shall your entrie be easie, but your comming foorth miraculous. And thereupon the Magitian left the window.
               Then one of the Knights went vnto the Iasper piller, and with a vehement breath sounded the inchanted trumpet as S. George did before, whereat the gates flew open in like manner: wherein (without anie disturbance) they entred: & comming into the same Court where ye champions had fought with the Giants, they spied the inchanted Lampes, which hung burning before the entrie of ye caue where the Champions lay vpon the inchanted bed. Under the Lampes hung a siluer tablet in an yron chaine, in it was written these words following.
               These fatal lamps with their inchanted lights,
               In deaths sad sleep hath shut 7. christē knights
               Within this caue they ly with sloth cōfoūded
               Whose fame but late in eury place resoūded.
               Except these flaming lampes extinguisht bee,
               Their golden thoughts shall sleepe eternally.
               A Fountaine framde by furies raisd from hell,
               About whose spring doth fear & terror dwel:
               No earthly vvater may suffise but this
               To quench the lamp vvhere art cōmander is.
               No vvightaliue this vvater may procure,
               But she that is a Virgin chast and pure.
               For Nature at her birth did so dispose,
               Vpon her breast to print a purple Rose.
               
                  These verses being perused by the thrée Knights, & finding them as it were contriued in the manner of a mysticall Oracle, they could not imagine what they should signifie: but Rosana being singularly well conceated, and of a quicke vnderstanding, presently knewe that by her the Aduenture should be finished, and therefore shee incouraged them to a forwardnes, and to séeke out the inchaunted Fountaine, that by the water thereof the lamps might be quenched, and the seauen Champions deliuered out of captiuitie.
               This importunate desire of Rosana, caused the thrée yong Knights not to loose anie time, but to search in euery corner of the Castle, till they had found the place wherin the Fountaine was: for as they went towards the North side of the Court, they espied another little doore standing in the wall, and when they came to it, they sawe that it was made all of verie strong yron, with a portal of stéele, and in the key hole thereof there was a brazen key, with t
                     •
                  e which they did open it, whereat pres
                     •
                  ntly (vnto theyr wonderfull amazements) they heard a verie sad and sorrowfu
                     •
                  l voyce breath foorth these words following.
               
                  Let no man bee so foolish hardy, as to enter here, for it is a place of terror and confusion.
               
               Yet for all this they entered in thereat, and would not be daunted with anie ceremonious fear, but like knights of an heroycall estimation they went forward: wherein they were no sooner entred, but they saw that it was wonderfully darke, and it séemed vnto them that it should be a verie large Hall, and therein they heard verie fearefull howlings, as though there had bin a legion of helhounds, or that Plutoes Dogge had béen vice gerent of that place. Yet for all this these valiant Knights did not loose anye of their accustomed courage, nor wold the Ladie leaue their companies for anie danger: but they entred in further, &

tooke off their gauntlets from their left hands, whereon they wore meruailous great and fine Diamonds, which were set in rings, that gaue so much light, that they might plainly sée all things that were in the Hal, the which was verie great and wide, and vppon the walls were painted the figures of manie furious fiends and diuells, wyth other straunge Uisions framed by Magicke arte, onely to terrefie the beholders. But looking verie circumspectlye about them on euerie side, they espied the inchanted fountaine standing directly in the middle of the Hall, towards which they went with their shieldes braced on theyr left armes, and their good swords charged in their hands, readie to withstand anie daungerous accident whatsoeuer should happen.
               But comming to the Fountaine, and offering to fill their helmets with water, there appeared before them a strange and terrible Griphon, which séemed to bee all of flaming fire who stroke all the thrée Knights one after another in such sort, that they were forced to recoyle backe a great way: yet notwithstanding with great discretion they kept themselues vpright, & with a wonderfull lightnesse, accompanied with no lesse anger, they threw theyr shields at their backes, and taking their swordes in both their handes, they began most fiercely to assaile the Griphon with mortall and strong blowes. Then presentlye there appeared before them a whole legion of diuels with flesh-hookes in their hands, spitting forth flames of fire, & breathing from their nosthrills smoking sulphure & brimstone. In this terrible sort tormented they these thrée valiant Knights, whose yeres although they were but yong, yet with great wrath and redoubled force aduentred they themselues amongst this hellish crue, striking such terrible blowes, that in spite of them they came vnto ye Fountaine and proff
                     •
                  red to take of the water: but all in vain, for they were not onely put from it by this diuelish companie, but the water it selfe glided from their hands.
               
                  Oh in what great trauel and perplexitie these Knights remained amongst this wicked and diuellish generation, for to defend themselues that they might attaine to the finishing of this Aduenture, according to their knightlye promise.
               But during the time of all these daungerous encounters, Rosana stood like one berest of sense, thorough ye terror of the same: but at last remembring her selfe of ye prophecie written in the siluer tablet, the which the knights perused by the inchaunted Lampes: the signification of which was, that the quenching of the lights should be accomplished by a pure Uirgin, that had the liuely forme of a Rose naturally pictured vpon her breast: all the which Rosana knew most certainly to bee comprehended in her selfe.
               Therefore whilst they continued in their fight, she tooke vp a helmet that was pulled from one of the Knightes heads by the furious force of the Griphon, and ranne vnto the Fountaine and filled it with water, wherewith shee quenched the inchaunted Lampes, with as much ease, as though one had dipped a waxen torch in a mightie riuer of water.
               This was no sooner done and finished to Rosanaes chéefest contentment, when that the heauens began to waxe darke, and the cléere skies to be ouerspred with a blacke & thicke clowd, and it came with great thundrings & lightnings, and with such a terrible noyse, as though the earth would haue sunke: and the longer it indured, the more was the furie thereof, in such sort that the Griphon wyth all that deluding generation of spirits vanished away, and the Knights forsooke their incounters, and fell vpon theyr knées, and with great humilitie they desired of God to be deliuered from the furie of that excéeding and terrible tempest.
               By this sodaine alteration of the heauens, the knight of the Castle knew that the Lampes were extinguished,

the Champions redéemed from their inchaunted sléepes the Castle yéelded to the pleasure of the thrée knights, and his owne life to the furies of their swords, except hée preserued it by a sodaine flight, so presently hee departed the Castle, and secretly fled out of the Iland vnsuspected by anie one: of whose after fortunes, miseries, and death, you shall heare more hereafter in the course of the historie following.
               The Nigromancer by his Arte likewise knew, that the Castle was yéelded vnto his Enemies power, & that his charmes and magicke spells nothing preuailed: therfore he caused two ayrie spirits in the likenes of two Dragons to carrie him swiftly through the ayre in an Ebonie Chariot.
               Héere we leaue him in his wicked & diuelish attempts and diuelish enterprises, which shall bee discoursed héereafter more at large: because it appertaineth to our Historie now to speake of the seauen Champions of Christendome, that by the quenching of the Lampes were awakened from their inchauntments, wherein they had laine in obscuritie for the space of seauen dayes. For when they were risen from their sléepes, and had rowsed vp theyr drowsie spirits, like men newly recouered from a trance, being ashamed of that dishonorable enterprice, they long time gazed in each others faces, being not able to expresse their mindes, but by blushing lookes, beeing the silent speakers of their extreame sorrowes. But at last Saint George began to expresse the extremitie of his griefe in this manner.
               What is become of you braue Europes Champions (said he) where is now your wonted valors, that hath bin so much renowmed through the world? what is become of your surmounting strengths, that hath bruzed inchaunted helmets, and quaild the power of mightie multitudes? what is become of your terrible blowes, that hath subdued mountaines, hewen in sunder diamond armours, and

brought whole kindomes vnder your subiections, now I sée that all is forgotten & nothing worth, for that we haue buried all our honors, dignities, and fames in slouthfull slumbers vpon a silken bed.
               And thereupon hee fell vpon his knées, and said: thou holy God, thou rector of the riding racks of heauen, to thée I inuocate and call, and desire thée to help vs, and doe not permit vs to haue our fames taken away for this dishonor, but let vs meritte dignitie by our victories, and that our bright renownes may ride vpon the glorious winges of fame, whereby that babes as yet vnborne may speake of vs and in time to come fill whole v
                     •
                  lumes with our princely atchiuements.
               These and such like reasons pronounced this disconted Champion, till such time as the elementes cleared, and that golden faced Phoebus glistred with splendant brightnes into the caue through a secret hole, which séemed in their conceits to daunce about the vale of heauen, and to reioyce at their happie deliueries.
               In this ioyfull manner returned they vp into the court of the Castle, with their armors buckled fast vnto their bodies, which had not béene vnbraced in seuen dayes before, where they met with the thrée Knightes comming to salute them, and to giue them the curtesies of Knighthood.
               But when Saint George saw his Sonnes whome he had not séene in twice two yéeres before he was so rauished with ioy, that he swounded in their bosomes, and not able to giue them his blessing, so great was the pleasure he tooke in their fights.
               Héere I leaue the ioyfull gréeting betwixt the Father and his Sons, to those that knowes the secret loue of parents to their children, and what deare affection long absence bréedeth.
               For when they had sufficiently ostended the integritie of their soules each to other, and had at large explained

how many daungers euery Knight and Champion had passed since their departures from England, where as they begun first their intended pilgrimage to Ierusalem as you heard in the beginning of this booke, they determined to search the Castle, and to finde out Leoger with his assosiate the wicked inchaunter, that they might receiue dew punishments for their committed offences, but they like wylie foxes were fled from the hunters traces, and had left the emptie Castle to the spoile of the Christian Champions: But when Rosana sawe her selfe dismist from her purpose, and that she could not performe her mothers will, against her disloyall Father, she protested by the mightie God of heauen, neuer to close vp her carefull eyes with quiet slumbers, nor neuer rest her wearie limbes in bed of Downe, but trauell vp and downe the circled earth till she inioyd 
                     〈◊〉
                   of her disloiall Father whome as yet her eyes did neuer see. Therefore shee coniured the Champions by the lou
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  nd honor that knights should beare vnto Ladies in 
                     〈◊〉
                  , to graunt her libertie to depart and not to hinder her from her intended trauell.
               The Knights considered with themselues that shée was a Lady of a deuine inspiration, borne vnto some straunge fortune, and one by the heau
                     •
                  n
                     •
                   appointment which had redéemed them from a wonderfull mizerie.
               Therefore they condescended to her desires, and not onely gaue her leaue to depart, but furnished her with all thinges belonging to a Ladye of so braue a minde.
               First they found within the Castle an armor fit for a woman, the which the inchaunter had caused to be made by magick arte of such a singuler nature that no weapon could pearce it, and so light in wearing, that it wayed no heuier then a Lions s
                     •
                  in, it was contriued after the Amazonian fashion, plated before with siluer plates, like the

scales of a Dolphin, and riuetted together with golden nayles: so that when she had it vppon her backe, shée séem
                     •
                  d like to Diana, hunting in the Forrests of transformed Acteon.
               
               Likewise they found (standing in a stable at the East side of the Castle) a lustie limbed Steed, big of stat
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  , & of a verie good haire, because the halfe part forwards was of the colour of a Wolfe, and the other halfe was al black, sauing that here and there it was spotted with litle white spots: his féete were clouen, so that he néeded not at anye time to be shod: his necke was somewhat long, hauing a little head, with great eares hanging downe like a hoūd: his pace was with great maiestie, and he so doubled hys necke, that his mouth touched his breast: there came out of his mouth two great tuskes like vnto an Elephant, and hee did exceede all horses in the world in lightnes, and dyd runne with an excéeding good grace. This likewise bestowed they vppon the Ladie, the which did more content her minde, than anie thing that euer her eye had séene before that time. Also the tē christian Knights gaue her at her departure ten diamond rings, continually to weare vpon her ten fingers, in perpetuall remembrance of their curtesies.
               This being done, without anie longer tarriance, but thanking them for their great kindnes shewed vnto her in distresse, she leapt into the saddle without helpe of stirrop or anie other thing, and so rode spéedely awaye from their sights, as a shower of raine driuen by a violent tempest.
               After her departure, the Champions remembred the olde Shepheard, whom they had almost forgotten, thorough the ioy that they tooke in their happie méetings: he as yet remained without the Castle gates, carefully kéeping their horses, whom now they caused to come in▪ and not onely gaue him the honour due vnto his age, but bestowed frankly vpon him the state and gouernment of the

Castle, with store of iewels, pearles and treasure, onely to be maintained and kept for the releefe of poore Trauailers.
               This being perfourmed with their generall consents, they spent the remnant of the day in banquetting and other pleasant conference of their passed Aduentures. And when that Night with her sable clowdes had ouer-spred the Dayes delightfull countenaunce, they betooke them to their rests: the seauen Champions in a chamber that had as manie windowes as there were daies in the yere, the olde Shepheard by himselfe in a rich furnished Parlour, and Saint Georges three Sonnes in the greatest Hall in the Castle.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               
                  How after the Christian Knightes were gone to bed in the black Castle: Saint George was awaked frō his sleep in the dead time of the night, after a most fearefull manner, and likwise how he found a Knight lying vpon a tombe, that stood ouer a flaming fire, with other thynges that hapned vpon the same.
               
               
                  MOst swéete were the sléepes that he s
                     •
                   P
                     •
                  incely minded companies took in the Castle all the first part of the night, without molestation eyther by disquiet dreames or disturbing motions of their mindes, till such time as the glistering Quéene of night had runne halfe her wearie Iorney, and had spent the better part of the night: for betwixt twelue and one, being the chiefest time of feare and terror in the night such a strainge alteracion worked in Saint Georges thought that he coulde not inioy the benefite of swéete sléepe, but

was forced to lye broad waking like one disquieted by some sodaine feare: but as hee laye with wakefull eyes thinking vppon his passed fortunes, and numbring the minutes of the night with his cogitations, hée heard as it were a cry of night Rauens, which flew beating their fatal wings against the windows of his lodging, by which he immagined that some direfull accident were néere at hand: yet being not frighted with this fearefull noise, nor daunted with the croking of these Rauens, he lay silently not reuealing it to any of the other Champions that lay in the sixe seuerall beds in the same chamber: but at last being betwixt waking and sléeping, hee heard as it were the voice of a sorrowfull Knight that constrained these bitter passions from his tormented soule, and they contayned these words following.
               
                  Oh thou inuincible knight of England, thou that art not frighted with this sorrowful dwelling, wherein thou canst see nothing but torments, rise vp I say, from thy sluggish bed & with thy vndaunted courage and stronge arme, infringe the charme of my inchauntment.
               
               And therewithall hee séemed to giue a most terrible grone and so ceased: This vnexpected noyse caused Saint George (without the knowledge of any of the other Champions) to arise from his bedde, and to buckle on his armor, and to search about the Castle to sée if hee might finde the place that harbored the Knight that made such sorrowfull lamentation.
               
                  So going vp and downe she by corners of the Castle, all the latter part of the night, without finding the aduenture of this strange voice, or disturbance by any other meanes but that he was hindred from his naturall and quiet sléepes, but by the breake of day, when the darke night b
                     •
                  gan to withdraw her sable curtaines, and to giue Aurora libertie to explayne her purple brightnesse, he entred into a foure square parlor, hunge rounde about with blacke cloth, and other mournfull habiliments, where on the one side of the same he sawe a tombe all couered likewise with blacke, and vppon it there lay a man with a pale colour, who at certaine times, gaue moste meruelous and gréeuous sighes, caused by the burning flames that procéeded from vnder the tombe, being such that it séemed that his body therewith should bee conuerted into coales: the flame thereof was so stincking that it made Saint George somewhat to retyre himselfe from the place where hee sawe that horrible and fearefull spectacle.
               He which lay vpon the tombe, casting his eyes aside, espied Saint George, and knowing him to be a humane creature, with an inflicted voyce he said: Who art thou Sir Knight that art come into this place of sorrow, where nothing is heard but clamors of feare and terror?
               But tell me said Saint George, who art thou, that with so much griefe dast demaund of me, that which I stand in doubt to reueale to thée
               I am the King of Babilon (answered hee) which without all consideration, with my cruell hand did pearce through the white and dilicate brest of my beloued daughter: woe be to me and woe vnto my soule therefore: for shee at once did pay her offence by death, but I a most mizerable wretch with many tormentes doe dye lyuing.
               When this worthy Champion Saint George was about to answere him, he saw come foorth from vnder the

tombe, a damsell who had her hayre of a yellow and wan colour hanging downe about her shoulders, and by her face she séemed that she should be verie strangely afflicted with tormentes, and with a sorrowfull voyce shee said.
               Oh vnfortunate Knight what doest thou séeke in this infernall lodging, where cannot be giuen thée any other pleasure, but mortall torment, and there is but one thing that can cleare thée from them, and this cannot be tolde thée by any other but by me: yet I will not expresse it except thou wilt graunt mee one thing that I will aske of thée.
               The English Champion that with a sad countenaunce stood beholding of the sorrowful damsel, and being greatly amazed at the sight which he had séene, answered and said: The Gods which are gouernours of my liberty, wil doe their pleasures, but touching the graunt of thy request I neuer denied any lawfull thing to either Lady or Gentle woman, but with all my power and strength I was ready to fulfill the same, therefore demaunde what thy pleasure is, for I am readie in all thinges that toucheth thy remedie.
               And with that the damsell threw her selfe into that sepulcher, and with a gréeuous voice she said. Nowe moste curteous Knight performe thy promise: strike but thrée stroakes vpon this fatall tombe, and thou shalt deliuer vs from a world of mizeries, and likewise make an ende of our continuall torments.
               Then the inuincible knight replyed in this order, whether you be humane creatures said he, pla
                     •
                  st in this sepulcher by inchauntment, or furies raisd from fiery Acheron to worke my confusion or no I know not, and there is so little truth in this infernall Castle, that I stand in doubt whether I may beléeue thy words or not: but yet discourse vnto me the truth of all your passed fortunes, and by what 
                     ••
                  anes you were brought into this place, and as I am a

true Christian Knight, and one that fights in the quarrell of Christ, I vow to accomplish whatsoeuer lyeth in my power.
               Then the Damsel began with a gréeuous and sorrowfull lamentation, to declare as strange a tragedie as euer was told. And lying in the fatall Sepulcher, vnséene of Saint George, that stood leaning his backe agaynst the wall to heare her discourse and lamentable Storie: with a hollow voice like a murthered Ladie, whose bléeding soule as yet did féele the terrible stroke at her death, shée repeated this pittifull tale following.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Of a tragicall Discourse pronounced by a Ladie in a Toombe: and hovv her Inchauntment vvas finished by saint George, vvith other straunge accidents that hapned to the other Christian Knights.
               
               
                  IN famous Babylon somtimes reigned a King, although a Heathen, yet adorned with noble and vertuous customes, and had onely one Daughter that was verie faire, whose name was Angelica, humble, wise, and chast: who was beloued of a mightie Duke, & a man man wonderfull cunning in the Blacke arte. This Magitian had a seuere & graue countenance, and one that for wisedome better deserued ye gouernment than anie other in the kingdome, and was verie well estéemed throughout all Babylon, almost equally with the king: for the which there ingendred in the kings heart a secret rancour and hatred towards him. Thys Magitian cast his loue vppon the yong Princesse Angelica, and it was the Gods will that shee should repaye him wyth the same affection: so that both theyr hearts beeing

wounded with loue the one to the other, in such sorte that the fire kindled dayly more and more, and neither of them had any other imagination but onelye to loue: and not knowing how to manifest their griefes, they indured sundry great passions.
               Then loue which continually séeketh occasions, did on a time set before this Magician a wayting maid of Angelicaes, named Fidela: the which thing séemed to be wrought by the immortall power of the Goddesse Venus: oh what feare this Magitian was in to discouer vnto her all his heart, and to bewray the secrets of his louesicke soule: but in the end, by the great industrie and diligence of the waighting Maid (whose name was answerable vnto her minde) there was order giuen that these two louers shuld méete together.
               This faire Angelica, for that she could not at her ease enioy her true Louer, she did determine to leaue her own naturall Countrey and Father: and with this intention being one night with her Loue, she cast her armes about his necke and said.
               Oh my swéete and welbeloued Frend, séeing that the soueraigne Gods haue béen so kinde to me, as to haue my heart linked in thy breast, let me not finde in thée ingratitude, for that I cannot passe my time, except continually I enioye thy sight: and doo not muse (my Lord) at these my words, for the entyre loue that I beare to you, dooth constraine me to make it manifest. And this beléeue of a certaintie, that if thy sight be absent from mée, it will bée an occasion that my heart will lacke his vitall recreation, and my soule forsake his earthly habitation. You knowe (my Lorde) how that the King my Father dooth beare you no good will, but doth hate you from hys soule, which wil be the occasion that we cannot enioy our harts contentments: for the which I haue determined (if you thinke well thereof) to leaue both my Father and my natiue Countrey, and to goe and liue with you in a strange

Land. And if you denie me this, you shall verie quickly sée your welbeloued Ladie without life: but I know you will not denie me it, for thereon consisteth the benefite of my welfare, and my chéefest prosperitie. And therewithall shedding a few teares from her christall eyes, she held her peace.
               The Magitian (as one halfe rauished with her earnest desires) answered and said.
               My Loue and swéete Mistres, wherefore haue you anie doubt that I will not fulfill and accomplish your desire in all things? therefore out of hand put all things in a readines that your pleasure is to haue done: for what more benefite and contentment can I receaue, than to enioy your sight continually, in such sort that neither of vs may depart from the others companie, till the fatall Destenies giue end vnto our liues. But if it so fall out that fortune frowne vpon vs, that wee bee espied and taken in our enterprise, and suffer death together, what more glorie can there be vnto my soule, than to dye with thée, and to leaue my life betwixt thy armes? Therefore doo not trouble your selfe my swéete Ladie and Mistres, but giue me leaue for to depart your presence, that I may prouide all things in a readines for our departures. And so wyth this conclusion they tooke leaue one of the other, and departed away with as great secrecie as might possibly bee deuised.
               After this within a fewe dayes, the Magitian by hys inchauntments caused a Chariot to bee made, that was gouerned by two flying Dragons into the which without being espied by anie one, they put themselues, in companie of their trustie wayting Maid: and so in great secret they departed out of the Kings Pallace, and tooke theyr iourney towards the Countrey of Armenia: in the which Countrey in a short time they arriued, and came without anie misfortune vnto a place whereas deepe riuers doo continually strike vpon a mightie rocke, vpon the which

stood an olde and ancient building, wherein they intended to inhabit as a most conuenient place for their dwellinges, whereas they might without all feare of beeing found, liue peacefullie in ioying in each others loue.
               Not farre from that place there was a small Uillage, from whence they might haue necessarie prouision for the maintayning of their bodies: great ioy and pleasure th
                     •
                  se two Louers receiued when they founde themselues in such a place wheras they might take their ease and inioy their loues.
               The Magitian delighted in no other thing but to goe a hunting with certaine Countrie dwellers that inhabited in the next Uillage, leauing his swéete Angellica accompanied with her trustie Fidela in that stronge house, so in this order they liued together foure yeares, spending their daies in great pleasure: but in the end time (who neuer resteth in one degrée) did take from them their rest and repayed them with sorrow and extream mizerie. For when the King her father found her missiing, the sorrowe and griefe was so much that he receiued, that he kept his chamber a long time, and would not be comforted of anie bodie.
               Foure yeares he passed away in great heauinesse, filling the Courte with Ecchoes of his beloued daughter, and making the skies to resound his lamentations: sorrowe was his foode, salte teares his drinke, and griefe his chiefe companion.
               But at last, vppon a time as he sate in his Chayre lamenting her absence with great heauinesse, and beeing ouercharged with griefe, he chanst to fall into a troublesome dreame, for after quiet sléepe had closed vp the closets of his eyes, he dreamd that he saw his daughter standing vppo a Rocke by the sea side, offring to cast her body into the waues before she would returne to Babylon, and that he beheld her Louer with an Armye of Satyrs and wilde men ready furnished with habiliments of warre to

pull him from his Throane, and to depriue him of hys Kingdome.
               Out of this vision he presently started from his chaire, as though it had béen one frighted with a legion of spirits, and caused foure of the chéefest Péeres of his Land to bee sent for, to whom he committed the gouernement of hys Countrey: certefying them that he intended a voyage to the Sepulcher at Memphis, thereby to quallifie the furie of his Daughters ghost, whom he dreamed to be drowned in the seas, and that except he sought by true submission to appease the angrie heauens, whom hee had offended by his vnnaturall sorrowes, hee should be deposed from hys Kingdome.
               None could withdraw him from this determination, though it was to the preiudice of his whole Land, therefore within twentie dayes he furnished himselfe with all necessaries as well of armour and martiall furniture, as of golde and treasure, and so departed from Babylon priuately and alone, not suffering anie other (though many desired it humbly, and were verie earnest) to beare hym companie.
               But he trauelled not as he told his Lords after any ceremonious order, but like a bloud-hound serching Countrey after Countrey, Nation by Nation, and Kingdome by Kingdome, that after a barbarous manner hee might be reuenged vpon his Daughter for her disobedience. And as he trauelled, there was no caue, den, wood nor wildernesse, but he furiously entered, and diligently searched for his Angelica.
               
               At last by strange fortune he happened into Armenia, néere vnto the place whereas his Daughter had her residence: where, after he had intelligence by the Commons of that Countrey, that she remained in an olde ruynated Building on the top of a rocke néere at hand, without anie more tariance hee trauelled vnto that place, at such a time as ye Magitian her louing Husband was gone about

his accustomed hunting: where comming to the gate and finding it lockt, hee knockt thereat so furiously, that hee made the noyse to resound all the house ouer, with a redoubling Eccho.
               When Angelica heard one knocke, she came vnto the gate and with all spéed did open it. And when she thought to imbrace him, thinking it to be her Louer, she saw that it was her Father, and with a sodain alteration she gaue a great shrike, and ran with all the spéed she could backe into the house.
               The King her Father being somewhat angrie, like a furious Lion followed her, saying: It dooth little auayle thée Angelica to run away, for that thou shalt dye by thys reuengefull hand, paying me with thy death the great dishonour that my royall crowne hath now by thy flight receaued.
               So he followed her till he came to the chamber where her wayting Maid Fidela was, who likewise presentlye knew the King: vpon whose wrathfull countenance appeared the image of pale death, and fearing the harme that should happen vnto her Ladie, she put her selfe ouer her bodie, and gaue most terrible, lowd, and lamentable shrikes.
               The King as one kindled in wrath, and forgetting the naturall loue of a Father towards his Childe, hee laid hand vppon his sword, and said: It dooth not profite thee Angelica to flie from thy death: for thy desert is such, that thou canst not escape from it: for heere mine owne arme shall be the killer of mine owne flesh: and I vnnaturally hate that, which Nature it selfe commaundeth me especily to loue.
               Then Angelica with a countenaunce more red than scarlet, answered and said: Ah my Lord and Father, wil you be now as cruell vnto me, as you had wont to be kind and pittifull? appease your wrath, and withdraw your vnmercifull sword, and hearken vnto this which I saye

in discharging my selfe in that you charge mee wthall, you shall vnderstand my Lord and father, that I was ouercome and constrained by loue for to loue, forgetting all fatherly loue and my dutie towardes your Maiestie: yet for all that, hauing power to accomplish the same, it was not to your dishonour in that I liue honorablie with my husband: then the King (with a visage fraught with terrible ire) more liker a dragon in the woods of Hercania then a man of méeke nature, answered and said:
               Thou viperous brat, degenerate from natures kinde, thou wicked Traitor to thy generation, what reason hast thou to make this false excuse, when as thou hast committed a crime that deserues more punishment then humaine nature can inflicte? and in saying these wordes, he lift vp his sword, intending to strike her vnto the harte and to bathe his weapon in his owne daughters blood, whereat Fidela being present, gaue a terrible shrike and threw her self
                     •
                   vpon the body of vnhappy Ange
                        •
                     lica, offring her tender brest to the furie of his sharpe cutting sword onely to set at libertie her déere Lady and Mistresse.
               But when the furious King sawe her in this sorte make her defence, he pulled her off 
                     •
                  y the haire of the hed, offring to trample her delicate body vnder his féete, thereby to make a way that he might execute his denermined purpose without resistance of any.
               
                  Fidela when she sawe the King determined to kill his daughter, like vnto a Lyonesse she hung about his necke, and said: thou monstrous murtherer, more crueller then mad dogs in Egipt, why dost thou determine to slaughter the moste chaste and loyallest Ladye in the worlde? euen she within whose lappe vntamed Lyons will come and sléepe?
               Thou arte thy se
                     •
                  fe (I say) the occasion of all this euill, and thyne onely is the faulte, for that thy selfe wert so malicious and so full of mischiefe, that shee durst not let thée vnderstand of her sodaine loue.
               
                  These wordes and teares of Fidela did little profite to mollifie the Kings heart, but rather like a wylde Boare in the Wildernes beeing compassed about with a companie of Dogges, doth shake his members: euen so did thys King shake himselfe, and threw Fidela from him in such sort, that he had almost dasht her braines against the chā
                  ber walls, and with double wrath hee did procure to execute his furie. Yet for all this▪ 
                  Fidela with terrible shrikes sought to hinder him, till such time as with his cruel hand he thrust the poynt of his sword in at her breast, so that it appeared foorth at her backe, whereby her soule was forced to leaue her terrestriall habitation, and flye into Paradice to those blessed soules, which dyed for true loues sake.
               Thus this vnhappie Angelica, when shee was most at quiet, and content with her prosperous life, then Fortune turned her vnconstant Whéele, and cast her from a glorious delight to a sodaine death.
               The yrefull King, when he beheld his daughters blood sprinkled about the chamber, and that by his own hands it was committed, he repented himselfe of the déede, and accursed the hower wherein ye first motion of such a crime entered into his minde, wishing the hand that did it euer after might be lame, and the heart that did contriue it to be plagued with more extremities, than was miserable Oedipus: or to be terrified with her ghastly spirit, as was the Macedonian Alexander with Clitus shadow, whom he causeles murthered.
               In this manner the vnfortunate King repented hys Daughters bloodie Tragedie, with this determination, not to stay till the Magitian returned from his Hunters exercise, but to exclude himselfe from the companie of all men, & to spend the remnant of his loathsome life among vntamed beasts in some wilde wildernes. Upon this resolution he departed the chamber, and withall said: Farwell thou liuelesse bodie of my Angelica, and may thy blood

which I haue spilt, craue vengeance of the Gods against my guiltie soule, for my earthly bodie shall indure a miserable punishment. Likewise at his departure he writ vppon ye chamber wals these verses following in his daughters blood.
               For now to hills, to dales, to rockes, to caues I goe,
               To spend my dayes in shameful sorrow, griefe & woe.
               
                  Fidela (after the departure of the King) vsed such violent fury against her selfe, both by rending the golden tramelles of her hayre, and tearing her Rosie coloured face with her furious nayles, that shee rather seemed an infernall Furie subiect to wrath, than an earthly creature furnished with clemencie.
               She sat ouer Angelicaes bodie, wiping her bléeding bosome with a damaske scarffe, which shee pulled from her waste, and bathing her dead bodie in luke-warme tears, which forcibly ranne downe from her eyes like an ouerflowing Fountaine.
               In this wofull manner spent ye sorrowfull Fidela that vnhappie day, till bright Phoebus went into the westerne seas: at which time the Magitian retourned from his accustomed hunting, and finding the doore open, he entered into Angelicaes chamber, where when he found her bodie weltring in congealed blood, and beheld how Fidela sate wéeping ouer her bléeding wounds, he cursed himselfe, for that he accompted his negligence ye occasion of her death, in that he had not left her in more safetie. But when Fidela had certefied him, how that by the hands of her owne Father she was slaughtered, he began like a franticke tyrant to rage against heauen and earth, and to fill the ayre with terrible exclamations.
               Oh cruell murtherer (said he) crept from the womb of some vntamed Tyger: I wilbe so reuenged vpon thée, O vnnaturall king, that all ages shal wonder at thy misery.
               
                  And likewise thou vnhappie Uirgin, shalt indure like punishment, in that thy accursed tung hath bruted this fatall déed vnto my eares: the one for committing the crime and the other for reporting it. For I will cast such deserued vengeance vpon your heads, and place your bodies in such continuall torments, that you shall lament my Ladies death, leauing aliue the fame of her with your lamentations.
               And in saying these words, he drew a Booke out of his bosome, and in reading certaine charmes and inchauntments that was therein contained, he made a great & verie blacke clowde appeare in the skies, which was broght by terrible and hastie windes, in the which he tooke them vp both, and brought them into this inchaunted Castle, where euer since they haue remained in this Tombe, cruelly tormented with vnquenchable fire: and must eternally continue in the same extremitie, except some curteous Knight will vouchsafe to giue but thrée blowes vpon the Tombe, and breake the inchauntment.
               Thus haue you heard you magnanimious Knights, the true discourse of my vnhappie fortunes. For the virgine which for the true loue she bore vnto her Ladie was committed to this torment is my selfe: and this pale body lying vpon the Tombe, is the vnhappie Babylonian King which vnnaturally murthered his owne Daughter: and the Magitian which committed al these villanies, is that accursed wretch, which by his charmes and diuellish Enchauntments hath so strangely withstood your valiant incounters.
               These words were no sooner finished, but Sa. George drew out his sharpe cutting sword, and gaue thrée blowes vpon the inchaunted Tombe, whereat presentlye appeared the Babylonian King standing before him, attyred in rich robes, with an Emperiall Diadem vpon his head: & the Ladie standing by him, with a countenance more beutifull than the damaske Rose.
               
                  When Saint George beheld them, he was not able to speake for ioy, nor to vtter his minde, so excéeding was the pleasure that he tooke in their sights. So without anie long circumstance, he tooke them betwixt both his hands, and led them into the chamber, whereas hee found the other Knights newly risen from their beds. To whom hée reuealed the true discourse of the passed Aduenture, and by what meanes he redéemed the King and the Lady from their inchauntments: which to them was as great ioye, as before it was to Saint George.
               
               So, after they had for some sixe dayes refreshed themselues in the castle, they generaly intended to accompany the Babilonian King into his Countrey, and to place him againe in his Regiment.
               In which trauel we wil leaue the Christian knights to the conduction of Fortune, and returne againe vnto Rosana, whom (as you heard before) departed from the Castle in the pursute of her disloyal father: of whose strange accidents shall be spoken in this following Chapter.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  How the Knight of the Blacke Castle after the conquest of the same by the christian chā
                     pions, wandred vp and downe the vvorld in great terror of conscience, and after hovv he was found in a wood by his own daughter, in whose presence he desperately slew himselfe, with other accidents that after hapned.
               
               
                  YOu doo well remember when that that the Christian champions had slaine the seuen Giants in the inchanted castle, and had made conquest thereof, disloyall Leoger being lord of the same, secretly fled: not for anie anger of the losse, but for the preseruation of his life. So in great gréefe and terror of conscience he wandred like a fugitiue vp and downe ye world: sometimes remembring of his passed prosperitie, other times thinking vpon the rapes he had committed, how disloyally in former times he had left the Quéene of Armenia big with Childe, bearing in her wombe the staine of

her honour, and the confusion of his reputation. Sometime his guiltie minde imagined, that the bléeding ghosts of the two Sisters (whom he both rauished and murthered) followed him vp and downe, haunting his ghost with fearfull exclamations, and filling each corner of the earth with clamours of reuengement.
               Such feare and terrour raged in his soule, that he thought all places where he trauelled, were filled with multitudes of of Knightes, and that the strength of Countries pursued him, to heape vengeance vpon his guiltye head for those wronged Ladyes.
               Whereby hee curssed the hower of his birth, and blamed the cause of his creation, wishing the Heauens to consume his bodye with a flashe of fire, or that the earth would gape and swallowe him: In this manner trauelled he vp and downe, filling all places with Ecchoes of his sorrowes and griefe, which brought him into such a perplexitie, that many times hee would haue slaine himselfe, and haue ridde his wretched soule from a worlde of mizeries.
               But it happened that one morning very early, by the first light of Titans golden toarch, he entred into a narow and straight path, which conducted him into a very thicke and solitarie Forrest, wherein with much sorrowe he trauelled till suche time as glistring Phoebus had passed the halfe parte of his iorney.
               And beeing wearye with the longe waye, and the greate waighte of his Armour, hee was forced to take some rest and ease vnder certaine freshe and gréene Myrtle trées, whose leaues did bathe themselues in a faire and cleare Fountaine, whose streame made a bubling murmure on the pebble.
               Béeing set, he began a newe to haue in remembrance his former cōmitted cruelty, and complaining of Fortune he published his great griefe, and although he was weary of complaining, and séeing hinselfe without all remidy,

he resolued like vnto the Swan to sing awhile before his d
                     •
                  ath: and so thinking to giue some ease vnto his tormented heart, he warbled forth these verses following.
               
                  Mournfull Melpomine approach with speed,
                  and shew thy sacred face with teares besprēt:
                  Let all thy sisters harts vvith sorrovv bleed
                  To heare my plaints and rufull discontent.
                  And vvith your moanes svveet Muses all assist
                  My vvailfull song, that doth on vvoe consist.
               
               
                  And then I may at large paint out my paine,
                  Within these desert groues and vvildernesse:
                  And after I haue ended to complaine,
                  They may record my vvoes and deep distres:
                  Except these myrtle trees relentles bee,
                  They vvill vvith sobs assist the sighes of mee.
               
               
                  Time vveares out life, it is reported so,
                  And so it may I vvill it not denie:
                  Yet haue I tride long time, & this do knovve,
                  Time giues no ende to this my miserie.
                  But rather fortune, time and heauens agree,
                  To plague my hart vvith vvoe eternally.
               
               
                  ye siluan nimphs that in thes wods do shroud
                  To you my mournfull sorrovves I declare:
                  
                     You sauage satyrs let your eares be bound
                  to heaare my woe, your sacred selues prepare:
                  Trees, herbs & flowrs, in rural fields that groe,
                  While thus I morne, do you some silence sho.
               
               
                  Sweet Philomel cease thou thy songs a vvhile
                  And vvill thy mate their melodies to leaue:
                  And all at once attend my mournfull stile,
                  vvhich vvil of mirth yor sugred notes bereaue
                  If you desire the burthen of my Song:
                  I sigh and sob, for Ladies I did vvrong.
               
               
                  You furious Beasts that feed on montains hye,
                  And restlesse run with rage your pray to find:
                  Dravve nere to him vvhose brutish crueltye
                  Hath cropt the bud of Virgins chaste & kind.
                  This onely thing yet rests to comfort mee:
                  Repentance comes a while before I dye.
               
               
                  Since heauens agree for to increase my care,
                  What hope haue I for to enioy delight?
                  Sith fates and fortune do themselues prepare,
                  To vvork against my soule their full despight.
                  I know no meanes to yeild my hart reliefe:
                  But only death, which can desolue my griefe.
               
               
                  
                  I muse and may my sorrovves being such,
                  That my poore hart can longer life sustaine:
                  Sith dayly I doe find my griefe so much,
                  As euery day I feele a dying paine.
                  But yet alas I liue afflicted still:
                  And haue no helpe to heale me of my ill.
               
               
                  When as I thinke vpon my pleasures past,
                  Novv turnd to paine, it makes me rue my state
                  And since my ioy vvith vvoe is ouercast,
                  O death giue ende to my vnhappy fate.
                  For onely death will lasting life prouide:
                  Where liuing thus, I sundry deathes abide.
               
               
                  Wherfore all you that hear my mornful song
                  And tasted haue the griefe that I sustaine:
                  All lustfull rauishers that haue done vvrong,
                  With teare-fild eyes assist me to complaine.
                  All that haue beeing, doe my beeing hate:
                  Crying haste, haste, this vvretches dying state
               
               This sorrowfull song being done, he laide himselfe all along vpon the gréene grasse closing vp the closets of his eyes, in hope to repose him selfe in a quiet sléepe, and to abandon al discontented thoughts: in which silent contemplation we will leaue him for a while, and returne to Rosana
                  
the Quéens daughter of Armenia that bolde Amazonian Lady, whome you remember likwise departed from the blacke Castle (clad with inch
                     •
                  unted armour) in the pursute of her disloyall Father, whome she neuer in her life beheld: this curteous Lady (to performe her mothers will) trauelled vp and downe strange countries, many a wearye step, yet neuer could she méet with her vnkind father, vnto whome she was commaunded to giue her mothers letter, neither could she beare in any place wheresoeuer she came, where shee might goe to séeke him: In which trauell shee met with many strange aduentures, the which with great honor to her name she finished, yet for all this she wandred ouer hils and dales: mountaines and vallies, and through many solitary woods. But at last she hapned by fortune into the wildernesse, whereas this discentented knight laye sléeping vpon the gréene grasse, néere to which place she likewise reposed her selfe vnder the branches of a Chesnut trée, desiring to take some rest after her long trauel.
               But vpon a sodaine being betwixt waking and sléeping, she heard towardes her left hand, a verie dolorous grone, as it were of some sorrowfull knight, which was so terrible, heauie, and bitter, that it made her to giue an attentiue eare vnto the sounde, and to sée if shee coulde heare and vnderstande what it shoulde be.
               So with making the least noyse that shee could possibly, she arose vp and went towardes the place whereas shee might see what it was, and there shee behelde a Knight very well armed, lying vpon the gréene grasse, vnder certaine fayre and gréene mirtie trées, is armour was all russet, and full of barres of blacke stéele, which shewed to bee a very sadde, sorrowfull and heauie inamelling, agreeable to the inward sadnesse of hys heart.
               Hee was somewhat of a bigge stature of bodie, and

well proportioned, and there seemed by his disposition, to be in his heart great greife, where after shee had a while stood in secret beholding his sorrowfull counteaunce, in a wofull manner hee tumbled his restlesse bodye vppon the greene grasse, and with a sad and heauy looke he breathed foorth this ruefull lamentation.
               Oh heauye and peruersse Fortune (said he) why doost thou consent that so vilde and euill a wretch doe breathe so long vpon the earth, vpon whose wicked head the golden Sun disdaines to shine, and the glistering Elementes denyes their chearfull lightes?
               Oh that some rauenous Harpey woulde welter from his denne, and make his loathsome bowelles my fatall Tombe, or that my eyes were sightes like the mizerable King of Thebes, that I neuer might againe beholde this earth, whereon I haue long liued and committed many cruelties.
               I am confounded with the cursse of heauen for wronging that Mayden Quéene of Armenia, in the spoyle of whose Uirginitie I made a triumphant conquest.
               Oh Leoger Leoger, what furye did induce thée to committe so great a sinne, in leauing her staind with thy lust, and dishonoured by thy disloyaltie?
               Oh cruell and without faith, thou wert nurssed with the vnkindly milke of Tigers, and borne into the worlde for thine owne torment: where was thy vnderstanding when thou forsookst that gracious Princesse? whome not only yeilded to thée her libertie, loue and honour, but therwith a Kingdome and a golden Diademe, and therefore woe vnto mee Traytor, and more woes vppon my soule then there be hayres vpon my head, and may the sorrows of olde Priam be my eternall punishment.
               What doth it profite me to all the ayre with lamentations, when that the crime is already past, without all remedye or hope of comforte? this being said, he gaue a gréeuous and terrible sigh and so held his p
                     •
                  ace.
               
                  
                  Rosana by those heauye and sorrowfull lamentations, togeather with his reasons which shee heard, knewe him to bee her disloyall Father after whome shee had so long trauelled to finde out: but when she remembred how that his vnkindenesse was the death of her mother, her harte indured such extreame paine and sorrowe, that she was constrayned (without anye féeling) to fall downe to the ground.
               But yet her couragious harte would not remaine long in that passion: but straight waies shee rose vp againe on her féete, with a desire to performe her mothers will, but yet not intending to discouer her name, nor to reueale vnto him that shee was his daughter: so with this thought and determination, shee went vnto the place where Leoger was, who when he heard the noyes of her comming, straightway started bpon his feete.
               Then Rosana did salute him with a voyce some what heauye, and Leoger did returne his salutatiō with no lesse showe of griefe.
               Then the Amazonian Lady tooke forth the letter from her naked breste, where as so longe time she had kept it, and in deliuering it into his handes, she said:
               Is it possible that thou art that forgetfull and disloyall Knight, the which left the vnfortunate Quéene of Armenia (with so groat paine and sorrowe) big with Childe amongste those vnmercifull Tyrantes her Countrimen, which banished her out of her Countrie in reuenge of thy committed crime, where euer since she hath bene companion with wilde beasts that in their natures hath lamented her banishment?
               
                  Leoger when he heard her to say these words began to beholde her, and although his eyes were all to be blubbered and weary of wéeping, yet he most earnestly gazed in her face and answered her in this manner.
               I will not denie thée gentle Amazon (said he) that which the high heauens doth complaine off and the lowe

earth doth mourne for. Thou shalt vnderstand that I am the same Knight, whom thou hast demaunded after, tell me therefore what is thy will.
               My will is said she, thou most vngrateful Knight, that thou read héere this Letter, the last worke of the white hand of the vnhappie Armenian Quéene.
               At which words, the Knight was so troubled in thoght and gréeued in minde, that it was almost the occasion to dissolue his soule from his bodie: and therewithal putting forth his hand somewhat trembling, he tooke the Letter, & set him verie sorrowfully downe vpon the gréene grasse: without anie power to the contrarie, his gréefe so abounded the bounds of reason.
               No sooner did he open the letter, but he presently knew it to be written by the hands of his wronged Ladie ye 
                  Armenian Quéene, who with great alteration both of hart & minde, he read the sorrowfull lines, the which contayned these words following.
               
                  
                     The Queene of Armenia her Letter.
                     
                        TO thée thou disloyall Knight of the Blacke Castle, the vnfortunate Quéene of Armenia, can neither send nor wish salutations: for hauing no health my selfe, I cannot send it vnto him, whose cruel mind hath quite forgotten my true loue, I cannot but lament continuallye and complain vnto the Gods incessantly,

considering that my fortune is conuerted from a crowned Quéene to a miserable and banished caytiue, where the sauage beasts are my chiefe companions, & the mournfull bi
                           •
                        ds my best solliciters. Oh Leoger, Leoger, why didst thou leaue me comfortlesse without all cause, as did Aeneas his vnfortunate Dido? what second loue hath bereaued me of thy sight, and made thée forget her, that euer shall remember thée. Oh Leoger, remember the day when first I saw thy face, which day bee fatall euermore, and counted for a dismal day in time to come, both heauy, blacke, and full of foule mischances, for it was vnhappie vnto me: for in giuing thée ioy, I bereaued my selfe of all, and lost the possession of my libertie and honour: althogh thou hast not estéemed nor tooke care of my sorrowfull fortunes, yet thou shouldst not haue mockt my perfect loue, and disdained the feruent aff
                           •
                        ction that I haue borne thée, in that I haue yéelded to thée that precious iewell, ye which hath béen denied to manie a noble King. Oh Loue, cruel and spitefull Loue, that so quickly didst make mee blinde, and depriuedst mee of the knowledge that belonged vnto my royall Highnesse.
                     Oh vncurteous Knight, beeing blinded with thy loue the Quéene of Armenia denied her honestie which shee ought to haue kept, and preserued it from the biting canker of disloyall l
                           •
                        ue? Hadst thou pretended to mocke me, thou shouldst not haue suffred me to haue lost so much as is forgone for thy sake.
                     Tell me, why didst not thou suffer mee to execute my will, that I might haue opened my white brest with a pearcing swoord, and sent my soule to the shady banke of swéete Elizium? Then had it béene better for me to haue died, than to liue still, and dayly die.
                     Remember thy selfe Leoger, and behold the harm that will come héereof: haue thou a care vnto the pawn which thou leftst sealed in my wombe, and let it bee an occasion that thou doost (after all thy violent wronges) retourne

to sée me sléeping in my tombe, that my childe may not remaine fatherlesse in the power of wilde beastes, whose hearts be fraughted with nothing but with crueltie. Doe not consent that this perfecte loue which I beare thée, should be counted vaine, but rather performe the promise the which thou hast denied me.
                     O vnkinde Leoger, O cruell and heard heart, is alshoode the firme loue that so faindedly thou didst professe to me? what is he that hath béene more vnmercifull then thou hast béene? There is no furious beast nor lurking Lion in the deserts of Libia, whose vnmercifull pawes are all besmearde in bloud, that is so cruell harted as thy self, els wouldst thou not leaue me comfortles, spending my dayes in solitarie woods, where as the Tigers mourne at my distresses, and chirping birdes in their kindes, grieue at my lamentations: the vnreasonable torments and sorrowes of my soule are so many, that if my penne were made of Lidian stéele, and my Inke the purple Ocean, yet could not I write the number of woes.
                     But nowe I determine to aduertise thée of my desired death, for in writing this my latest testament, the fates are cutting a sunder my thrid of life, and I can giue thée knowledge of no more, but yet I desire thée by the true loue which I beare thée, that thou wilt read with some sorrow these fewe lines: and héere of the powers of heauen, I do desire that thou maist dye the like death that for thée I now dye. And so I ende.
                     
                        By her vvhich did yeeld vnto thee her life, Loue, Honor, Fame and Liberty.
                     
                  
               
               
                  WHen this sad and heauie knight had made an end of reading this dolorous letter, hee could not restraine his eyes from distilling salte teares, so great was the griefe that his hart sustaned: Rosana did likewise beare him company to solemnize his heauines, with as manye teares trickling from the Conduite of her eyes.
               The greate sorrowe and lamentation was such and so much in both their hartes, that in a great space the one coulde not speake vnto the other: but afterwardes, their griefes being somewhat appeased, Leoger began to say.
               Oh Messenger, from her with the remembrance of whose wronge my soule is wounded, being vndeseruedly of me euill rewarded: tell me (euen by the nature of true loue) if thou dost knowe where she is? showe vnto me her abiding place, that I may goe thither and giue a discharge of this my great fault, by yeilding vnto death.
               Oh cruell and without loue (answered Rosana) what discharge canst thou giue vnto her, that alreadye (thorow thy crueltie) is dead and buryed? onely by the occasion of such a forsworne knight.
               This penitent and payned knight, when he vnderstood the certaintie of her death, with a sodaine and hastie fury he strooke him selfe on the 
                     〈◊〉
                   with his fist, and lifting his eyes vnto the heauens, in manner of exclamation against the Gods, giuing déepe and sorrowfull sighes, he threwe him selfe to the ground, tumbling and wallowing from the one part vnto the other, without taking any ease, or hauing anye power or strength to declare his inward griefe which at that time he felt, but with lamentations which did torment his hart, he called continually on the Armenian Quéen, and in that deuilish furye wherein he was, dre
                     •
                   out his dagger and lifting vp the skirt of his shirt of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , he thrust it into his body, and giuing himself this vnhappy death (with calling vpon his wrōged Lady, he finished his life, and fell to the ground.
               
                  This sad and heauie Ladie when she beheld him so desperately to gorge his martiall breast, and to fall liuelesse to the earth, she greatly repented her selfe that she had not discouered her name, and reuealed to him how that shee was his vnfortunate Daugh
                     •
                  er, whose face before that time he neuer had beheld and as a Lion, (though all too late) who seeing before her eyes her yong Lion
                     •
                  sse euil intreated of the Hu
                     •
                  ter, euen so she ran vnto her wel
                     •
                  eloued Father, and with great spéed pulled off his helme frō his wounded head, and vnbraced his armour, the which was in colour according to his passion, but as strong as anie Diamond, made by Magicke arte. Also she tooke away his shéeld, which was of a russet field, and in ye middest thereof was portrayed the God of Loue with two faces, the one was verie faire, and bound about with a cloth his eyes, and the other was made meruailous fierce and furious.
               This being done, with a faire linnen cloth shee wyped off the blood from his mortal face. And when she was certaine that it was him after whom she had traueled so manie wearie steps, and that he was without life, with a furious madnes she tore her attyre from her head, and all so rent her golden haire, tearing it in péeces, and then returned again and wyped that infernall face making such sorrowfull lamentation, that whosoeuer had séene her, would haue been mooued to compassion. Then shee tooke his head betwixt her hands, procuring to lift it vp, and to lay it vpon her lap, and seeing for al this that there was no moouing in him, she ioyned her face vnto his pale and dead chée
                     •
                  es, and with sorrowfull words, she said.
               Deare Father, open thine eyes, and behold me, open them swéete Father, and looke vppon mee thy sorrowfull Daughter: if fortune be so fauourable, let me receiue some contentment whilest life remaineth. 
                     〈…〉
                   thy selfe to looke vpon me, wherein such delight may come to me, that we may either accōpany other. Oh my Lord and

onely Father, s
                     ••
                  ing that in former times my vnfortunat
                     •
                   Mothers tears were not sufficien
                     •
                   to reclaime thée, make me satisfaction for the great trauell which hath béen taken in séeking thee out. Come now in death, and ioye in the sight of thy vnhappie Daughter, and dye not without séeing her: open thine eyes, that she may gratefie thée in dying with thée.
               This being said, Rosana began again to wipe his face, for that i
                     •
                   was ag
                     ••
                  n all to be bathed in blood, and with her white hands she felt his eyes and mouth, and all hys face and head till such time as she touched his breast, and put her hand on the mortall wound where she held it still and looked vpon him whether he mooued or no. But when she felt him witho
                     ••
                   sense or féeling, she began anew to complayne, and crying out with most terrible exclamations, she said.
               Oh my haplesse Father, how manie troubles & great trauells hath thy Daughter passed in séeking thée, watering the earth with her teares, and alwayes in vaine calling for thée? Oh how manie times in naming thy name hath she béen answered with an Eccho, which was vnto her great dolour and griefe? and now that Fortune hath brought her where thou art, to reioice her selfe in thy presence, the same Fortune hath conuerted her wishes into greefe and do
                     •
                  or. Oh cruell and vnconstant Quéene of Chaunce, hath Rosana deserued this, to bee most afflicted when she expected most ioy. Oh Leoger, if euer thou wilt open thine eyes now open them, or let the glasses of my eyes be cloased eternally.
               Herewith she perceiued his dim eyes to open, and hys senses now a little gathered together: a
                     •
                  d when hee saw himselfe in her armes, and vnderstood by her words, that she was his Daughter whom hee had by the vnfortunate Quéene of Armenia, he sodainly stroue against weaknes, and at last recouering some strength, he cast hys yéelding armes about the milke white necke of the faire Rosana,
                  
and they ioyned their faces the one with the other, distilling betwixt them many salte and bitter teares, in such sort that it would haue moued the wilde beasts vnto compassion: and with a féeble and weake voice, the wounded knight said:
               Ah my daughter, vnfortunate by my disloyaltie, let me recreate and comforte my selfe, in enioying this thy mouth the time that I shall remaine aliue, and before my sillie soule doth departe the company of my dying bodie: I do confesse that I haue béene pittilesse vnto thy mother and vnkinde to thée, in making thée to trauell with great sorrow in séeking me, and now thou hast found me I must leaue thée alone in this sorrowfull place with my dead body pale and wanne: yet before my death swéet girle giue me a thousand kisses: this onely delighte I craue, for the little time I haue to tarrie, and afterward I desire thée to intombe my body in thy mothers graue though it be far in distance from this vnluckie Country.
               O my déere Lord answered she, dost thou request of me to giue thy body a Sepulcher? well I sée that it is requisit, to séeke some to giue it vnto vs both, for I knowe my life can not continue longe, if the angry fates depriue me of your liuing companye: and without strength to procéed any further in speaches, she kissed his face with great sobbing and sighes, making within her selfe a terrible conflicte, tarying for the answere of her dying Father, who with no lesse paine and anguish of death, said:
               Oh my Childe, how happy should I be, that thus imbracing one in the others armes, we might depart togeather? then should I be ioyfull in thy company, and account my selfe happy in my death: and here vppon I leaue thée vnto the worlde: daughter farwell, the Gods preserue thée and take me to their mercies. And when he had said these wordes, hee enclyned his necke vppon the face of Rosana and dyed.
               When this sorrowfull Ladye sawe that the soule had

got the victorie and departed from the body, she kissed his pale lippes and giuing 
                     •
                  éepe and dolo
                     •
                  ous sighes, shee beganne a merualous and heauy lamentation, calling her selfe vnhappie and vnfortunate, and layde her selfe vpon the dead body, cursing her destinies, so that it was lamentable to heare.
               O my déere father sayd she, what small benefite haue I receiued for all my trauell and paine, the which I haue suffered in séeking of thée, and nowe in the finding of thée the more is my griefe, for that I came to sée thée dye? Oh most vnhappie that I am, where was my minde when I saw that fatall dagger pearce thy tender brest? whereon was my thought? wherefore did I stand still, and did not with great lightnes make resistance against that terrible blow?
               If my strength would not haue serued me, yet at the least I shoulde haue borne thée companie: you furious beastes that are hid in your dens and déepe caues, where are you now? why doe you not come and take pittie vpon my griefe in taking away my life? in doing so you shewe your selues pittifull, for that I doe abhorre this dolorous life, yet she did not forget the promise that shee made him, which was to giue his body burial in her mothers tombe. This was the occasion that she did somewhat cease her lamentation, and taking vnto her selfe more courage then her sorrowfull griefe would consent vnto, she put the dead bodie vnder a mightie pine Apple trée, and couered it with leaues of gréene grasse, and like wise hung his armor, vpon the bowes, in hope that the sight thereof would cause some aduenturous knight to approach her presence, that in kindenes would asist her to intombe him: heere we will leaue Rosana wéeping ouer her fathers body, and speake of the Nigromancer after his flight from the black Castle.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  How the Magitian found Leogers armour hanging vpon a pine tree, kept by Rosana the Queenes Daughter of Armenia, betwixte whome hapned, a terrible battle: also of the desperate death of the Lady: And 
                        〈◊〉
                      how the Magitian framed by magick arte an 
                        ••
                     
                     chaunted Sepulcher, wherin he inclosed himselfe from the sight of all humane creatures.
               
               
                  I Am sure you doe well remember when the Christian Knights had conquered the black Castle which was kept by inchauntment, how the furious Nigromancer to preserue his life fled from the same, caried by his arte through the ayre in an yron Chariot, drawne by two flying Dragons: in which charmed Chariot he crossed ouer many parts and plaines of the earsterne climets.
               At last being wearie of his iourney, he put himself in the thickest of the forrest, wherin traueling wt his whirling

Dragons, hee n
                     •
                  uer rested till hee came vnto a mightie and great riuer, the which seemed to 
                     •
                  ee an arme of the purple Ocean, there he alighted from his chariot for to refresh himselfe, and tooke water with his handes and drunke thereof, and washed his face: and as he found him selfe all alone, there came into his 
                     •
                  inde 
                     〈◊〉
                   thoughts, amongst all his passed life▪ and how hee was vanquished by the Christian Knights▪ for which with great anger he gaue terrible sighes and began to curse, not onely the hower of his birth, but the whole world, and the generation of mankinde.
               Likewis
                     •
                   he remembred the great sorrowe and trauell that euer since hee endured, and what toyle trauelling knights must indure: In these vari
                     •
                  ble cogitations spent he the time away till golden 
                     〈◊〉
                   began to withdraw himself into his ac
                     •
                  ustomed lodging and h
                     •
                  ding his 
                     ••
                  ght in the 
                     •
                  ccidentall 
                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     〈◊〉
                   drew on the darke and tenebrous night, which was the occasion that his paine did the mo
                     •
                  e incre
                     •
                  se: a
                     •
                   that night he passed away with such sorrowfull lamentations for his late disgraces, that all the woods and mountaines did resounde his wofull exclamations, till that Apollo with his glistering beames began to couer the earth.
               The which being séene by the Magitian, with a trice he arose vp, and intended to prosecute his iorney, but lifting vp his eyes towards the heauens hee did discouer hanging vpon a high and mightie pine apple trée the armour of Leoger.
               
               Which was hung there in remembrance of his death by Rosana as you heard in the last Chapter, the armour had alm
                     •
                  st lost his bright colour and beganne to rus
                     •
                  e through the great aboundance of raine that fell thereon.
               Yet for all that it seemed of great 
                     〈…〉
                   and of a wonderfull richnesse, so without any further circumspection or regarde, hee tooke downe the most bright

armor, and armed himselfe therewith, and when he lacked no more to put on but the helmet, hee heard a voice that said, bee not so hardy thou knight as to vndoe thys Trophie, except thou prepare thy selfe to winne it by thy sword.
               The Magitian at this vnexpected noyse, cast his head on the one side, and espied Rosana newly awaked from a heauy sléep, most richly armed with a stronge inchaunted armor after the manner of the Amazonians, but for al that he did not let to make an ende of arming himselfe, and hauing laced on his Burgonet, hee went towardes the demaunder with his sworde ready drawne in his hand, inuiting her with mortall battell.
               
                  Rosana who saw his determination, did procure to defend her selfe, and offend her enemy.
               Oh my muse that I had such learned eloquence, for to set out and declare the noble incounters of these two gallant warriors: Rosana although shee was but a Feminin nature, yet was she as bold
                     •
                   in heroycall aduentures as any Knight in the world, except the Christian Champions.
               But now to returne we to our historie, the valliant Amazonian when her enemy came vnto her, she stroke him so terrible a blow vpon the visor of his helmet, that with the fury therof she made sparkles of fire to issue out with great aboundance, and bowe downe his head vnto hys brest.
               The Magitian did returne vnto her his salutation, and stroake her such a blow vpon her helmet, that with the great noyse thereof, it made a sound in al the mountains. Now began betwéene them a maruelous and fearefull battell, fortune not willing to vs
                     •
                   her most extremitie declined the foyle to neither party, nor giuing the conquest as yet to any: all the time of the conflicte, the furious Magitian and the valiant Amazonian thought on no other thing, but either of them procured to bring his aduersarie

to his ouerthrow, striking at each other such terrible blowes, and with so great furie, that manie times it made either of them to loose feeling: and both séeing the great force of one another, were meruailously incensed with anger.
               Then the valiant Lady threw her shéeld at her backe, that with more force she might strike and hurt her enemy: and therewithall gaue him so strong a blow vpon the burgonet, that he fell astonied to the earth without anie féeling.
               But when the Magitian came againe to himselfe, he returned Rosana such a terrible blow, that if it had chanced to alight vpon her, it would haue clouen her head in péeces, but with great discretion she cleared her self therof in such sort, that it was stroken in vaine, and with great lightnes she retyred, and stroke the Magitian so furiously, that she made him once againe to fall to the ground, al astonied, and there appeared at the visor of his helme the abundance of blood that issued out of his mouth: but presently he reuiued, and got vp in a trice, with so great anger, that the smoke which came from his mouth, séemed like a myst before his helme, so that almost it could not be séene.
               Then this furious deuill (blaspheming against his Gods) hauing his mortall sword verie fast in his hand, he ran towards his enemie, who (without anie feare of hys furie) went foorth to receaue him: and when they met together, they discharged their blowes at once, but it fortuned, that the Amazonians blow did first fasten with so great strength, that for all the helmet of the Magitian, which was wrought of the strongest stéele, it was not sufficient to make defence, but with the rigorous force wherwith it was charged, it ben
                     •
                  ed 
                     〈◊〉
                   such sorte that it brake all to péeces: and the Magitians head was so gréeuouslye wounded, that streames of blood ran downe his armour, and he was forced for want of strength to yéeld to the mercie

of the valiaunt Ladye, who quickely condesended to his requestes, vppon this condition, that hee woulde be a meane to conuaye her fathers dead body to an Iland nere adioyning to the borders of Armenia, and there to intomb it in her mothers graue, as shee promised when that his ayre of life fléeted from his body.
               The Magtion for safe garde of his life, presently agréed to performe her desires, and protested to accomplish what soeuer she demaunded.
               Then presently by his Arte he prepared his yron Chariot with his flying dragons in a readines, wherein they layd the murthered bodye of Leoger vppon a pillowe of mystle-toe, and likewise placed themselues therein, wher in they were no sooner entred, with necessaries belonging to their trauelles, but they flewe thorowe the ayre more swifter then a whirl-wind, or a shippe sayling on the seas in a stormye tempest.
               The wonders that he performed by the way, be so many and miraculous, that I want an Orators eloquence to discribe them, and a Poets skil to expresse them.
               But to bee shorte, when Rosana was desirous to eate, and that her hunger increased: by his charmes he would procure birdes (of their owne accordes) to fall out of the skyes, and yeild themselues vnto their pleasures, with all things necessary to suffice their wantes.
               Thus was Rosana with her fathers dead body, caryed through the ayre b
                     •
                   Magicke arte, ouer hilles and dales, mountaines and valleys, wooddes and forrestes, townes and Citties, and through many both wonderfull and strange places and countries.
               And at the last, they arriued néere vnto the confines of Armenia, beeing the place of their long desired rest: But when they approached néere vnto the Queene of Armenias groue, they descended from their inchaunted Chariot, and bore Leogers body to his burying place, the which they found (since Rosanaes departure) ouergrowne with mosse

and wythered brambles: yet for all that they opened the Sepulcher, and layd his bodie (yet freshly bléeding) vpon his Ladies consuming carcasse: which beeing done, the Magitian couered againe the graue with earth, and laid thereon gréene turues, which made it séeme as though it neuer had béen opened.
               All the time that the Magitian was perfourming the ceremonious Funerall, Rosana watered the earth wyth her teares, neuer withdrawing her eyes from looking vppon the Graue: and when it was finished, shee fell into this most sorrowfull and distresfull lamentation following.
               Oh cruell Destinies (said she) sith your rigours haue bereaued me of both my Parents, & left me to the world a comfortlesse Orphane, receaue the sacrifice of my chastitie, in payment of your vengeaunce: and let my blood here shed vpon this Graue, shewe the singlenesse of my heart. And with the like solemnitie may all their hearts be broken in péeces, that séeke the downfall and dishonor of Ladies.
               As she was vttering these and such like sorrowes, shee tooke foorth a naked sword, which she had readie for the same effect, and put the pummell to the ground, and cast her breast vpon the poynt. The which shee did with such furious violence and such excéeding hast, that the Magitian although he was there present could not succour her, nor preuent her from committing on her selfe so bloodie a fact.
               This sodaine mischaunce so amazed him, and so gréeued his soule, that his heart (for a time) would not consent that his tung should speake one word to expresse hys passion.
               But at last, (hauing taken a truce with sorrowe, and recouering his former speach) he tooke vp the dead bodye of Rosana, bathed all in blood, and likewise buried her in her Parents Graue: and ouer the same he hung vp an

Epitaph that did declare the occasion of all their deathes.
               This being done to expresse the sorrowes of his heart for the desperat death of such a Magnaminious Lady, and the rather to exempt himselfe from the company of all humaine creatures: he erected ouer the graue (by magicke arte) a very stately Tombe, the which was in this order framed. First there was fixed foure pillors, euery one of a very fine Rubie: vpon the which was placed a Sepulcher of Cristall: within the sepulcher there seemed to be two faire Ladyes, the one hauing her breste peirced thorowe with a sword and the other with a Crowne of golde vpon her head and so leane of body that she séemed to pine away: and vpon the sepulcher there lay a knight all along with his face looking vp to the heauens, and armed with a coarselet of fine stéele, of a russet enamelling: vnder the sepulcher there was spread abroad a great carpet of gold, and vpon it two pillors of the same, and vpon them lay an olde sheapheard with his shéep hooke lying at his feete: his eyes were shut, and out of them distilled manye pearled teares: at euery pillor there was a gentlewomā without any remembrance, the one of them séemed to be murthered, and the other rauished.
               And néere vnto the sepulcher there lay a terrible great beast, headed like a Lyon: his brest and body like a wolfe, and his tayle like a scorpion, which séemed to spitte continually flames of fire: the sepulcher was compassed about with a wall of yron, with foure gates for to enter in therat: the gates were after the manner and cullour of fine Diamonds and directly ouer the top of the chiefest gate, stood a marble pillor whereon hung a table written with red letters: the contentes whereof were as followeth.
               
               So long shall breath vpon this brittle earth,
               The framer of this stately Monument,
               Till that three children of a wondrous birth,
               Out of the Northerne climate shall be sent.
               They shall obscure his name as fates agree:
               And by his fall, the fiendes shall tamed bee.
               This Monument being no sooner framed by the assistance of Plutos legions, and maintained by their deuillish powers, but the Nigromancer enclosed himselfe in the walles, where he consorted chiefly with furyes and walking spirits, that continually fed vpon his blood, and left their damnable seales sticking vnto his left side, as a sure token and witnes that he had giuen both his soule and body to their gouerments after the date of his mortall life was finished.
               In which inchaunted sepulcher we will leaue him for a time conferring with his damnable mates, and returne to the christian knightes, where we left them trauelling towardes Babylon, to place the King againe in his Kingdome.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  How the seauen Champions of Christendome restored the Babylonian King vnto the Kingdome: and after how honourably they were receiued at Rome, vvhere Saint George fell in loue with the Emperours Daughter, being a professed Nunne. Of the mischiefe that insued thereby, and of the desperate ende of yong Lucius Prince of Rome.
               
               
                  THe valiant Christian Champions hauing as you heard in the Chapter going before, perfourmed the Aduenture of the inchaunted monument, accompanied the Babylonian King home to his kingdom of Assiria, as they had all verie solemnly and faithfully promised to him.
               But when they approached the Confines of Babylon, and made no question of peacefull and princely entertainment, there was neither signe of peace, nor likelihood of ioyfull or frendly welcome: for all the Countrey raged with intestine warre, foure seuerall Competitors vniustly striuing for what to the King properly and of right belonged.
               The vnnaturall causers and stirrers vp to thys blood-deuouring

controuersie, were the foure Noblemen, vnto whom the King vnaduisedly committed the gouernment of his Realme, when hee went in the tragicall pursute of his faire daughter, after his dreaming illusion that caused him so cruelly to séeke her death. And the breaking out into this hurly burly, grew first to head in this maner following.
               Two yeres after the Kings departure, these Deputies gouerned the publike State in great peace, and with prudent policie, til after no tidings of the King could be heard notwithstanding so manie messengers as were in euerie quarter of the world sent to enquire of him: and then did Ambition kindle in all their hears, each striuing to wrest into his hand the sole possession of the Babylonian Kingdome.
               To this end did they all make seuerall frends: for this had they contended in manie Fights, and now lastly they intended to set all their hopes vpon this maine chaunce of warre, intending to fight all till thrée fell, and one remained victor ouer the rest, whose head should bee beautifyed with a crowne.
               But of traitors and treason the end is sodaine & shamefull: for no sooner had Saint George (placing himselfe betwéene the Battells) in a bréefe Oration shewed ye aduentures of the King, and he himselfe to the people discouered his reuerend face, but they all shouted for ioye, and haled the Usurpers presently to death, and reinsialled in his ancient dignitie, their true, lawfull and long lookt for King.
               The King being thus restored married Fidela for her faithfulnes: and after the nuptiall Feasts, the Champions (at the earnest request of Saint Anthonie) departed towards Italy: where in Rome the Emperour spared no cost honourably and most sumptuously to entertaine those neuer daunted Knightes, the famous Wonders of Christendome.
               
                  At that time of the yeare when the Summers Quéen had beautefied the Earth with interchaungeable ornaments, Saint George (in companie of the Emperour) with the rest of the Champions chanced to walke along by the side of the Riuer Tyber, and to delight themselues with the pleasurable meades, and beauteous prospect of the Countrey.
               Before they had walked halfe a myle from the Cittie, they approached an ancient Nunnerie, which was right faire and of a stately building, and likewise incompassed about with christall streames and gréene meddowes, furnished with all manner of beauteous trées, and fragrant flowers.
               This Nunnerie was consecrated to Diana the Quéene of Chastitie, and none were suffered to liue therein, but such chast Ladies and Uirgins, as had vowed themselues to a single life, and to kéepe their Uirginities for euer vnspotted.
               In this place the Emperours onely Daughter liued a professed Nunne, and exempted her selfe from all companie, except it were the fellowship of chast and Religious Uirgins.
               This vertuous Lucina (for so was shee called) hauing intelligence before by the ouerséeers of the Nunnerie, how that the Emperour her Father with manie other Knights were comming to visite their religious Habitation, against their approach shee attyred her selfe in a gowne of white satten, all layd ouer with gold lace, also hauing her golden lockes of haire somewhat laid foorth: and vpon her head was knit a garland of swéete smelling flowers, which made her séeme celestiall and of a diuine creation.
               Her b
                     •
                  autie was so excellent, that it might haue quailed the heart of Cupide, and her brauerie excéeded the Paphian Quéenes. Neuer could Circes with al her cunning frame so much beautie in anie creature, as was vpon her

face: nor neuer could the flattering Syrens more beguile the trauellers, then did her bright countenaunce inchant the English Champion for at his first entrance into the Nunnerie, he was so rauished with her sight, that he was not able to withdrawe his eyes from her beauty, but stoodszigag vppon her Rosie culloured chéekes, like one bewitched with Me-dusaes shadowes: but to bee shorte, her beauty séemed so Angellicall, and the burning flames of loue so fieres his heart, that he must either inioy her companye or giue ende to his life by some vntimely meanes.
               Saint George beeing wounded thus with the darte of loue, dissembled his griefe and not reuealed it to any one, but departed with the Emperor back againe to the Citie, leauing his heart behinde him cloased in the stonye Monastery with his louely Lucina.
               
               All that ensuing night he could not enioy the benifit of sléepe, but did contemplate vpon the diuine beautye of his Lady, and fraughted his minde with a thousand seuerall cogitations how hee might attaine to her loue, beeing a chaste virgin and a professed Nun.
               In this manner spent hee away the night, and no sooner appéered the mornings brightnesse in at his chamber window, but he arose from his restlesse bed, and attyred him selfe in watchet veluet, to signifie his true loue, and wandred all alone vnto the Monastery wher he reuealed his déepe affection vnto his Ladye, who was as farre from graunting to his requests, as heauen is from earth, or the déepest seas from the highest Elements: for shee protested while life remayned within her bodye, neuer to yeild her loue in the way of mariage to anye one, but to remaine a pure virgin and one of Dianaes traine.
               No other resolution could Sa. George get of the chaste Nun, which caused him to departe in great discontent, intending to séeke by some other meanes to obtaine her loue, so comming to the rest of the Christian Champions,

he reuealed to them the truth of all things that had hapned, who in this maner counsailed him, that hee should prouide a multitude of armed Knightes, euery one bearing in their handes a sword ready drawen, and to enter the Monastery at such a time as she little mistrusted, and first with faire promises and flattering speeches, to entice her to loue, then if she yéelded not, to fill her eares with cruell threatnings, protesting that if she will not graunt to requite his loue with like affection, he would not leaue standing one stone of that Monastery vppon an other, and likewise to make her a bloudy offering vppe to Diana.
               
               This pollicy liked wel Saint George, though he intended not to prosecute such cruelty: so the next morning by break of day he went vnto the nunnery in company of no other but the christian champions armed in bright armour with their glistering swordes ready drawen, the which they caried vnder their side cloakes to pr
                     •
                  uent suspition.
               But when they came to the Monastery, and had entered into the chamber of Lucina (whom they found knéeling vpon the bare ground at her ceremonious orasons) Saint George first proffered kindnes by faire promises, and afterward made knowne his vnmercifull pretended cruelty, and therewithall shaking their bright swordes against her vertuous brest, they protested (though contrary to their mindes) that except he would yéeld vnto Saint George her vnconquered loue, they would bathe their weapone in her dearest bloud.
               At which wordes the distressed Uirgin, being ouercharged with feare, sunke down presently to the ground, and lay for a time in a dead agony, but in the ende, recouering her selfe, she lifted vp her angelicall face, shrowded vnder a cloude of pale sorrow, and in this maner declared her minde.
               Most renowned, and well approoued Knights said she,

it is as difficult to me, to climbe vppe to the highest toppe of heauen, as to perswade my minde to yeeld to the fulfilling of your requests.
               The pure and chast Goddesse Diana that sittes nowe crownde amongst the golden starres in heauen, will reuenge my periured promise if I yéeld to your desires, for I haue long since deepely vowed to spende my daies in this religious house, in the honour of her diety, and not to yéelde the flower of my virginity to any one, which vow I will not infringe for all the Maiesty of Roome: you know braue champions, that in time the watery droppes will mollify the hardest Diamond, and time may weede out this deepe roote and impression from my heart.
               Therfore I request of you by the honour of true knighthood, and by the loues you beare vnto your natiue countreyes, to graunt me the liberty of seauen daies, that I may at full consider with my heart, before I giue an answere to your demaunds, and to the intent that I may make some publike sacrifice as well to appease the wrath which the chast Goddesse Diana may conceaue against me, as to satisfie mine owne soule, for not fulfilling my vowe.
               These wordes being no sooner ended, but the champions incontinently without any more delay ioyfully consented, and moreouer profered themselues to bee all present at the same sacrifice, and so departed from the Monastery with excéeding great comfort.
               The champions being gone, Lucina called togither all the rest of the Nuns, and declared to them the whole discourse of her assailment, where after amongst this religious company, with the help of some other of their approued friends, they deuised a most strange sacrifice, which hath since been the occasion that so many inhumaine and bloudy sacrifices hath bin committed.
               The next morning after sixe daies were finished, no sooner did bright Phoebus shew his goldē beames abroad,

but the Nunnes began to prepare all thinges in readines for the sacrifice: for directly before the doore of the Monestary, they hyred cunning workmen to erect a scaffold, all very richly couered with cloth of golde, and vpon the scaffold (about the middle therof) was placed a faire table couered also with a Carpet of cloth of golde, and vppon it a chafingdish of coales burning: all this beeing set in good order, the Emperor with the Christian Champions, and many other Roman knights being present to beholde the cerimonious sacrifice, who little mistrusting the dolefull tragedie that after hapned.
               The assemblie béeing silent, there was straightwayes heard a swéete and hermonious sound of Clarions and Trumpets and sundrie other kind of Instrumentes: these entred first vppon the scaffolde, and next vnto them were brought seauen Rammes, all adorned with fine white woole, more softe in féeling then Arabian silke, with huge and mightie cragged hornes bound about with garlands of flowers: after them followed a certaine number of Nunnes attyred in blacke vestures, singing their accustomed songes in the honor of Diana: after them followed an auncient Matrone drawne in a Chariot by foure comly virgins, bringing in her handes the Image of Diana: and on either side of her two auncient Nunnes of great estimation, each of them bearing in their handes rich vessels of golde full of most precious and swéete wines: then after all this came the beautifull Lucina apparelled with a rich Roabe of estate, beeing of a great and inestimable value.
               Thus cerimoniously they ascended the scaffold, where the Matrone placed the Image of Diana behinde the chafingdish of coales that was there burning: the rest of the Nunnes continued still singing their songs and drinking of the precious wines that was brought in the golden vessell: this being done, they all at once brought lowe the necks of the Rams by cutting their throates, whose bloods

they sprinckled round about the scaffold, and opened their bowelles and burned their inward partes in the chafingdish of coales.
               Thus with this slaughter, they made sacifice vnto the Quéene of Chastitie: at the sight whereof was present, the surfetting Louer Saint George, with the other sixe Christian Knightes armed all in bright armor, and were all verye attentiue to this that I 
                     •
                  éere haue tolde you.
               The sacrifice ended, this Lucina commaunded silence to be made, and when all the company were still she raysed vp her selfe vpon her féete, and with a heauie voyce distilling many salte teares: she said.
               O most excellent and chaste Diana, in whose blessed bosome we vndefiled Uirgins doe recreate our selues: vnto thy deuine excellency doe I now commende this my last sacrifice, crauing record of all the Gods, that I haue done my best to continue a spotles maiden of thy most beautiful traine.
               Oh heauens shall I consent to deliuer my Uirginitie willingly to him whose soule desires to haue the vse of it, or shall I my selfe commit my vtter ruine and sorrowfull destruction, the which procéedeth onely by the meanes of my flouring beautie, the which woulde it had beene as blacke as the nightly rauens, or like to the tawny tanned Moores in the furthest mountaines of India.
               
               O sacred Diana, thou blessed Quéene of chastitie, is it possible that thou doest consent that a Uirgin descended from so royall a race as I am, should procure to spotte the worthines of her predecessors, by yéelding her Uirgins honor to the conquest of loue without respecting my beauty, or regarding my chaste vowe I haue made vnto thy diety?
               Well séeing it is so that I must néedes violate my selfe against all humane nature, I beséech thée to receiue the solempnitie of this my death, which I offer vp in sacrifice to thy deuine excellencie, for I am héere constrained with

mine own trembling hand to cut off the flourishing branches of these my dayes: for this I sweare before the Maiestie of heauen, that I had rather offer vp my soule into the s
                     •
                  cietie and sacred bosome of Diana, than to yéeld the cas
                     •
                  le of my chastitie, to the conquest of anie Knight in the world.
               And now to thée I speake thou valiant Knight of England, behold héere I yéeld vnto thy hands my liuelesse bodie, to vse according to thy will and pleasure, requesting onely this thing at thy hand, that as thou louedst mee lyuing, thou wilt loue me dead, and like a mercifull Champion suffer me to receaue a princely Funerall.
               And last of all, to thée diuine Diana doo I speake, accept of this my bléeding soule, that with so much blood is offered vnto thée.
               So in finishing this sorrowfull speach she drew out a faire and bright shining sword, which shee had hidden secretly vnder her gowne, and setting the hylt agaynst the Scaffold (little looked for of her Father and those yt were present) shee sodainly threw her selfe vppon the poynt of that Sword, in such a furious manner, that it ryued her bloodie heart in sunder, and so rendred her soule to the tuition of her, vnto whom she offered her bloodie and ruthfull sacrifice.
               What shall I héere declare the lamentable sorrowes and pittifull lamentation that was there made by her father and other Roman Knights that were present at this vnhappie mischance? so great it was, that the walles of the Monasterie ecchoed, and their pittifull shrikes ascended to the heauens.
               But none was more gréened in mind than the afflicted English Champion, who (like a man distraught of sense) in great furie rushed amongst the people, throwing them downe on euerie side, till he ascended vpon the scaffold: & approaching the dead bodie of Lucina, hee tooke her vp in his armes, and with a sorrowfull and passionate voyce he

said. O my beloued ioy, and late my only hearts delight, is this the Sacrifice wherein (through thy desperatenes) thou hast deceiued me, who loued thée more than my selfe? is this the respite that thou requiredst for seauen dayes, wherein thou hast concluded thy own death and my vtter confusion?
               Oh noble Lucina, and my beloued Ladie, if this were thy intent, why didst not thou first sacrifice mee thy Seruant and Loue, wholly subiected vnto thy deuine beautie? Woe be vnto mee, and woe bee vnto my vnhappie enterprise: for by it is she lost, who was made souereigne Ladie of my heart.
               Oh Diana, accursed by this chaunce, because thou hast consented to so bloodie a tragedie, by the eternall powers of heauen, that neuer more thou shalt be worshipped, but in euerie Countrey where the English Champion commeth, Lucina in thy stead shall be adored. For euermore will he séek to diminish thy name, and blot it from the golroll of heauen, yea and vtterly extinguish it in eternitie: so that there shall neuer more memorie remaine of thée, for this thy bloodie Tyrannie, in suffering so lamentable a Sacrifice.
               No sooner had he deliuered these speaches, but incensed with furie he drew out his sword, and parted the image of Diana in two péeces, protesting to ruinate the Monasterie, within whose walls the deuice of this bloodie Sacrifice was concluded.
               The sorrow and extreame gréefe of the Romane Emperour so excéeded for the murther of his Daughter, that he fell to the c
                     •
                  rth in a senselesse sw
                     •
                  und, and was carried halfe dead with gréefe by some of his knights home to his Pallace, where he remained spéechles by the space of thirtie dayes.
               The Emperour had a Sonne, as valiant in armes as anie borne Italian except Saint Anthonie. This young Prince whose name was Lucius, seeing his sisters timeles

death and by what meanes it was committed, he presently intended with a traine of a hundred armed Knightes, which continually attended vpon his person, to assaile the discontented Champions, and by force of armes to reuenge his sisters death.
               This resolution so incouraged the Romaine Knyghtes, but especially the Emperors sonne, that betwixt these two companies began as terrible a battle as euer was fought by any knights, the fearcenes of their blowes so excéeded the one side against the other, that they did resounde ecchoes, and they yeelded a terrible noyse in the great woods.
               This battell did continue betwixt them both sharp and fierce for the space of two houres, by which time the valor of the encensed Champions so preuailed, that most of the Romaine knights were discomfited and slaine, some had their handes pared from their shoulders, some had their armes and legs lopped off, and some lay breathles w
                     •
                  ltring in their owne blouds, in which incounter many a Romaine Ladie lost her husband, many a widowe was bereaud of her Sonne, and many a childe was left fatherles to the great sorrow of the whole country.
               But when the valiant young Prince of Roome sawe his knightes discomfited, and hee lefte alone to withstand so many noble Champions, he presently set spurs to his horse, and fled from them like to a heape of oust forced by a whirlewinde.
               After whom the Champions would not persue, accountting it no glory to their names to triumph in the ouerthrow of a single knig
                     ••
                  , but remained still by the scaffolde, where they buried the sacrificed Uirgin, vnder a marble stone close by the monasterie wall. The which being done to their contentments, Saint George ingraued this Epitaph vppon the same stone with the point of his dagger, which was in this wise following.
               
               Vnder this marble stone interd doth lye
               Luckles Lucina, of beautie bright:
               Who to maintaine her spotles chastitie
               Against the assailment of an English Knight,
               Vpon a blade her tender breast she cast:
               A bloodie offering to Diana chast.
               SO when hee had written this Epitaph, the Christian Champions mounted vpon their swift foote stéedes, & bad adieu to the vnhappie Confines of Italy, hoping to finde better fortune in other Countries. In which trauell wee will leaue them for a time, and speake of the Prince of Rome: who after the discomfiture of the Romane knights, fled in such hast from the furies of the warlike Champions. After which, hee like a starued Lion trauersed along by the Riuer of Tybris, filling all places with his melancholy passions, vntill such time as hee entred into a thicke groue, wherein he purposed to rest hys wearie limbes, and lament his misfortunes. After he had in this solitarie place vnlaced his Helmet, and huried it scornfully against the ground, the infernal Furies began to visite him, and to sting his breast with motions of fierie reuenge. In the end he cast vp his wretched eyes vnto

heauen, and said. Oh you fatall torches of the elements, why are you not clad in mourn
                     •
                  full abiliments, to cloake my wandring steps in eternall darknes? shall I be made a scorne in Rome for my cowardise? or shall I return and accompanie my Romane frends in death? whose bloodes me thinkes I sée sprinkled about the fields of Italy. Mee thinks I heare their bléeding soules fill each corner of the earth with my base flight: therefore will I not liue to bée tearmed a fearfull coward, but dye couragiously by mine owne hands, wherby those accursed Champions shall not obtaine the conquest of my death, nor triumph in my fall. This being said, he drew out his dagger, and ryued hys heart in sunder. The newes of whose desperate death, after it was bruted to his Fathers eares, hée interred hys bodie with his Sister Lucinaes, and erected ouer them a stately Chappell, wherein the Nunnes and ceremonious Monkes during all their liues sung Dirges for his Childrens soules.
               After this the Emperour made proclamation through all his Dominions, that if anie Knight were so hardie as trauell in pursute after the English Champion, & by force of armes bring him backe, and deliuer his head vnto the Emperour, he should not onely be held in great estimation through the Land, but receaue the gouernment of the Empire after his decease. Which rich proffer so encouraged the mindes of diuers aduenterous Knightes, that they went from sundry Prouinces in the pursute of Saint George, but their attempts were all in vaine.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  Of the triumphs, tilts and turnaments that were solemnly held in Constantinople by the Grecian Emperour, and of the honorable aduentures that wer there atchiued by the christian champions, with other strange accidents that happened.
               
               
                  IN the Easterne Parts of the world the fame and valiant déedes of the Champions of Christendome was noysed, with their honourable victories, heroycall actes, and feates of armes, naming them the myrrours of nobilitie, and the types of bright honour. All Kings & Princes (to whose eares the report of their valors was bruted) desired much to behold their noble personages. But when the Emperour of Grecia (kéeping then his Court in the Cittie of Constantinople) heard of their mightie and valiant déedes, he thirsted after their sights, and his minde could neuer bee satisfied with content, vntill such time as he had deuised a meane to trayne them vnto his Court, not onely in that he might enioy the benefit of their companies, but to haue his Court honoured with the presence of such renowmed Knights: & therfore in this manner it was accomplished.
               
                  The Emperour dispatched Messengers into dyuers parts of the world, giuing them in charge to publish thorough out euery Countrey and Prouince as they went, of an honourable Turnament that should bee holden in the Cittie of Constantinople within sixe months following: thereby to accomplish his intent, and to bring the Christian Champions (whose companie hee so desired) vnto hys Court.
               This charge of the Grecian Emperor (as he commanded) was spéedely perfourmed, with such diligence, that in a short time it came to the eares of ye Christian knights, as they trauelled betwixt the Prouinces of Asia and Africa Who at the time appointed came in great pompe and maiestie to Constantinople, to furnish foorth the honorable Triumphs.
               At the fame whereof likewise resorted thether a great number of Knights of great valour and strength: among whom was the Prince of Argler, with a goodly companie of noble persons: and the prince of Fesse, with many well proportioned Knights. Likewise came thether the King of Arabia in great state, and with no lesse maiestie came the King of Silicia and a Brother of his, who were both Giants. Manie other braue and valiant Knights (whose names I héere omit) came thether to honour the Grecian Emperour: for that he was verie well estéemed of them all. And as they came to honor the triumphs, so likewise they came to prooue their fortitudes, and to get fame and name, & the praise that belongeth to aduentrous knights. It was supposed of all the companie, that the King of Silicia wold gaine by his prowesse the dignity from the rest, for that he was a Giant of verie big members, although his Brother were taken to be the more furious Knight: who determined not to iust, for that his Brother should get the honour and praise from all Knightes that came. But it fell out otherwise, as heereafter you shall vnderstand.
               
                  So when the day of turniment was come, all the Ladies and damsels put themselues in places to beholde the iesting, and attired themselues in the greatest braue
                     •
                  e that they could deuise, and the great court full of peoply which came thither for to see the triumphant tourniment.
               What should I say héere of the Emperours Daughter, the faire Alcida, who was of so great beauty that she seemed more liker a deuine substance then an earthly creature and sate glistering in her rich ornaments amongest the other Ladies like vnto Phoebe in the Christall firmament, and was noted of all behoulders to be the fairest Princes that euer mortall eye beheld: so when the Emperour was seated vppon his imperiall throane vnder a tent of gréene veluet, the Knights began to enter into the listes, and 
                     •
                  ee which was the first that entred was the King of Arabia, mounted vpon a very faire and well adorned 
                     •
                  ourser, he was armed with blacke armour, all to be spotted full of siluer knobs, and brought with him fifty Knightes all apparelled with the same liuery, and thus with great Maiesty he rode rounde about the place, making 
                     •
                  reat obedience vnto all the Ladies and damsels.
               After him entred a Pagan Knight, who was Lorde of Si
                     •
                  ia, and armed with armour of a Lyons collour, accompanied with a hundred Knights all apparelled in veluet of the same colour, and passed rounde about the place, shewing vnto the Ladies great friendship and cou
                     •
                  tesie as the other did.
               Which being done, he beheld the King of Arabia, tarrying to receaue him at the Iust: and the trumpets began to sound, giuing them to vnderstand that they must prepare themselues ready to the incounter: whereat these Knights were nothing vnwilling but spurred their coursers with great fury and closed together with couragious vallure.
               
                  The king of Arabia most strongly made his encounter, and stroke the Pagan without missing vpon the brest: but the Pagan at the next race, being heate with furie stroke him so surely with his launce, in such sort that he heaued him out of his saddle, and he fell presently to the ground, after which the Pagan Knight rode vp & downe with great pride and gladnes.
               The Arabian king being thus ouerthrowne, there entered into the listes the king of Argier armed with no other furniture but with siluer male and a brestplate of bright stéele before his brest, his pompe and pride excéeded all the knightes that were then present, but yet to small purpose his pride and arrogancy serued, for at the first encounter hee was ouerthrowne to the ground: in like sort did this Pagan vse fiftéene other knightes of fifteene seuerall prouinces, to the great wonder and amazement of the Emperour and all the assembly.
               During all these valiant encounters Saint George with the other christian champions st
                     ••
                  d a farre off vpon a high gallery beholding them, intending not as yet to be séene in the tilte.
               But now this valiant Pagan after he had rode some sixe courses vp and downe the place, and séeing none entring the tilt yarde, he thought to heare all the fame and honour away for that day.
               But at that same instance there entred the noble minded Prince of Fesse, being for courage the onely pride of his countrey hee was a merueilous well proportioned knight and was armed all in white armour, wrought with excellent knottes of golde, and hee brought in his company a hundred Knightes, all attired in white satten, and riding about the place he shewed his obedience vnto the Emperour and to all the Ladies, end thereupon the trumpets began to sound.
               At the noyse whereof, the two Knightes spurred their coursers and made their incounter so strong and with

such great furie that the proude Pagan was cast to the grounde and so departed the listes with greate dishonour.
               Straight way entered the braue King of Silicia, who was armed in a glistering corslet of very fine stéele, and was mounted vpon a mighty and rich courser, & brought in his company, two hundred knightes, all apparelled with rich cloth of gold, hauing euery one a seueral instrument of musicke in their hands, sounding thereon most heauenly melody.
               And after the Silician king had made his accustomed compasse and courtesie in that place, hee locked downe his heuor and put himselfe in readinesse to iust.
               So when the signe was giuen by the chiefe harrolde at armes, they spurred their horses and made their encounters so valiant, that at the first race they made their launces shiuer in the aire and the pieces thereof to scatter abroade, like aspen leaues in a whirlewinde.
               At the second course the young Prince of Fesse was caried ouer his horse buttockea, and the saddle with him betwixt his legs, which was a great griefe vnto the Emperour, and all the company that did see him, for that he was wel beloued of them al, and held for a knight of great estimation.
               The Silician king grewe proude at the Prince of Fesses ouerthrow, and was so incouraged and so furious that in a small time he l
                     •
                  ft not a knight remaining on horsebacke in their saddles that durste attempt to iust with him, but euerie one of what Countrey and Nation soere auoyded the attempt: so that there was no question among eyther Nobles or the multitude but that vnto hym the vndoubted honour of the victory in triumph would bée attributed.
               And being in this arrogant pride, hee heard a great noise in the maner of a tumult drawing néere, which was the occasion that he stoode still, and to expect some

strange accident, and looking about what it should bee, he beheld Saint George entering the listes, who was armed with his rich and strong armour, all of purple, full of golden starres, and before him roade the champions of France, Italy, Spaine and Scotland, al on stately coursers, bearing in their handes foure silken streamers of fou
                     •
                  e seuerall colours.
               And the champion of Wales followed him carrying his shield whereon was portraied a golden Lyon in a sable field, and the champion of Ireland likewise carried his speare being of knotty ash strongly bound about with plates of steele, all which shewed the highnesse of his discent, in that so many braue Knightes attended vppon him.
               So when Saint George had passed by the royall seate whereon the Emperour sate, inuested in whose company was many knights of great authority, he rode along by the other side, whereas Alcida the Emperours faire Daughter sate amongst many gallant Ladies and faire damsels richly apparelled with vestures of gold, to whom he valed his bonnet shewing thē the courtesie of a knight and so passed by Alcida, at the fight of this noble champion could not refraine her selfe, but that with a high and bold voice she said vnto the Emperour.
               Most mighty Emperour and my royall father (saide she) this is the Knight in whose power and strength, all christendome doth put their fortunes, and this is he whom the whole world admires for chiualrie.
               Saint George although, he heard very well what the louely Princesse had said, passed on, and dissembled as though he had heard nothing, and so when he came before the face of his curious aduersary, hee tooke his shield and his speare and prepared himseife in readinesse to iust, and so being both prouided, the trumpets beganne to sounde, whereat with great fury, these two warlike knights met togither, and neither of them missed their blowes at their

encounter: but yet by reason that Saint George had a desire to extoll his fame, and to make his name resounde thorough the worlde, hee stroke the giant such a mighty blowe vpon his brest, that he presently ouerthrewe him to the ground, and so with great state and maiesty he passed along without any shew of disdaine, whereat the people gaue a great shoute that it resounded like an eccho in the ayre: and in this maner said.
               The great and mighty boaster is ouerthrown, and his furious strength hath little auailed him. After this many Princesse proued their aduentures against this English champion, and euery knight that were of any estimation iusted with him.
               But with great ease he ouercame them al in lesse then the space of two houres: so at such time as bright Phoebus began to make an end of his long iourney, and the day to draw to an ende, there appeared to enter into the listes the braue and mighty giant, being brother to the Scilician king with a mighty great speare in his hande, whose glimmering point of steele glistered through al the court, he brought with him but onely one squire, attired in siluer male bringing in his hand another launce.
               So this furious giant without any care of curtesie due vnto the Emperour or any of his knights there present entered the place, the which being done, the squire that brought his other speare, went vnto the English champion and saide. Sir Knight (quoth he) yonder braue and valiant giant, my Lord and Maister doth send vnto thée this warlike speare, and therewithall he willeth thée to defend thy self to the vttermost of thy power & strength, for he hath vowed before sun set, to be either Lord of thy fortunes or a vassell to thy prowesse and likewise saith that he doth not only defie thée in the turniment, but also challenge thée to mortall battaile.
               This brauing message caused Saint George to smile, and bre 
                     •
                   in his brest a new desire of honour, and so returned

him this answere, friend go thy waies and tell the giant that sent thée, that I doe accept his demaunde, although it doth grieue my very soule to heare his arrogant defiance to the great disturbance of this royall company, and in the presence of so mighty an Emperour, but séeing his stomacke is gorged with so much pride, tell him that George of Englād is ready to make his defence, and also that shortly he shall repent him by my pledge of Knighthood.
               In saying. these words he tooke the speare frō the squire, and deliu
                     •
                  red him his gauntlet from his hand to carry to his master, and so put himselfe to the standing, awaighting for the encounter.
               At that time he was very nie the place where the Emperour sate, who heard the answere which the English knight made vnto the squire, and was much displeased that the giant in such sort should defie S. George without any occasion.
               But it was no time as then to speake but to kéepe s
                     •
                  
                  lence, and to pray vnto his Gods to take away his great pride and arrogancie.
               All this time the two warriours (mounted vpon their stéedes) tarried the signe to bee made by the trumpets, which being giuen, they set forward their coursers, with their speares in their restes, with so great fury and desire the one to vnhorse the other, that they both fayled in their encounter.
               The giant who was very strong and proude, when he sawe that he had missed his intent, he returned against Saint George, carrying his speare vppon his shoulder, and comming nie vnto him, vpon a sodaine before he could cleare hims
                     •
                  lfe, h
                     •
                   stroke him such a mighty blowe vpon his corslet, that his staffe broke in pieces, by reason of the finenesse of his armour, and mado the English Knight to double his body backewardes vppon his horse crupper.
               
                  But when he sawe the great villany that the giant vsed against him, his anger increased very much and so taking his speare in the same sort, he went towards the giant and saide.
               Thou furious and proude beast, thou scorne of nature and enemy of true knighthood, thinkest thou for to entrap me trecherously, and to gore me at vnawar
                     •
                  s like to a sauage boare: Now as I am a christian knight, if my knotty speare haue good successe I will reuenge me of thy cruelty.
               And in saying this, hee stroke him so furiously on the brest, that his speare passed through the giants body, and appeared foorth at his backe, whereby hee fell presently downe dead to the ground, and yéelded his life to the conquest of the fatall sisters.
               All that were present were very much amazed thereat, and wondred greatly at the strength and force of saint George, accompting him the fortunatest knight that euer wéelded launce, and the very patterne of true nobility.
               At this time the golden sun had finished his course, hauing nothing aboue the orizon but his glistering beames, whereby the Iudg
                     •
                  s of the turniments, commanded with sound of trumpets that the Iustes should cease, and make an end of the day.
               So the Emperour descended from his imperial throne into the tilting place, with all his knightes and Gentlemen at armes, for to receaue the noble champion of England, and desired him that he would go with them into his pallace, there to receaue al honors due vnto a knight of such desart: to the which he could not make any denial, but most vnwillingly consented, after this the Emperors daughter (in company of many courtly virgins) likewise descended their places, wher Alcida bestowed vpon saint George hir gloue, the which he wore for her fauour many a day after in his burgonet.
               
                  The six other christian champions, although they merited no honour by this turniment, because they did not try their aduentures therein, yet obtained they such good liking among the Grecian Ladies, that euery one had his mistresse, and in their presence they long time fixed their chiefe delightes: nowe must we leaue the champions in the Emperours courte for a time surfeiting in pleasures and returne to Saint Georges sons traueiling the world, to seeke out aduentures.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  How a Knight with two heads tormented a beautifull Maiden, that had betroathed her selfe to the Emperors Sonne of Constantinople: and how she was rescued by Saint Georges Sonnes, and after how they were brought by a strange Aduenture into the companie of the Christian Champions, with other things that hapned in the same trauells.
               
               
                  THis renowmed Emperour (within whose Court ye Christian champions made their aboades) of late yeares had a Sonne named Pollemus, in all vertues and knightlye demeanours, equall with anie liuing. This young prince in the spring time of his youth, through the pearcing dartes of blinde Cu-,pide, fell in loue with a Maiden of a meane parentage-but in beautie and other precious gifts of Nature most excellent.
               This Dulcippa (for so was she called) being but daughter to a Countrey Gentleman, was restrained from the Emperours Court, and denied the sight of her beloued Pollemus, and he forbidden to set his affection so l
                     •
                  w, vpon

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
the displeasure of the Emperour his Father: for he being the Sonne of so mightie a Potentate, and she the daughter of so meane a Gentleman, was thought to be a match vnfit and disagréeable to the lawes of the Countrey: and therefore they could not be suffered to manifest their loues as they would, but were constrained by stealth to enioye each others most beloued and heartely desired companies.
               So vpon a time these two Louers concluded to méete together in a vally betwixt two hills, in distance from the Emperours Court some thrée miles, wheras they might in s
                     •
                  cret (deuoyd of all suspition) vnite and tye both theyr hearts in one knot of true loue, and to preuent the determination of their Parentes, that so vnkindlye sought to crosse them.
               But when the appoynted day drew on, Dulcippa arose from her restlesse bed, and attired her self in rich and costly apparell, as though she had béen going to performe her nuptiall ceremonies.
               In this manner entred she the Ualley, at such time as the Sunne began to appeare out of his golden Horizon, & to shewe himselfe vppon the face of the Earth, glistering with his bright beames vppon the siluer floating Riuers. Likewise the calmie westerne windes did verie swéetely blow vpon the gréene leaues, and made a delicate harmonie: at such time as the fairest Dulcippa (accompanyed with high thoughts) approched the place of their appointed méeting.
               But when shee found not Prince Pollimus present, she determined to spend ye time away till he came in trimming of her golden haire, and decking her delicate bodie, and such like delightful plesures for her contentment and recreation.
               So sitting downe vpon a gréene banke vnder the shaddow of a myrtle trée, she pulled a golden cawle from her head, wherein her haire was wrapped, letting it fall and

dispearse it selfe all abroad her backe, and taking out from her christalline breast an yuorie comb, she began to kemb her haire, her hands and fingers séeming to be of white alablaster, her face staining the beautie of roses and lyllies mixed together, and the rest of her bodie comparable to Hyrens, vpon whose loue and beautie Mahomet did sometime doate.
               But now marke (gentle Reader) how frowning Fortune crossed her desiros, and changed her wished ioyes into vnexpected sorrowes. For as she sate in this deuine and angelicall likenes, there fortuned to come wandring by an inhumane tyrant, surnamed the Knight with 2. heads, who was a rauisher of virgins, an oppressor of infants, & an vtter enemie to vertuous Ladies, and strange trauelling Knights.
               This tyrant was bodied like vnto a man, but couered all ouer with lockes of haire. Hee had two heads, two mouthes, and foure eyes, but all as red as blood. Which deformed creature presently ranne vnto the Uirgin, and caught her vp vnder his arme, and carried her away ouer the mountains into another Countrey, where hee intended to torment her, as you shall heare more at large hereafter.
               But now returne we to Prince Pollemus, who at the time appointed likewise repaired to méete his betroathed Louer: but comming to the place, he found nothing but a silken scarffe, the which Dulcippa had let fall through the fearfull frighting she tooke at the sight of the thrée headed Knight.
               No sooner found he the scarffe, but he was oppressed extreamly with sorrow, fearing Dulcippa was murthered by some inhumane meanes, and had left her scarffe as a token that she infringed not her promise, but perfourmed ii to the losse of her owne life. Therefore taking it vp, & putting it next his heart, he breathd foorth this wofull lamentation.
               
                  Héere rest thou néere vnto my bléeding heart, thou precious token and remembraunce of my déerest Ladie, neuer to bee hence remooued, till such time as my eyes maye either behold her bodie, or my eares heare perfect newes of her vntimely death, that I may in death consort wyth her.
               Frowne you accursed Lampes of heauen, that gaue first light vnto this fatall morning: for by your dismall light the pride of earthly women is dishonoured. Come, come, you wrathfull planets, descend the lucklesse Horizon, and rayne vpon my head eternal vengeance, oppresse my bodie with continuall miserie, as once you did the wo
                  
                     •
                  ull King of Thebes: for by my slouthfull negligence and ouer-long tariance, this bloodie tragedie hath béene committed.
               Yet for her sake I vowe to trauell through the world, as farre as euer golden Phoebus lendes his light, filling each corner of the earth with clamours of her name, and making the Elements resound with Ecchoes of my lamentations.
               In this resolution returned he home to the Emperour his Fathers pallace, dissembling his gréefe in such manner, that none did suspect his discontented sorowes, nor the strange accident that vnto beauteous Dulcippa had happened.
               So vpon a day as he was imagining with himselfe, séeing the small comfort that he tooke in the Court, considering the want of her presence whom so much hee desired, he determined in great secret as soone as it was possible to depart the Court.
               This determination he straight wayes put in practise, and tooke out of the Emperours Armourie verie secretly an excéeding good corslet, the which was all russet, and enameled with blacke, and embrothered round about with a gilded edge verie curiously and artificially grauen and curued.
               
                  Also he tooke a shéelde of the same making, sauing that it was not grauen as the armour was, and commaunded a young Gentleman, that was Sonne vnto an ancient Knight of Constantinople, of a good disposition and hardy that he should kéepe them safely, and gaue him to vnderstand of his determined pretence.
               Although it did gréeue this young man verie much, yet for all that séeing the great fréendship which hee vsed towardes him, in vttring his secret vnto him before any other, without replying to the contrarie, hee verie diligently tooke the armour, and hidde it, till hee founde a conuenient time to put it into a Shippe verie secretly.
               So likewise he put into the same Ship two of the best horses which the Emperour had, and foorthwith he gaue the Prince vnderstanding, that all thinges were then in a readines, and in good order. Pollimus d
                     •
                  ssembling with the accustomed heauines hee vsed, withdrewe himselfe into his Chamber, till such time as the darke night came.
               Which when it was come he made himselfe readie with his apparell, and when all the people of the Court were at their rest, and in their deade sleepes, hee alone with his page, who was named Mercurio, departed ye pallace and went to the Sea side. His page did call the Marriners of the Ship, who straight way brought vnto them their boate, into the which they entred and went straight aboord.
               And being therein for that the winde was verie faire, he commaunded to waigh their Anckers and to hoyse vp Sailes, and to commit themselues to the mercy of the waters: as he commaunded all was done, and so in short time, they founde themselues ingulfed in the mayne Ocean, far from the sight of any land.
               But when the Emperour his Father vnderstood of his secret departure, the lamentation which hee made

was verie much: and he commaunded his knights to goe vnto the sea side, to know if there were anie ship that departed that night. And when it was told them that there was a B
                     •
                  rke that hayled anchor and hoysed sayle, they vnderstood straight way that the prince was gone awaye in her.
               I cannot héere declare the great griefe and sorrowe which the Emperour felt in his wofull heart for the absence of his Sonne, which a long time he alwayes suspected and feared.
               But when the departure of Pollemus was bruted thorough all Constantinople, all sports and feasts ceased, and all the vassalls of the Country were ouercome with a generall sorrow.
               So Pollemus sayled through the déepe seas thrée dayes and thrée nightes with a verie fayre and prosperous forewinde.
               The fourth day in the euening, beeing calme, and no Winde at all, the Marriners went to take their restes, some on the poope, and some in the foreship, for to ease their wearied bodies:
               The prince (who sate vpon the poope of the ship) asked his page for his Lute, the which straight way was giuen him: and when he had it in his hands, he playde and sung so swéetely, that it séemed to be a most heauenly melodie, and being in this swéete musicke, he heard a verye lamentable crye, as it were of a Woman: and leauing his delicate musicke hee gaue a listening and attentiue eare to hearken, what this sorrowfull creature sayd, and by reason of the stilnes of the night, he might easely heare the voyce vtter these words.
               
                  
                  It will little profite thee thou cruell tyrant, this thy bold hardinesse: for that I am beloued of so worthie a Knight, as will vndoubtedly reuenge this thy tirannous crueltie profered mee.
               
               Then he heard another voyce which séemed to answere.
               
                  Now I haue thee in my power, there is no humane creature of power able enough to deliuer or redeeme thee from the tormentes, that (in my determination) I haue purposed thou shalt indure.
               
               
                  Pollemus could heare no more, by reason that the Bark wherein they were passed by so swiftly: but hee supposed that it was his Ladies voyce which he heard, and that she was carried by force away. So (laying downe his Lute) he began to fall into a great thought, and was verie heauie and sorrowfull, in that he knew not how to aduenture for her recouerie.
               Beeing in this cogitation, hee retourned to hys page which was asléepe, and strake him with his foote, and awaked him, saying: What didst not thou heare the great lamentation which my Ladie Dulcippa made (as to mee it séemed) beeing in a small Barke that is passed by, and gone forwards along the seas. To the which his page Mercutio aunswered nothing, for that hee was still in a soun
                     •
                   sléepe.
               
                  to whome the Prince called againe, saying: arise I say, bring foorth mine armour, call vp the Marriners that they may launch their boate into the Sea, for by the omnipotent Iupiter I sweare that I will not b
                     •
                  e called the Sonne of my Father, if I doe suffer such violence to bee done against my loue, and not to procure with all my strength to reuenge the same, Mercutio woulde haue replyed vnto him, but the furious countenance of the Prince would not giue him leaue, no, not once to looke vpon his face: so hee broughte foorth his armour and buckled it on.
               In the meane time the Marriners had launched their bo
                     •
                  te into the Sea, wherein he leaped with a hastie fury, and caried with him his page, and foure of the Marriners for to towe the Barke, and he commaunded them to take their way towards the other companie that passed by them.
               So they labored all the night till such time as bright Phoebus with his glistering beames gaue vnto them such light that they might discouer and see the other Barke, although somewhat a farre off.
               So laboured they in great courage, till two partes of the day was spent, at which time they sawe come after them a Gallie which was gouerned with eyght oares vpon a side, and it made so great way, that with a trice they were with them, and hee saw that there were in her thrée Knightes in bright armour, to whome Pollimus called with a loude voyce saying. Moste curteous Knightes I request you to take me into your Gallie, that being in her I may the better accomplishe my desire.
               The Knightes of the Gallie passed by the Prince without making returne of any aunsweare, but rather shewed that they made but little accompt of him.
               
                  These thrée knightes were the sonnes of the English champion which departed from their father in his iourny towards Babylon, to set the King againe in his kingdome.
               But now to follow our history, the Prince of Constantinople séeing the little account they made of him, with the great anger and fury that he receaued, he tooke an ore in one hand, and an other in the other hand, and with such strength he stroke the water, that he made the slothfull barke to flie, and laboured so much with his oares, that with a trice they were equall with the gally.
               So leauing the oares with a light leape he put himselfe in the gally with his helme on, and his shield at his shoulder, and being within he said.
               Now shall you doe that by force, which before I vsing great courtesie you would not yéeld vnto.
               This being said, one of Saint Georges sonnes tooke the incounter in hand, thinking it a blemish to the honor of knighthoode by multitudes to assaile him, so the two braue knightes without any aduantage the one of the other made their encoūters so valiantly that it was a wonder to all the beholders.
               The Prince of Constantinople stroake the Englishe Knight such a furious blow that he made him to decline his head to his brest, and forced him to recoile backwards two or three steppes, but he came quickly againe to himselfe and returned him so mighty a blow vpon his helme, that he made all his teeth to chatter in his head, which was pittifull to sée.
               Then beganne betwixt them a merueilous and well foughten battle that al that beheld them greatly admired: with great pollicy and strength, they indured the bickering all that day, and when they saw the darke and tenebrous night came vpon them, they did procure with more courage and strength for to finish their battle.
               The Prince of Constantinople, puffing and blowing

like a bell lifting vp his sword with both his handes and discharged it so strongly vpon his enemy that perforce hée made him to fall to the ground and therewithal offered to pull his helmet from his head.
               But when the English Knight sawe himselfe in that sort, he threwe his shielde from him, and very strongly caught the other about the necke and held him fast, so that betwixt them beganne a mighty and terrible wrestling tumbling and wallowing vp and downe the gally breaking their plankes and oares that it was straunge to beholde.
               At this time the night began to be very darke, whereby they called for lightes, which presently were brought them by the Marriners, in the meane time these knights did somewhat breath themselues, although it was not much.
               So when the Lightes were brought, they returned to their late contention with new force and strength.
               O heauens said Pollimus, I cannot beléeue to the contrary but that this is Mars the God of war that doth contend in battle with me, and for the great enuy he beares against me, he goeth about to dishonour me.
               And with these wordes they thickned their blows with great desperatenesse.
               And althogh this last assault continued more then two houres, yet neither of them did faint, but at the last they both together lift vp their swoordes, and charged them together the one vpon ye others helm with so great strength that both of them fell downe vppon the hatches without any remembrance.
               The rest that did looke vpon them, did beléeue verily that they were both dead, by reason of the aboundance of bloud which came foorth at their visors, but quickly it was perceaued that there was some hope of life in them.
               Then presently there was an agréement made betwixt

the Knightes of the gally and the Marriners of the barke that they should conioyne together and to trauell whither fortune would conduct thē in this order as you haue heard carried they these two Knightes without any remembrance.
               But when the Prince of Constantinople came to himselfe with a loude voice he said, Oh God is it possible to be true that I am ouercome in this first encounter & assault of my knighthood.
               Here I curse the day of my creation and the houre when first I merited the name of a knight, henceforth Ile bury all my honours with disgrace, and spend the remnant of my life in base cowardice, and in speaking these wordes he cast his eie aside and beheld the English knight as one newly risen from a trance, who likewise breathed foorth these discontented spéeces. Oh vnhappy son of S. George, thou coward and of little valour, I know not howe thou canst name thy selfe to be the son of the mightiest Knight in the world, for that thou hast lost thy honour in this last assault.
               This being said, the two weary knights concluded a peace betwixt them, and reuealed each to the other their names and liuing and wherefore they aduentured to trauell, the which when it was known they sailed forwards that way whereas the dolorous woman went, so in this sort they trauelled all the rest of the night that remained, till such time as the day began to be cleare, and straightway they descried land, to which place with great hast they rowed.
               And comming a land they found no vsed way, but one narrow path, the which they kept, wherein they had not traueiled long when that they met with a poore simple countrey man, with a great hatchet in his hand, and he was going for to cut some firewood from high and mighty trées, of whom they demaunded what countrey and land it was.
               
                  This countrey (said hee) is called Armenia, but yet most curteous Knightes you must pardon me, for that I doe request you to returne againe, and procéede no farther if you doe estéeme of your liues, for in going this way there is nothing to be had but death.
               For that the Lord of this countrey is a furious monster called the two headed Knight, and he is so furious in his tyranny, that neuer any stranger as yet could escape out of his hand aliue.
               And for proofe of his cruelty no longer then yesterday he brought hither a Lady prisoner, who at her first comming on shoare all to be whipt and beat her in such sorte that it would make the tyrannous tyrant to relent and pitty her distresses, swearing that eueryday he would so torment her, till such time as her life and body did make their seperation.
               
                  Pollimus the Prince of Constantinople was very attentiue to the olde mans words, thinking the Lady to be his Dulcippa after whom he so long traueiled: the griefe he receaued at this report stroke such a terrour to his hart that he fell into a sound, and was not able to go any further.
               But Saint Georges sonnes who knew him to bee a Knight of much vallour incouraged him, and protested by the honour of their Knighthoodes neuer to forsake his company, till they saw his Lady deliuered from her torments and he safely conducted home into his owne countrey.
               So traueiling with this resolution the night came on, and it was so darke, that they were constrained to séeke some place to take their restes, and laying themselues downe vnder a broad branched tree of Oake, they passed the night pondering in their mindes a thousand imaginations.
               So when the morning was come and that the Diamond of heauen began to glister with his beames vpon

the mountaine toppes, these martiall Knightes were not slothful, but rose vppe and followed their iourneies.
               After this they had not traueiled scarce halfe a mile, when that they hearde a pittifull lamentation of a woman, who by reason of her lowde shrikes her voice was very hoarse, so they staid to heare from whence that lamentable noise should come.
               And presently a farre off, they behelde a high piller of stone, out of the which there came foorth a spoute of faire and cleare water, and thereat was bounde a woman all naked, her backe fastned to the piller, her armes backeward imbracing it, with her armes fast bounde behinde her.
               Her skinne was so fare and white, that if it had not béene, that they heard her lamentation, they would haue iudged her to haue béene an image made artificially of allablaster ioyned vnto the piller.
               These warlike Knights laced on their helmets, and came vnto the place where she was, but when the prince of Constantinople saw her, he presenly knewe her to be his Lady and louely mistresse.
               For by reason of the coldnesse of the darke night, and with her great lamentation and weepings, she was so ful of sorrow and affliction, that she could scarce speake.
               Likewise the Princes hart so yerned at the sight of his vnhappy Lady, that almost he could not looke vppon her for wéeping.
               But yet at last with a sorrowfull sigh he said, Oh cruell hands is it possible that there should remaine in you so much mischiefe, that whereas there is such great beauty and fairenes, you should vse such basenes and villany? she doth more deserue to be loued and serued, than to bee in this sort so euill intreated.
               This wofull Prince with much sorrow did behold her white skin and backe all to be spotted with her red bloud, and taking a cloake from one of the marriners, he threwe

it vppon her and couered her body▪ and tooke her in his armes, whilest the other knights vnlosed her.
               This vnhappy Lady neuer felt nor knew what was done vnto her, till such time as shee was vnbound from those bands and in the armes of her louer.
               Then giuing a terrible sigh she thought that shee had béene in the armes of the monstrous two headed knight s
                     •
                  ying, Oh Pollimus thou true betrothed husband where art thou now that thou comst not to succour me? and therwithall ceased her spéeches.
               This Prince hearing these words would haue answered her, but he was disturbed by hearing of a great noise of a horse, which s
                     •
                  emed to be in the woods amongest the trées.
               The rest of the Knights intending to sée what it should be left the Lady lying vpon the gréene grasse in the kéeping of Prince Pollimus and the Marriners, and so saint Georges sonnes went towards the place, whereas they heard that rushing noise, and as they vigelently lookt about them, they beheld the two headed monster mounted vpon a mighty and great palfrey, who returned to sée if the Lady were aliue for to torment her anew.
               But when he came to the piller and saw not the Lady, with an ireful looke he cast his eies, looking about him on euery side, and at last he saw the three knights, comming towards him with a reasonable and quiet pace, and howe the Lady was vntied from the piller wher he left her and in the armes of another Knight making her sorrowfull complaint.
               The two headed knight séeing them in this order, with great fury vpon his mighty horse he came towards them, and when he was neare them, he staid, and did behold the princely proportions, and gentle dispositions of ye knights that without my leaue hath aduentured to vntie the Lady from the piller where I left her, or come you to offer vppe your blouds in sacrifice vpō my fauchion, to whom one of

the thrée valiant brothers answered & said, we be knights of a strange countrey, that at the sorrowfull complant of this Lady arriued in this place, and séeing her to be a faire and beautifull woman, and without any desert to be thus so euill intreated, it moueth vs to put our persons in aduenture against them that will séeme farther to misuse her.
               In the meane time that the knight was speaking these wordes, the deformed monster was beholding him very presizely, knitting his browes with the great anger hee receaued in hearing his spéeches, and with great fury he spurred his monstrous beast, that he made him to giue so mighty a leape that he had almost fallen vppon the English knight: who with great lightnes did deliuer himselfe, and so drawing foorth his sword he would haue stroken him, but the beast passed by with so great fury that he could not reach him.
               Here began as terrible a battaile betwixt the two headed knight and saint Georges sonnes, as euer was fought by any knights, their mighty blowes séemed to rattle in the elements like to a terrible thunder, and their swords to strike sparkling fier, in such abundance as though it had béene from a smithes anuile.
               During this conflict the English Knights were so grieuously wounded, that all their bright armours were stained with a bloudy gore and their helmets brused with the terrible stroakes of the monsters fauchion, whereat they grew more inraged, and their strengthes beganne to increase in such sort that one of them stroake an ouerthwart blow with his trusty sword vpon his knée, and by reason that his armour was not very good he cut it cleane a sunder, so that legge and all fell to the ground, and the two headed knight fell on the other side to the earth, and with great roring he began to stampe and stare like a beast, and to blaspheme against the heauens for this his sodaine mishap.
               
                  The other two brothers seeing this, presently cut off his two heads, whereby he was forced to yéeld to the mercy of imperious death.
               There was another knight that came with the monster, who when he sawe all that had passed, with great feare returned the way from whence he came.
               These victorious conquerours, when they sawe that with so great ease they were deliuered from the tyrantes cruelty, with lowde voices they saide, oh thou God whom we christians still doe worship, we doe giue thée humble thankes, and doe acknowledge this our good successe and victory both procéede from thée.
               Therefore we doe promise and vow before thy celestiall Maiesty, that once comming to our father and the other Christian champions, generally to erect a shrine, and consecrate it to thy blessed sonne, vnder whose banner we euermore doe fight.
               This being said, they departed with conquest to the Prince of Constantinople, where they left him comforting of his distressed Lady.
               So when they were altogether, they commanded the marriners to prouide them somwhat to eate, for that they had great néede thereof, who presently prepared it, for that continuall they bore their prouision about them: of this banquet the Knights were very glad, and reioyced much at that which they had atchieued and commanded that the Lady should be very well looked vnto and healed of her harme receaued.
               So at the end of thrée daies when the Princesse Lady had recouered her health, they left the countrey of Armenia and departed backe to the sea whereas they had lefte their ships lying at roade, and there tarried vntill their comming.
               Wherein they were no sooner entered, but the Marriners hoysed saile, and tooke their way toward Constantinople as the Knights commanded. The windes serued

them so prosperously, that within a small time they arryued in Greece, and landed within two dayes iourney of the Courte: which laye then at Peru, a myle from Constantinople.
               
               Being aland, the Prince Pollemus consulted with S. Georges thrée Sonnes, what course were best to be taken for their procéeding to the Court. For saith he, vnlesse I may with the Emperour my Fathers consent enioye my déerest Dulcippa, I wyll liue vnknowen in her companie, rather than delight in the heritage of ten such Empyres.
               At last they concluded, that the Ladie should bee couered in a blacke veyle for being knowen▪ and Pollemus in black armes, and the other Knights all sutable shuld ride together: which accordingly they did, and about tenne in the morning entred the Pallace: where they found the Emperour, the seuen Champions with manie other princes in the great hall: to whom one of Sa. Georges Sons thus spake.
               Great Emperour and noble Knights, this Knight th
                     •
                  t leadeth the Lady hath long loued her, in their births there is great diff
                     •
                  rence, so that their Parents crosse their affections: for him she hath indured much s
                     •
                  rrow, for her he will and hath suff
                     •
                  red manie hazards. His comming thus to your Court is to this end, to approoue her the onely desertfull Ladie in the world, himselfe the faithfulst Knight against all Knights whatsoeuer: which with your Emperiall leaue▪ he▪ my selfe and these two my associates will maintaine: desiring your Maiestie to giue iudgement as we shall deserue.
               The Emperour condescended, and on the gréene before the Pallace, those foure ouerthrew more than foure hundred Knights: so that Sa. George and thr
                     ••
                   other of the Champions entred the lysts, and ran thrée violent courses against the Blacke knights, without moouing them: who neuer suffered the poynts of their speares to toutch the armour

of the Champions. Which the Emperour perceiuing, gessed them to be of acquaintaunce: wherefore gyuing iudgement that the Knight should possesse his Lady, at his request they all discouered themselues.
               To describe the delightfull comfort that the English Champion tooke in the presence of his Children, and the ioy that the Emperour receiued at the returne of hys lost Sonne, requires more arte and eloquence, than my tyred senses can affoord. I am therefore here forced to conclude this Part, leauing the Flowers of Chiualrie in the Cittie of Constantinople. Of whose following Aduentures I wil at large discourse hereafter: so that the gentle Reader (with a kinde looke and a smiling countenance) wyll curteously accept of this which is alreadie finished.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   