
      
         
            
            A Lanterne-light for loyall Subiects. Or, A terrour for Traytours. Wherein may be seene the odiousnesse of Treason, the deserued ende of Traytours, and the wonderfull preseruation of anoynted Princes. A matter rightly agreeing with this time of danger, where wicked persons haue desired our publike sorrow, and the ruine of this Realme of England.
            
               Feare God, Be true to thy Prince: and obey the Lawes.
            
            Printed at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling in Hosier lane, neere Smithfield. 1603.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ To the right Honorable, the Lord Thomas Howard, Earle of Suffolke, Baron of Walden, Lord Chamberlaine of the Kings houshold, Knight of the Noble order of the Garter, and one of his Maiesties most Honorable priuy Councell, health, happinesse, and prosperity.
            
               
                  I
                Haue aduentured (Right Honourable Lord) vnder your Noble protection, to publish to the world, a poore testimony of my loyalty to my Prince and Countrey. A little Pamphlet it is, but a sweete comfort, and a sound counsell for good Subiects, describing many fayre examples of Traytours foule ends; shewing, that the reward of Treason, is destruction, and after death, lasting infamy.
            The matter agreeing with the condition of this troublesome time, hath made mee the bolder to present it to your Honourable censure: Acceptance I doe not doubt; for no good subiect can mislike it. For here, in the name of Experience, I aduise all men, whose heads clyme aboue the heyght of their present conditions,

to make loyall and honest actions, the Ladder of their aduauncement, which will commend them with a beloued life, or an honorable death, when Treason is the Hatchet that seuereth life, and ioyneth Infamy vnto death. The Lord be with your Honour in all your affayres; for whose health and Honorable prosperity, the good subiects of England continually pray.
            
               At your Honours commaundement, in all humble duty, Richard Johnson.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Lanterne-light for loyall Subiects: OR, A terrour for Traytours.
            
            
               GOD placeth Kings in their Kingdoms, and he alone will haue the dissoluing of them. If Princes be good, let vs be thankfull to God for them: if they be tyrannous, let vs looke into our sinnes; for God sendeth Tyrants, to punish the sinnes of the wicked. Therefore, whether Princes be good or bad, let subiects be obedient, lest (for their disobedience, God take away the good, and double the tyrannie of the bad.
            Then, I wonder, why men are so bewitched with the inticements of the Deuill, to lay violent hands vpon the Lords Anoynted, knowing, that the reward of such enterprises, is shame and confusion.
            Wherefore let all men consider this, that God by sundrie examples preserueth the innocent, from the violent

hands of the wicked, euen in the pride and greatest hope of their purposes.
            
               Haman erected a gallows for Mardocheus the Iew; and he and his ten sonnes suffred therevpon.
            The false Iudges had got sentence of death against chaste Susanna: but by diuine prouidence, the stones dashed out their owne braines. But where the practise tendeth to the murther of Anoynted Princes, the odiousnes thereof so highly offendeth the Maiesty of God, as he hath defended euen notable Tyrants, from the murthering swords of Traytours.
            As for example: Commodus was a wicked Emperour, and to kill him, the Traitor Quintianus wayted at his chamber 
                  
                     •
                  lutarch. dore: his dagger was ready drawne, his heart was resolute, and his hand was striking the stroke, at what time the Traytor cryed, This the Senate sendeth thee. By which fore-warning, Quintianus was stayd, and the Emperour escaped vnhurt.
            If God plucked wit and prudence from Traytors, that purposed to kill such notable Tyrants, as this was, it is constantly to bee beleeued, that with the Shield of his strength, he wil defend righteous Princes, amongst whom our most gracious King is crowned with the soueraigne renowne of vertue: in which dignity the King of Kings long continue his Maiestie.
            The murther of a Prince is so odious, as euen nature it selfe crieth out against it.
            King Croesus had a young sonne, that from his birth was dumbe
                  •
                and yet, when one of King Cyrus soldiers (taking him for a common person) was ready to kil him, the Infant

cryed out, O, kill him not; for he is the King my father. 
               Persia
                     •
                   Hist.
            
            Also I haue read of a stranger matter; namely, of a Kings sonne that brake forth of his mothers wombe, to giue his father warning of his enemies; & presently after his birth, cryed out, I am borne in a wofull houre, to be the messenger of no better tidings, then that my father is in present danger, so lose both his life and kingdome. Which being spoken, the Infant presently dyed.
            We hereby perceiue, how the person of an anoynted Prince is so sacred, as nature maketh a passage for sucking babes and dumbe persons, to deliuer the same from danger; and withall, the Traytor is so open to destruction, as the Preacher saith to the Traytour, A Bird of the ayre 
               Ecclesiastes. 10. 20. 
               shall bewray thy voyce, and with her feathers shall discouer thy words.
            
            
               Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, they, and all that they had, went downe quicke into hell, because of their rebellion.
            And certainly, whosoeuer marketh the sequel of treason, shall find a hundred examples to one, to proue the end of Traytors to be most miserable.
            By Statute law, it is petty treason for a seruant to murther his master, being but a subiect. How detestable treason is it then, for a sworne seruant, to lay violent hands on his anoynted Prince? The offence being in the extremest degree of sinnes, the punishment ought to be according to the seuerest censure of iustice.
            Euery mans house well gouerned, resembleth a Common wealth, wherein seruants ought to liue in the awe and subiection of subiects. But the wicked policy of men hath alwayes bene such, as where open power was too weake,

ambition, enuy, and money, allured the seruants of Emperours & Kings, and men of all estates, to lay violent hands on their masters, and to betray them to death.
            
               Iudas, one of the Apostles, betrayed our Sauiour Iesus into the hands of the Iewes.
            King Alexander was poysoned by his Physicion.
            The death of the Emperour Commodus, was compassed by the practise of his owne sister.
            Many haue had their bane by their wiues; some by their sonnes: but innumerable haue beene destroyed by the treason of their seruants.
            But let all good subiects, to their comfort, and Traytors, to their confusion, know, that the wicked dig a pit, and fall therein themselues.
            The Iewes had Saint Paul in prison, where forty of them vowed, that they would neither eate nor drinke, vntil they had slayne him: but God in a due time defended him.
            The Angell of the Lord led Peter forth of prison.
            The Angell of the Lord defended Sidrac, Misac, and Abednago in the burning fire.
            The Angell of the Lord stopped the Lions mouthes, that should haue deuoured Daniel. And there is no doubt but the good Angell of the Lord, with a drawne sword, will defend our Soueraigne Lord King Iames, from all his enemies.
            A comfortable saying it is, that this holy Angell of the Lord, with a drawne sword (though not visibly seene) standeth between the godly and their enemies. And then, though the wicked come armed with an host of men, they shall bee ouercome with their subtill deuices, and their

swords shall goe thorow their owne hearts.
            Call we now to mind our late soueraigne Lady Queen Elizabeth, whom the Angell of the Lord, euen from her cradle, did miraculously preserue from the tyranny of all her enemies. When (for our sinnes) Queene Mary committed both the Word and Sword, to the hypocrisy and tyranny of the popish Cleargy, good Lady Elizabeths life was then assayled with a thousand publike and priuate practises, but the Angell of the Lord still stood betweene her and her harmes; and from the fetters of aduersity, loosed, and crowned her Maiesty, with the supreme dignity of this Realme. Afterwards, in the dayes of her Maiesties most happy raigne, many there were, that with the superstition of Papistry were so blinded, that they sought dayly to take away this good Queenes life: as Arden and Someruile; the one whereof was quartered, and made a prey for Powles; the other hanged himselfe, the night before the appoynted day of his execution.
            The dangerous Traitor Throgmarton, as cunningly as he disguised his odious treasons, was intrapped in the snares, which he set for his Countries destruction, and worthily dyed with the sword, which hee had whetted for the innocent.
            The odious Atheist Parry likewise had the reward of his fellow Traytors, who, though he had the place and opportunity, yet as gracelesse as he was, the very Maiesty of her princely countenance made him lose his resolution.
            Many are the falles of Traytors, which I could bring in, since the beginning of Queene Elizabeths raigne, which for this time I omit. But surely, neither her Maiesties goodnes,

nor their own duties could mouethem to obedience, that had but once drunke of the dregs of Popery. Therefore all true subiects may sigh and say, Alas: those whose hearts are hardened therein, haue their iudgements blind, and their affections swift to runne vpon destruction.
            
               Pharao was warned with diuers plagues, that he should not hinder the departure of the children of Israel forth of Egypt: yet he would needs follow them, to his vtter destruction.
            Gods iustice strooke Mahomet with the falling sicknesse, to make him knovv and repent his blasphemie: but to strengthen the peoples misbeleefe, the Deuill taught him to say, that his traunce proceeded of the conference of an Angell, vvhose diuine presence could not endure his earthly shape.
            Vpon the principall day of the bloudy murther at Paris in Fraunce, as a token that Gods word should flourish, in despight of their cruelty, a dead and withered tree bare greene leaues, in that Churchyard that receiued many a murthered carkase. And yet the Papists, on the contrary part, applied this prophesying example, to the second florishing of the Romish church. Thus blind they are in their wicked imaginations & traytrous attempts: and thus, with such vaine hopes, are all Traytors led vnto the follies, and falles of vnloyall subiects. Wherefore, howsoeuer they perswade themselues, and threaten our Countrey with a change of prosperity; so long as we feare God, and be true to his Maiesty, our peace will vndoubtedly last, and the Sir Walter Rawley, disturbers thereof are like shortly to taste their own miserable fortunes, being already iustly condemned for their

trayterous attempts against our most gracious King, and Sir Griff
                     ••
                   Markham, M. George Brooke, M. Antony C
                     •
                  pley, M. Brooksby, Watson, & Clarke. their owne natiue Countrey. Therefore let all sorts of people beare this in mind, that whosoeuer loseth his life by any kind of treason or violence, God will not onely reuenge the bloud of the same man so murthered, but will also seuerely punish the murtherers in a strange maner.
            God punished the murther of Abel, committed by his brother Cain, with a most bitter curse; and yet that there might bee no protection in murder, God sayd himselfe, That whosoeuer slue the reprobate Cain, it should be auenged seuen fold.
            
            And now to touch the guilt of murther more neerely, God requireth the bloud of Innocents, at the hands of Kings and anoynted Princes, as thus: To punish the fault of King Dauid, in seeking the death of Vrius, God tooke away the life of the child, which Dauid had by Vrias vvife.
            Furthermore, in the time of King Dauid, there were three yeres famine, and Dauid demaunded the cause why? And the Lord sayd, It was for Saul, and the house of bloud, because he slew the Gibeonites. According to the opinion of Erasmus, the consenter to murther, is as gilty as the doer.
            
               Iudas that betrayed Christ, and Pilate that adiudged him to death, only to please the Iewes, carried the feareful burthen of murther in their consciences, and by the horrour thereof, wrought their owne destructions.
            Moreouer, nature hath taught the very Infidels and heathen people to beleeue, that vengeance followeth murther. Reason then may perswade all Christians, to assure

themselues, that the bloudthirsty are worse then Infidels, and cannot escape the sword of vengeance.
            Now, seeing that Kings, if they shead any bloud, otherwise then by the sword of Iustice; and Iudges, if they adiudge death for hatred, feare, or gayne, by Gods righteousnes are punished as murtherers: what may they then expect, that in corners lay violent hands on annoynted Kings, or without colour of authority, murther the innocent? If the eyes of their vnderstanding were not blind, they might see a bad successe in their purpose, and the open confusion of themselues.
            I haue read of a number of good and bad Princes, and also of other which haue bene bereaued of their liues, by the violent hands of secret Traitors: but among a hundred, you shall hardly find of one murtherer, that hath escaped the torture of Gods vengeance.
            
               Brutus and his partakers murdered Iulius Casar; but not one of them escaped a violent death.
            Wee may yet remember the vnhappy murther of the King of Scotland, father to our Soueraigne Lord, King Iames (whose life God long continue) how villanously he was made away: yet the greatest fauourers, & the greatest procurers of the sayd murther, were by common iustice drawn to commit almost all the murderers into the hands of the hangman; and such as escaped, and were not bound to the censure of the law, could by no meanes shift themselues from the vengeance of God.
            
               Iohn I
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  g
                     •
                  , that first assailed the godly Prince of Orange, had the common reward of Traytors. And the most odious Atheist Balthazar Serack, that slue the sayd Prince, for

all the blessings of the Pope, the commendations and threatnings of the King of Spaine, exchanged the Pistoll wherewith hee slue him, for most horrible tortures to bee executed vpon himselfe, being the iust reward for his haynous treason.
            I could alledge infinite examples, to disswade men from violent murther, which Gods prouidence many wayes preuenteth, when as his iustice neuer leaueth the murtherer vnpunished. Yet if Traytors had reason to obserue the iudgements of such practisers, or experience to looke into the wisdome of this age, they should see their attempt as vayne a matter, as to throw stones against the starres, or with a knock of their head to leuell a mountaine, that seeke to displace a beloued Prince.
            But now to wade into the depth of our subiect, ambition and desire of dignity, is the welspring of rebellion and treason: they that will flye without wings, are like to fall before they are wise.
            Hee that is borne to bee a seruant, in no wise ought to looke for double attendance.
            Dignity is like a vane on a high Tower, which is subiect to the chaunce of fortune, as the other is to the chaunce of the wind. And, who so will sit surely vpon the seat of prosperity, must, like the Snayle, get experience with slow climing; lest in taking a swifter course, like vnto a Bird, he be remoued with the least stone that is throwne, I meane, with the least disgrace of fortune. If mens minds grow bigger then their naturall conditions, there are many examples of vertue to imitate, which haue raised sundry men from the cart to the highest degree of honour: when otherwise,

in clyming by treason, many honorable Estates dye dishonorably, and to their posterity, leaue no better Inheritance, then Infamy. Therefore let all ambitious minded men know, that destruction followeth presumption, and the clyming of pride will haue a fall.
            And now I thinke it not amisse, to discourse vnto you the speaches of an English Traytour, which hee spoke at his execution within these few yeres: and his words were these, Oh, woe is me, vnhappy man! I may now rightly compare my estate to the state of Adam, who at first was placed in Paradise, and there enioyed all the pleasures of the earth, and was onely forbidden to eate of the fruite of one tree: but for his transgression, he not onely procured misery vpon his owne head, but vpon the heads of all his posterity. So (quoth he) I that wanted nothing, but had health, wealth, and friends, and so might long haue liued, if I could haue forborne to haue bin vntrue to my Prince: but alas, for my offence, I haue brought my selfe vnto this misery, by which, my good mother, my louing wife, my foure brethren, and sixe sisters, yea, and our whole house (neuer before attaynted) is infamed, and our posterity for euer like to be vndone.
            By his ouerthrow all men are warned to make choyce of good company: for the old Prouerbe is verified, Euill company corrupts good maners. And truly, the injury he hath done to his vvhole posterity, may be a fearefull example, to feare men from treason, especially the Nobility and better sort of Gentlemen: for they thereby not onely lose their liues and liuings, but the honour of their houses are corrupted. Contrarivvise, for the vertue and dutifull

seruice of one man, a number of his posterity receiue both honour, and many other worldly blessings.
            Hereby we may compare a Traytors offence to Adams fault, and wee may liken the sacred Maiesty of our renowmed King, to the pleasant and glorious fruit of the tree of life, so precious in Gods eyes, as he forbade Adam, and all the seed of Adam, to lay violent hands vpon.
            But now, to returne againe to the bad successe of Traytors in their attempts, consider yet these fewe examples, that hapned in Queene Elizabeths dayes.
            First, consider we how Pius quintus set Doctor M
                     •
                  rt
                     ••
                  
                on worke (being an English Fugitiue) to rayse a commotion in the North parts, where the Earle of Westmerland, and other great personages entred into open rebellion: yet the very sound of her Maiesties power dismayed them, and happy was he that could run fastest away. The principals fled; but escaped not the iustice due vnto Traytors: and the Earle of Westmerland himselfe euer after liued in pouerty, and for a bare allowance, was subiect to the proud controlement of euery rascall Spanyard.
            
               Felton, to draw her Maiesties subiects from dutifull obedience, set vp the Popes Bull vpon the Bishop of Londons gate: but (God be praysed) the hornes, that should haue gored the innocent, turned into a halter to hang the Traytor Felton.
            
            The Pope expecting no good successe by open force, then armed his practises with Machiauils policies: Mader & Barlow, were made Instruments to murther some principal Magistrates: but their confusion was speedy, and their purpose frustrate.
            
               
The peace of England was troubled with the conspiracy of Throg
                     ••
                  rton, Appleyard, Brooke and others; but they had no better successe, then in helping thēselues to the gallow
                  •
               .
            Doctor Story may be an example of Gods iustice herein; the Earle of Desmond, Doctour Saunders, Campion, the foureteene Traytors, and many others may be sufficient witnesses of the miserable ends of Traytors.
            Moreouer, we may read in King Edward the sixt his time, of a generall rebelliō that was almost throughout England: yet al had bad successe. The Papists tempted the commons to rebellion, with perswasions to throw downe inclosure, and for themselues foysted in, to haue their olde Religion againe.
            The banishment of strangers, hath bin made the cause of many commotions. Also the Northerne men had but a bad proofe of two rebellions, when they had the Crosse and Banner of fiue wounds borne before them.
            And to conclude, thus you may see the iust end and due desert of all Traytors. Therefore my counsell is (which I speake from the true zeale of my heart) that my louing brethren the subiects of England, open not their eares to the subtill perswasions of Papists, lest rebellion enter into their hea
                  •
               ts, & so vengeance light vpon their whole bodies. If this counsell were surely grafted in all mens hearts, then no doubt, but the rotten braunches of rebellion would soone be cut off, and vnity surely placed in England, to the great comfort of our Soueraign Liege King Iames; whom the Lord of Hostes preserue 
                  •
               nd keepe, and all that wish him well.
            
         
      
   