
      
         
            
            
            THE Firſt and ſecond Part of the troubleſome Raigne of John King of England. With the diſcouerie of King Richard Cor
                  delions Baſe ſonne (vulgarly named, The Baſtard Fawconbridge:) Alſo, the death of King Iohn at Swinſtead Abbey. As they were (ſundry times) lately acted the Queenes Maieſties Players. Written by W. Sh.
            Imprinted at London by 
                  Ʋalentine Simmes for Iohn Helme, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Saint Dunſtons Churchyard in Fleeteſtreet. 1611.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The troubleſome Raigne of King Iohn.
            Enter K. Iohn, Queene Elinor his mother, William Marſhall Earle of Pembrooke, the Earles of Eſſex, and of Salisbury.
            
            
               Queene Elianor.
               BArons of England, and my noble Lords;
               Though God and Fortune haue bereft from vs
               Victorious Richard ſcourge of Infidells,
               And clad this Land in ſtole of diſmall hew:
               Yet giue me leaue to ioy, and ioy you all,
               That from this wombe hath ſprung a ſecond hope,
               A King that may in rule and vertue both
               Succeede his brother in his Emperie.
            
            
               K. Iohn
               My gratious mother Queene, and Barons all;
               Though farre vnworthy of ſo high a place,
               As is the Throne of mighty Englands King;
               Yet Iohn your Lord, contented vncontent,
               Will (as he may) ſuſtaine the heauy yoke
               Of preſſing cares, that hang vpon a Crowne.
               My Lord of Pembrooke and Lord Salsbury,
               
               Admit the Lord Chattilion to our preſence;
               That we may know what Philip King of Fraunce
               
               (By his Ambaſſadors) requires of vs.
            
            
               Q. Elinor
               Dare lay my hand that Elinor can geſſe
               Whereto this weighty Embaſſade doth tend:
               If of my nephew Arthur and his claime,
               Then ſay, my Sonne, I haue not miſſde my aime.
            
            Enter Chattilion and the two Earles.
            
               
               Iohn
               My Lord Chattilion, welcome into England:
               
               How fares our brother Philip king of Fraunce?
               
            
            
               Chat.
               His Highneſſe at my comming was in health,
               And will'd me to ſalute your Maieſtie,
               And ſay the meſſage he hath giuen in charge.
            
            
               Iohn
               And ſpare not man, wee are preparde to heare.
            
            
               Chat.
               
                  Philip, by the grace of God moſt Chriſtian King of France, hauing taken into his gardain & protection Arthur D. of Brittaine ſonne and heire to Ieffrey thine elder brother, requireth in the behalfe of the ſaide Arthur, the kingdome of England, with the lordſhip of Ireland, Poiters, Aniow, Toraine, Maine: and I attend thine anſwer.
            
            
               Iohn
               A ſmall requeſt: belike hee makes account,
               That England, Ireland, Poiters, Aniow, Toraine, Maine,
               
               Are nothing for a King to giue at once:
               I wonder what he meanes to leaue for me.
               Tell Philip, he may keepe his Lords at home,
               With greater honour than to ſend them thus
               On Embaſſades that not concerne himſelfe,
               Or if they did, would yeeld but ſmall returne.
            
            
               Chat.
               Is this thine anſwer?
            
            
               Iohn
               It is, and too good an anſwer for ſo prowd a meſſage.
            
            
               Chat.
               Then King of England, in my Maſters name,
               And in Prince Arthur duke of Brittaines name,
               I doe defie thee as an enemie,
               And wiſh thee to prepare for bloody warres.
            
            
               Q. Elinor
               My Lord (that ſtands vpon defiance thus)
               Commend me to my nephew, tell the boy,
               That I Queene Elianor (his grandmother)
               Vpon my bleſſing charge him leaue his Armes,
               Whereto his head-ſtrong mother prickes him ſo:
               Her pride we know, and know her for a Dame
               That will not ſticke to bring him to his end,
               So ſhe may bring herſelfe to rule a realme.
               Next, wiſh him to forſake the King of Fraunce,
               
               And come to me and to his vncle here,
               And he ſhall want for nothing at our hands.
            
            
               
               Chat.
               This ſhall I do, and thus I take my leaue.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Pembrooke, conuey him ſafely to the ſea,
               But not in haſte: for as we are aduiſde,
               We meane to be in France as ſoone as he,
               To fortifie ſuch townes as we poſſeſſe
               In Aniow, Toraine, and in Normandie.
               
            
            Exit Chatt.
            Enter the Shriue and whispers the Earle of Saliſ. in the care.
            
               Salſ.
               Pleaſe it your maieſty, here is the ſhriue of Northhamptonſhire, with certaine perſons that of late committed a riot, and haue appeald to your Maieſtie, beſeeching your Highneſſe for ſpeciall cauſe to heare them.
            
            
               Iohn
               Will them come neere, and while wee heare the cauſe,
               Goe Salsbury and make prouiſion,
               We meane with ſpeed to paſſe the Sea to France.
               
               Say ſhriue, what are theſe men, what haue they done?
               Or whereto tends the courſe of this appeale?
            
            
               Shriue
               Pleaſe it your maieſty, theſe two brethren vnnaturally falling at odds about their fathers liuing, haue broken your Highneſſe peace, in ſeeking to right their owne wrongs without courſe of Lawe, or order of Iuſtice, & vnlawfully aſſembled thēſelues in mutinous maner, hauing committed a riot, appealing from triall in their country to your Highnes: and here I Thomas Nidigate ſhrine of Northamptonſhire do deliuer them ouer to their triall.
            
            
               Iohn
               My Lord of Eſſex, wil thoffenders to ſtand forth, and tell the cauſe of their quarrell.
            
            
               Eſſex
               Gentlemen, it is the Kings pleaſure that you diſcouer your griefs, and doubt not but you ſhal haue iuſtice.
            
            
               Phil.
               Pleaſe it your M. the wrong is mine: yet will I abide all wrongs, before I once open my mouth t'vnrip the ſhamefull ſlander of my parents, the diſhonor of my ſelf, & the bad dealing of my brother in this princely aſſemblie.
            
            
               Robert
               Then, by my Prince his leaue, ſhall Robert ſpeake,
               And tell your Maieſtie what right I haue
               To offer wrong, as he accounteth wrong.
               My father (not vnknowne vnto your Grace)
               Receiu'd his ſpurres of Knighthood in the Field,
               
                  At kingly Richards hands in Paleſtine,
               
               When as the walls of Acon gaue him way:
               His name ſir Robert Fauconbridge of Mountbery.
               
               What by ſucceſſion from his Anceſtors,
               And warlike ſeruice vnder Englands Armes,
               His liuing did amount to at his death
               Two thouſand markes reuenew euery yeare:
               And this (my Lord) I challenge for my right,
               As lawfull heire to Robert-Fauconbridge.
               
            
            
               Philip
               If firſt-borne ſonne be heire indubitate
               By certaine right of Englands auntient Lawe,
               How ſhould my ſelfe make any other doubt,
               But I am heire to Robert Fauconbridge?
               
            
            
               Iohn
               Fond youth, to trouble theſe our princely cares,
               Or make a queſtion in ſo plaine a caſe:
               Speake, is this man thine elder brother borne?
            
            
               Robert
               Pleaſe it your Grace with patience for to heare.
               I not deny but he mine elder is,
               Mine elder brother too: yet in ſuch ſort,
               As he can make no title to the land.
            
            
               Iohn
               A doubtfull tale as euer I did heare,
               Thy brother, and thine elder, and no heire:
               Explaine this darke Aenigma.
               
            
            
               Robert
               I grant (my Lord) he is my mothers ſonne,
               Baſe borne, and baſe begot, no Fauconbridge.
               
               Indeede the world reputes him lawfull heire,
               My father in his life did count him ſo,
               And here my mother ſtands to prooue him ſo:
               But I (my Lord) can prooue, and doe auerre
               Both to my mothers ſhame, and his reproach,
               He is no heire, nor yet legitimate.
               Then (gratious Lord) let Fauconbridge enioy
               The liuing that belongs to Fauconbridge.
               
               And let not him poſſeſſe anothers right.
            
            
               Iohn
               Prooue this, the land is thine by Englands lawe.
            
            
               Q. Elin.
               Vngratious youth, to rip thy mothers ſhame,
               The wombe from whence thou didſt thy being take,
               
                  All honeſt eares abhorre thy wickedneſſe,
               But gold I ſee doth beate downe Natures law.
            
            
               Mother
               My gratious Lord, and you thrice reuerend Dame,
               That ſee the teares diſtilling from mine eies,
               And ſcalding ſighes blowne from a rented heart:
               For honour and regard of womanhood,
               Let me intreate to be commaunded hence.
               Let not theſe eares heere receiue the hiſſing ſound
               Of ſuch a viper, who with poyſoned words
               Doth maſſerate the bowells of my ſoule.
            
            
               Iohn
               Lady, ſtand vp, be patient for a while:
               And fellow, ſay, whoſe baſtard is thy brother?
            
            
               Philip
               Not for my ſelfe, nor for my mother now;
               But for the honour of ſo braue a man,
               Whom hee accuſeth with adulterie:
               Heere I beſeech your Grace vpon my knees,
               To count him mad, and ſo diſmiſſe vs hence.
            
            
               Robert
               Nor mad, nor mazde, but well aduiſed, I
               Charge thee before this royall preſence here
               To be a baſtard to king Richards ſelfe,
               Sonne to your Grace, and brother to your Maieſtie.
               Thus bluntly, and
            
            
               Elian.
               Yong man, thou needſt not be aſhamed of thy kin,
               Nor of thy Sire. But forward with thy proofe.
            
            
               Robert
               The proofe ſo plaine, the argument ſo ſtrong,
               As that your Highneſſe and theſe noble Lords,
               And all (ſaue thoſe that haue no eies to ſee)
               Shall ſweare him to be baſtard to the king.
               Firſt, when my Father was Embaſſadour
               In Germanie vnto the Emperour,
               The King lay often at my fathers houſe;
               And all the realme ſuſpected what befell:
               And at my fathers backe-returne agen
               My mother was deliuered, as tis ſed,
               Sixe weeks before the account my father made.
               But more than this: looke but on Philips face,
               His features, actions, and his lineaments,
               
                  And all this princely preſence ſhall confeſſe,
               He is no other but King Richards ſonne.
               Then gratious Lord, reſt he King Richards ſonne,
               And let me reſt ſafe in my Fathers right,
               That am his rightfull ſonne and only heire.
            
            
               Iohn
               Is this thy proofe, and all thou haſt to ſay?
            
            
               Robert
               I haue no more, nor neede I greater proofe.
            
            
               Iohn
               Firſt, where thou ſaidſt in abſence of thy Sire
               My brother often lodged in his houſe:
               And what of that? baſe groome to ſlaunder him,
               That honoured his Embaſſador ſo much,
               In abſence of the man to cheere the wife?
               This will not hold, proceed vnto the next.
            
            
               Q. Elin.
               Thou ſaiſt ſhee teemde ſixe weekes before her time,
               Why good ſir Squire, are you ſo cunning growen,
               To make account of womens reckonings?
               Spit in your hand and to your other proofes:
               Many miſchances happen in ſuch affaires,
               To make a woman come before her time.
            
            
               Iohn
               And where thou ſaiſt, he looketh like the King,
               In action, feature and proportion:
               Therein I hold with thee, for in my life
               I neuer ſaw ſo liuely counterfet
               Of Richard Cordelion, as in him.
            
            
               Robert
               Then good my Lord, be you indiffrent Iudge,
               And let me haue my liuing and my right.
            
            
               Q. Elinor
               Nay, heare you ſir, you runne away too faſt:
               Know you not, Omne ſimile non est idem?
               
               Or haue read in. Harke yee good ſir,
               Twas thus I warrant, and no otherwiſe,
               Shee lay with ſir Robert your father, and thought vpon King Richard my ſonne, and ſo your brother was formed in this faſhion.
            
            
               Robert
               Madame, you wrong me thus to ieſt it out,
               I craue my right: King Iohn, as thou art King,
               So be thou iuſt, and let me haue my right.
            
            
               Iohn
               Why (fooliſh boy) thy proofes are friuolous,
               
                  Nor canſt thou chalenge any thing thereby.
               But thou ſhalt ſee how I will helpe thy claime:
               This is my doome, and this my doome ſhall ſtand
               Irreuocable, as I am king of England.
               For thou know'ſt not, weele aske of them that know,
               His mother and himſelfe ſhall end this ſtrife:
               And as they ſay, ſo ſhall thy liuing paſte.
            
            
               Robert.
               My Lord, herein I challenge you of wrong,
               To giue away my right, and put the doome
               Vnto themſelues. Can there be likelihood
               That ſhee will looſe?
               Or he will giue the liuing from himſelfe?
               It may not be my Lord. Why ſhould it be?
            
            
               Iohn.
               Lords, keep him back, & let him heare the doom.
               
                  Eſſex, firſt aske the Mother thrice who was his Sire?
            
            
               Eſſex.
               Lady Margaret, widow of Fauconbridge,
               
               Who was Father to thy Sonne Philip?
               
            
            
               Mother.
               Pleaſe it your Maieſty, Sir Rob. Fauconbridge.
               
            
            
               Rob.
               This is right, aske my fellow there if I be a thiefe.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Aske Philip whoſe ſonne he is.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               
                  Philip, who was thy Father?
            
            
               Philip.
               Mas my Lord, and that's a queſtion: and you had not taken ſome paines with her before, I ſhould haue deſired you to aske my Mother.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Say, who was thy Father?
            
            
               Philip.
               Faith (my Lord) to anſwere you, ſure hee is my father that was neereſt my mother when I was begotten, and him I thinke to be Sir Robert Fauconbridge.
               
            
            
               Iohn.
               
                  Eſſex, for faſhions ſake demand agen,
               And ſo an end to this contention.
            
            
               Robert.
               Was euer man thus wrongd as Robert is?
            
            
               Eſſex.
               
                  Philip ſpeake I ſay, who was thy father?
            
            
               Iohn.
               Young man how now, what art thou in a trance?
            
            
               Elianor.
               
                  Philip awake, the man is in a dreame.
            
            
               Philip.
               Philippus atauis aedite Regibus.
               What ſaiſt thou Philip, ſprung of auncient Kings?
               Quo me rapit tempeſtas?
               
                  What winde of honour blowes this furie forth?
               Or whence proceede theſe fumes of Maieſtie?
               Me thinkes I heare a hollow Eccho ſound,
               That Philip is the ſonne vnto a King:
               The whiſtling leaues vpon the trembling trees,
               Whiſtle in conſort I am Richards ſonne:
               The bubling murmur of the waters fall,
               Records Philippus Regius filius:
               
               Birds in their flight make muſicke with their wings,
               Filling the aire with glorie of my birth:
               Birds, bubbles, leaues, and mountaines, Eccho, all
               Ring in mine eares, that I am Richards ſonne.
               Fond man! ah whither art thou carried?
               How are thy thoughts ywrapt in Honors heauen?
               Forgetfull what thou art, and whence thou camſt.
               Thy Fathers land cannot maintaine theſe thoughts,
               Theſe thoughts are farre vnfitting Fauconbridge:
               
               And well they may; for why this mounting minde
               Doth ſoare too high to ſtoupe to Fauconbridge.
               
               Why how now? knoweſt thou where thou art?
               And knoweſt thou who expects thine anſwer here?
               Wilt thou vpon a franticke madding vaine
               Goe looſe thy land, and ſay thy ſelfe baſe borne?
               No, keepe thy land, though Richard were thy Sire,
               What ere thou thinkſt, ſay thou art Fauconbridge.
               
            
            
               Iohn.
               Speake man, be ſodaine, who thy Father was.
            
            
               Philip.
               Pleaſe it your Maieſtie, Sir Robert
               
               
                  Philip, that Fauconbridge cleaues to thy iawes:
               It will not out, I cannot for my life
               Say I am ſonne vnto a Fauconbridge.
               
               Let land and liuing goe, tis Honors fire
               That makes me ſweare King Richard was my Sire.
               Baſe to a King addes title of more State,
               Than Knights begotten, though legittimate.
               Pleaſe it your Grace, I am King Richards Sonne.
            
            
               Robert
               
                  Robert reuiue thy heart, let ſorrow die,
               His faltring tongue not ſuffers him to lie.
            
            
               
               Mo.
               What head-ſtrong furie doth enchant my ſonne?
            
            
               Philip
               
                  Philip cannot repent, for he hath done.
            
            
               Iohn
               Then Philip blame not me, thy ſelfe haſt loſt
               By wilfulneſſe, thy liuing and thy land.
               
                  Robert, thou art the heire of Fauconbridge,
               
               God giue thee ioy, greater than thy deſert.
            
            
               Q. Elia.
               Why how now Philip, giue away thine owne?
            
            
               Ph.
               Madame, I am bold to make my ſelf your nephew,
               The pooreſt kinſman that your Highneſſe hath:
               And with this Prouerb gin the world anew,
               Help hands, I haue no lands, Honor is my deſire;
               Let Philip liue to ſhew himſelfe worthy ſo great a Sire.
            
            
               Eli.
               
                  Philip, I think thou knewſt thy Grandams minde:
               But cheere thee boy, I will not ſee thee want
               As long as Elinor hath foote of land;
               Henceforth thou ſhalt be taken for my ſonne,
               And waite on me and on thine vncle heere,
               Who ſhall giue honour to thy noble mind.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Philip kneele downe, that thou maiſt throughly know
               How much thy reſolution pleaſeth vs,
               Riſe vp Sir Richard Plantaginet king Richards Sonne.
            
            
               Philip
               Grant heauens that Philip once may ſhew himſelfe
               Worthy the honour of Plantaginet,
               
               Or baſeſt glorie of a Baſtards name.
            
            
               Iohn
               Now Gentlemen, we will away to France,
               
               To checke the pride of Arthur and his mates:
               
                  Eſſex, thou ſhalt be Ruler of my Realme,
               And toward the maine charges of my warres,
               Ile ceaze the laſic Abbey lubbers lands
               Into my hands to pay my men of warre.
               The Pope and Popelings ſhall not greaſe themſelues
               With gold and groates, that are the ſouldiers due.
               Thus forward Lords, let our commaund be done,
               And march we forward mightily to France.
               
            
            Exeunt.
            Manet Philip and his Mother.
            
               Philip
               Madame, I beſeech you deigne me ſo much leaſure as the hearing of a matter that I lōg to impart to you.
            
            
               
               Mother.
               What's the matter Philip? I thinke your ſuit in ſecret, tends to ſome money matter, which you ſuppoſe burnes in the bottome of my cheſt.
            
            
               Phil.
               No Madam, it is no ſuch ſuit as to beg or borrow,
               But ſuch a ſuit, as might ſome other grant,
               I would not now haue troubled you withall.
            
            
               Mother.
               A Gods name let vs heare it.
            
            
               Phil.
               Then Madam thus, your Ladiſhip ſees well,
               How that my ſcandall growes by meanes of you,
               In that report hath rumord vp and downe,
               I am a baſtard, and no Fauconbridge.
               
               This groſſe attaint ſo tilteth in my thoughts,
               Maintaining combat to abridge mine eaſe,
               That field and towne, and company alone,
               What ſo I doe, or whereſoere I am,
               I cannot chaſe the ſlaunder from my thoughts.
               If it be true, reſolue me of my fire,
               For pardon Madam, if I thinke amiſſe.
               Be Philip Philip, and no Fauconbridge,
               
               His father doubtleſſe was as braue a man.
               To you on knees, as ſometime Phaeton,
               
               Miſtruſting ſielly Merop for his ſire,
               Straining a little baſhfull modeſtie,
               I beg ſome inſtance whence I am extraught.
            
            
               Moth.
               Yet more adoe to haſte me to my graue,
               And wilt thou too become a mothers croſſe?
               Muſt I accuſe my ſelfe to cloſe with you?
               Slaunder my ſelfe, to quiet your affects?
               Thou moou'ſt me Philip with this idle talke,
               Which I remit, in hope this mood will die.
            
            
               Phil.
               Nay Lady mother, heare me further yet,
               For ſtrong conceit driues dutie hence awhile:
               Your husband Fauconbridge was father to that ſonne,
               That carries markes of Nature like the fire,
               The ſonne that blotteth you with wedlockes breach,
               And holds my right, as lineall in deſcent
               From him whoſe forme was figured in his face▪
               
               
                  Can Nature ſo diſſemble in her frame,
               To make the one ſo like as like may be,
               And in the other print no character
               To challenge any marke of true deſcent?
               My brothers mind is baſe, and too too dull,
               To mount where Philip lodgeth his affects,
               And his externall graces that you viewe,
               (Though I report it) counterpoiſe not mine:
               His conſtitution plaine debilitie,
               Requires the chaire, and mine the ſeat of ſteele.
               Nay, what is he, or what am I to him?
               When any one that knoweth how to carpe,
               Will ſcarcely iudge vs both one countrey borne.
               This Madam, this, hath droue me from my ſelfe:
               And here by heauens eternall lampes I ſweare,
               As curſed Nero with his mother did,
               So I with you, if you reſolue me not.
            
            
               Moth.
               Let mothers teares quench out thy angers fire,
               And vrge no further what thou doeſt require.
            
            
               Phil.
               Let ſonnes intreatie ſway the mother now,
               Or elſe ſhee dies: Ile not infringe my vow.
            
            
               Moth.
               Vnhappy taske: muſt I recount my ſhame,
               Blab my miſdeeds, or by concealing die?
               Some power ſtrike me ſpeechleſſe for a time,
               Or take from him a while his hearings vſe.
               Why wiſh I ſo, vnhappy as I am?
               The fault is mine, and he the faultie fruit,
               I bluſh, I faint, oh would I might be mute.
            
            
               Phil.
               Mother be briefe, I long to know my name.
            
            
               Moth.
               And longing die, to ſhroud thy mothers ſhame.
            
            
               Phil.
               Come Madame come, you need not be ſo loath,
               The ſhame is ſhared equall twixt vs both.
               Iſt not a ſlackeneſſe in me, worthy blame,
               To be ſo old, and cannot write my name.
               Good mother reſolue me.
            
            
               Moth.
               Then Philip heare thy fortune, and my griefe,
               My honours loſſe by purchaſſe of thy ſelfe,
               
                  My ſhame, thy name, and husbands ſecret wrong,
               All maimd and ſtaind by youths vnruly ſway.
               And when thou know'ſt from whence thou art extraught,
               Or if thou knew'ſt what ſuites, what threats, what feares,
               To mooue by loue, or maſſacre by death.
               To yeeld with loue, or end by loues contempt.
               The mightineſſe of him that courted me,
               Who tempered terror with his wanton talke,
               That ſomething may extenuate the guilt.
               But let it not aduantage me ſo much:
               Vpbraid me rather with the Romane dame,
               That ſhed her blood to waſh away her ſhame.
               Why ſtand I to expoſtulate the crime
               With pro & contra, now the deed is done?
               When to conclude two words may tell the tale,
               That Philips father was a princes ſonne,
               Rich Englands rule, worlds onely terror he,
               For honours loſſe left me with child of thee:
               Whoſe ſonne thou art, then pardon me the rather,
               For faire King Richard was thy noble father.
            
            
               Phil.
               Then Robin Fauconbridge I wiſh thee ioy,
               My ſire a king, and I a landleſſe boy.
               Gods lady mother, the world is in my debt,
               There's ſomething owing to Plantaginet.
               
               I marry ſir, let me alone for game,
               Ile act ſome wonders now I know my name.
               By bleſſed Mary. Ile not ſell that pride
               For Englands wealth, and all the world beſide.
               Sit faſt the proudeſt of my fathers foes,
               Away good mother, there the comfort goes.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Philip the French King, and Lewis, Limoges, Conſtance, and her ſonne Arthur.
            
            
               King.
               Now gin we broach the title of thy claime,
               Young Arthur in the Albion territories,
               Skaring proud Angiers with a puiſſant ſiege:
               
                  Braue Austria, cauſe of Cordelions death,
               Is alſo come to aide thee in thy warres;
               And all our Forces ioyne for Arthurs right.
               And, but for cauſes of great conſequence,
               Pleading delay till newes from England come,
               Twice ſhould not Titan hide him in the Weſt,
               To coole the f
                     •
                  t-locks of his wearie teame,
               Till I had with an vnreſiſted ſhocke
               Controld the mannage of prowd Angiers walls,
               Or made a forfet of my fame to Chaunce.
            
            
               Conſt.
               May be that Iohn in conſcience or in feare
               To offer wrong where you impugne the ill,
               Will ſend ſuch calme conditions backe to Fraunce,
               
               As ſhall rebate the edge of fearefull warres:
               If ſo, forbearance is a deed, well done.
            
            
               Arth.
               Ah mother, poſſeſſion of a Crowne is much,
               And Iohn as I haue heard reported of,
               For preſent vantage would aduenture farre.
               The world can witneſſe, in his Brothers time,
               He tooke vpon him rule, and almoſt raigne;
               Then muſt it follow as a doubtfull point,
               That hee'l reſigne the rule vnto his Nephew.
               I rather thinke the menace of the world
               Sounds in his eares, as threats of no eſteeme,
               And ſooner would he ſcorne Europa's power,
               Than looſe the ſmalleſt title he enioyes;
               For queſtionleſſe he is an Engliſhman.
            
            
               Lewis.
               Why are the Engliſh peereleſſe in compare?
               Braue Caualiers as ere that Iſland bred,
               Haue liu'd and di'd, and dar'd, and done enough,
               Yet neuer grac'd their countrey for the cauſe:
               England is England, yeelding good and bad,
               And Iohn of England is as other Iohns.
               
               Truſt me yong Arthur, if thou like my reed,
               Praiſe thou the French that helpe thee in this need.
            
            
               Lymog.
               The Engliſhman hath little cauſe I trowe,
               To ſpend good ſpeaches on ſo proud a foe.
               
                  Why Arthur here's his ſpoyle that now is gone,
               Who when he liu'd outrou'd his brother Iohn:
               
               But haſtie curres that lie ſo long to catch,
               Come halting home, and meete their ouer-match.
               But newes comes now, here's the Embaſſadour.
            
            Enter Chattilion.
            
               K. Phil.
               And in good time, welcome my Lord Chattillion:
               
               What newes? will Iohn accord to our command?
            
            
               Chat.
               Be I not briefe to tell your Highneſſe all,
               He will approach to interrupt my tale:
               For one ſelfe bottome brought vs both to France.
               He on his part will trie the chance of warre,
               And if his words inferre aſſured truth,
               Will looſe himſelfe, and all his followers,
               Ere yeeld vnto the leaſt of your demands.
               The Mother Queene ſhee taketh on amaine
               Gainſt Lady Constance, counting her the cauſe
               That doth effect this claime to Albion,
               Coniuring Arthur with a grandames care,
               To leaue his Mother; willing him ſubmit
               His ſtate to Iohn, and her protection,
               Who (as ſhee ſaith) are ſtudious for his good.
               More circumſtance the ſeaſon intercepts:
               This is the ſumme, which briefly I haue ſhowne.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               This bitter wind muſt nip ſome-bodies ſpring:
               Sodaine and briefe, why ſo, tis harueſt weather.
               But ſay Chattilion, what perſons of account are with him?
            
            
               Chat.
               Of England, Earle Pembrooke and Salisburie,
               
               The onely noted men of any name.
               Next them, a baſtard of the Kings deceaſt,
               A hardie wild-head, tough and venturous,
               With many other men of high reſolue.
               Then is there with them Elinor Mother Queene,
               And Blanch her Neece, daughter to the King of Spaine:
               Theſe are the prime birds of this hot aduenture.
            
            Enter Iohn and his followers, Queene, Baſtard, Earles, &c.
            
               K. Phil.
               Me ſeemeth Iohn, an ouer-daring ſpirit
               
                  Effects ſome frenſie in thy raſh approach,
               Treading my Confines with thy armed troupes.
               I rather lookt for ſome ſubmiſſe reply
               Touching the claime thy Nephew Arthur makes
               To that which thou vniuſtly doſt vſurpe.
            
            
               K. Iohn
               For that Chattilion can diſcharge you all,
               I liſt not pleade my Title with my tongue.
               Nor came I hither with intent of wrong
               To France or thee, or any right of thine;
               But in defence and purchaſe of my right,
               The towne of Angiers: which thou doſt begirt
               In the behalfe of Lady Constance ſonne,
               Whereto nor he nor ſhe can lay iuſt claime.
            
            
               Constance
               Yes (falſe intruder) if that iuſt be iuſt,
               And head-ſtrong vſurpation put apart,
               
                  Arthur my Sonne, heire to thy elder brother,
               Without ambiguous ſhadow of diſcent,
               Is Soueraigne to the ſubſtance thou withholdſt.
            
            
               Q. Elinor
               Miſgouernd goſſip, ſtaine to this reſort,
               Occaſion of theſe vndecided iarres,
               I ſay (that know) to checke thy vaine ſuppoſe,
               Thy ſonne hath naught to do with that he claimes.
               For proofe whereof, I can inferre a Will,
               That barres the way he vrgeth by diſcent.
            
            
               Con.
               A Will indeed, a crabbed womans will,
               Wherein the diuell is an ouerſeer,
               And prowd dame Elinor ſole Executreſſe:
               More wills than ſo, on perill of my ſoule,
               Were neuer made to hinder Arthurs right.
            
            
               Arthur
               But ſay there was, as ſure there can be none,
               The Law intends ſuch teſtaments as void,
               Where right diſcent can no way be impeacht.
            
            
               Q. Elinor
               Peace Arthur peace, thy mother makes thee wings
               To ſoare with perill after Icarus,
               
               And truſt me yongling for the Fathers ſake,
               I pity much the hazard of thy youth.
            
            
               Constance
               Beſhrew you elſe how pittifull you are,
               
                  Ready to weepe to heare him aske his owne;
               Sorrow betide ſuch Grandames and ſuch griefe,
               That miniſter a poyſon for pure loue.
               But who ſo blind, as cannot ſee this beame,
               That you forſooth would keepe your couſin downe,
               For feare his mother ſhould be vs'd too well?
               I there's the griefe, confuſion catch the braine,
               That hammers ſhiftes to ſtop a Princes raigne.
            
            
               Q. Elia.
               Impatient, franticke, common ſlaunderer,
               Immodeſt dame, vnnurtur'd quarreller,
               I tell thee I, not enuie to thy ſonne,
               But iuſtice makes me ſpeake as I haue done.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               But here's no proofe that ſhews your ſon a king.
            
            
               K.I.
               What wants, my ſword ſhal more at large ſet down
            
            
               Lew.
               But that may breake before the truth be known.
            
            
               Baſt.
               Then this may hold till all his tight be ſhowne.
            
            
               Lym.
               Good words ſir ſauce, your betters are in place.
            
            
               Baſt.
               Not you ſir doughtie, with your Lyons caſe.
            
            
               Blanch.
               Ah ioy betide his ſoule, to whom that ſpoyle belong'd:
               Ah Richard, how thy glory here is wrong'd.
            
            
               Lym.
               Me thinks that Richards pride & Richards fall,
               Should be a preſident t'affright you all.
            
            
               Baſt.
               What words are theſe? how do my ſinews ſhake?
               My fathers foe clad in my fathers ſpoyle,
               A thouſand furies kindle with reuenge,
               This heart that choller keepes a conſiſtori
                     •
                  ,
               Searing my inwards with a brand of hate:
               How doth Alecto whiſper in mine eares?
               Delay not Philip, kill the villaine ſtraight,
               Diſrobe him of the matchleſſe monument
               Thy fathers triumph ore the Sauages,
               Baſe heardgroom, coward peaſant, worſe than a threſhing ſlaue,
               What mak'ſt thou with the Trophie of a king?
               Sham'ſt thou not coyſtrell, loathſome dunghill ſwad,
               To grace thy carkaſſe with an ornament
               Too pretious for a Monarkes couerture?
               
                  Scarce can I temper due obedience
               Vnto the preſence of my Soueraigne,
               From acting outrage on this trunke of hate:
               But arme thee traytor, wronger of renowne,
               For by his ſoule I ſweare, my Fathers ſoule,
               Twiſe will I not reuiew the mornings riſe,
               Till I haue torne that Trophie from thy backe,
               And ſplit thy heart for wearing it ſo long.
               
                  Philip hath ſworne, and if it be not done,
               Let not the world repute me Richards ſonne.
            
            
               Lym.
               Nay ſoft ſir baſtard, hearts are not ſplit ſo ſoone,
               Let them reioyce that at the end doe win:
               And take this leſſon at thy foe-mans hand,
               Pawne not thy life to get thy Fathers skin.
            
            
               Blan.
               Wel may the world ſpeake of his knightly valor,
               That wins this hide to weare a Ladies fauour.
            
            
               Baſt.
               Ill may I thriue, and nothing brooke with me,
               If ſhortly I preſent it not to thee.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               Lordings forbeare, for time is comming faſt,
               That deeds may trie what words can not determine,
               And to the purpoſe for the cauſe you come.
               Me ſeemes you ſet right in chaunce of warre,
               Yeelding no other reaſons for your claime,
               But ſo and ſo, becauſe it ſhall be ſo.
               So wrong ſhall be ſubornd by truſt of ſtrength:
               A tyrants practiſe to inueſt himſelfe,
               Where weake reſiſtance giueth wrong the way.
               To checke the which, in holy lawfull armes,
               I, in the right of Arthur, Geffreys ſonne,
               Am come before this city of Angiers,
               To barre all other falſe ſuppoſed claime,
               From whence, or howſoere the error ſprings.
               And in his quarrell on my princely word,
               Ile fight it out vnto the lateſt man.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Know King of France, I will not be commanded
               By any power or prince in Chriſtendome,
               To yeeld an inſtance how I hold mine owne,
               
                  More than to anſwere, that mine owne is mine,
               But wilt thou ſee me parley with the Towne,
               And heare them offer me allegeance,
               Fealtie and homage, as true liege men ought.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               Summon them, I will not beleeue it till I ſee it, and when I ſee it, Ile ſoone change it.
            
            They ſummon the Towne, the Citizens appeare vpon the walls.
            
               K. Iohn
               You men of Angiors, and as I take it my loiall ſubiects, I haue ſummoned you to the walls: to diſpute on my right, were to thinke you doubtfull therein, which I am perſwaded you are not. In few words, our brothers ſonne, backt with the king of France, haue beleagred your towne vpon a falſe pretended title to the ſame: in defence wherof I your liege Lord haue brought our power to fence you from the Vſurper, to free your intended ſeruitude, and vtterly to ſupplant the foemen, to my right and your reſt. Say then, who keepe you the towne for?
            
            
               Citizen
               For our lawfull King.
            
            
               Iohn
               I was no leſſe perſwaded: then in Gods name open your gates, and let me enter.
            
            
               Citizen
               And it pleaſe your Highnes we comptroll not your title, neither will wee raſhly admit your entrance: if you be lawfull King, with all obedience we keep it to your vſe, if not King, our raſhnes to be impeached for yeelding, without more conſiderate triall: wee anſwere not as men lawleſſe, but to the behoofe of him that prooues lawfull.
            
            
               Iohn
               I ſhall not come in then?
            
            
               Citizen
               No my Lord, till we know more.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               Then heare me ſpeak in the behalfe of Arthur ſon of Geffrey, elder brother to Iohn, his title manifeſt, with out contradiction, to the crowne & kingdom of England, with Angiers, & diuers townes on this ſide the ſea: wil you acknowledge him your liege Lord, who ſpeaketh in my word, to entertain you with all fauors, as beſeemeth a King to his ſubiects, or a friend to his welwillers: or ſtand to the peril of your contēpt, whē his title is proued by the ſword.
            
            
               
               Citiz.
               We anſwer as before, till you haue proued one right, we acknowledge none right, he that tries himſelfe our Soueraigne; to him wil we remaine firme ſubiects, and for him, and in his right we hold our towne, as deſirous to know the truth, as loth to ſubſcribe before we know: more than this we cannot ſay, & more than this we dare not do.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               Then Iohn I defie thee, in the name and behalfe of Arthur Plantaginet, thy king and couſin, whoſe right and patrimony thou detaineſt, as I doubt not, ere the day end, in a ſet battel make thee confeſſe; whereunto, with a zeale to right, I challenge thee.
            
            
               K. Iohn.
               I accept thy challenge, and turne the defiance to thy throat.
            
            Excurſions. The Bastard chaſeth Lymoges the Auſtrich Duke, and maketh him leaue the Lyons skin.
            
               Baſt.
               And art thou gone misfortune haunt thy ſteps,
               And chill cold feare aſſaile thy times of reſt.
               
                  Morpheus leaue here thy ſilent Eban caue,
               Beſiege his thoughts with diſmall fantaſies,
               And ghaſtly obiects of pale threatning Mors.
               
               Affright him euery minute with ſtearne lookes,
               Let ſhadow temper terror in his thoughts,
               And let the terror make the coward mad,
               And in his madneſſe let him feare purſuit,
               And ſo in frenſie let the peaſant die.
               Here is the ranſome that allaies his rage,
               The firſt freehold that Richard left his ſonne:
               With which I ſhall ſurprize his liuing foes,
               As Hectors ſtatue did the fainting Greekes.
            
            Exit.
            Enter the Kings Heraulds with Trumpets to the wals of Angiers: they ſummon the Towne.
            
               Eng. Her.
               
                  Iohn by the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, Aniou, Toraine, &c. demandeth once againe of you his ſubiects of Angiers, if you wil quietly ſurrender vp the towne into his hands?
            
            
               
               Fr. Herold.
               
                  Philip by the grace of God King of France, demaundeth in the behalfe of Arthur Duke of Brittaine, if you will ſurrender vp the towne into his hands, to the vſe of the ſaid Arthur.
               
            
            
               Citizens.
               Herrolds go tell the two victorious Princes, that we the poore Inhabitants of Angiers, require a parley of their Maieſties.
            
            
               Herolds.
               We goe.
            
            Enter the Kings, Queene Elianor, Blanch, Baſtard, Lymoges, Lewis, Caſtilean, Pembrooke, Salisbury, Conſtance, and Arthur Duke of Brittaine.
            
               Iohn.
               Herold, what anſwer doe the Townſmen ſend?
            
            
               Philip.
               Will Angiers yeeld to Philip King of France?
            
            
               Eng. Her.
               The Townſmen on the wals accept your Grace.
            
            
               Fr. Her.
               And craue a parley of your Maieſty.
            
            
               Iohn.
               You cittizens of Angiers, haue your eyes
               Beheld the ſlaughter that our Engliſh bowes
               Haue made vpon the coward fraudfull French?
               And haue you wiſely pondred therewithall
               Your gaine in yeelding to the Engliſh King?
            
            
               Phil.
               Their loſſe in yeelding to the Engliſh King.
               But Iohn, they ſaw from out their higheſt towers
               The Cheualiers of France and croſſe-bow-ſhot
               Make lanes of ſlaughterd bodies through thine hoaſt,
               And are reſolu'd to yeeld to Arthurs right.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Why Philip, though thou brauſt it fore the wals,
               Thy conſcience knowes that Iohn hath wonne the field.
            
            
               Phi.
               What ere my conſcience knowes, thy army feeles
               That Philip had the better of the day.
            
            
               Baſtard.
               
                  Philip indeed hath got the Lions caſe,
               Which here he holds to Lymoges diſgrace.
               Baſe Duke to flie and leaue ſuch ſpoiles behind:
               But this thou knewſt of force to make me ſtay.
               It farde with thee as with the mariner,
               Spying the hugie Whale, whoſe monſtrous bulke
               Doth beare the waues like mountaines fore the wind,
               
                  That throwes out emptie veſſels, ſo to ſtay
               His fury, while the ſhip doth ſayle away.
               
                  Philip t'is thine: and fore this princely preſence,
               Madame, I humbly lay it at your feete,
               Being the firſt aduenture I atchieu'd,
               And firſt exploite your Grace did me enioyne:
               Yet many more I long to be enioyn'd.
            
            
               Blanch.
               
                  Philip I take it, and I thee command
               To weare the ſame as earſt thy father did:
               Therewith receiue this fauour at my hands,
               T'incourage thee to follow Richards fame.
            
            
               Arth.
               Ye Cittizens of Angiers are ye mute?
               
                  Arthur or Iohn, ſay which ſhall be your King?
            
            
               Citizen.
               We care not which, if once we knew the right
               But till we know, we will not yeeld our right.
            
            
               Baſt.
               Might Philip counſell two ſo mightie Kings,
               As are the Kings of England and of France,
               He would aduiſe your Graces to vnite
               And knit your forces gainſt theſe cittizens,
               Pulling their battred wals about their eares.
               The Towne once wonne, then ſtriue about the claime,
               For they are minded to delude you both.
            
            
               Citti.
               Kings, Princes, Lords, & Knights aſſembled here,
               The Cittizens of Angiers all by me
               Entreate your Maieſtie to heare them ſpeake:
               And as you like the motion they ſhall make,
               So to account and follow their aduice.
            
            
               Iohn. Phil.
               Speake on, we giue thee leaue.
            
            
               Cittiz.
               Then thus: whereas the young and luſty knight▪
               
               Incites you on to knit your kingly ſtrengths:
               The motion cannot chuſe but pleaſe the good,
               And ſuch as loue the quiet of the State.
               But how my Lords, how ſhold your ſtrengths be knit?
               Not to oppreſſe your ſubiects and your friends,
               And fill the world with brawles and mutinies:
               But vnto peace your forces ſhould be knit
               To liue in Princely league and amitie:
               
                  Doe this, the gates of Angiers ſhall giue way,
               And ſtand wide open to your hearts content.
               To make this peace a laſting bond of loue,
               Remaines one onely honourable meanes,
               Which by your pardon I ſhall here diſplay.
               
                  Lewis the Dolphin and the heire of France,
               A man of noted valour through the world,
               Is yet vnmarried: let him take to wife
               The beauteous daughter of the king of Spaine,
               Neece to K. Iohn, the louely Lady Blanch,
               
               Begotten on his ſiſter Elianor.
               
               With her in marriage will her vnkle giue
               Caſtles and towers, as fitteth ſuch a match.
               The Kings thus ioynd in league of perfect loue,
               They may ſo deale with Arthur Duke of Britaine,
               Who is but young, and yet vnmeet to raigne,
               As he ſhall ſtand contented euery way.
               Thus haue I boldly (for the common good)
               Deliuered what the Citie gaue in charge.
               And as vpon conditions you agree,
               So ſhall we ſtand content to yeeld the Towne.
            
            
               Arth.
               A proper peace, if ſuch a motion hold;
               Theſe Kings beare armes for me, and for my right,
               And they ſhall ſhare my lands to make them friends.
            
            
               Q. Elian.
               Sonne Iohn, follow this motion, as thou loueſt thy mother.
               Make league with Philip, yeeld to any thing:
               
                  Lewis ſhall haue my neece, and then be ſure
               
                  Arthur ſhall haue ſmall ſuccour out of France.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Brother of France, you heare the Citizens:
               Then tell me, how you meane to deale herein.
            
            
               Const.
               Why Iohn, what canſt thou giue vnto thy Neece,
               That haſt no foote of land, but Arthurs right?
            
            
               Lew.
               Bir lady Citizens, I like your choyce,
               A louely damſell is the Lady Blanch,
               
               Worthy the heire of Europe for her pheere.
            
            
               Conſt.
               What kings, why ſtand you gazing in a trance?
               
                  Why how now Lords? accurſed Cittizens
               To fill and tickle their ambitious eares,
               With hope of gaine, that ſprings from Arthurs loſſe.
               Some diſmall Planet at thy birth-day raign'd,
               For now I ſee the fall of all thy hopes.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               Ladie, and Duke of Brittaine, know you both,
               The King of France reſpects his honor more,
               Than to betray his friends and fauourers.
               Princeſſe of Spaine, could you affect my Sonne,
               If we vpon conditions could ageee?
            
            
               Baſt.
               Swounds Madam, take an Engliſh Gentleman?
               Slaue as I was, I thought to haue moou'd the match.
               Grandame you made me halfe a promiſe once,
               That Lady Blanch ſhould bring me wealth inough,
               And make me heire of ſtore of Engliſh land.
            
            
               Q. Elian.
               Peace Philip, I will looke thee out a wife,
               We muſt with policie compound this ſtrife.
            
            
               Baſtar.
               If Lewis get her, well, I ſay no more:
               But let the frollicke Frenchman take no ſcorne,
               If Philip front him with an Engliſh horne.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Ladie, what anſwer make you to the K. of France?
               Can you affect the Dolphin for your Lord?
            
            
               Blanch.
               I thanke the King that likes of me ſo well,
               To make me Bride vnto ſo great a Prince:
               But giue me leaue my Lord to pauſe on this,
               Leaſt beeing too too forward in the cauſe,
               It may be blemiſh to my modeſtie.
               
                  Q. Elinor. Sonne Iohn, and worthy Philip K. of France,
               Do you confer awhile about the Dower,
               And I will ſchoole my modeſt Neece ſo well,
               That ſhe ſhall yeeld as ſoone as you haue done.
            
            
               Conſtance.
               I, theres the wretch that brocheth all this il,
               Why flie I not vpon the Beldams face,
               And with my nayles pull forth her hatefull eyes.
            
            
               Arthur.
               Sweet mother ceaſe theſe haſtie madding fits:
               For my ſake, let my Grandam haue her will.
               O would ſhe with her hands pull forth my heart,
               
                  I could affoord it to appeaſe theſe broyles.
               But (mother) let vs wiſely winke at all,
               Leaſt farther harmes enſue our haſtie ſpeech.
            
            
               Phil.
               Brother of England, what dowrie wilt thou giue
               Vnto my ſonne in marriage with thy Neece?
            
            
               Iohn.
               Firſt Philip knowes her dowrie out of Spaine,
               To be ſo great as may content a King:
               But more to mend and amplifie the ſame,
               I giue in mor ey thirtie thouſand markes.
               For land I leaue it to thine owne demand.
            
            
               Phil.
               Then I demand Volqueſſon, Torain, Main,
               Poiters and Aniou, theſe fiue Prouinces,
               Which thou as King of England holdſt in France:
               Then ſhall our peace be ſoone concluded on.
            
            
               Baſt.
               No leſſe then fiue ſuch Prouinces at once?
            
            
               Iohn.
               Mother what ſhal I do? my brother got theſe lands
               With much effuſion of our Engliſh bloud:
               And ſhall I giue it all away at once?
            
            
               Q. Elin.
               
                  Iohn giue it him, ſo ſhalt thou liue in peace,
               And keepe the reſidue ſans ieopardie.
            
            
               Iohn.
               
                  Philip, bring foorth thy ſonne, here is my neece,
               And here in marriage I do giue with her
               From me and my ſucceſſors Engliſh Kings,
               Volqueſſon, Poiters, Aniou, Torain, Main,
               And thirtie thouſand markes of ſtipend coyne.
               Now cittizens, how like you of this match?
            
            
               Cittiz.
               We ioy to ſee ſo ſweete a peace begun.
            
            
               Lewis.
               
                  Lewis with Blanch ſhall euer liue content.
               But now King Iohn, what ſay you to the Duke?
               Father, ſpeake as you may in his behalfe.
            
            
               Phil.
               K. Iohn, be good vnto thy Nephew here,
               And giue him ſomewhat that ſhall pleaſe you beſt.
            
            
               Iohn.
               
                  Arthur, although thou troubleſt Englands peace
               Yet here I giue thee Brittaine for thine owne,
               Together with the Earledome of Richmont,
               And this rich cittie of Angiers withall,
            
            
               
               Q. Elian.
               And if thou ſeeke to pleaſe thine Vncle Iohn,
               
               Shalt ſee my ſonne how I will make of thee.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Now euery thing is ſorted to this end,
               Lets in, and there prepare the marriage rites,
               Which in S. Maries Chappell preſently
               Shall be performed ere this Preſence part.
            
            Exeunt.
            Manent Conſtance & Arthur.
            
               Art.
               Madam good cheere, theſe drouping languiſhments
               Adde no redreſſe to ſalue our awkward haps,
               If heauens haue concluded theſe euents,
               To ſmall auaile is bitter penſiueneſſe:
               Seaſons will change, and ſo our preſent greefe
               May change with them, and all to our releefe.
            
            
               Conſt.
               Ah boy, thy yeares I ſee are farre too greene
               To looke into the bottome of theſe cares.
               But I, who ſee the poyſe that weigheth downe
               Thy weale, my wiſh, and all the willing meanes
               Wherewith thy fortune and thy fame ſhould mount.
               What ioy, what eaſe, what reſt can lodge in me,
               With whom all hope and hap doe diſagree?
            
            
               Arth.
               Yet Ladies teares, and cares, and ſolemn ſhewes,
               Rather then helpes, heape vp more worke for woes.
            
            
               Conſt.
               If any power will heare a widowes plaint,
               That from a wounded ſoule implores reuenge;
               Send fell contagion to infect this clime,
               This curſed countrey, where the traitors breath,
               Whoſe periurie (as proud Briareus,)
               Beleaguers all the Skie with miſ-beleefe.
               He promiſt Arthur, and he ſware it too,
               To fence thy right, and check thy fo-mans pride:
               But now black-ſpotted Periure as he is,
               He takes a truce with Elnors damned brat,
               And marries Lewis to her louely Neece,
               Sharing thy fortune, and thy birth-dayes gift
               Betweene theſe louers: ill betide the match.
               And as they ſhoulder thee from out thine owne,
               And triumph in a widowes tearefu
                     •
                  l cares:
               
                  So heau'ns croſſe them with a thriftleſſe courſe,
               Is all the bloud yſpilt on either part,
               Cloſing the cranies of the thirſtie earth,
               Growne to a loue-game and a Bridall feaſt?
               And muſt thy birth-right bid the wedding banes?
               Poore helpeleſſe boy, hopeleſſe and helpleſſe too,
               To whom miſfortune ſeemes no yoake at all.
               Thy ſtay, thy ſtate, thy imminent miſhaps
               Woundeth thy mothers thoughts with feeling care,
               Why lookſt thou pale? the colour flies thy face:
               I trouble now the fountaine of thy youth,
               And make it muddie with my doles diſcourſe,
               Goe in with me, reply not louely boy,
               We muſt obſcure this mone with melodie,
               Leaſt worſer wrack enſue our male-content.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter the King of England, the King of France, Arthur, Baſtard, Lewis, Lymoges, Conſtance, Blanch, Chattillion, Pembrooke, Salisburie, and Elianor.
            
            
               Iohn.
               This is the day, the long-deſired day,
               Wherein the Realmes of England and of France
               Stand highly bleſſed in a laſting peace.
               Thrice happie is the Bridegroome and the Bride,
               From whoſe ſweet Bridall ſuch a concord ſprings,
               To make of mortall foes immortall friends.
            
            
               Conſt.
               Vngodly peace made by anothers warre.
            
            
               Phil.
               Vnhappie peace, that tyes thee from reuenge,
               Rouze thee Plantaginet, liue not to ſee
               The butcher of the great Plantaginet.
               
               Kings, Princes, and ye Peeres of either realmes,
               Pardon my raſhnes, and forgiue the zeale
               That carries me in furie to a deede
               Of high deſert, of honour, and of armes.
               A boone (O Kings) a boone doth Philip begge
               Proſtrate vpon his knee: which knee ſhall cleaue
               Vnto the ſuperficies of the earth,
               Till France and England grant this glorious boone.
            
            
               
               Iohn.
               Speake Philip, England grants thee thy requeſt.
            
            
               Phil.
               And France confirmes what ere is in his power.
            
            
               Bast.
               Then Duke ſit faſt, I leuell at thy head,
               Too baſe a ranſome for my fathers life.
               Princes, I craue the combate with the Duke
               That braues it in diſhonour of my ſire.
               Your words are paſt, nor can you now reuerſe
               The Princely promiſe that reuiues my ſoule,
               Whereat me thinkes I ſee his ſinewes ſhake:
               This is the boone (dread Lords) which granted once
               Or life or death are pleaſant to my ſoule;
               Since I ſhall liue and die in Richards right.
            
            
               Lym.
               Baſe baſtard, misbegotten of a King,
               To interrupt theſe holy nuptiall rites
               With brawles and tumults to a Dukes diſgrace;
               Let it ſuffice, I ſcorne to ioyne in fight,
               With one ſo farre vnequall to my ſelfe.
            
            
               Baſt.
               A fine excuſe, Kings if you will be Kings,
               Then keepe your words, and let vs combate it.
            
            
               Iohn.
               
                  Philip, we cannot force the Duke to fight,
               Beeing a ſubiect vnto neither Realme:
               But tell me Austria, if an Engliſh Duke
               Should dare thee thus, wouldſt thou accept the challenge?
            
            
               Lym.
               Elſe let the world account the Auſtrich Duke
               The greateſt coward liuing on the earth.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Then cheere thee Philip, Iohn wil keep his word,
               Kneele downe, in ſight of Philip King of France,
               And all theſe Princely Lords aſſembled here,
               I gird thee with the ſword of Normandie,
               And of that Land I doe inueſt thee Duke:
               So ſhalt thou be in liuing and in land
               Nothing inferiour vnto Auſtria.
            
            
               Lym.
               K. Iohn, I tell thee flatly to thy face,
               Thou wrong'ſt mine honour: and that thou mai'ſt ſee
               How much I ſcorne thy new made Duke and thee,
               I flatly ſay, I will not be compeld:
               And ſo farewell ſir Duke of lowe degree,
               
                  Ile finde a time to match you for this geare.
            
            Exit.
            
               Iohn.
               Stay Philip, let him goe, the honours thine.
            
            
               Baſt.
               I cannot liue vnleſſe his life be mine.
            
            
               Q. Elia.
               Thy forwardnes this day hath ioy'd my ſoule,
               And made me thinke my Richard liues in thee.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               Lordings let's in, and ſpend the wedding day
               In maskes and triumphs, letting quarrels ceaſe.
            
            Enter a Cardinall from Rome.
            
               Card.
               Stay king of France, I charge thee ioyn not hands
               With him that ſtands accurſt of God and men.
               Know Iohn, that I Pandulph Cardinall of Millaine, and Legate from the Sea of Rome, demand of thee in the name of our holy Father the Pope Innocent, why thou do'ſt (contrary to the lawes of our holy mother the Church, and our holy Father the Pope) diſturb the quiet of the Church, and diſanull the election of Stephen Langhton, whom his holineſſe hath elected Archbiſhop of Canterburie: this in his holineſſe name I demaund of thee?
            
            
               Ioh.
               And what haſt thou or the Pope thy maſter to do to demand of me, how I imploy mine own? Know ſir prieſt, as I honor the Church and holy Church-men, ſo I ſcorne to be ſubiect to the greateſt Prelate in the world. Tell thy maſter ſo from me, and ſay, Iohn of England ſaid it, that neuer an Italian Prieſt of them all, ſhal either haue tythe, tole, or polling peny out of England; but as I am King, ſo will I raigne next vnder God, ſupreame head both ouer ſpiritual and temporall: and he that contradicts me in this, Ile make him hop headleſſe.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               What K. Iohn, know you what you ſay, thus to blaſpheme againſt our holy father the Pope?
            
            
               Ioh.
               
                  Philip, though thou and all the Princes of Chriſtendome ſuffer themſelues to be abus'd by a Prelates ſlauery, my mind is not of ſuch baſe temper. If the Pope will bee king of England, let him win it with the ſword, I know no other title he can alleadge to mine inheritance.
            
            
               Card.
               
                  Iohn, this is thine anſwer?
            
            
               
               Iohn.
               What then?
            
            
               Card.
               Then I Pandulph of Padua, Legate from the Apoſtolike Sea, doe in the name of Saint Peter and his ſucceſſor our holy father Pope Innocent, pronounce thee accurſed, diſcharging euery of thy ſubiects of all dutie and fealtie that they doe owe to thee, and pardon and forgiueneſſe of ſinne to thoſe or them whatſoeuer, which ſhal carrie armes againſt thee, or murder thee: This I pronounce, and charge all good men to abhorre thee as an excommunicate perſon.
            
            
               Ioh.
               So ſir, the more the foxe is curs'd the better a fares: if God bleſſe me and my Land, let the Pope and his ſhauelings curſe and ſpare not.
            
            
               Card.
               Furthermore, I charge thee Philip K. of Fraunce, and all the kings and princes of Chriſtendome, to make warre vpon this miſcreant: and whereas thou haſt made a league with him, and confirmed it by oath, I doe in the name of our foreſaid father the Pope, acquit thee of that oath, as vnlawfull, beeing made with an hereticke; howe ſai'ſt thou Philip, do'ſt thou obey?
            
            
               Ioh.
               Brother of France, what ſay you to the Cardinall?
            
            
               Phil.
               I ſay, I am ſory for your Maieſtie, requeſting you to ſubmit your ſelfe to the Church of Rome.
            
            
               Ioh.
               And what ſay you to our league, if I do not ſubmit?
            
            
               Phil.
               What ſhould I ſay? I muſt obey the Pope.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Obey the Pope, and breake your oath to God?
            
            
               Phil.
               The Legate hath abſolu'd me of mine oath:
               Then yeeld to Rome, or I defie thee here.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Why Philip, I defie the Pope and thee,
               Falſe as thou art, and periur'd King of France,
               Vnworthy man to be accounted King.
               Giu'ſt thou thy ſword into a Prelates hands?
               
                  Pandulph, where I of Abbots, Monkes, and Friers
               Haue taken ſomewhat to maintaine my wars,
               Now will I take no more but all they haue.
               Ile rouze the lazie lubbers from their cels,
               And in deſpight Ile ſend them to the Popc.
               
                  Mother come you with me, and for the reſt
               That will not follow Iohn in this attempt,
               Confuſion light vpon their damned ſoules.
               Come Lords, fight for your K. that fighteth for your good
            
            
               Phil.
               And are they gone? Pandulph thy ſelfe ſhalt ſee
               How France will fight for Rome and Romiſh rites.
               Nobles to armes, let him not paſſe the ſeas,
               Let's take him captiue, and in triumph lead
               The K. of England to the gates of Rome.
               
                  Arthur beſtirre thee man, and thou ſhalt ſee
               What Philip K. of France will doe for thee.
            
            
               Blanch.
               And will your Grace vpon your wedding day
               Forſake your bride, and follow dreadfull drums?
               Nay, good my Lord, ſtay you at home with me.
            
            
               Lew.
               Sweet heart content thee, and wee ſhall agree.
            
            
               Phil.
               Follow my Lords, Lord Cardinall lead the way,
               Drums ſhalbe muſicke to this wedding day.
            
            Exeunt.
            Excurſions. The Baſtard purſues Auſtria, and kils him.
            
               Baſt.
               Thus hath K. Richards ſon performd his vowes,
               And offred Auſtria's blood for ſacrifice
               Vnto his fathers euerliuing ſoule.
               Braue Cordelion, now my heart doth ſay,
               I haue deſeru'd, though not to be thine heire,
               Yet as I am, thy baſe begotten ſonne,
               A name as pleaſing to thy Philips heart,
               As to be cald the Duke of Normandie.
               Lie there a prey to euery rau'ning fowle:
               And as my father triumpht in thy ſpoyles,
               And trode thine Enſignes vnderneath his feet,
               So doe I tread vpon thy curſed ſelfe,
               And leaue thy body to the fowles for food.
            
            Exit.
            Excurſions. Arthur, Conſtance, Lewis, hauing taken Q. Elianor priſoner.
            
            
               Const.
               Thus hath the God of kings with conquering arme
               
                  Diſpearſt the foes to true ſucceſſion,
               Proud, and diſturber of thy Countries peace,
               
                  Conſtance doth liue to tame thine inſolence,
               And on thy head will now auenged be
               For all the miſchiefs hatched in thy braine.
            
            
               Q. Elinor.
               Contemptuous Dame, vnreuerent Dutches thou,
               To braue ſo great a Queene as Elianor,
               
               Baſe ſcold, haſt thou forgot, that I was wife
               And mother to three mightie Engliſh Kings?
               I charge thee then, and you forſooth ſir boy,
               To ſet your Grandmother at libertie,
               And yeeld to Iohn your Vncle and your King.
            
            
               Conſt.
               T'is not thy words proud Queene ſhall carry it.
            
            
               Elin.
               Nor yet thy threates proud Dame ſhal daunt my mind.
            
            
               Arth.
               Sweete Grandam, and good mother leaue theſe braules.
            
            
               Elian.
               Ile find a time to triumph in thy fall.
            
            
               Conſt.
               My time is now to triumph in thy fall,
               And thou ſhalt know that Conſtance will triumph.
            
            
               Arthur.
               Good mother, weigh it is Queene Elinor,
               
               Though ſhe be captiue, vſe her like her ſelfe.
               Sweet Grandame beare with what my Mother ſayes,
               Your Highneſſe ſhall be vſed honourably.
            
            Enter a meſſenger.
            
               Meſſ.
               
                  Lewis my Lord, Duke Arthur, and the reſt,
               To armes in haſt, K. Iohn relyes his men,
               And ginnes the ſight afreſh: and ſweares withall
               To looſe his life, or ſet his mother free.
            
            
               Lewis.
               
                  Arthur away, t'is time to looke about.
            
            
               Eli.
               Why how now dame, what is your courage coold?
            
            
               Conſt.
               No Elinor my courage gathers ſtrength,
               And hopes to leade both Iohn and thee as ſlaues:
               And in that hope, I hale thee to the field.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               Excurſions. Elianor is reſcued by Iohn, and Arthur is taken priſoner. Exeunt. Sound victory.
            Enter Iohn, Elianor, and Arthur priſoner, Baſtard, Pembrooke, Salisbury, and Hubert de Burgh.
            
            
               Iohn
               Thus right triumphs, and Iohn triumphs in right:
               
                  Arth
                        •
                     r thou ſeeſt, Fraunce cannot bolſter thee:
               Thy mothers pride hath brought thee to this fall.
               But if at laſt nephew thou yeeld thy ſelfe
               Into the gardance of thine vncle Iohn,
               
               Thou ſhalt be vſed as becomes a Prince.
            
            
               Arthur
               Vncle, my grandame taught her nephew this,
               To beare captiuitie with patience.
               Might hath preuaild, not right, for I am King
               Of England, though thou weare the Diademe.
            
            
               Q. Elin.
               Sonne Iohn, ſoone ſhall wee teach him to forget
               Theſe prowd preſumptions, and to know himſelfe.
            
            
               Iohn
               Mother, he neuer will forget his claime,
               I would he liude not to remember it.
               But leauing this, we will to England now,
               And take ſome order with our Popelings there,
               That ſwell with pride and fat of lay mens lands.
               
                  Philip, I make thee chiefe in this affaire,
               Ranſacke the Abbeis, Cloyſters, Priories,
               Conuert their coine vnto my ſouldiers vſe:
               And whatſoere he be within my Land,
               That goes to Rome for iuſtice and for law,
               While he may haue his right within the Realme,
               Let him be iudgde a traitor to the State,
               And ſuffer as an enemy to England.
               
               Mother, wee leaue you here beyond the ſeas,
               As Regent of our Prouinces in France,
               
               While we to England take a ſpeedie courſe,
               And thanke our God that gaue vs victorie.
               
                  Hubert de Burgh take Arthur here to thee,
               
                  Be he thy priſoner: Hubert keepe him ſafe,
               For on his life doth hang thy Soueraignes Crowne,
               But in his death conſiſts thy Soueraignes bliſſe:
               Then Hubert, as thou ſhortly hearſt from me,
               So vſe the priſoner I haue giuen in charge.
            
            
               Hubert
               Frolicke yong prince, thogh I your keeper be,
               Yet ſhall your keeper liue at your command.
            
            
               Arthur
               As pleaſe my God, ſo ſhall become of me.
            
            
               Q. Elian.
               My ſonne, to England, I will ſee thee ſhipt,
               And pray to God to ſend thee ſafe aſhore.
            
            
               Bastard
               Now warres are done, I long to be at home,
               To diue into the Monks and Abbots bagges,
               To make ſome ſport among the ſmooth skind Nunnes,
               And keepe ſome reuell with the fanzen Friers.
            
            
               Iohn
               To England Lords, each looke vnto your charge,
               And arme your ſelues againſt the Roman pride.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter the King of France, Lewes his ſonne, Cardinall Pandolph Legate, and Constance.
            
               Philip
               What, euery man attacht with this miſhap?
               Why frowne you ſo, why droope ye Lords of France?
               
               Me thinkes it differs from a warrelike minde,
               To lowre it for a checke or two of Chaunce.
               Had Lymoges eſcapt the Baſtards ſpight,
               A little ſorrow might haue ſerude our loſſe.
               Braue Austria, heauen ioyes to haue thee there.
            
            
               Card.
               His ſoule is ſafe and free from Purgatorie▪
               
               Our holy Father hath diſpenſt his ſinnes,
               The bleſſed Saints haue heard our Oriſons,
               And all are mediators for his ſoule,
               And in the right of theſe moſt holy warres,
               His Holineſſe free pardon doth pronounce
               To all that follow you gainſt Engliſh heretikes,
               Who ſtand accurſed in our mother Church.
            
            Enter Conſtance alone.
            
               
               Philip.
               To aggrauate the meaſure of our greefe,
               All male-content comes Conſtance for her Sonne.
               Be breefe good Madame, for your face imports
               A tragicke tale behind thats yet vntold.
               Her paſſions ſtop the organ of her voyce,
               Deepe ſorrow throbbeth miſ-befalne euents,
               Out with it Ladie, that our Act may end
               A full Cataſtrophe of ſad laments.
            
            
               Conſtance.
               My tongue is tun'd to ſtorie forth miſhap:
               When did I breath to tell a pleaſing tale?
               Muſt Conſtance ſpeake? let teares preuent her talke:
               Muſt I diſcourſe? let Dido ſigh and ſay,
               Shee weepes againe to heare the wracke of Troy:
               Two words will ſerue, and then my tale is done:
               
                  Elnors proud brat hath rob'd me of my ſonne.
            
            
               Lewis.
               Haue patience Madame, this is chance of warre:
               He may be ranſom'd, we reuenge his wrong.
            
            
               Conſt.
               Be it ne'r ſo ſoone, I ſhall not liue ſo long.
            
            
               Phil.
               Deſpaire not yet, come Conſtance, go with me,
               Theſe clouds will fleet, the day will cleare againe.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               Card.
               Now Lewis, thy fortune buds with happy ſpring,
               Our holy Fathers prayers effecteth this.
               
                  Arthur is ſafe, let Iohn alone with him,
               Thy title next is fairſt to Englands Crowne:
               Now ſtirre thy father to begin with Iohn,
               
               The Pope ſayes I, and ſo is Albion thine.
            
            
               Lewis.
               Thanks my Lord Legat for your good conceit,
               T'is beſt we follow now the game is faire,
               My father wants to worke him your good words.
            
            
               Card.
               A few will ſerue to forward him in this,
               Thoſe ſhall not want: but let's about it then.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Philip leading a Friar, charging him ſhew where the Abbots gold lay.
            
               Phil.
               Come on you fat Franciſcan, dallie no longer, but ſhew me where the Abbots treaſure lies, or die.
            
            
               
               Frier.
               
                  Benedicamus Domini, was euer ſuch an iniurie▪
               
               Sweet S. Withold of thy lenitie, defend vs from extremitie,
               And heare vs for S. Charitie, oppreſſed with auſteritie.
               
                  In nomini Domini, make I my homily,
               Gentle gentilitie grieue not the Cleargie.
            
            
               Phil.
               Gray-gown'd good face, coniure ye,
               nere truſt me for a groat
               If this waſt girdle hang thee not
               that girdeth in thy coat.
               Now bald and barefoot Bungie birds,
               when vp the gallowes climing,
               Say Philip he had words enough,
               to put you downe with riming.
            
            
               Fr.
               O pardon, O parce, S. Francis for mercie,
               Shall ſhield thee from night-ſpels, and dreaming of diuels,
               If thou wilt forgiue me, and neuer more grieue me,
               With faſting and praying, and Haile Marie ſaying,
               From blacke Purgatorie, a penance right ſory:
               Frier Thomas will warme you,
               It ſhall neuer harme you.
            
            
               Phil.
               Come leaue off your rabble,
               Sirs, hang vp this lozell.
            
            
               2. Fr.
               
               For charitie I beg his life,
               Saint Francis chiefeſt Frier,
               The beſt in all our Couent ſir,
               to keepe a Vintners fire.
               O ſtrangle not the good old man,
               my hoſteſſe oldeſt gueſt,
               And I will bring you by and by
               vnto the Priors cheſt.
            
            
               Phil.
               I, ſaiſt thou ſo, & if thou wilt the Frier is at liberty,
               If not, as I am honeſt man, I hang you both for company.
               
                  Fr. Come hither, this is the cheſt, thogh ſimple to behold,
               That wanteth not a thouſand pound in ſiluer and in gold.
               My ſelf wil warrant ful ſo much, I know the Abbots ſtore,
               Ile pawn my life there is no leſſe, to haue what ere is more.
            
            
               Phil.
               I take thy word, the ouerplus vnto thy ſhare ſhal come,
               
                  But if there want of full ſo much, thy necke ſhall pay the ſumme.
               Breake vp the Coffer, Frier.
            
            
               Frier
               Oh I am vndone, faire Alice the Nunne
               Hath tooke vp her reſt in the Abbots cheſt.
               
                  Sancte benedicite, pardon my ſimplicitie.
               Fie Alice, confeſſion will not ſalue this tranſgreſſion.
            
            
               Philip
               What haue we here, a holy Nunne? ſo keepe me God in health.
               A ſmooth facde Nunne (ſor aught I know) is al the Abbots wealth.
               Is this the Nunries chaſtitie?
               Beſhrew me but I thinke
               They go as oft to venery as niggards to their drinke.
               Why paltry Frier and Pandar too, yee ſhameleſſe ſhauen crowne,
               Is this the cheſt that held a hoord,
               at leaſt a thouſand pound?
               And is the hoord a holy whore?
               well, be the hangman nimble,
               Hee'l take the paine to pay you home,
               and teach you to diſſemble.
               
                  Nunne O ſpare the Frier Anthony,
               
               a better neuer was
               To ſing a Dirige ſolemnely,
               or reade a morning maſſe.
               If money be the meanes of this,
               I know an ancient Nunne,
               That hath a hoord theſe ſeuen yeeres,
               did neuer ſee the ſunne;
               And that is yours, and what is ours,
               ſo fauour now be ſhowne,
               You ſhall commaund as commonly,
               as if it were your owne.
            
            
               Frier
               Your honour excepted.
            
            
               Nunne
               I Thomas, I meane ſo.
            
            
               Philip
               From all ſaue from Friers.
            
            
               
               Nunne
               Good ſir, doe not thinke ſo.
            
            
               Philip
               I thinke and ſee ſo:
               why how camſt thou here?
            
            
               Frier
               To hide her from lay men.
            
            
               Nunne
               Tis true ſir, for feare.
            
            
               Philip
               For feare of the laitie: a pitifull dred
               When a Nunne flies for ſuccour to a fat Friers bed.
               But now for your ranſome my cloyſter-bred conney,
               To the cheſt that you ſpeake of where lies ſo much mony.
            
            
               Nun
               Faire ſir, within this preſſe, of plate and mony is
               The valew of a thouſand markes, and other thing by gis.
               Let vs alone, and take it all, tis yours ſir, now you know it.
            
            
               Phi.
               Come on ſir Frier, picke the locke, this geere doth cotton hanſome,
               That couetouſneſſe ſo cunningly muſt pay the lechers ranſome.
               What is in the hoord?
            
            
               Frier
               Frier Laurence my Lord, now holy water helpe vs,
               Some witch or ſome diuell is ſent to delude vs:
               
                  Haud credo Laurentius, that thou ſhouldſt be pend thus
               In the preſſe of a Nunne we are all vndone,
               And brought to diſcredence if thou be Frier Laurence,
               
            
            
               Frier
               
                   Amor vincit omnia, ſo Cato affirmeth,
               And therefore a Frier whoſe fancie ſoone burneth,
               Becauſe he is mortall and made of mould,
               He omits what he ought, and doth more than he ſhould.
            
            
               Philip
               How goes this geere? the Friers cheſt filld with
               a fauſen Nunne.
               The Nunne againe lockes Frier vp,
               to keepe him from the Sunne.
               Belike the preſſe is Purgatorie,
               or penance paſſing grieuous:
               The Friers cheſt a hell for Nunnes!
               how doe theſe dolts deceiue vs?
               Is this the labour of their liues, to feede and liue at eaſe?
               To reuell ſo laſciuiouſly as often as they pleaſe.
               Ile mend the fault or fault my aime,
               if I doe miſſe amending,
               
                  Tis better burne the Cloyſters downe,
               than leaue them for offending.
               But holy you, to you I ſpeake,
               to you religious diuell,
               Is this the preſſe that holds the ſumme,
               to quit you for your euill?
            
            
               Nun.
               I crie peccaui, parce me,
               
               good ſir I was beguil'd.
            
            
               Fr.
               Abſolue ſir for charitie,
               ſhee would bee reconcil'd.
            
            
               Phil.
               And ſo I ſhall, ſirs bind them faſt,
               This is their abſolution,
               goe hang them vp for hurting them,
               Haſte them to execution.
            
            
               Fr. Laurence.
               O tempus edax rerum,
               Giue children bookes they teare them.
               
                  O vanitas vanitatis, in this waning aetatis,
               
               At threeſcore welneere, to goe to this geere,
               To my conſcience a clog, to die like a dog.
               Exaudi me Domine, ſiuis me parce
               Dabo pecuniam, ſi habeo veniam.
               To goe and fetch it, I will diſpatch it,
               A hundred pound ſterling, for my liues ſparing.
            
            Enter Peter a Prophet, with people.
            
               Pet.
               Hoe, who is here? S. Francis be your ſpeed,
               Come in my flocke, and follow me,
               your fortunes I will reed.
               Come hither boy, goe get thee home,
               and clime not ouer hie,
               For from aloft thy fortune ſtands, in hazard thou ſhalt die.
            
            
               Boy.
               God be with you Peter, I pray you come to our houſe a Sunday.
            
            
               Pet.
               My boy ſhew me thy hand, bleſſe thee my boy,
               For in thy palme I ſee a many troubles are ybent to dwel,
               But thou ſhalt ſcape them all, and doe full well.
            
            
               
               Boy
               I thanke you Peter, theres a cheeſe for your labor: my ſiſter prayes yee to come home, and tell her how many husbands ſhe ſhall haue, and ſhee'l giue you a rib of bacon.
            
            
               Peter
               My maſters, ſtay at the townes end for me, Ile come to you all anone: I muſt diſpatch ſome buſines with a Frier, and then Ile reade your fortunes.
            
            
               Philip
               How now, a prophet! ſir prophet whence are ye?
            
            
               Peter
               I am of the world and in the world, but liue not as others, by the world: what I am I know, and what thou wilt be I know. If thou knoweſt me now, be anſwered: if not, enquire no more what I am.
            
            
               Phil.
               Sir, I know you will be a diſſembling knaue, that deludes the people with blinde prophecies: you are hee I look for, you ſhal away with me: bring away all the rable, and you Frier Laurence, remember your raunſome a hundred pound, and a pardon for your ſelfe, and the reſt; come on ſir prophet, you ſhall with me, to receiue a prophets rewarde.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Hubert de Burgh with three men.
            
               Hubert
               My maſters, I haue ſhewed you what warrant I haue for this attempt; I perceiue by your heauy countenances, you had rather be otherwiſe imployed, and for my owne part, I would the King had made choice of ſome other executioner: only this is my comfort, that a king commaunds, whoſe precepts neglected or omitted, threatneth torture for the default. Therefore in briefe, leaue me, and be ready to attend the aduenture: ſtay within that entry, and when you heare me crie, God ſaue the King, iſſue ſodainely forth, lay hands on Arthur, ſet him in this chaire, wherein (once faſt bound) leaue him with me to finiſh the reſt.
            
            
               Attendants
               We goe, though loath.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               Hubert
               My Lord, will it pleaſe your Honor to take the benefit of the faire euening?
            
            Enter Arthur to Hubert de Burgh.
            
            
               Arthur
               Gramercie Hubert for thy care of me,
               
                  In or to whom reſtraint is newly knowne,
               The ioy of walking is ſmall benefit,
               Yet will I take thy offer with ſmall thanks,
               I would not looſe the pleaſure of the eie.
               But tell me curteous Keeper if thou can,
               How long the King will haue me tarrie heere.
            
            
               Hubert
               I know not Prince, but as I geſſe, not long.
               God ſend you freedome, and God ſaue the King.
               
            
            They iſſue forth.
            
               Arthur
               Why how now ſirs, what may this outrage meane?
               O help me Hubert, gentle Keeper help:
               God ſend this ſodaine mutinous approach
               Tend not to reaue a wretched guiltles life.
            
            
               Hubert
               So ſirs, depart, and leaue the reſt for me.
            
            
               Arth.
               Then Arthur yeeld, death frowneth in thy face,
               What meaneth this? good Hubert pleade the caſe.
            
            
               Hubert
               Patience yong Lord, and liſten words of woe,
               Harmefull and harſh, hells horror to be heard:
               A diſmall tale fit for a furies tongue.
               I faint to tell, deepe ſorrow is the ſound.
            
            
               Arthur
               What, muſt I die?
            
            
               Hubert
               No newes of death, but tidings of more hate,
               A wrathfull doome, and moſt vnluckie fate:
               Deaths diſh were daintie at ſo fell a feaſt,
               Be deafe, heare not, its hell to tell the reſt.
            
            
               Arthur
               Alas, thou wrongſt my youth with words of feare,
               Tis hell, tis horror, not for one to heare:
               What is it man if it muſt needes be done,
               Act it, and end it, that the paine were gone.
            
            
               Hubert
               I will not chaunt ſuch dolour with my tongue,
               Yet muſt I act the outrage with my hand.
               My heart, my head, and all my powers beſide,
               To aide the office haue at once denide.
               Peruſe this Letter, lines of trebble woe,
               Reade ore my charge, and pardon when you know.
            
            
               
               
                  Hubert, theſe are to commaund thee, as thou tendreſt our quiet in minde, and the estate of our perſon, that preſently vpon the receipt of our commaund, thou put out the eies of Arthur Plantaginet.
               
            
            
               Arthur
               Ah monſtrous damned man! his very breath infects the elements.
               Contagious venome dwelleth in his heart,
               Effecting meanes to poyſon all the world.
               Vnreuerent may I be to blame the heauens
               Of great iniuſtice, that the miſcreant
               Liues to oppreſſe the innocents with wrong.
               Ah Hubert! makes he thee his inſtrument,
               To ſound the trump that cauſeth hell triumph?
               Heauen weepes, the Saints do ſhed celeſtiall teares,
               They feare thy fall, and cite thee with remorſe,
               They knocke thy conſcience, mouing pitie there,
               Willing to fence thee from the rage of hell:
               Hell Hubert, truſt me all the plagues of hell
               Hangs on performance of this damned deed.
               This ſcale, the warrant of the bodies bliſſe,
               Enſureth Satan chiefetaine of thy ſoule:
               Subſcribe not Hubert, giue not Gods part away.
               I ſpeake not only for eies priuiledge,
               The chiefe exterior that I would enioy:
               But for thy perill, farre beyond my paine,
               Thy ſweete ſoules loſſe, more than my eies vaine lacke:
               A cauſe internall, and eternall too.
               Aduiſe thee Hubert, for the caſe is hard,
               To looſe ſaluation for a Kings reward.
            
            
               Hubert
               My Lord, a ſubiect dwelling in the land
               Is tied to execute the Kings commaund.
            
            
               Arthur
               Yet God commaunds whoſe power reacheth further,
               That no command ſhould ſtand in force to murther.
            
            
               Hubert
               But that ſame Eſſence hath ordaind a law,
               A death for guilt, to keepe the world in awe.
            
            
               Arthur
               I pleade, not guilty, treaſonleſſe and free.
            
            
               
               Hubert
               But that appeale my Lord concernes not me.
            
            
               Arthur
               Why thou art he that maiſt omit the perill.
            
            
               Hubert
               I, if my Soueraigne would omit his quarrell.
            
            
               Arthur
               His quarrell is vnhallowed falſe and wrong.
            
            
               Hubert
               Then be the blame to whom it doth belong.
            
            
               Arthur
               Why thats to thee if thou as they proceede,
               Conclude their iudgement with ſo vile a deede.
            
            
               Hubert
               Why then no execution can be lawfull,
               If Iudges doomes muſt be reputed doubtfull.
            
            
               Arthur
               Yes where in forme of Law in place and time,
               The offender is conuicted of the crime.
            
            
               Hubert
               My Lord, my Lord, this long expoſtulation,
               Heapes vp more griefe, than promiſe of redreſſe;
               For this I know, and ſo reſolude I end,
               That ſubiects liues on Kings commands depend.
               I muſt not reaſon why he is your foe,
               But do his charge ſince he commaunds it ſo.
            
            
               Arthur
               Then do thy charge, and charged be thy ſoule
               With wrongfull perſecution done this day.
               You rowling eyes, whoſe ſuperficies yet
               I doe behold with eies that Nature lent:
               Send foorth the terror of your Moouers frowne,
               To wreake my wrong vpon the murtherers
               That rob me of your faire reflecting view:
               Let hell to them (as earth they wiſh to me)
               Be darke and direfull guerdon for their guilt,
               And let the blacke tormenters of deepe Tartary
               
               Vpbraide them with this damned enterpriſe,
               Inflicting change of tortures on their ſoules.
               Delay not Hubert, my oriſons are ended,
               Begin I pray thee, reaue me of my ſight:
               But to performe a tragedie indeede,
               Conclude the period with a mortall ſtab.
               
                  Constance farewell, tormenter come away,
               Make my diſpatch the Tyrants feaſting day.
            
            
               Hubert
               I faint, I feare, my conſcience bids deſiſt:
               Faint did I ſay? feare was it that I named:
               
                  My King commaunds, that warrant ſets me free:
               But God forbids, and he commaundeth Kings,
               That great Commaunder countercheckes my charge,
               He ſtayes my hand, he maketh ſoft my heart.
               Goe curſed tooles, your office is exempt,
               Cheere thee yong Lord, thou ſhalt not looſe an eie,
               Though I ſhould purchaſe it with loſſe of life.
               Ile to the King, and ſay his will is done,
               And of the langor tell him thou art dead,
               Goe in with me, for Hubert was not borne
               To blinde thoſe lampes that Nature polliſht ſo.
            
            
               Arthur
               
                  Hubert, if euer Arthur be in ſtate,
               Looke for amends of this receiued gift,
               I tooke my eieſight by thy curteſie,
               Thou lentſt them me, I will not be ingrate.
               But now procraſtination may offend
               The iſſue that thy kindneſſe vndertakes:
               Depart we Hubert to preuent the worſt.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter K. Iohn, Eſſex, Salisbury, Penbrooke.
            
            
               Iohn
               Now warlike followers, reſteth aught vndone
               That may impeach vs of fond ouerſight?
               The French haue felt the temper of our ſwords,
               Cold terror keepes poſſeſſion in their ſoules,
               Checking their ouerdaring arrogance
               For buckling with ſo great an ouermatch,
               The arch prowd titled Prieſt of Italy,
               
               That calls himſelfe grand Vicar vnder God,
               Is buſied now with trentall obſequies,
               Maſſe and months mind, dirge and I know not what,
               To eaſe their ſoules in painefull purgatorie,
               That haue miſcarried in theſe bloody warres.
               Heard you not Lords when firſt his Holineſſe
               Had tidings of our ſmall account of him,
               How with a taunt vaunting vpon his toes,
               He vrgde a reaſon why the Engliſh Aſſe
               Diſdaind the bleſſed ordinance of Rome?
               
               
                  The title (reuerently might I inferre)
               Became the Kings that earſt haue borne the load,
               The ſlauiſh weight of that controlling Prieſt:
               Who at his pleaſure temperd them like waxe
               To carrie armes on danger of his curſe,
               Banding their ſoules with warrants of his hand▪
               
               I grieue to thinke how Kings in ages paſt
               (Simply deuoted to the Sea of Rome)
               Haue run into a thouſand acts of ſhame.
               But now for confirmation of our State,
               Sith we haue proind the more than needfull braunch
               That did oppreſſe the true well-growing ſtocke,
               It reſteth we throughout our Territories
               Be reproclaimed and inueſted King.
            
            
               Pemb.
               My Liege, that were to buſie men with doubts,
               Once were you crownd, proclaimd, and with applauſe
               Your citie ſtreets haue ecchoed to the eare,
               God ſaue the King, God ſaue our Soueraigne Iohn.
               
               Pardon my feare, my cenſure doth inferre
               Your Highneſſe not depoſde from regall State,
               Would breed a mutinie in peoples mindes,
               What it ſhould meane to haue you crownd againe.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Pembrooke, performe what I haue bid thee do,
               Thou knowſt not what induceth me to this.
               
                  Eſſex goe in, and Lordings all be gone
               About this taske, I will be crownd anone.
            
            Enter the Bastard.
            
               Philip
               What newes, how do the Abbots cheſts?
               Are Friers fatter than the Nunnes are faire?
               What cheere with Church-men, had they gold or no?
               Tell me, how hath thy office tooke effect?
            
            
               Phil.
               My Lord, I haue performd your Highnes charge:
               The eaſe-bred Abbots, and the bare-foote Friers,
               The Monks, the Priors, and holy cloyſtred Nunnes,
               Are all in health, and were my Lord in wealth,
               Till I had tithde and tolde their holy hoords.
               
                  I doubt not when your Highneſſe ſees my prize,
               You may proportion all their former pride.
            
            
               Iohn
               Why ſo, now ſorts it Philip as it ſhould:
               This ſmall intruſion into Abbey trunkes,
               Will make the Popelings excommunicate,
               Curſe, ban, and breathe out damned oriſons,
               As thicke as haile-ſtones fore the Springs approach:
               But yet as harmeleſſe and without effect,
               As is the eccho of a Cannons cracke
               Diſchargde againſt the battlements of heauen.
               But what newes elſe befell there Philip?
               
            
            
               Bast.
               Strange news my Lord: within your territories
               Neere Pomfret is a prophet new ſprung vp,
               Whoſe diuination volleis wonders foorth:
               To him the Commons throng with Countrey gifts,
               He ſets a date vnto the Beldames death,
               Preſcribes how long the Virgins ſtate ſhall laſt,
               Diſtinguiſheth the moouing of the heauens,
               Giues limits vnto holy nuptiall rites,
               Foretelleth famine, aboundeth plentie forth:
               Of fate, of fortune, life and death he chats,
               With ſuch aſſurance, ſcruples put apart,
               As if he knew the certaine doomes of heauen,
               Or kept a Regiſter of all the Deſtinies.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Thou telſt me maruels, would thou hadſt brought the man,
               We might haue queſtiond him of things to come.
            
            
               Bastard
               My Lord, I tooke a care of had-I-wiſt,
               And brought the prophet with me to the Court,
               He ſtaies my Lord but at the Preſence doore:
               Pleaſeth your Highneſſe, I will call him in.
            
            
               Iohn
               Nay ſtay awhile, wee'l haue him here anone,
               A thing of weight is firſt to be performd.
            
            Enter the Nobles and crowne King Iohn, and then cry God ſaue the King.
            
            
               Iohn
               Lordings and friends ſupporters of our State,
               
                  Admire not at this vnaccuſtomd courſe,
               Nor in your thoughts blame not this deede of yours.
               Once ere this time was I inueſted King,
               Your fealtie ſworne as Liegemen to our ſtate:
               Once ſince that time ambitious weedes haue ſprung
               To ſtaine the beauty of our garden plot:
               But heauens in our conduct rooting thence
               The falſe intruders, breakers of worlds peace,
               Haue to our ioy, made ſunne-ſhine chaſe the ſtorme.
               After the which, to trie your conſtancie,
               That now I ſee is worthy of your names,
               We crau'd once more your helps for to inueſt vs
               Into the right that enuy ſought to wracke.
               Once was I not depoſde, your former choice;
               Now twice beene crowned and applauded King?
               Your cheered action to inſtall me ſo,
               Infers aſſured witneſſe of your loues,
               And binds me ouer in a Kingly care
               To render loue with loue, rewards of worth
               To ballance downe requitall to the full.
               But thankes the while, thankes Lordings to you all:
               Aske me and vſe me, trie me and finde me yours.
            
            
               Eſſex
               A boone my Lord, at vantage of your words
               We aske to guerdon all our loyalties.
            
            
               Pemb.
               We take the time your Highneſſe bids vs aske:
               Pleaſe it you grant, you make your promiſe good,
               With leſſer loſſe than one ſuperfluous haire
               That not remembred falleth from your head.
            
            
               Iohn
               My word is paſt, receiue your boone my Lords,
               What may it be? Aske it, and it is yours.
            
            
               Eſſ.
               We craue my Lord, to pleaſe the Commons with
               The libertie of Lady Constance ſonne:
               Whoſe durance darkeneth your Highneſſe right,
               As if you kept him priſoner, to the end
               Your ſelfe were doubtfull of the thing you haue.
               Diſmiſſe him thence, your Highneſſe needs not feare,
               Twice by conſent you are proclaim'd our King.
            
            
               
               Pemb.
               This if you grant, were all vnto your good:
               For ſimple people muſe you keepe him cloſe.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Your words haue ſearcht the center of my thoghts,
               Confirming warrant of your loyalties,
               Diſmiſſe your counſell, ſway my ſtate,
               Let Iohn doe nothing, but by your conſents.
               Why how now Philip, what extaſie is this?
               Why caſts thou vp thy eyes to heauen ſo?
            
            There the fiue Moones appeare.
            
               Bast.
               See, ſee my Lord, ſtrange apparitions,
               Glancing mine eie to ſee the Diadem
               Plac'd by the Biſhops on your Highneſſe head,
               From forth a gloomie cloud, which curtaine-like
               Diſplaid it ſelfe, I ſuddainely eſpied
               Fiue Moones reflecting, as you ſee them now:
               Euen in the moment that the crowne was plac'd
               Can they appeare, holding the courſe you ſee.
            
            
               Ioh.
               What might portend theſe apparitions,
               Vnvſuall ſignes, forerunners of euent,
               Preſagers of ſtrange terrors to the world:
               Beleeue me Lords, the obiect feares me much.
               
                  Philip thou toldſt me of a Wizard but of late,
               Fetch in the man to deſcant of this ſhow.
            
            
               Pemb.
               The heauens frowne vpon the ſinfull earth,
               When with prodigious vnaccuſtom'd ſignes
               They ſpot their ſuperficies with ſuch wonder.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               Before the ruines of Ieruſalem,
               Such meteors were the Enſignes of his wrath,
               That haſt'ned to deſtroy the faultfull towne.
            
            Enter the Bastard with the Prophet.
            
               Iohn.
               Is this the man?
            
            
               Bast.
               It is my Lord.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Prophet of Pomfret, for ſo I heare thou art,
               
                  That calculat'ſt of many things to come:
               Who by a power repleat with heauenly gift,
               Canſt blab the counſell of thy Makers will.
               If fame be true, or truth be wrong'd by thee,
               Decide in cyphering, what theſe fiue moones
               Portend this clime, if they preſage at all.
               Breath out thy gift, and if I liue to ſee
               Thy diuination take a true effect,
               Ile honour thee aboue all earthly men.
            
            
               Pet.
               The skie wherein theſe moones haue reſidence,
               Preſenteth Rome the great Metropolis,
               
               Where ſits the Pope in all his holy pompe.
               Foure of the moones preſent foure prouinces,
               To wit, Spaine, Denmarke, Germanie, and France,
               That beare the yoke of proud commanding Rome,
               And ſtand in feare to tempt the Prelates curſe.
               The ſmalleſt moone that whirles about the reſt,
               Impatient of the place he holds with them,
               Doth figure forth this Iſland Albion,
               Who gins to ſcorne the ſea and ſeat of Rome,
               And ſeekes to ſhunne the Edicts of the Pope:
               This ſhowes the heauen, and this I doe auerre
               Is figured in the apparitions.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Why then it ſeemes the heauens ſmile on vs,
               Giuing applauſe for leauing of the Pope.
               But for they chance in our Meridian,
               Doe they effect no priuate growing ill
               To be inflicted on vs in this clime?
            
            
               Pet.
               The moones effect no more than what I ſaid:
               But on ſome other knowledge that I haue
               By my preſcience, ere Aſcenſion day
               Haue brought the Sunne vnto his vſuall height,
               Of Crowne, Eſtate, and Royall dignity,
               Thou ſhalt be cleane diſpoyl'd and diſpoſſeſt.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Falſe dreamer, periſh with thy witched newes,
               Villaine thou woundſt me with thy fallacies:
               If it be true, die for thy tidings price;
               
                  If falſe, for fearing me with vaine ſuppoſe:
               Hence with the Witch, hels damned ſecretarie.
               Locke him vp ſure: for by my faith I ſweare,
               True or not true, the Wizard ſhall not liue.
               Before Aſcenſion day: who ſhould be cauſe hereof?
               Cut off the cauſe, and then the effect will die.
               Tut, tut, my mercie ſerues to maime my ſelfe,
               The roote doth liue, from whence theſe thornes ſpring vp,
               I and my promiſe paſt for his deliu'rie:
               Frowne friends, faile faith, the diuell goe withall,
               The brat ſhall die, that terrifies me thus.
               
                  Pembrooke and Eſſex, I recall my graunt,
               I will not buy your fauours with my feare:
               Nay murmure not, my will is lawe enough▪
               
               I loue you well, but if I lou'd you better,
               I would not buy it with my diſcontent.
               Enter Hubert.
               
               How now, what newes with thee?
            
            
               Hub.
               According to your highneſſe ſtrict command,
               Young Arthurs eies are blinded and extinct.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Why ſo, then he may feele the crown, but neuer ſee it.
            
            
               Hub.
               Nor ſee nor feele, for of the extream paine,
               Within one houre gaue he vp the ghoſt.
            
            
               Ioh.
               What is he dead?
            
            
               Hub.
               He is my Lord.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Then with him dies my cares.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               Now ioy betide thy ſoule.
            
            
               Pemb.
               And heauens reuenge thy death.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               What haue you done my Lord? Was euer heard
               A deed of more inhumane conſequence?
               Your foes will curſe, your friends will crie reuenge.
               Vnkindly rage, more rough than Northern wind;
               To clip the beautie of ſo ſweete a flower.
               What hope in vs for mercie on a fault,
               When kinſman dies without impeach of cauſe,
               As you haue done, ſo come to cheere you with,
               The guilt ſhall neuer be caſt me in my teeth.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               
               Ioh.
               And are you gone? The diuell be your guide:
               Proud rebels as ye are, to braue me ſo:
               Saucie, vnciuill, checkers of my will.
               Your tongues giue edge vnto the fatall knife,
               That ſhall haue paſſage through your trayt'rous throats.
               But huſht, breath not bugs words too ſoone abroad,
               Leſt time preuent the iſſue of thy reach.
               
                  Arthur is dead, I there the corzie growes:
               But while he liu'd, the danger was the more;
               His death hath freed me from a thouſand feares,
               But it hath purchaſt me ten times ten thouſand foes.
               Why all is one, ſuch lucke ſhall haunt his game,
               To whom the diuell owes an open ſhame:
               His life a foe that leueld at my crowne,
               His death a frame to pull my building downe.
               My thoughts harpt ſtill on quiet by his end,
               Who liuing aimed ſhrewdly at my roome:
               But to preuent that plea, twice was I crown'd,
               Twice did my ſubiects ſweare me fealtie,
               And in my conſcience lou'd me as their liege,
               In whoſe defence they would haue pawn'd their liues.
               But now they ſhun me as a Serpents ſting,
               A tragyke tyrant, ſterne and pitileſſe,
               And not a title followes after Iohn,
               
               But butcher, blood-ſucker, and murtherer.
               What planet gouern'd my natiuitie,
               To bode me ſoueraigne types of high eſtate,
               So interlac'd with helliſh diſcontent,
               Wherein fell furie hath no intereſt?
               Curſt be the crowne, chiefe author of my care,
               Nay curſt my will, that made the crowne my care:
               Curſt be my birth-day, curſt ten times the wombe
               That yeelded me aliue into the world.
               Art thou there villaine, furies haunt thee ſtill,
               For killing him whom all the world laments.
            
            
               Hub.
               Why here's my Lord your Highnes hand & ſeale,
               
                  Charging on liues regard to do the deed.
            
            
               Iohn
               Ah dull conceipted peſant, knowſt thou not
               It was a damned execrable deed?
               Shewſt me a Seale? Oh villaine, both our ſoules
               Haue ſolde their freedome to the thrall of hell,
               Vnder the warrant of that curſed Seale.
               Hence villaine, hang thy ſelfe, and ſay in hell
               That I am comming for a kingdome there.
            
            
               Hubert
               My Lord, attend the happy tale I tell,
               For heauens health ſend Sathan packing hence
               That inſtigates your Highneſſe to deſpaire.
               If Arthurs death be diſmall to be heard,
               Bandie the newes for rumors of vntruth:
               He liues my Lord, the ſweeteſt youth aliue,
               In health, with eie ſight, not a haire amiſſe.
               This heart tooke vigor from this forward hand,
               Making it weake to execute your charge.
            
            
               Iohn
               What, liues he! Then ſweete hope come home agen,
               Chaſe hence deſpaire, the purueyor for hell.
               Hye Hubert, tell theſe tidings to my Lords
               That throb in paſſions for yong Arthurs death:
               Hence Hubert, ſtay not till thou haſt reueald
               The wiſhed newes of Arthurs happy health.
               I goe my ſelfe, the ioyfullſt man aliue
               To ſtorie out this new ſuppoſed crime.
            
            Exeunt.
            The end of the first Part.
         
         
            
            To the Gentlemen Readers.
            THe changeleſſe purpoſe of determinde Fate
            Giues period to our care, or hearts content,
            When heau'ns fixt time for this or that hath end:
            Nor can earths pomp or pollicie preuent
            The doome ordained in their ſecret will.
            Gentles, we left King Iohn repleate with bliſſe
            That Arthur liude, whom he ſuppoſed ſlaine;
            And Hubert posting to returne thoſe Lords,
            Who deem'd him dead, and parted diſcontent:
            
               Arthur himſelfe begins our latter Act,
            Our Act of outrage, desprate furie, death;
            Wherein fond raſhneſſe murdreth first a Prince,
            And Monkiſh falſeneſſe poyſneth last a King,
            First Scene ſhews Arthurs death in infancie,
            And last concludes Iohns fatall tragedie.
         
         
            
            The ſecond part of The troubleſome Raigne of King Iohn. Containing The entrance of Lewis the French Kings ſonne: With the poyſoning of King Iohn by a Monke.
            Enter yong Arthur on the walls.
            
               NOw help good hap to further mine entent,
               Croſſe not my youth with any more extremes:
               I venter life to gaine my libertie,
               And if I die, worlds troubles haue an end.
               Feare gins diſſwade the ſtrength of my reſolue,
               My holde will faile, and then alas I fall,
               And if I fall, no queſtion death is next:
               Better deſiſt, and liue in priſon ſtill.
               Priſon ſaid I? nay, rather death than ſo:
               Comfort and courage come againe to me,
               Ile venter ſure: tis but a leape for life.
               He leapes, and bruſing his bones, after he was from his traunce, ſpeakes thus;
               Hoe, who is nigh? ſome bodie take me vp.
               Where is my mother? let me ſpeake with her.
               Who hurts me thus? ſpeake hoe, where are you gone?
               Ay me poore Arthur, I am heere alone.
               Why calld I mother, how did I forget?
               My fall, my fall, hath killd my mothers ſonne.
               How will ſhe weepe at tidings of my death?
               My death indeed, O God, my bones are burſt.
               
                  Sweet Ieſu ſaue my ſoule, forgiue my raſh attempt,
               Comfort my mother, ſhield her from deſpaire,
               When ſhee ſhall heare my tragycke ouerthrowe.
               My heart controls the office of my tongue,
               My vitall powers forſake my bruſed trunke,
               I die I die, heauen take my fleeting ſoule,
               And Lady mother all good hap to thee.
            
            He dies.
            Enter Pembrooke, Salisburie, Eſſex.
            
               Eſſex.
               My Lords of Pembrooke and of Salisburie,
               
               We muſt be carefull in our policie,
               To vndermine the keepers of this place,
               Elſe ſhall we neuer find the Princes graue.
            
            
               Pemb.
               My Lord of Eſſex, take no care for that,
               I warrant you it was not cloſely done.
               But who is this? lo Lords the withered flowre,
               Who in his life ſhin'd like the Mornings bluſh,
               Caſt out a doore, deni'd his buriall right,
               A prey for birds and beaſts to gorge vpon.
            
            
               Salisb.
               O ruthfull ſpectacle! O damned deed!
               My ſinewes ſhake, my very heart doth bleed.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               Leaue childiſh teares braue Lords of England,
               If water-floods could fetch his life againe,
               My eies ſhould conduit forth a ſea of teares.
               If ſobs would helpe, or ſorows ſerue the turne,
               My heart ſhould volley out deepe piercing plaints.
               But bootleſſe were't to breath as many ſighes
               As might ecclipſe the brighteſt Sommers ſunne,
               Here reſts the helpe, a ſeruice to his ghoſt.
               Let not the tyrant cauſer of this dole,
               Liue to triumph in ruthfull maſſacres,
               Giue hand and heart, and Engliſhmen to armes,
               Tis Gods decree to wreake vs of theſe harmes.
            
            
               Pemb.
               The beſt aduice: But who comes poſting here?
               
                  Enter Hubert.
               
               Right noble Lords, I ſpeake vnto you all,
               The King entreats your ſooneſt ſpeed
               To viſit him, who on your preſent want,
               Did ban and curſe his birth, himſelfe and me,
               For executing of his ſtrict command.
               I ſaw his paſſion, and at fitteſt time,
               Aſſur'd him of his couſins being ſafe,
               Whom pity would not let me doe to death:
               He craues your company my Lords in haſte,
               To whom I will conduct young Arthur ſtraight,
               Who is in health vnder my cuſtody.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               In health baſe villaine, were't not I leaue the crime
               To Gods reuenge, to whom reuenge belongs,
               Here ſhould'ſt thou periſh on my rapiers point.
               Call'ſt thou this health? ſuch health betide thy friends,
               And all that are of thy condition,
            
            
               Hub.
               My Lords, but heare me ſpeake, and kil me then,
               If here I left not this yong Prince aliue,
               Maugre the haſtie Edict of the King,
               Who gaue me charge to put out both his eyes,
               That God that gaue me liuing to this houre,
               Thunder reuenge vpon me in this place:
               And as I tendred him with earneſt loue,
               So God loue me, and then I ſhall be well.
            
            
               Salſ.
               Hence traytor hence, thy counſel is herein.
               Exit. Hu.
               Some in this place appointed by the King,
               Haue throwne him from this lodging here aboue,
               And ſure the murther hath bin newly done,
               For yet the body is not fully cold.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               How ſay you Lords, ſhal we with ſpeed diſpatch
               Vnder our hands a packet into France,
               To bid the Dolphin enter with his force,
               To claime the kingdom for his proper right,
               His title maketh lawfull ſtrength thereto.
               Beſides, the Pope, on peril of his curſe,
               
                  Hath bard vs of obedience vnto Iohn,
               
               This hatefull murder, Lewis his true deſcent,
               The holy charge that we receiu'd from Rome,
               Are weightie reaſons, if you like my reed,
               To make vs all perſeuer in this deed.
            
            
               Pemb.
               My Lord of Eſſex, well haue you aduis'd,
               I will accord to further you in this.
            
            
               Salisb.
               And Salisbury will not gaineſay the ſame:
               But aide that courſe as farre forth as he can.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               Then each of vs ſend ſtraight to his allies,
               To win them to this famous enterpriſe:
               And let vs all yclad in Palmers weed,
               The tenth of April at S. Edmunds Bury
               
               Meet to conferre, and on the altar there
               Sweare ſecrecie and aid to this aduiſe.
               Meane while, let vs conuey this body hence,
               And giue him buriall, as befits his ſtate,
               Keeping his months mind, and his obſequies
               With ſolemne interceſſion for his ſoule.
               How ſay you Lordings, are you all agreed?
            
            
               Pemb.
               The tenth of April at S. Edmunds Burie,
               
               God letting not, I will not faile the time.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               Then let vs all conuey the body hence.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter K. Iohn, with two or three, and the Prophet.
            
               Ioh.
               Diſturbed thoughts, foredoomers of mine ill,
               Diſtracted paſſions, ſignes of growing harmes,
               Strange prophecies of imminent miſhaps,
               Confound my wits, and dull my ſenſes ſo,
               That euery obiect theſe mine eies behold,
               Seeme inſtruments to bring me to my end.
               Aſcenſion day is come, Iohn feare not then
               The prodigies this pratling Prophet threats.
               Tis come indeed: ah were it fully paſt,
               Then were I careleſſe of a thouſand feares.
               
                  The Diall tels me, it is twelue at noone.
               Were twelue at midnight paſt, then might I vaunt,
               Falſe ſeers prophecies of no import.
               Could I as well with this right hand of mine
               Remoue the Sunne from our Meridian,
               Vnto the mooneſted circle of th'antipodes,
               As turne this ſteele from twelue to twelue agen,
               Then Iohn, the date of fatall prophecies,
               Should with the Prophets life together end.
               But multa cadunt inter calicem ſupremaque labra.
               
               
                  Peter, vnſay thy fooliſh doting dreame,
               And by the crowne of England here I ſweare,
               To make thee great, and greateſt of thy kin.
            
            
               Peter.
               King Iohn, although the time I haue preſcrib'd
               Be but twelue houres remaining yet behind,
               Yet doe I know by inſpiration,
               Ere that fixt time be fully come about,
               King Iohn ſhall not be king as heretofore.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Vaine buzzard, what miſchance can chance ſo ſoone,
               To ſet a king beſide his regall ſeat?
               My heart is good, my body paſſing ſtrong,
               My Land in peace, my enemies ſubdu'd,
               Onely my barons ſtorme at Arthurs death,
               But Arthur liues, I there the challenge growes,
               Were he diſpatch'd vnto his longeſt home,
               Then were the King ſecure of thouſand foes.
               
                  Hubert, what newes with thee, where are my Lords?
            
            
               Hub.
               Hard newes my Lord, Arthur the louely prince,
               Seeking to eſcape ouer the caſtle walles,
               Fell headlong downe, and in the curſed fall
               He brake his bones, and there before the gate
               Your barons found him dead, and breathleſſe quite.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Is Arthur dead? then Hubert without more words hang the Prophet.
               Away with Peter, villain out of my ſight,
               I am deafe, be gone, let him not ſpeake a word.
               
                  Now Iohn, thy feares are vaniſht into ſmoake,
               
                  Arthur is dead, thou guiltleſſe of his death.
               Sweet youth, but that I ſtriued for a crowne,
               I could haue well affoarded to thine age,
               Long life, and happineſſe to thy content.
            
            Enter the Baſtard.
            
               Ioh.
               
                  Philip what newes with thee?
            
            
               Baſt.
               The newes I heard was Peters prayers,
               Who wiſht like fortune to befall vs all:
               And with that word, the rope his lateſt friend,
               Kept him from falling headlong to the ground.
            
            
               Ioh.
               There let him hang, and be the Rauens food,
               While Iohn triumphs in ſpite of prophecies.
               But whats the tydings from the Popelings now?
               What ſay the Monkes and Prieſts to our proceedings?
               Or where's the Barons that ſo ſuddainely
               Did leaue the king vpon a falſe ſurmiſe?
            
            
               Baſt.
               The Prelates ſtorme and thirſt for ſharp reuenge:
               But pleaſe your Maieſtie, were that the worſt,
               It little skild: a greater danger growes,
               Which muſt be weeded out by carefull ſpeed,
               Or all is loſt, for all is leueld at.
            
            
               Ioh.
               More frights and feares▪ what ere thy tidings be,
               I am prepar'd: then Philip, quickly ſay,
               Meane they to murder, or impriſon me,
               To giue my Crowne away to Rome or France;
               Or will they each of them become a King?
               Worſe than I thinke it is, it cannot be.
            
            
               Bast.
               Not worſe my Lord, but euery whit as bad.
               The Nobles haue elected Lewis King,
               In right of Lady Blanch, your neece, his wife:
               His landing is expected euery houre,
               The Nobles, Commons, Clergie, all Eſtates,
               Incited chiefly by the Cardinall,
               
                  
                  Pandulph that lies here Legate for the Pope,
               Thinke long to ſee their new elected King.
               And for vndoubted proofe, ſee here my Liege,
               Letters to me from your Nobilitie,
               To be a partie in this action:
               Who vnder ſhew of fained holineſſe,
               Appoint their meeting at S. Edmunds Burie,
               
               There to conſult, conſpire, and conclude
               The ouerthrowe and downefall of your State.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Why ſo it muſt be: one houre of content,
               Match'd with a month of paſſionate effects.
               Why ſhines the Sunne to fauour this conſort?
               Why doe the winds not breake their brazen gates,
               And ſcatter all theſe periur'd complices,
               With all their counſels, and their damned drifts?
               But ſee the welkin rolleth gently on,
               There's not a lowring cloud to frowne on them;
               The heauen, the earth, the ſunne, the moone and all,
               Conſpire with thoſe confederates my decay.
               Then hell for me, if any power be there,
               Forſake that place, and guide me ſtep by ſtep,
               To poyſon, ſtrangle, murder in their ſteps
               Theſe traytors: oh that name is too good for them,
               And death is eaſie: is there nothing worſe,
               To wreake me on this proud peace-breaking crew?
               What ſaiſt thou Philip? why aſſiſts thou not?
            
            
               Baſt.
               Theſe curſes (good my Lord) fit not the ſeaſon:
               Help muſt deſcend from heauen againſt this treaſon?
            
            
               Ioh.
               Nay thou wilt proue a traytor with the reſt,
               Goe get thee to them, ſhame come to you all.
            
            
               Baſt.
               I would be loath to leaue your Highneſſe thus,
               Yet you command, and I, though grieu'd, will goe.
            
            
               Ioh.
               Ah Philip, whither go'ſt thou? come againe.
            
            
               Baſt.
               My Lord, theſe motions are as paſſions of a mad man.
            
            
               Ioh.
               A mad man Philip, I am mad indeed,
               My heart is maz'd, my ſences all foredone.
               
                  And Iohn of England now is quite vndone.
               Was euer King as I oppreſt with cares?
               Dame Elianor my noble mother Queene,
               My onely hope and comfort in diſtreſſe,
               Is dead, and England excommunicate,
               And I am interdicted by the Pope,
               All Churches curſt, their doores are ſealed vp,
               And for the pleaſure of the Romiſh Prieſt,
               The ſeruice of the Higheſt is neglected,
               The multitude (a beaſt of many heads)
               Doe wiſh confuſion to their ſoueraigne;
               The Nobles blinded with ambitions fumes,
               Aſſemble powers to beate mine Empire downe,
               And more than this, elect a forrein king.
               O England, wert thou euer miſerable,
               King Iohn of England ſees thee miſerable:
               
                  Iohn, tis thy ſinnes that makes it miſerable,
               Quicquid delirunt Reges, plectuntur Achiui.
               
                  Philip, as thou haſt euer lou'd thy King,
               So ſhow it now: poſt to S. Edmunds Burie,
               
               Diſſemble with the Nobles, know their drifts,
               Confound their diuelliſh plots, and damn'd deuiſes.
               Though Iohn be faultie, yet let ſubiects beare,
               He will amend, and right the peoples wrongs.
               A mother though ſhee were vnnaturall,
               Is better than the kindeſt ſtep-dame is:
               Let neuer Engliſhman truſt forraine rule.
               Then Philip ſhew thy fealty to thy King,
               And mongſt the Nobles plead thou for the King.
            
            
               Bast.
               I goe my Lord: ſee how he is diſtraught,
               This is the curſed Prieſt of Italy
               Hath heap'd theſe miſchiefes on this hapleſſe land.
               Now Philip, hadſt thou Tullies eloquence,
               Then might'ſt thou hope to plead with good ſucceſſe.
            
            Exit
            
               Ioh.
               And art thou gone? ſucceſſe may follow thee:
               Thus haſt thou ſhew'd thy kindneſſe to thy King.
               
                  Sirra, in haſte goe greet the Cardinall,
               
                  Pandulph I meane, the Legat from the Pope.
               Say that the King deſires to ſpeake with him.
               Now Iohn bethinke thee how thou maiſt reſolue:
               And if thou wilt continue Englands King,
               Then caſt about to keepe thy Diadem;
               For life and land, and all is leueld at.
               The Pope of Rome, tis he that is the cauſe,
               He curſeth thee, he ſets thy ſubiects free
               From due obedience to their Soueraigne:
               He animates the Nobles in their warres,
               He giues away the Crowne to Philips ſonne,
               And pardons all that ſeeke to murther thee:
               And thus blind zeale is ſtill predominant.
               Then Iohn there is no way to keepe thy crowne,
               But finely to diſſemble with the Pope:
               That hand that gaue the wound muſt giue the ſalue
               To cure the hurt, elſe quite incurable.
               Thy ſinnes are farre too great to be the man
               T'aboliſh Pope, and Poperie from thy Realme:
               But in thy Seate, if I may gueſſe at all,
               A King ſhall raigne that ſhall ſuppreſſe them all.
               Peace Iohn, here comes the Legate of the Pope,
               Diſſemble thou, and whatſoere thou ſai'ſt,
               Yet with thy heart wiſh their confuſion.
            
            Enter Pandulph.
            
               Pand.
               Now Iohn, vnworthy man to breath on earth,
               That do'ſt oppugne againſt thy mother Church:
               Why am I ſent for to thy curſed ſelfe?
            
            
               Iohn.
               Thou man of God, Vicegerent for the Pope,
               The holy Vicar of S. Peters Church,
               Vpon my knees, I pardon craue of thee,
               And doe ſubmit me to the ſea of Rome,
               And vow for penance of my high offence,
               
                  To take on me the holy Croſſe of Chriſt,
               And carry Armes in holy Chriſtian warres.
            
            
               Pand.
               No Iohn, thy crowching and diſſembling thus
               Cannot deceiue the Legate of the Pope,
               Say what thou wilt, I will not credite thee:
               Thy Crowne and Kingdome both are tane away,
               And thou art curſt without redemption.
            
            
               Iohn
               Accurſt indeed to kneele to ſuch a drudge,
               And get no help with thy ſubmiſſion,
               Vnſheathe thy ſword, and ſley the miſprowd prieſt
               That thus triumphs ore thee a mightie King:
               No Iohn, ſubmit againe, diſſemble yet,
               For Prieſts and Women muſt be flattered.
               Yet holy Father thou thy ſelfe doſt know,
               No time too late for ſinners to repent,
               Abſolue me then, and Iohn doth ſweare to do
               The vttermoſt what euer thou demaundſt.
            
            
               Pandulph
               
                  Iohn, now I ſee thy hearty penitence,
               I rew and pitty thy diſtreſt eſtate,
               One way is left to reconcile thy ſelfe,
               And onely one which I ſhall ſhew to thee.
               Thou muſt ſurrender to the ſea of Rome
               Thy Crowne and Diadem, then ſhall the Pope
               Defend thee from th'inuaſion of thy foes.
               And where his Holineſſe hath kindled Fraunce,
               
               And ſet thy ſubiects hearts at warre with thee,
               Then ſhall he curſe thy foes, and beate them downe,
               That ſeeke the diſcontentment of the King.
            
            
               Iohn
               From bad to worſe, or I muſt looſe my realme,
               Or giue my Crowne for penance vnto Rome:
               
               A miſerie more piercing than the darts
               That breake from burning exhalations power.
               What, ſhall I giue my Crowne with this right hand?
               No: with this hand defend thy Crowne and thee.
               What newes with thee?
            
            
               Enter Meſſenger.
            
               Pleaſe it your Maieſtie, there is deſcried on the coaſt of Kent an hundred Sayle of Ships, which of all men is thought to be the French fleet, vnder the conduct of the Dolphin, ſo that it puts the countrey in a mutiny, ſo they ſend to your Grace for ſuccour.
            
            
               K. Ioh.
               How now Lord Cardinal, what's your beſt aduiſe?
               Theſe mutinies muſt be allaid in time,
               By policy or headſtrong rage at leaſt.
               O Iohn, theſe troubles tyre thy wearied ſoule,
               And like to Luna in a ſad Eclipſe,
               So are thy thoughts and paſſions for this newes.
               Well may it be, when Kings are grieued ſo,
               The vulgar ſort worke Princes ouerthrowe.
            
            
               Card.
               K. Iohn, for not effecting of thy plighted vow,
               This ſtrange annoyance happens to thy Land:
               But yet be reconcil'd vnto the Church,
               And nothing ſhall be grieuous to thy ſtate.
            
            
               Ioh.
               On Pandulph, be it as thou haſt decreed,
               
                  Iohn will not ſpurne againſt thy ſound aduiſe,
               Come lets away, and with thy helpe I trow,
               My Realme ſhall flouriſh, and my Crowne in peace.
            
            Enter the Nobles, Pembrooke, Eſſex, Cheſter, Bewchampe, Clare, with others.
            
               Pemb.
               Now ſweet S. Edmund holy Saint in heauen,
               Whoſe Shrine is ſacred, high eſteem'd on earth,
               Infuze a conſtant zeale in all our hearts,
               To proſecute this act of mickle weight,
               Lord Bewchampe ſay, what friends haue you procur'd.
            
            
               Bewch.
               The L. Fitz Water, L. Percie, and L. Roſſe,
               
               Vow'd meeting here this day the leuenth houre.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               Vnder the cloke of holy pilgrimage,
               
                  By that ſame houre on warrant of their faith,
               
                  Philip Plantagenet, a bird of ſwifteſt wing,
               Lord Eustauce, Veſcy, Lord Creſſy, and Lord Mowbrey,
               
               Appointed meeting at S. Edmunds ſhrine.
            
            
               Pemb.
               Vntill their preſence, Ile conceale my tale,
               Sweet complices in holy Chriſtian acts,
               That venture for the purchaſſe of renowne,
               Thrice welcome to the league of high reſolue,
               That pawne their bodies for their ſoules regard.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               Now wanteth but the reſt to end this worke,
               In Pilgrimes habite comes our holy troupe
               A furlong hence, with ſwift vnwoonted pace,
               May be they are the perſons you expect.
            
            
               Pemb.
               With ſwift vnwoonted gate, ſee what a thing is zeale,
               That ſpurs them on with feruence to this ſhrine,
               Now ioy come to them for their true intent:
               And in good time, here come the war-men all,
               That ſweat in body by the minds diſeaſe:
               Hap and hearts-eaſe braue Lordings be your lot.
               Enter the Bastard Philip, &c.
               Amen my Lords, the like betide your lucke,
               And all that trauell in a Chriſtian cauſe.
            
            
               Eſſex.
               Cheerely repli'd braue branch of Kingly ſtocko,
               A right Plantagenet ſhould reaſon ſo.
               But ſilence Lords, attend our commings cauſe:
               The ſeruile yoke that pained vs with toyle,
               On ſtrong inſtinct hath fram'd this conuenticle,
               To eaſe our neckes of ſeruitudes contempt.
               Should I not name the foeman of our reſt,
               Which of you all ſo barren in conceipt,
               As cannot leuell at the man I meane?
               But leſt Enigma's ſhadow ſhining truth,
               Plainely to paint, as truth requires no art.
               Th'effect of this reſort importeth this,
               To root and cleane extirpate tyrant Iohn,
               
               Tyrant I ſay, appealing to the man,
               
                  If any here that loues him, and I aske,
               What kindſhip, lenitie, or Chriſtian raigne,
               Rules in the man, to barre this ſoule impeach?
               Firſt I inferre the Cheſters baniſhment:
               For reprehending him in moſt vnchriſtian crimes▪
               
               Was ſpeciall notice of a tyrants will.
               But were this all, the diuell ſhould be ſau'd,
               But this the leaſt of many thouſand faults,
               That circumſtance with leiſure might diſplay.
               Our priuate wrongs, no parcell of my tale
               Which now in preſence, but for ſome great cauſe
               Might wiſh to him as to a mortall foe.
               But ſhall I cloſe the period with an act
               Abhorring in the eares of Chriſtian men,
               His couſins death, that ſweet vnguiltie child,
               Vntimely butcherd by the tyrants meanes,
               Here are my proofes, as cleere as grauel brooke,
               And on the ſame I further muſt inferre,
               That who vpholds a tyrant in his courſe,
               Is culpable of all his damned guilt.
               To ſhew the which, is yet to be deſcrib'd.
               My Lord of Pembrooke, ſhewe what is behinde,
               Onely I ſay, that were there nothing elſe
               To mooue vs, but the Popes moſt dreadfull curſe,
               Whereof we are aſſured, if we faile,
               It were enough to inſtigate vs all,
               With earneſtneſſe ofſprite, to ſeeke a meane
               To diſpoſſeſſe Iohn of his regiment.
            
            
               Pemb.
               Well hath my Lord of Eſſex told his tale,
               Which I auerre▪ for moſt ſubſtantiall truth,
               And more to make the matter to our minde,
               I ſay that Lewis in challenge of his wife,
               Hath title of an vncontrouled plea,
               To all that longeth to our Engliſh crowne.
               Short tale to make, the Sea Apoſtolike,
               Hath offerd diſpenſation for the fault.
               
                  If any be, as truſt me none I know,
               By planting Lewis in the Vſurpers roome:
               This is the cauſe of all our preſence here,
               That on the holy Altar we proteſt,
               To aid the right of Lewis with goods and life,
               Who on our knowledge is in armes for England.
               What ſay you Lords?
            
            
               Saliſ.
               As Pembrooke ſaith, affirmeth Salisburie:
               
               Faire Lewis of France that ſpouſed Lady Blanch,
               
               Hath title of an vncontrouled ſtrength
               To England, and what longeth to the Crowne:
               In right whereof, as we are true inform'd,
               The Prince is marching hitherward in armes.
               Our purpoſe, to conclude that with a word,
               Is to inueſt him as we may deuiſe,
               King of our countrey, in the tyrants ſtead:
               And ſo the warrant on the Altar ſworne,
               And ſo the intent for which we hither came.
            
            
               Baſt.
               My Lord of Salisburie, I cannot couch
               My ſpeeches with the needfull words of arte,
               As doth beſeeme in ſuch a waightie worke,
               But what my conſcience and my duty will,
               I purpoſe to impart.
               For Chesters exile, blame his buſie wit,
               That medled where his duty quite forbade:
               For any priuate cauſes that you haue,
               Me thinke they ſhould not mount to ſuch a height,
               As to depoſe a King in their reuenge.
               For Arthurs death, K. Iohn was innocent,
               He deſperate was the deathſman to himſelfe,
               Which you, to make a colour to your crime, iniuſtly do impute to his defalt,
               But wher fel traitoriſme hath reſidēce,
               There wants no words to ſet deſpight on worke.
               I ſay tis ſhame, and worthy all reproofe,
               To wreſt ſuch petty wrongs in tearms of right,
               Againſt a King annointed by the Lord.
               
                  Why Salsburie, admit the wrongs are true,
               Yet ſubiects may not take in hand reuenge,
               And rob the heauens of their proper power,
               Where ſitteth he to whom reuenge belongs.
               And doth a Pope, a prieſt, a man of pride,
               Giue charters for the liues of lawfull kings?
               What can he bleſſe, or who regards his curſe,
               But ſuch as giue to man, and take from God?
               I ſpeake it in the ſight of God aboue,
               There's not a man that dies in your beleefe,
               But ſels his ſoule perpetually to paine.
               Aid Lewis, leaue God, kill Iohn, pleaſe hell,
               Make hauocke of the welfare of your ſoules,
               For here I leaue you in the ſight of heauen,
               A troope of traytors, food for helliſh fiends;
               If you deſiſt, then follow me as friends,
               If not, then doe your worſt, as hatefull traytors.
               For Lewis his right, alaſſe tis too too lame,
               A ſenſleſſe claime, if truth be titles friend.
               In briefe, if this be cauſe of our reſort,
               Our pilgrimage is to the diuels ſhrine.
               I came not Lords, to troupe as traytors doe,
               Nor will I counſell in ſo bad a cauſe:
               Pleaſe you returne, we goe againe as friends,
               If not, I to my King, and you where traytors pleaſe.
            
            Exit.
            
               Percie.
               A hot yong man, and ſo my Lords proceed,
               I let him goe, and better loſt than found.
            
            
               Pemb.
               What ſay you Lords, will all the reſt proceed,
               Will you all with me ſweare vpon the Altar,
               That you wil to the death, be aid to Le. & enemy to Iohn?
               
               Euery man lay his hand by mine, in witnes of his harts accord.
               Wel then, euery man to armes to meet the king,
               Who is already before London.
            
            Enter Meſſenger.
            
               Pemb.
               What newes Herauld?
               
                  The right Chriſtian Prince my maſter, Lewis of France, is at hand, comming to viſit your Honours, directed hither by the right honourable Richard Earle of Bigot, to conferre with your honours.
            
            
               Pemb.
               How neere is his Highneſſe?
            
            
               Meſ.
               Ready to enter your preſence.
            
            Enter Lewis, Earle Bigot, with his troupe.
            
               Lew.
               Faire Lords of England, Lewis ſalutes you all
               As friends, and firme wel-willers of his weale,
               At whoſe requeſt, from plentie flowing France,
               Croſſing the Ocean with a Southerne gale,
               He is in perſon come at your commands,
               To vndertake and gratifie withall,
               The fulneſſe of your fauours profferd him.
               But worlds braue men, omitting promiſes,
               Till time be miniſter of more amends,
               I muſt acquaint you with our fortunes courſe.
               The heauens dewing fauours on my head,
               Haue in their conduct ſafe with victory,
               Brought me along your well manured bounds,
               With ſmall repulſe, and little croſſe of chance,
               Your Citie Rocheſter, with great applauſe,
               By ſome diuine inſtinct laid armes aſide:
               And from the hollow holes of Thameſis,
               Eccho apace repli'd, Viue la Roy.
               
               From thence, along the wanton rowling glade
               To Troynouant, your faire Metropolis,
               
               With lucke came Lewis, to ſhew his troupes of France,
               Wauing our Enſignes with the dallying winds,
               The fearefull obiect of fell frowning warre;
               Where after ſome aſſault, and ſmall defence,
               Heauens may I ſay, and not my warlike troupe,
               Temperd their hearts to take a friendly foe
               Within the compaſſe of their high built wals,
               Giuing me title, as it ſeemd they wiſh.
               
                  Thus fortune (Lords) acts to your forwardneſſe,
               Meanes of content, in lieu of former griefe:
               And may I liue but to requite you all,
               Worlds wiſh were mine, in dying noted yours.
            
            
               Saliſ.
               Welcom the balme that cloſeth vp our wounds,
               The ſoueraigne medcine for our quicke recure,
               The anchor of our hope, the onely prop,
               Whereon depends our liues, our lands, our weale,
               Without the which, as ſheepe without their heird,
               (Except a ſhepheard winking at the wolfe)
               We ſtray, we pine, we run to thouſand harmes.
               No maruell then, though with vnwonted ioy,
               We welcome him that beateth woes away.
            
            
               Lew.
               Thanks to you all of this religious league,
               A holy knot of Catholike conſent.
               I cannot name you Lordings, man by man,
               But like a ſtranger vnacquainted yet,
               In generall I promiſe faithfull loue:
               Lord Bigot brought me to S. Edmunds ſhrine,
               Giuing me warrant of a Chriſtian oath
               That this aſſembly came 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               To ſweare according as your p
                     •
                  ckets ſhow'd,
               Homage and loyall ſeruice to our ſelfe,
               I need not doubt the ſuretie of your wils,
               Since well I know, for many of your ſakes,
               The townes haue yeelded on their own accords:
               Yet for a faſhion, not for misbeleefe,
               My eyes muſt witneſſe, and theſe eares muſt heare
               Your oath vpon the holy Altar ſworne,
               And after march, to end our commings cauſe.
            
            
               Salſ.
               That we intend no other than good truth,
               All that are preſent of this holy league,
               For confirmation of our better truſt,
               In preſence of his Highneſſe, ſweare with me,
               The ſequel that my ſelfe ſhall vtter here.
               
                  I Thomas Plantaginet, Earle of Salisburie, ſweare vpon the Altar, and by the holy army of Saints, homage and allegeance to the right Chriſtian Prince Lewis of France, as true and rightfull King to England, Cornewall, & Wales, and to their territories: in the defence whereof, I vpon the holy Altar ſweare all forwardneſſe. All the Eng. Lo. ſweare.
               
               As the noble Earle hath ſworne, ſo ſweare we all.
            
            
               Lew.
               I reſt aſſured on your holy oath,
               And on this Altar in like ſort I ſweare
               Loue to you all, and princely recompence
               To guerdon your good wils vnto the full.
               And ſince I am at this religious ſhrine,
               My good wel-willers giue vs leaue awhile,
               To vſe ſome orizons our ſelues apart,
               To all the holy company of heauen,
               That they will ſmile vpon our purpoſes,
               And bring them to a fortunate euent.
            
            
               Sal.
               We leaue your Higneſſe to your good intent.
            
            Exeunt Lords of England.
            
               Lew.
               Now Vicount Meloun, what remains behind?
               Truſt me theſe traytors to their Soueraigne State,
               Are not to be beleeu'd in any ſort.
            
            
               Meloun.
               Indeed my Lord, they that infringe their oths,
               And play the Rebels gainſt their natiue King,
               Will for as little cauſe reuolt from you,
               If euer opportunitie incite them ſo:
               For once forſworne, and neuer after ſound,
               There's no affiance after periury.
            
            
               Lew.
               Well Meloun, wel, let's ſmooth with thē awhile,
               Vntill we haue as much as they can doe:
               And when their vertue is exhaled drie,
               Ile hang them for the guerdon of their helpe:
               Meane while wee'l vſe them as a pretious poyſon,
               To vndertake the iſſue of our hope.
            
            
               Fr. Lo.
               Tis policy (my Lord) to bait our hookes
               With merry ſmiles, and promiſe of much weight:
               
                  But when your Highneſſe needeth them no more.
               Tis good make ſure worke with them, leſt indeede
               They prooue to you as to their naturall King.
            
            
               Melun.
               Truſt mee my Lord, right well haue you aduiſde,
               Venome for vſe, but neuer for a ſport
               Is to be dallied with, leſt it infect.
               Were you inſtald, as ſoone I hope you ſhall:
               Be free from traitors, and diſpatch them all.
            
            
               Lewes
               That ſo I meane, I ſweare before you all
               On this ſame Altar, and by heauens power,
               Theres not an Engliſh traitor of them all,
               
                  Iohn once diſpatcht, and I faire Englands King,
               Shall on his ſhoulders beare his head one day,
               But I will crop it for their guilts deſert:
               Nor ſhall their heires inioy their Seigniories,
               But periſh by their parents foule amiſſe.
               This haue I ſworne, and this will I performe,
               If ere I come vnto the height I hope.
               Lay downe your hands, and ſweare the ſame with me.
               The French Lords ſweare.
               Why ſo, now call them in, and ſpeake them faire,
               A ſmile of Fraunce will feed an Engliſh foole.
               Beare them in hand as friends, for ſo they be:
               But in the heart like traitors as they are.
               Enter the Engliſh Lords.
               Now famous followers, chiefetaines of the world,
               Haue we ſollicited with hearty prayer
               The heauen in fauour of our high attempt.
               Leaue we this place, and march we with our power
               To rowſe the tyrant from his chiefeſt hold:
               And when our labours haue a proſprous end,
               Each man ſhall reape the fruit of his deſert.
               And ſo reſolu'd, braue followers let vs hence.
               
                  Enter K. Iohn, Baſtard, Pandulph, and a many Priests with them.
               Thus Iohn, thou art abſolu'd from all thy ſinnes,
               And freed by order from our Fathers curſe.
               Receiue thy Crowne againe, with this prouiſo,
               That thou remaine true liegeman to the Pope,
               And carry armes in right of holy Rome.
               
            
            
               Iohn
               I holde the ſame as tenant to the Pope,
               And thanke your Holineſſe for your kindneſſe ſhewne.
            
            
               Philip
               A proper ieſt, when Kings muſt ſtoop to Friers,
               Need hath no law, when Friers muſt be Kings.
            
            Enter a Meſſenger.
            
               Meſſ.
               Pleaſe it your maieſtie, the Prince of France,
               
               With all the Nobles of your Graces Land
               Are marching hitherward in good aray.
               Where ere they ſet their foot, all places yeeld:
               Thy Land is theirs, and not a foot holds out
               But Douer Caſtle, which is hard beſieg'd.
            
            
               Pan.
               Feare not king Iohn, thy kingdome is the Popes,
               And they ſhall know his Holineſſe hath power,
               To beate them ſoone from whence he hath to doe.
            
            Drums and Trumpets. Enter Lewes, Melun, Salisbury, Eſſex, Pembrooke, and all the Nobles from Fraunce, and England.
            
            
               Lewes
               
                  Pandulph, as gaue his Holineſſe in charge,
               So hath the Dolphin muſtred vp his troupes,
               And wonne the greateſt part of all this Land.
               But ill becomes your Grace Lord Cardinall,
               Thus to conuerſe with Iohn that is accurſt.
            
            
               
               Pand.
               
                  Lewes of France, victorious Conqueror,
               Whoſe ſword hath made this Iland quake for feare;
               Thy forwardneſſe to fight for holy Rome,
               
               Shall be remunerated to the full:
               But know my Lord, K. Iohn is now abſolu'd,
               The Pope is pleaſde, the Land is bleſt agen,
               And thou haſt brought each thing to good effect.
               It reſteth then that thou withdraw thy powers,
               And quietly returne to Fraunce againe:
               For all is done the Pope would wiſh thee doe.
            
            
               Lewes
               But all's not done that Lewes came to do.
               Why Pandulph, hath king Philip ſent his ſonne
               And beene at ſuch exceſſiue charge in warres,
               To be diſmiſt with words? king Iohn ſhall know,
               
                  England is mine, and he vſurps my right.
            
            
               Pand.
               
                  Lewes, I charge thee and thy complices
               Vpon the paine of Pandulphs holy curſe,
               That thou withdraw thy powers to Fraunce againe,
               And yeeld vp London and the neighbour townes
               That thou haſt tane in England by the ſword.
            
            
               Melun
               Lord Cardinall, by Lewes princely leaue,
               It can be nought but vſurpation
               In thee, the Pope, and all the Church of Rome,
               
               Thus to inſult on Kings of Chriſtendome,
               Now with a word to make them carrie armes,
               Then with a word to make them leaue their armes.
               This muſt not be: Prince Lewes keepe thine owne,
               Let Pope and Popelings curſe their bellies full.
            
            
               Bast.
               My Lord of Melun, what title had the Prince
               To England and the Crowne of Albion,
               
               But ſuch a title as the Pope confirm'd:
               The Prelate now lets fall his fained claime:
               
                  Lewes is but the agent for the Pope,
               Then muſt the Dolphin ceaſe, ſith he hath ceaſt:
               But ceaſe or no, it greatly matters not,
               If you my Lords and Barons of the Land
               
                  Will leaue the French, and cleaue vnto our King.
               For ſhame yee Peeres of England ſuffer not
               Your ſelues, your honours, and your land to fall:
               But with reſolued thoughts beate backe the French,
               And free the Land from yoke of ſeruitude.
            
            
               Salisbury
               
                  Philip, not ſo, Lord Lewes is our King,
               And wee will follow him vnto the death.
            
            
               Pand.
               Then in the name of Innocent the Pope,
               I curſe the Prince and all that take his part,
               And excommunicate the rebell Peeres
               As traitors to the King, and to the Pope.
            
            
               Lew.
               
                  Pandulph, our ſwords ſhall bleſſe our ſelues agen:
               Prepare thee Iohn, Lords follow me your King.
            
            Exeunt
            
               Iohn
               Accurſed Iohn, the Diuell owes thee ſhame,
               Reſiſting Rome, or yeelding to the Pope, all's one.
               The diuell take the Pope, the Peeres, and Fraunce:
               
               Shame be my ſhare for yeelding to the Prieſt.
            
            
               Pand.
               Comfort thy ſelfe king Iohn, the Cardnall goes
               Vpon his curſe to make them leaue their armes.
            
            Exit.
            
               Bastard
               Comfort my Lord, and curſe the Cardinall,
               Betake your ſelfe to armes, my troupes are preſt
               To anſwer Lewes with a luſtie ſhocke:
               The Engliſh archers haue their quiuers full,
               Their bowes are bent, the pikes are preſt to puſh:
               Good cheere my Lord, King Richards fortune hangs
               Vpon the plume of warrelike Philips helme.
               Then let them know his brother and his ſonne
               Are leaders of the Engliſhmen at armes.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Philip I know not how to anſwer thee:
               But let vs hence, to anſwer Lewes pride.
            
            Excurſions. Enter Meloun with Engliſh Lords.
            
               Mel.
               O I am ſlaine, Nobles, Salsbury, Pembrooke,
               
               My ſoule is charged, heare me: for what I ſay
               Concerns the Peeres of England, and their State.
               
                  Liſten, braue Lords, a fearefull mourning tale
               To be deliuered by a man of death.
               Behold theſe ſcarres, the dole of bloudie Mars
               
               Are harbingers from natures common foe,
               Citing this truncke to Tellus priſon houſe;
               Lifes charter (Lordings) laſteth not an houre:
               And fearefull thoughts, forerunners of my end,
               Bids me giue phyſicke to a ſickely ſoule.
               O Peeres of England, know you what you do?
               There's but a haire that ſunders you from harme,
               The hooke is baited, and the traine is made,
               And ſimply you runne doating to your deaths.
               But leſt I die, and leaue my tale vntolde,
               With ſilence ſlaughtering ſo braue a crew.
               This I auerre, if Lewes winne the day,
               There's not an Engliſhman that lifts his hand
               Againſt King Iohn to plant the heire of France,
               
               But is already damnd to cruell death.
               I heard it vow'd; my ſelfe amongſt the reſt
               Swore on the Altar aide to this Edict.
               Two cauſes Lords, makes me diſplay this drift,
               The greateſt for the freedome of my ſoule,
               That longs to leaue this manſion free from guilt:
               The other on a naturall inſtinct,
               For that my Grandſire was an Engliſhman.
               Miſdoubt not Lords the truth of my diſcourſe,
               No frenſie, nor no brainſicke idle fit,
               But well aduiſde, and wotting what I ſay,
               Pronounce I here before the face of heauen,
               That nothing is diſcouered but a truth.
               Tis time to flie, ſubmit your ſelues to Iohn,
               
               The ſmiles of Fraunce ſhade in the frownes of death,
               Lift vp your ſwords, turne face againſt the French,
               Expell the yoke that's framed for your necks.
               Backe warremen, backe, imbowell not the clime,
               Your ſeate, your nurſe, your birth dayes breathing place,
               
                  That bred you, beares you, brought you vp in armes.
               Ah! be not ſo ingrate to digge your mothers graue,
               Preſerue your lambes and beate away the wolfe.
               My ſoule hath ſaid, contritions penitence
               Laies hold on mans redemption for my ſinne.
               Farewell my Lords; witneſſe my faith when we are met in heauen,
               And for my kindneſſe giue me graue roome here.
               My ſoule doth fleet, worlds vanities farewell.
            
            
               Salſ.
               Now ioy betide thy ſoule well-meaning man,
               How now my Lords, what cooling carde is this?
               A greater griefe growes now than earſt hath beene.
               What counſell giue you, ſhall we ſtay and die?
               Or ſhall we home, and kneele vnto the King.
            
            
               Pemb.
               My heart miſgaue this ſad accurſed newes:
               What haue we done? fie Lords, what frenſie moued
               Our hearts to yeeld vnto the pride of Fraunce?
               
               If we perſeuer, we are ſure to die:
               If we deſiſt, ſmall hope againe of life.
            
            
               Salsb.
               Beare hence the body of this wretched man,
               That made vs wretched with his dying tale,
               And ſtand not wayling on our preſent harmes,
               As women wont: but ſeeke our harmes redreſſe.
               As for my ſelfe, I will in haſte be gone:
               And kneele for pardon to our ſoueraigne Iohn.
               
            
            
               Pemb.
               I, there's the way, lets rather kneele to him,
               Than to the French that would confound vs all.
            
            Exeunt
            Enter King Iohn carried betweene two Lords.
            
               Iohn
               Set downe, ſet downe the loade not woorth your paine,
               For done I am with deadly wounding griefe:
               Sickely and ſuccourleſſe, hopeleſſe of any good,
               The world hath wearied me, and I haue wearied it:
               It loathes I liue, I liue and loathe my ſelfe.
               Who pities me? to whom haue I beene kinde?
               But to a few; a few will pitie me.
               Why die I not? Death ſcornes ſo vilde a prey.
               
                  Why liue I not, life hates ſo ſad a prize.
               I ſue to both to be retaind of either,
               But both are deafe, I can be heard of neither.
               Nor death nor life, yet life and neare the neere,
               Ymixt with death, biding I wot not where.
            
            
               Phil.
               How fares my Lord, that he is carried thus?
               Not all the aukeward fortunes yet befalne,
               Made ſuch impreſſion of lament in me.
               Nor euer did my eye attaint my heart
               With any obiect moouing more remorſe,
               Than now beholding of a mighty King,
               Borne by his Lords in ſuch diſtreſſed State.
            
            
               Ioh.
               What newes with thee? if bad, report it ſtraight▪
               
               If good, be mute, it doth but flatter me.
            
            
               Phil.
               Such as it is, and heauy though it be,
               To glut the world with tragicke elegies,
               Once will I breathe to aggrauate the reſt,
               Another moane to make the meaſure full.
               The braueſt bow-man had not yet ſent forth
               Two arrowes from the quiuer at his ſide,
               But that a rumor went throughout our Campe,
               That Iohn was fled, the King had left the field.
               At laſt the rumor ſcal'd theſe eares of mine,
               Who rather choſe as ſacrifice for Mars,
               
               Than ignominious ſcandall by retire.
               I cheer'd the troupes, as did the prince of Troy
               His weary followers gainſt the Mermidons,
               Crying alowd, S. George, the day is ours.
               But feare had captiuated courage quite,
               And like the Lambe before the greedie Wolfe,
               So heartleſſe fled our war-men from the field.
               Short tale to make, my ſelfe amongſt the reſt,
               Was faine to flie before the eager foe.
               By this time night had ſhadowed all the earth,
               With ſable curtaines of the blackeſt hue,
               And fenc'd vs from the furie of the French,
               
                  As Io from the iealous Iunoes eie,
               When in the morning our troupes did gather head,
               Paſſing the waſhes with our carriages,
               The impartiall tide deadly and inexorable,
               Came raging in with billowes threatning death,
               And ſwallowed vp the moſt of all our men,
               My ſelfe vpon a Galloway right free, well pac'd,
               Out ſtript the flouds that followed waue by waue,
               I ſo eſcap'd to tell this tragicke tale.
            
            
               Iohn
               Griefe vpon griefe, yet none ſo great a griefe
               To end this life, and thereby rid my griefe.
               Was euer any ſo infortunate,
               The right Idea of a curſed man,
               As I, poore I, a triumph for deſpight,
               My feuer growes, what ague ſhakes me ſo?
               How farre to Sminstead, tell me, do you know?
               Preſent vnto the Abbot word of my repaire.
               My ſickneſſe rages, to tyrannize vpon me,
               I cannot liue vnleſſe this feuer leaue me.
            
            
               Philip
               Good cheere my Lord, the Abbey is at hand,
               Behold my Lord, the Churchmen come to meet you.
            
            Enter the Abbot and certaine Monkes.
            
               Abb.
               All health & happines to our ſoueraigne lord the King.
            
            
               Iohn
               Nor health nor happines hath Iohn at all.
               Say Abbot, am I welcome to thy houſe?
            
            
               Abbot
               Such welcome as our Abbey can afford,
               Your Maieſtie ſhall be aſſured of.
            
            
               Philip
               The King thou ſeeſt is weake and very faint,
               What victuals haſt thou to refreſh his Grace?
            
            
               Abb.
               Good ſtote my Lord, of that you need not feare,
               For Lincolneſhire, and theſe our Abbey grounds
               Were neuer fatter, nor in better plight.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Philip, thou neuer needſt to doubt of cates,
               Nor King nor Lord is ſeated halfe ſo well,
               As are the Abbeis throughout all the land,
               If any plot of ground do paſſe another,
               
                  The Friers faſten on it ſtrait:
               But let vs in to taſte of their repaſt,
               It goes againſt my heart to feed with them,
               Or be beholding to ſuch Abbey groomes:
            
            Exeunt.
            Manet the Monke.
            
            
               Monke
               Is this the King that neuer lou'd a Frier?
               Is this the man that doth contemne the Pope?
               Is this the man that rob'd the holy Church,
               And yet will flie vnto a Friory?
               Is this the King that aymes at Abbeis lands?
               Is this the man whom all the world abhorres,
               And yet will flie vnto a Friorie?
               Accurſt be Swinstead Abbey, Abbot, Friers,
               Monkes, Nunnes, and Clarks, and all that dwells therein,
               If wicked Iohn eſcape aliue away.
               Now if that thou wilt looke to merit heauen,
               And be canonized for a holy Saint:
               To pleaſe the world with a deſeruing worke,
               Be thou the man to ſet thy countrey free,
               And murder him that ſeekes to murder thee.
            
            Enter the Abbot.
            
               Abbot
               Why are not you within to cheere the King?
               He now begins to mend, and will to meate.
            
            
               Monke
               What if I ſay to ſtrangle him in his ſleepe?
            
            
               Abbot
               What, at thy Mumpſimus? away,
               And ſeeke ſome meanes for to paſtime the King.
            
            
               Monke
               Ile ſet a dudgeon dagger at his heart,
               And with a mallet knocke him on the head.
            
            
               Abbot
               Alas, what meanes this Monke to murder me?
               Dare lay my life hee'l kill me for my place.
            
            
               Monke
               Ile poyſon him, and it ſhall ne'r be knowne,
               And then ſhall I be chiefeſt of my houſe.
            
            
               Abbot
               If I were dead indeed he is the next,
               But Ile away, for why the Monke is mad,
               And in his madneſſe he will murder me.
            
            
               
               Mon.
               My L.I cry your Lordſhip mercy, I ſaw you not.
            
            
               Abbot
               Alas good Thomas do not murder me, and thou ſhalt haue my place with thouſand thanks.
            
            
               Monke
               I murder you! God ſhield from ſuch a thought.
            
            
               Abbot
               If thou wilt needs, yet let me ſay my prayers.
            
            
               Monke
               I will not hurt your Lordſhip good my Lord: but if you pleaſe, I will impart a thing that ſhall be beneficiall to vs all.
            
            
               Abbot
               Wilt thou not hurt me holy Monke? ſay on.
            
            
               Monke
               You know my Lord, the King is in our houſe.
            
            
               Abbot
               True.
            
            
               Monke
               You know likewiſe the King abhorres a Frier.
            
            
               Abbot
               True.
            
            
               Monke
               And he that loues not a Frier is our enemy.
            
            
               Abbot
               Thou ſaiſt true.
            
            
               Monke
               Then the King is our enemy.
            
            
               Abbot
               True.
            
            
               Mon.
               Why then ſhould we not kil our enemy, and the king being our enemy, why then ſhould we not kill the K.
            
            
               Abbot
               O bleſſed Monke! I ſee God moues thy minde
               to free this land from tyrants ſlauery.
               But who dare venter for to do this deede?
            
            
               Mon.
               Who dare? why I my Lord dare do the deed,
               Ile free my Countrey and the Church from foes,
               And merit heauen by killing of a King.
            
            
               Abbot
               
                  Thomas kneele downe, and if thou art reſolu'd,
               I will abſolue thee here from all thy ſinnes,
               For why the deede is meritorious.
               Forward, and feare not man, for euery month,
               Our Friers ſhall ſing a Maſſe for Thomas ſoule.
            
            
               Mon.
               God and S. Francis proſper my attempt,
               For now my Lord I goe about my worke.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Lewes and his armie.
            
               Lewes
               Thus victorie in bloudie Lawrell clad,
               Followes the fortune of yong Lodowike,
               
               The Engliſhmen as danted at our ſight,
               
                  Fall as the fowle before the Eagles eies,
               Onely two croſſes of contrary change
               Do nip my heart, and vex me with vnreſt.
               Lord Meluns death, the one part of my ſoule,
               A brauer man did neuer liue in Fraunce.
               
               The other griefe, I that's a gall indeed,
               To thinke that Douer Caſtle ſhould hold out
               Gainſt all aſſaults, and reſt impregnable.
               Yee warrelike race of Francus Hectors ſonne,
               Triumph in conqueſt of that tyrant Iohn,
               
               The better halfe of England is our owne:
               And towards the conqueſt of the other part,
               We haue the face of all the Engliſh Lords,
               What then remaines but ouerrunne the land?
               Be reſolute my warrelike followers,
               And if good fortune ſerue as ſhee begins,
               The pooreſt peſant of the realme of France
               Shalbe a maſter ore an Engliſh Lord.
            
            Enter a Meſſenger.
            
               Lewes
               Fellow, what newes?
            
            
               Meſſ.
               Pleaſeth your Grace, the Earle of Salsbury, Penbrooke, Eſſex, Clare, and Arundell, with all the Barons that did fight for thee, are on a ſodaine fled with all their powers, to ioyne with Iohn, to driue thee backe againe.
            
            Enter another Meſſenger.
            
               Meſſen.
               
                  Lewes my Lord, why ſtandſt thou in a maze?
               Gather thy troupes, hope not of helpe from Fraunce,
               
               For all thy forces being fiftie ſaile,
               Containing twenty thouſand ſouldiers,
               With victuall and munition for the warre,
               Putting them from Callis in vnluckie time,
               Did croſſe the ſeas, and on the Goodwin ſands,
               The men, munition, and the ſhips are loſt.
            
            Enter another Meſſenger.
            
               Lewes
               More newes? ſay on.
            
            
               Meſſen.
               
                  Iohn (my Lord 
                     •
                  ith all his ſcattered troups,
               
                  Flying the fury of your conquering ſword,
               As Pharaoh earſt within the bloody ſea,
               So he and his enuironed with the tide,
               On Lincolne waſhes all were ouerwhelmed,
               The Barons fled, our forces caſt away.
            
            
               Lewes
               Was euer heard ſuch vnexpected newes?
            
            
               Meſſenger
               Yet Lodowike reuiue thy dying heart,
               King Iohn and all his forces are conſumde.
               The leſſe thou needſt the aid of Engliſh Earles,
               The leſſe thou needſt to grieue thy nauies wracke,
               And follow times aduantage with ſucceſſe.
            
            
               Lewes
               Braue Frenchmen arm'd with magnanimitie,
               March after Lewes, who will leade you on
               To chaſe the Barons power that wants a head,
               For Iohn is drown'd, and I am Englands King.
               Though our munition and our men be loſt,
               
                  Philip of Fraunce will ſend vs freſh ſupplies.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter two Friers laying a Cloth.
            
               Frier
               Diſpatch, diſpatch, the King deſires to eate,
               Would a might eate his laſt for the loue he bears to church men.
            
            
               Frier
               I am of thy mind too, and ſo it ſhould be and we might be our owne caruers.
               I maruell why they dine here in the Orchard.
            
            
               Frier
               I know not, nor I care not. The King comes.
            
            
               Iohn.
               Come on Lord Abbot, ſhall we ſit together?
            
            
               Abbot
               Pleaſeth your Grace ſit downe.
            
            
               Iohn
               Take your places ſirs, no pomp in penury, all beggers and friends may come, where Neceſſitie keepes the houſe, curteſie is barr'd the table, ſit downe Philip.
               
            
            
               Baſt.
               My Lord, I am loth to allude ſo much to the prouerb, honors change maners: a king is a king, though Fortune do her worſt, & we as dutifull in deſpite of her frown, as if your highnes were now in the higheſt tipe of dignitie.
            
            
               Iohn
               Come, no more adoe, and you tell mee much of dignity, you'l marre my appetite in a ſurfet of ſorrow.

What cheere Lord Abbot, me thinks ye frown like an hoſt that knows his gueſt hath no money to pay the reckning?
            
            
               Abbot
               No my Liege, if I frowne at all, it is for I feare this cheere too homely to entertaine ſo mighty a gueſt as your maieſtie.
            
            
               Baſt.
               I thinke rather, my Lord Abbot, you remember my laſt being here, when I went in progreſſe for powches, and the rancor of his heart breakes out in his countenance, to ſhew he hath not forgot me.
            
            
               Abb.
               Not ſo my Lord, you, and the meaneſt follower of his maieſty, are heartily welcome to me.
            
            
               Monke
               Waſſell my Liege, and as a poore Monke may ſay, welcome to Swinstead.
               
            
            
               Iohn
               Begin Monke, and report hereafter thou waſt taſter to a King.
            
            
               Monke
               As much health to your Highneſſe as to mine owne heart.
            
            
               Iohn
               I pledge thee kind Monke.
            
            
               Monke
               The merrieſt draught that euer was drunke in England.
               
               Am I not too bold with your Highneſſe?
            
            
               Iohn
               Not a whit, all friends and fellowes for a time.
            
            
               Monke
               If the inwards of a toad be a compound of any proofe: why ſo it workes.
            
            
               Iohn
               Stay Philip, where's the Monke?
            
            
               Bastard
               He is dead my Lord.
            
            
               Iohn
               Then drinke not Philip for a world of wealth.
            
            
               Ba.
               What cheere my liege? your collor gins to change.
            
            
               Iohn
               So doth my life: O Philip, I am poiſon'd.
               The Monke, the Diuell, the poyſon gins to rage,
               It will depoſe my ſelfe a King from raigne.
            
            
               Bast.
               This Abbot hath an intereſt in this act.
               At all aduentures take thou that from me.
               There lie the Abbot, Abbey, Lubber, Diuell.
               March with the Monke vnto the gates of hell.
               How fares my Lord?
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Philip, ſome drinke, oh for the frozen Alpes,
               To tumble on and coole this inward heate,
               That rageth as the fornace ſeuen-fold hote.
               
                  To burne the holy tree in Babylon,
               
               Power after power forſake their proper power,
               Onely the heart impugnes with faint reſiſt
               The fierce inuade of him that conquers Kings,
               Helpe God, O paine! die Iohn, O plague
               Inflicted on thee for thy grieuous ſinnes.
               
                  Philip, a chaire, and by and by a graue,
               My legges diſdaine the carriage of a King.
            
            
               Bast.
               A good my Liege, with patience conquer griefe,
               And beare this paine with kingly fortitude.
            
            
               Iohn
               Me thinkes I ſee a catalogue of ſinne,
               Wrote by a fiend in marble characters,
               The leaſt enough to looſe my part in heauen.
               Me thinkes the Diuell whiſpers in mine eares,
               And tells me, tis in vaine to hope for grace,
               I muſt be damn'd for Arthurs ſodaine death,
               I ſee I ſee a thouſand thouſand men
               Come to accuſe me for my wrong on earth,
               And there is none ſo mercifull a God
               That will forgiue the number of my ſinnes.
               How haue I liu'd, but by anothers loſſe?
               What haue I lou'd, but wracke of others weale?
               When haue I vow'd, and not infring'd mine oath?
               Where haue I done a deede deſeruing well?
               How, what, when, and where, haue I beſtow'd a day,
               That tended not to ſome notorious ill.
               My life repleate with rage and tyrannie,
               Craues little pittie for ſo ſtrange a death.
               Or, who will ſay that Iohn deceaſde too ſoone?
               Who will not ſay, he rather liu'd too long.
               Diſhonour did attaint me in my life,
               And ſhame attendeth Iohn vnto his death.
               Why did I ſcape the fury of the French,
               And dide not by the temper of their ſwords?
               Shameleſſe my life, and ſhamefully it ends,
               Scorn'd by my foes, diſdained of my friends.
            
            
               
               Bast.
               Forgiue the world and all your earthly foes,
               And call on Chriſt, who is your lateſt friend.
            
            
               Iohn
               My tongue doth falter: Philip, I tell thee man,
               Since Iohn did yeeld vnto the Prieſt of Rome,
               
               Nor he nor his haue proſpred on the earth:
               Curſt are his bleſſings, and his curſe is bliſſe.
               But in the ſpirit I crie vnto my God,
               As did the kingly prophet Dauid cry,
               (Whoſe hands, as mine, with murder were attaint)
               I am not he ſhall build the Lord a houſe,
               Or roote theſe locuſts from the face of earth:
               But if my dying heart deceiue me not,
               From out theſe loynes ſhall ſpring a kingly braunch
               Whoſe armes ſhall reach vnto the gates of Rome,
               
               And with his feete treades downe the Strumpets pride,
               That ſits vpon the chaire of Babylon.
               
               
                  Philip, my heart ſtrings breake, the poyſons flame
               Hath ouercome in me weake Natures power,
               And in the faith of Ieſu Iohn doth die.
            
            
               Baſtard
               See how he ſtriues for life, vnhappy Lord,
               Whoſe bowels are diuided in themſelues.
               This is the fruit of Poperie, when true Kings
               Are ſlaine and ſhouldred out by Monkes and Friers.
            
            Enter a Meſſenger.
            
               Meſſ.
               Pleaſe it your Grace, the Barons of the Land,
               Which all this while bare armes againſt the King,
               Conducted by the Legate of the Pope,
               Together with the Prince his Highneſſe ſonne,
               Do craue to be admitted to the preſence of the King.
            
            
               Baſt.
               Your Sonne, my Lord, yong Henry craues to ſee
               Your Maieſtie, and brings with him beſide
               The Barons that reuolted from your Grace.
               O piercing ſight, he fumbleth in the mouth,
               His ſpeech doth faile: lift vp your ſelfe my Lord,
               And ſee the Prince to comfort you in death.
            
            
               Enter Pandulph, yong Henry, the Barons with daggers in their hands.
            
               Prince
               O let me ſee my father ere he die:
               O vncle, were you here, and ſuffred him
               To be thus poyſned by a damned Monke?
               Ah he is dead, Father, ſweet Father ſpeake.
            
            
               Bastard
               His ſpeach doth faile, he haſteth to his end.
            
            
               Pandulph
               Lords, giue me leaue to ioy the dying King,
               With ſight of theſe his Nobles kneeling here
               With daggers in their hands, who offer vp
               Their liues for ranſome of their foule offence.
               Then good my Lord, if you forgiue them all,
               Lift vp your hand in token you forgiue.
            
            
               Saliſ.
               We humbly thanke your royall Maieſtie,
               And vow to fight for England and her King:
               And in the ſight of Iohn our ſoueraigne Lord,
               In ſpite of Lewes and the power of Fraunce,
               
               Who hitherward are marching in all haſte,
               We crowne yong Henry in his fathers ſted.
            
            
               Henry
               Help, help, he dies; Ah father! looke on mee.
            
            
               Legat
               K. Iohn, farewell: in token of thy faith,
               And ſigne thou dieſt the ſeruant of the Lord,
               Lift vp thy hand, that we may witneſſe here,
               Thou diedſt the ſeruant of our Sauiour Chriſt.
               Now ioy betide thy ſoule: what noiſe is this?
            
            Enter a Meſſenger.
            
               Meſſ.
               Help Lords, the Dolphin maketh hitherward
               With Enſignes of defiance in the winde,
               And all our armie ſtandeth at a gaze,
               Expecting what their Leaders will commaund.
            
            
               Bast.
               Let's arme our ſelues in yong K. Henries right,
               And beate the power of Fraunce to ſea againe.
            
            
               
               Legate
               
                  Philip not ſo, but I will to the Prince,
               And bring him face to face to parley with you.
            
            
               Bast.
               Lord Salsbury, your ſelfe ſhall march with me.
               So ſhall we bring theſe troubles to an end.
            
            
               King
               Sweet vncle, if thou loue thy Soueraigne,
               Let not a ſtone of Swinstead Abbey ſtand,
               But pull the houſe about the Friers eares:
               For they haue kill'd my Father and my King.
            
            Exeunt.
            A Parley ſounded, Lewes, Pandulph, Salisbury &c.
            
               Pand.
               
                  Lewes of Fraunce, yong Henry Englands king
               Requires to know the reaſon of the claime
               That thou canſt make to any thing of his.
               King Iohn that did offend, is dead and gone,
               See where his breathleſſe trunke in preſence lies,
               And he as heire apparant to the crowne
               Is now ſucceeded in his Fathers roome.
            
            
               Henry
               
                  Lewes, what law of armes doth leade thee thus,
               To kéepe poſſeſſion of my lawfull right?
               Anſwere; in fine, if thou wilt take a peace,
               And make ſurrender of my right againe,
               Or trie thy title with the dint of ſword:
               I tell thee Dolphin, Henry feares thee not.
               For now the Barons cleaue vnto their King,
               And what thou haſt in England they did get.
            
            
               Lewes
               
                  Henry of England, now that Iohn is dead,
               That was the chiefeſt enemie to Fraunce,
               
               I may the rather be inducde to peace.
               But Salsbury, and you Barons of the Realme,
               This ſtrange reuolt agrees not with the oath
               That you on Bury Altare lately ſware.
            
            
               Salſ.
               Nor did the oath your Highneſſe there did take
               Agree with honour of the Prince of Fraunce.
               
            
            
               Bast.
               My Lord, what anſwer make you to the King?
            
            
               Dolphin
               Faith Philip this I ſay: It bootes not me,
               
                  Nor any Prince, nor power of Chriſtendome
               To ſeeke to win this Iland Albion,
               
               Vnleſſe he haue a partie in the Realme
               By treaſon for to help him in his warres.
               The Peeres which were the partie on my ſide,
               Are fled from me: then bootes not me to fight,
               But on conditions, as mine honour wills,
               I am contented to depart the Realme.
            
            
               Henry
               On what conditions will your Highnes yeeld?
            
            
               Lew.
               That ſhall we thinke vpon by more aduice.
            
            
               Bast.
               Then Kings & Princes, let theſe broils haue end,
               And at more leiſure talke vpon the League.
               Meane while to Worster let vs beare the King,
               And there interre his bodie, as beſeemes.
               But firſt, in ſight of Lewes heire of Fraunce,
               
               Lords take the Crowne, and ſet it on his head,
               That by ſucceſſion is our lawfull King.
               They crowne yong Henry.
               
               Thus Englands peace begins in Henries raigne,
               And bloodie warres are cloſde with happie league.
               Let England liue but true within it ſelfe,
               And all the world can neuer wrong her State.
               
                  Lewes, thou ſhalt be brauely ſhipt to Fraunce,
               
               For neuer Frenchman got of Engliſh ground
               The twentith part that thou haſt conquered.
               Dolphin, thy hand; to Worster we will march:
               Lords all, lay hands to beare your Soueraigne
               With obſequies of honour to his graue:
               If Englands Peeres and people ioyne in one,
               Nor Pope, nor France, nor Spaine can do them wrong.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   