
      
         
            
            
            ¶The treatyſe anſwerynge the boke of Berdes. Compyled by Collyn clowte, dedycatyd to Barnarde barber dwellynge in Banbery.
            
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶To drynke with me, be not a ferde
            For here ye ſe groweth neuer a berde▪
            
            
               
            
            ¶I am a Foole of Cocke lorellys bote
            Callyng al knaues, to pull therin a rope.
         
         
            
            ¶The preface, or the pyſtle.
            
               TO the ryght worſhypfulle (Barnarde Barber,) dwellynge in Banberye, Collyn▪ Clowte, ſurrendreth gretynge with immortall thankes.
            IT was ſo worſhypful ſyr, that at my laſt beynge in Mountpyllour I chaū
               ſed to be aſſocyat with a doctor of Phyſyke / which at his retorne had ſet forth .iij. Bokes to be prynted ī Fleetſtrete, within Temple barre, the whiche Bokes were compyled togyther ī one volume named the Introductorie of knowledge / whervpon there dyd not reſort only vnto hym marchauntes, gentylmen, and wymen / but alſo knyghtes, and other great men, whiche were deſyrous to knowe the effycacyte, and the effecte of his aforeſayd bodis, and ſo amonge many thynges, they deſyred to knowe his fanſye, conſernynge the werynge of Berdes / He anſweryd in great experyence. Some wyl weer berdis bycauſe theyr faces be pocky, maungy

ſauſflewme, lyporous, & dyſfygured / by the whiche many clene men were infected. So this done he deſyred euery mā to be contentyd: Vvherfore I deſyre no man to be dyſpleaſyd with me. And where as he was anymatyd to wryte his boke to thende, that great men may laugh therat / I haue deuyſed this anſwere to the entent: that ī the redyng they myght laughe vs bothe to ſcorne / And for that cauſe I wrote this boke, as god knoweth my pretence / who euer keape youre mayſterſhyp in helthe.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Here foloweth a treatyſe, made Anſwerynge the treatyſe of doctor Borde vpon Berdes.
            
               CAllynge to remembraunce your notable reproche gyuē vnto berdes, I was cōſtrayned to render the occaſion therof, wherupon, I founde by longe ſurmyſe and ſtudye that ye had red the ſtorye of Hellogobalus, & founde therin greate and ſtronge auctoryties / which by lykelyhode mouyd you to this

Reformacyon of berdes. For ye knowe that Hellogobalus beynge gyuen moche to the deſyre of the body, & that by moche ſuperfluyte, ye thought it requyſyght to cōmyt the fylthy ſyn̄e of lechey, vpon the receyptꝭ of delycate meatꝭ. For he cauſed his cokes to make & ordeyne ſuche hote meates that maye prouoke or ſt
                  •
               t
                  •
                hym the rather therunto. And ī ther ſo doyng he made them ſome of his preuye chambre ſome of his hed lordes of his counſell But yet the chefe and pryncypall preſeptes that he gaue vnto his cokꝭ, was this that they ſhulde not only polle theyr hedes, but alſo ſhaue theyr berdes. For this entente, that when he were dronkyn, or v
                  ••
               etynge rype by takyng exceſſe, that he myghte be well aſſuryd, that it came not by no heer of from his cokes heddes. For his delyght was not onely in the feminyne kynde / and alſo delyghted in wo
               
                  ••••
               y mēn / yet 
                  ••
                and his ſyne vnder
               
                  •
               y
                  •
                faces ledde not onely a 
                  •
               ytyous lyfe, but alſo made a ſhameful ende. Not withſtandynge other that, or this ſtorye folowynge was and 
                  •
               s the 
                  •••
               alyon why yt

abore berdes, and that was this at your laſte beynge in Mowntpyllyer, Martyn the ſurgyen beyng there with you, & dyd accompany dayly with none ſo moch as with you: yf ye be remēbred, he brought you to dyner vpon a daye to one Hans ſmormowthes houſe a duche mā, in whiche houſe you were cupſhore, otherwyſe called dronkyn, at whiche tyme your berde was lōge / ſo then your aſſocyat martyn brought you to bed / and with the remouyng your ſtomake tornyd, & ſo ye vometyd in his boſome, howbeit as moche as your berde myghte holde vpon youre berde remayned tyll the next daye in the morenyng. And when ye waked & ſmelt your owne berde, ye fel to it a freſſhe, and callynge for your frende Martyn ſhewynge the cauſe of this laſte myſchaunce. wherupon ye deſyred to ſhaue you. And ſo when ye ſawe your berde ye ſayd that it was a ſhamfull thynge on any mans face. And ſo it is in ſuche caſes I not denye / yet ſhall ye conſyder, that our Englyſſhe men beynge in Englande dothe vſe to kepe theyr berdes moche more clen
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
            
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  As 
                        •••
                     ge as any berdes be worne
                  Mockynge ſhall not be forborne
                  But yet al length his is the ſcorne.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶with berdyd men, he wyll not drynke
                  Bycauſe it doth in theyr berdes ſynke
                  The cauſe therof, ye may ſoone thynke
                  His berde in Flaunders ones dyd ſtynke
                  whiche by dyſtulacyon
                  Of a vomytacyon
                  Made ſuche dyſturbacyon
                  That it abored the nacyon.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶Some berdꝭ he ſaith doth grow a pace
                  To hyde an euyll roleryd face
                  In fayth his had an homlye grace
                  when he was in that dronkyn caſe
                  But ſythe he doth this matter ſtere
                  To make that ſhauynge ſhuld be dere
                  I thynke it doth full well appere
                  That foles had neuer leſſe wyt in a yere
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶A berde ſayth he, wyl breyd moch care
                  If that he with his mayſter compare
                  Hi
                        •
                      may ye proue a wy
                        •
                      full dare
                  That iudgeth ſo a man to fare
                  
                     what mā lyuyng, I wold fayne knowe
                  That for comꝑaſon letꝭ his berde growe
                  But yet though that a ſpyghtfull ſhrow
                  His ſpyghtful wordes, abrode doth blow
                  I fere it not, &c
               
               
                  ¶Of berdes he ſayth, ther cōms no gaynes
                  & berdꝭ quycknyth not the braynes
                  Lo how in Phyſyke, he taketh paynes
                  He merytes a buſſhel of brwers graynes
                  He warneth alſo euery eſtate
                  To auoyde berdes, for fere of debate
                  If men, lyke hym ſhuld vſe to prate
                  His warnyng then ſhuld come to late.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶If berdes alſo a purſe doth pycke
                  As ye compare them to be lyke
                  yet ye haue gotte more in one wycke
                  Then berdes in .x. togyther may ſtryke
                  For by caſtynge of a pyſpotte
                  ye haue pollyd many a grote
                  yea and moche more god wotte
                  By falſhede ye haue gotte.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶yet one thynge more, I wyll aſſayle
                  The daūger of drynkyng ye do bewayle
                  Beleue ye me, yf all do fayle
                  
                     In ſtede of a cup, ye ſhall haue a payle
                  For you haue gyuen warnynge playne
                  That berdyd men, ſhall be full fayne
                  To brynge a cup, for theyr owne gayne
                  The more fole you, ſo to dyſdayne,
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶Note me well, for it is trewe
                  Thoughe berdyd men, ye wyll eſchewe
                  There be moche honyſter men than you
                  That wyl drynke long, or they do ſpewe
                  As you haue done, I knowe or this
                  wherfore I ſay, though ſo it is
                  I wyll not tell that is amys
                  yet wyll I tell, ſome trewyth yewys.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶yet of one thynge, that ye do treate
                  Howe that a berde, in a great ſwete
                  By lyke doth catche, a kauyſſhe hete
                  Therby ye do a great prayſe gete
                  For trewely vnfayned
                  your honyſte is dyſtayned
                  All though ye haue dyſdayned
                  Men knowe ye haue ſuſtayned.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶Though in the wynter, a dew wyl lye
                  That dyſtylleth from the noſe pryuelye
                  
                     To refrayne your cup, ye pray thē hartly
                  And all is for ſuperflous glotonye
                  For glotony, is of ſuche a kynde
                  That ende of exceſſe, he can none fynde
                  Tyll paſt is both, the wyt and mynde
                  So one of thoſe ye be aſſynde.
                  I fere it not
               
            
            
               The ſeconde parte of that ſonge.
               
                  I Lytell thought, ye were ſo wyſe
                  Berdes to deuyſe of the new guyſe
                  But truely, for your enterpryſe
                  ye may go caſt your wyt at dyſe
                  At ſyncke or ſyſe, whiche ſo doth fall
                  Fere ye not to caſh at all
                  For yf you loſe your loſtes be ſmall
                  It is to dere, a tenys ball.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶A berde vpon his ouer lyppe
                  ye ſaye wyll be a proper tryppe
                  wherby ye ſhall the better ſkyppe
                  Go your wayes. I dare let you ſlyppe
                  where as be many more
                  I thynke by .xx. ſcore
                  In cocke lorelles 
                        •
                     ote before
                  
                     ye maye take anore.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶yet though that ye one thing do craue
                  which is a muſter deuyles berde to haue
                  ye make me ſtudy, ſo god me ſaue
                  If this peticion, came not of a knaue
                  Perhapes ſome other man dyd make it
                  And ſo ye dyd vp take it
                  But beſt ye were forſake it
                  For fere of Pears go nakyt.
                  Nowe fere you that
               
               
                  ¶ye ſay ſome berdes be lyke lābes woll
                  with lytell wyt within theyr ſkull
                  who goth a myle, to ſucke a bull
                  Comes home a fole, and yet not full
                  And where ye wyſhe thē pekt with pyes
                  That weres a berde, vnto theyr lyes
                  Be wyſe take hede, ſuche homely ſpyes
                  O tymes can ſpye your crafty lyes.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶But ſyr I praye you, yf you tell can
                  Declare to me when god made man
                  I meane by our forefather Adam
                  whyther that he had a berde than
                  And yf he had, who dyd hym ſhaue
                  Syth that a 
                        〈…〉
                     , he coulde no
                        •
                      haue
                  
                     well then ye proue hym there a knaue
                  Bycauſe his berde, he dyd ſo ſaue.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶Chriſt & his apoſtles, ye haue declaryd
                  That theyr berdes myght not be ſparyd
                  Nor to theyr berdes, no berdes cōparyd
                  Trewe it is, yet we repayryd
                  By his vocacion, to folowe in generall
                  His diſciples, both great and ſmall
                  And folowyng ther vſe we ſhuld not fal
                  Nothynge exceptynge our berdes at all
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶Sāpſon with many thouſandes more
                  Of aūcient phyloſophers, full great ſtore
                  wolde not be ſhauen, to dye therfore
                  why ſhulde you then, repyne ſo ſore
                  Amyt that men doth Imytate
                  Thynges of antyquite, and noble ſtate
                  Such coūterfeat thīgꝭ oftymes do mytygate
                  Moche erneſt yre, and debate.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶Therfore to ceaſe, I thynke be beſt
                  For berdyd men, wolde lyue in reſt
                  you proue your ſelfe, a homly geſt
                  So folyfſhely, to rayle and ieſt
                  For if I wolde go make in ryme
                  
                     Howe new ſhauyd mē, loke lyke ſcraped fwyne
                  & ſo rayle forth, frō tyme to tyme
                  A knauyſſhe laude, then ſhulde be myne
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  ¶what ſhulde auayle, me to do ſo
                  yf I ſhulde teache, howe men ſhulde go
                  Thynkynge my wyt, moche better lo
                  Then any other, frende or fo
                  I myght be imputed trewly
                  For a foole, that doth gloryfye
                  In my nowne ſelfe onelye
                  I thynke you wyll it veryfye.
                  I fere it not
               
               
                  And thus farewel, though I do wryght
                  To anſwere for berdes, by reaſon ryght
                  yet vnberdyd men, I do not ſpyght
                  Though ye on berdes therin delyght
                  And in concludynge, of this thynge
                  I praye god, laue our noble kynge
                  Berdes & vnberdyd, to heuen vs brynge
                  Where as is Ioye euerlaſtynge.
                  I fere it not. &c.
               
            
            ¶Finis,
         
         
            
            
               ❧Barnes in the defence of the Berde.
            
               
            
            BArnes I ſay yf thou be ſhent
            Bycauſe thou wantyſt eloquence
            Deſyre them that thyne entent
            May ſto
                  •
               de all tymes for thy defence
            Conſyderynge that thy hole pretence
            was more deſyrous of vnyte
            Then to enuent curyoſyte.
            
               R W
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   