
      
         
            
               
               
               
                  Engraved border
                  THE WORKES OF Beniamin Jonson.
                  
                  
                     —neque, me vt miretur turbo, laboro:
                     Contentus paucis lectoribus.
                  
                  
                     LONDON printed by W. Stansby, and are to be sould by Rich. $eighen. Ano D. 1616.
                  
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                      fecit
               
            
         
         
            
            
            The Catalogue.
            
               Euery Man in his Humor,
               To Mr. CAMBDEN.
               Euery Man out of his Humor,
               To the INNES of COVRT.
               Cynthias Reuells,
               To the COVRT.
               Poētaster,
               To Mr. RICH. MARTIN.
               Seianus,
               To ESME Lo. Aubigny.
               The Foxe,
               To the VNIVERSITIES.
               The silent Woman,
               To Sir FRAN. STVART.
               The Alchemist,
               To the Lady WROTH.
               Catiline,
               To the Earle of PEMBROK.
               Epigrammes,
               To the same.
               The Forrest,
               
               Entertaynments,
               
               Panegyre,
               
               Masques,
               
               Barriers.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               Ad V. CL. BEN. IONSONIVM, Carmen protrepticon.
               Raptam Thrëicij lyram Neanthu
                     •
                  
               
               Pulset; carmina circulis Palaemon
               Scribar; qui manibus facit Deabus
               Illotis, metuat Probum. Placere
               Te doctis innat auribus, placere
               Te raris innat auribus. Camaenas
               Cùm totus legerem tuas (camaenae
               Nam totum rogitant tuae, nec vllam
               Qui pigrè trabat oscitationem,
               Lectorem) & Numeros, Acumen, Artem,
               Mirum Iudicium, quod ipse censor,
               Ionsoni, nimiùm licet malignus,
               Si doctus simùl, exigat, viderem,
               Sermonem & nitidum, Facetiás
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               Dignas Mercurio, nouás
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Gnomas
               Morum sed veterum, tuí
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iuris
               Quicquid Dramaticum tui legebam,
               Tam semper fore, tám
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   te loquuium,
               Vt nec Lemnia notior sigillo
               Tellus, nec maculâ sacrandus Apis,
               Non cesto Venus, aut comis Apollo,
               Quàm Musâ fueris sciente notus,
               Quàm Musâ fueris tuá notatus,
               Illâ, quae vnica, sydus vt refulgens,
               Stricturas, superat comis, Minorum:
               In mentem subijt Stolonis illud,
               Lingua Pieridas fuisse Plauti
               Vsuras, Ciceronis at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   dictum,
               Saturno genitum phrasi Platonis,
               Musae si Latio, Iouis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Athenis
               Dixissent. Fore iam sed hunc & illas
               IonsonI numeros puto loquutos,
               
               Anglis si fuerint vtri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fati.
               Tam, mi, tu sophiam doces amaenè,
               Sparsìm tám
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sophos amaena sternis!
               Sed, tot delicias, minùs placebat,
               Sparsis distraherent tot in libellis
               Cerdoi caculae. Volumen vnum,
               Quod seri Britonum terant nepotes,
               Optabam, & thyasus chorús
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   amantum
               Musas hoc cupiunt, tui laborum
               Et quicquid reliquum est, adhuc tuís
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               Seruatum pluteis. Tibi at videmur
               Non tàm quaerere quàm parare nobis
               Laudem, dum volumus palàm merentis
               To laurus cupidi reposta scripta;
               Dum secernere te tuás
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Musas
               Audemus numero vngulae liquorem
               Gustante, vt veteres nonem sorores
               Et sirenibus & solent cicadis;
               Dum & secernere posse te videmur,
               Efflictìm petimus nonúm
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   librum,
               Qui nullo sacer haùt petatur aeuo,
               Qui nullo sacer exolescat aeuo,
               Qui curis niteat tuis secundis;
               Vt nos scire aliquid simùl putetur.
               Atqui hoc macte sies, velút
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   calpar,
               Quod dijs inferium, tibi sacremus,
               Vt nobis benè sit, tuám
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   frontem
               Perfundant ederae recentiores
               Et splendor nouus. Inuident coronam
               Hanc tantam patriae tibi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   (quantà
               Aeternùm à merito tuo superbum
               Anglorum genus esse possit olìm)
               Tantùm qui penitùs volunt amaenas
               Sublatas literas, timéntue lucem
               Ionson I nimiam tenebriones.
               
                  
                     I. Selden I. C.
                  
               
            
            
               
               TO BEN. IONSON, on his workes.
               MAy I subscribe a name? dares my bold quill
               Write that or good or ill,
               Whose frame is of that height, that, to mine eye,
               Its head is in the sky?
               Yes. Since the most censures, beleeues, and saith
               By an implicit faith:
               Least their misfortune make them chance amisse,
               I'le wast them right by this.
               Of all I know thou onely art the man
               That dares but what he can:
               Yet by performance showes he can do more
               Then hath bene done before,
               Or will be after. (such assurance giues
               Perfection where it liues.)
               Words speake thy matter; matter fills thy words;
               And choyce that grace affords
               That both are best: and both most fitly plac't,
               Are with new VENVS grac't
               From artfull method all in this point meet,
               With good to mingle sweet.
               These are thy lower parts. what stands aboue
               Who sees not yet must loue,
               When on the Base he reads BEN. IONSONS name,
               And heares the rest from Fame.
               This from my loue of truth: which payes this due
               To your iust worth, not you.
               
                  
                     Ed. Heyward.
                  
               
            
            
               Vpon SEIANVS.
               SO brings the wealth-contracting ieweller
               Pearles and deare stones, from richest shores and streames,
               As thy accomplisht trauaile doth confer
               From skill-inriched soules, their wealthyer gems;
               
               So doth his hand enchase in ammeld gold,
               Cut, and adorn'd beyond their natiue merits,
               His solid flames, as thine hath here inrold
               In more then golden verse, those better'd spirits;
               So he entreasures Princes cabinets,
               As thy wealth will their wished libraries;
               So, on the throate of the rude sea, he sets
               His ventrous foot, for his illustrous prise:
               And through wild desarts, arm'd with wilder beasts,
               As thou aduentur'st on the multitude,
               Vpon the boggie, and engulfed brests
               Of hyrelings, sworne to find most right, most rude:
               And he, in stormes at sea, doth not endure,
               Nor in vast desarts, amongst wolues, more danger;
               Then we, that would with vertue liue secure,
               Sustayne for her in euery vices anger.
               Nor is this Allegorie vniustly rackt,
               To this strange length: Onely, that iewells are,
               In estimation meerely, so exact:
               And thy worke, in it selfe, is deare and rare.
               Wherein MINERVA had beene vanquished,
               Had shee, by it, her sacred loomes aduanc't,
               And through thy subiect wouen her graphicke thred,
               Contending therein, to be more entranc't;
               For, though thy hand was scarce addrest to draw
               The semi-circle of SEIANVS life,
               The Muse yet makes it the whole sphaere, and law
               To all State liues: and bounds ambition's strife.
               And as a little brooke creepes from his spring,
               With shallow tremblings, through the lowest vales,
               As if he fear'd his streame abroad to bring,
               Least prophane sect should wrong it, and rude gales;
               But finding happy channels, and supplyes
               Of other foords mixe with his modest course,
               He growes a goodly riuer, and descryes
               The strength, that man'd him, since he left his source;
               Then takes he in delight some meades, and groues,
               And, with his two-edg'd waters, flourishes
               Before great palaces, and all mens loues
               Build by his shores, to greet his passages:
               So thy chaste Muse, by vertuous selfe-mistrust,
               Which is a true marke of the truest merit;
               In virgin feare of mens illiterate lust,
               Shut her soft wings, and durst not shew h
                     ••
                   spirit;
               Till, nobly cherisht, now thou lett'st her flie,
               Singing the sable orgies of the Muses,
               And in the highest pitch of tragoedie,
               Mak'st her command, all things thy ground produces.
               Besides, thy Poëme hath this due respect,
               That it lets passe nothing, without obseruing,
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               Worthie instruction; or that might correct
               Rude manners, and renow me the well deseruing:
               Performing such a liuely euidence
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   thy narrations, that thy hearers still
               Thou turn'st to thy spectators; and the sense
               That thy spectators haue of good or ill,
               Thou iniect'st ioyntly to thy readers soules.
               So deare is held, so deckt thy numerous taske,
               As thou putt'st handles to the Thespian boules,
               Or stuck'st rich plumes in the Palladian caske.
               All thy worth, yet, thy selfe must patronise,
               By quassing more of the Castalian head;
               In expiscation of whose mysteries,
               Our nets must still be clogd, with heauie lead,
               To make them sinke, and catch: For chearefull gold
               Was neuer found in the Pierian streames,
               But wants, and scornes, and shames for siluer sold.
               What? what shall we elect in these extreames?
               Now by the shafts of the great CYRRHAN Poet,
               That beare all light, that is, about the world;
               I would haue all dull Poet-haters know it,
               They shall be soule-bound, and in darknesse hurld,
               A thousand yeares (as Sathan was, their fyre)
               Ere any, worthie the poetique name,
               (Might I, that warme but at the Muses fire,
               Presume to guard it) should let deathlesse Fame
               
               Light halfe a beame of all her hundred eyes,
               At his dimme taper, in their memories.
               Flie, flie, you are too neere; so, odorous flowers
               Being held too neere the sensor of our sense,
               Render not pure, nor so sincere their powers,
               As being held a little distance thence.
               O could the world but 
                     •
                  e
                     ••
                  e how sweet a touch
               The Knowledge hath, which is in loue with goodnesse,
               (If Poesie were not rauished so much,
               And her compos'de rage, held the simplest woodnesse,
               Though of all heats, that temper humane braines,
               Her
                     •
                   euer was most subtle, high, and holy,
               First binding sauage liues, in ciuile chaines:
               Solely religious, and adored solely,
               If was felt this) they would not thinke a loue,
               That giues it selfe, in her, did vanities giue;
               Who is (in earth, though low) in worth aboue,
               Most able t'honour life, though least to liue.
               And so good Friend, safe passage to thy freight,
               To thee a long peace, through a vertuous strife,
               In which, lets both contend to vertues height,
               Not making fame our obiect, but good life.
               
               
                  
                     GEOR. CHAPMAN.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To his worthy friend, the Author, H. HOLLAND.
               IN that, this booke doth deigne SEIANVS name,
               Him vnto more, then CAESARS loue, it brings:
               For, where he could not with ambition's wings,
               One quill doth heaue him to the height of fame.
               Yee great-ones though (whose ends may be the same)
               Know, that, how euer we doe flatter kings,
               Their fauours (like themselues) are fading things,
               With no lesse enuie had, then lost with shame.
               Nor make your selues lesse honest then you are,
               To make our author wiser then he is:
               Ne of such crimes accuse him, which I dare
               By all his Muses sweare, be none of his.
               The men are not, some faults may be these times:
               He acts those men, and they did act these crimes.
            
            
               Amicissimo, & meritissimo BEN: IONSON.
               QVod arte ansus et hic tuâ, Poeta,
               Si anderent hominum Dei
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iuris
               Consulti, veteres sequi aemulariér
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  ,
               O omnes saperemus ad salutem.
               His sed sunt veteres araneosi;
               Tam nemo veterum est sequutor, vt tu
               Illos quòd sequeris nou
                     •
                  tor audis.
               Factamen quod agis; tui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   primâ
               Libricanitie induantur horâ:
               Nam chartis pueritiae est neganda,
               Nascuntúr
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   senes, oportet, illi
               Libri, queis dare vis perennitatem.
               Priscis, ingenium facit, labér
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               Te parem; ho
                     •
                   superes, vt & futuros,
               Ex nostrâ vitiositate sumas,
               Quâ priscos superamus, & futuros.
               
                  
                     I. D.
                  
               
            
            
               AD VTRAMQVE ACADEMIAM, DE BENIAMIN IONSONIO.
               HIc ille est primus, qui doctum drama Britannis,
               
                  Graiorum antiqua, & Latij monimenta Theatri,
               
                  Tanquam explorator versans, foelicibus ausis
               Prebebit: Magnis coeptis Gemina astra fauete.
               Alterutrâ veteres contenti laude: Cothurnum hic,
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pari soccum tractat Sol scenicus arte,
               Das VOLPONE iocos, fletus SEIANE dedisti.
               At si IONSONIAS mulctatas limite Musas
               
               Angustâ plangent quiquam: Vos, dicite, contrà,
               O nimiùm miseros quibus ANGLIS ANGLICA lingua
               Aut non sat nota est; aut queis (sen trans mare natis)
               Hand nota omnino: Vegetet cum tempore Vates,
               Mutabit patri
                     •
                  m, fiêt
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ipse ANGLVS APOLLO.
               
               
                  
                     E. BOLTON.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To my deare friend, M. BEN: IONSON. Vpon his Foxe.
               IF it might stand with iustice, to allow
               The swift conuersion of all follies; now,
               Such is my mercy, that I could admit
               All sorts should equally approue the wit
               Of this thy euen worke: whose growing fame
               Shall raise thee high, and thou it, with thy name▪
               
               And did not manners, and my loue command
               Me to forbeare to make those vnderstand,
               Whom thou, perhaps, hast in thy wiser doome
               Long since, firmely resolu'd, shall neuer come
               To know more then they doe; I would haue showne
               To all the world, the art, which thou alone
               Hast taught our tongue, the rules of time of place,
               And other rites, deliuer'd, with the grace
               Of comick stile, which only, is farre more,
               Then any English stage hath knowne before.
               But, since our subtle gallants thinke it good
               To like of nought, that may be vnderstood,
               Lest they should be disprou'd; or haue, at best,
               Stomacks so raw, that nothing can digest
               But what's obscene, or barkes: Let vs desire
               They may continue, simply, to admire
               Fine clothes, and strange words; & may liue, in age,
               To see themselues ill brought vpon the stage,
               And like it. Whilst thy bold, and knowing Muse
               Contenes al praise, but such as thou wouldst chuse
               
                  
                     FRANC. BEAVMONT.
                  
               
            
            
               VPON THE SILENT WOMAN.
               HEare you bad writers, and though you not see,
               I will informe you where you happy bee:
               Prouide the most malicious thoughts you can,
               And bend them all against some priuate man,
               To bring him, not his vices, on the stage,
               Your enuie shall be clad in so poore rage,
               And your expressing of him shall be such,
               That he himselfe shall thinke he hath no touch.
               Where he that strongly writes, although he meane
               To scourge but vices in a labour'd scene,
               Yet priuate faults shall be so well exprest
               As men doe act hem, that each priuate brest,
               That 
                     •••
                  des these errors in it selfe, shall say,
               He meant me, not my vices, in the play.
               
                  
                     FRANC. BEAVMONT.
                  
               
            
            
               To my friend M. BEN: IONSON. Vpon his Catiline.
               IF thou had'st itch'd after the wild applause
               Of common people, and had'st made thy lawes
               In writing, such, as catch'd at present voice,
               I should commend the thing, but not thy choise.
               But thou hast squar'd thy rules, by what is good;
               And art, three ages yet, from vnderstood:
               And (I dare say) in it, there lyes much wit
               Lost, till thy readers can grow vp to it.
               Which they can ne're out-grow, to find it ill,
               But must fall backe againe, or like it still.
               
                  
                     FRANC. BEAVMONT.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  Euery MAN IN HIS HVMOVR. A Comoedie. Acted in the yeere 1598. By the then Lord Chamberlaine his Seruants.
                  The Author B. I.
                  
                     IUVEN.
                     Haud tamen inuideas vati, quem pulpita pascunt.
                  
                  LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.
                  M. DC. XVI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE MOST LEARNED, AND MY HONOR'D FRIEND, Mr. Cambden.
                  
                     
                        SIR,
                     
                  
                  
                     THere are, no doubt, a supercilious race in the world, who will esteeme all office, done you in this kind, an iniurie; so solemne a vice it is with them to vse the authoritie of their ignorance, to the crying downe of Poetry, or the Professors: But, my gratitude must not leaue to correct their error; since I am none of those, that can suffer the benefits confer'd vpon my youth, to perish with my age. It is a fraile memorie, that remembers but present things: And, had the fauour of the times so conspir'd with my disposition, as it could haue brought forth other, or better, you had had the same proportion, & number of the fruits, the first. Now, I pray you, to accept this, such, wherein neither the confession of my manners shall make you blush; nor of my studies, repent you to haue beene the instructer: And, for the profession of my thanke-fulnesse, I am sure, it will, with good men, find either praise, or excuse.
                  
                     
                        Your true louer, BEN. IONSON.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Persons of the Play.
                  
                     
                        KNO'WELL, An old Gentleman.
                     
                        ED. KNO'WELL, His Sonne.
                     
                        BRAYNE-WORME, The Fathers man.
                     
                        Mr. STEPHEN, A countrey Gull.
                     
                        DOWNE-RIGHT, A plaine Squier.
                     
                        WELL-BRED, His halfe Brother.
                     
                        IVST. CLEMENT, An old merry Magistrat.
                     
                        ROGER FORMALL, His Clarke.
                     
                        KITELY, A Merchant.
                     
                        DAME KITELY, His Wife.
                     
                        Mr. BRIDGET, His Sister.
                     
                        Mr. MATTHEW, The towne-gull.
                     
                        CASH, KITELIES Man.
                     
                        COB, A Water-bearer.
                     
                        TIB, His Wife.
                     
                        CAP. BOBADILL, A Paules-man.
                  
                  THE SCENE LONDON.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  EVERY MAN IN HIS HVMOVR. PROLOGVE.
                  
                     THough neede make many Poets, and some such
                  As art, and nature haue not betterd much;
                  Yet ours, for want, hath not so lou'd the stage
                  As he dare serue th'ill customes of the age:
                  Or purchase your delight at such a rate,
                  As, for it, he himselfe must iustly hate.
                  To make a child, now swadled, to proceede
                  Man, and then shoote vp, in one beard, and weede,
                  Past threescore yeeres: or, with three rustie swords,
                  And helpe of some few foot-and-halfe-foote words,
                  Fight ouer Yorke, and Lancasters long iarres:
                  And in the tyring-house bring wounds, to scarres.
                  He rather prayes, you will be pleas'd to see
                  One such, to day as other playes should be;
                  Where neither Chorus wafts you ore the seas;
                  Nor creaking throne comes downe, the boyes to please;
                  Nor nimble squibbe is seene, to make afear'd
                  The gentlewomen; nor roul'd bullet heard
                  To say, it thunders; nor tempestuous drumme
                  Rumbles, to tell you when the storme doth come;
                  But deedes, and language, such as men doe vse:
                  And persons, such as Comoedie would chuse,
                  When she would shew an Image of the times,
                  And sport with humane follies, not with crimes.
                  
                  Except, we make 'hem such by louing still
                  Our popular errors, when we know th'are ill.
                  I meane such errors, as you'll all confesse
                  By laughing at them, they deserue no lesse:
                  Which when you heartily doe, there's hope left, then,
                  You, that haue so grac'd monsters, may like men.
               
               
                  
                     Act I.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     KNOWELL, BRAYNE-WORME, Mr STEPHEN.
                     
                        A Goodly day toward! and a fresh morning! BRAYNE-WORME,
                        Call vp your yong master: bid him rise, sir.
                        Tell him, I haue some businesse to employ him.
                     
                     
                        BRA.
                        I will sir, presently.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        But heare you, sirah,
                        If he be'at his booke, disturbe him not.
                     
                     
                        BRA.
                        Well sir.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        How happie, yet, should I esteeme my selfe
                        Could I (by any practise) weane the boy
                        From one vaine course of studie, he affects.
                        He is a scholler, if a man may trust
                        The liberall voice of fame, in her report
                        Of good accompt, in both our vniuersities,
                        Either of which hath fauour'd him with graces:
                        But their indulgence, must not spring in me
                        A fond opinion, that he cannot erre.
                        My selfe was once a student; and, indeed,
                        Fed with the selfe-same humour, he is now,
                        Dreaming on nought but idle poetrie,
                        That fruitlesse, and vnprofitable art,
                        Good vnto none, but least to the professors,
                        Which, then, I thought the mistresse of all knowledge:
                        But since, time, and the truth haue wak'd my iudgement,
                        And reason taught me better to distinguish,
                        The vaine, from th'vsefull learnings. Cossin STEPHEN!
                        What newes with you, that you are here so early?
                     
                     
                        STE.
                        Nothing, but eene come to see how you doe, vncle.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        That's kindly done, you are wel-come, cousse.
                     
                     
                        STE.
                        I, I know that sir, I would not ha'come else.
                        How doe my coussin EDWARD, vncle?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        O, well cousse, goe in and see: I doubt he be scarse stirring yet.
                     
                     
                        STE.
                        Vncle, afore I goe in, can you tell me, an' he haue ere a booke of the sciences of hawking, and hunting? I would faine borrow it.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Why, I hope you will not a hawking now, will you?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        NO wusse; but I'll practise against next yeere vncle: I haue bought me a hawke, and a hood, and bells, and all; I lacke nothing but a booke to keepe it by.
                     
                     
                        
                        KNO.
                        O, most ridiculous.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Nay, looke you now, you are angrie, vncle: why you know, an'a man haue not skill in the hawking, and hunting-languages now a dayes, I'll not giue a rush for him. They are more studied then the Greeke, or the Latine. He is for no gallants companie without 'hem. And by gads lid I scorne it, I, so I doe, to be a consort for euery hum drum, hang 'hem scroyles, there's nothing in 'hem, i' the world. What doe you talke on it? Because I dwell at Hogsden, I shall keepe companie with none but the archers of Finsburie? or the citizens, that come a ducking to Islington ponds? A fine iest ifaith! Slid a gentleman mun show himselfe like a gentleman. Vncle, I pray you be not angrie, I know what I haue to doe, I trow, I am no nouice.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        You are a prodigall absurd cocks-combe: Goe to.
                        Nay neuer looke at me, it's I that speake.
                        Tak't as you will sir, I'll not flatter you.
                        Ha' you not yet found meanes enow, to wast
                        That, which your friends haue left you, but you must
                        Goe cast away your money on a kite,
                        And know not how to keepe it, when you ha'done?
                        O it's comely! this will make you a gentleman!
                        Well cosen, well! I see you are eene past hope
                        Of all reclaime. I, so, now you are told on it,
                        You looke another way.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        What would you ha' me doe?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        What would I haue you doe? I'll tell you kinsman,
                        Learne to be wise, and practise how to thriue,
                        That would I haue you doe: and not to spend
                        Your coyne on euery bable, that you phansie,
                        Or euery foolish braine, that humors you.
                        I would not haue you to inuade each place,
                        Nor thrust your selfe on all societies,
                        Till mens affections, or your owne desert,
                        Should worthily inuite you to your ranke.
                        He, that is so respectlesse in his courses,
                        Oft sells his reputation, at cheape market.
                        Nor would I, you should melt away your selfe
                        In flashing brauerie, least while you affect
                        To make a blaze of gentrie to the world,
                        A little puffe of scorne extinguish it,
                        And you be left, like an vnsauorie snuffe,
                        Whose propertie is onely to offend.
                        I'ld ha'you sober, and containe your selfe;
                        Not, that your sayle be bigger then your boat:
                        But moderate your expences now (at first)
                        As you may keepe the same proportion still.
                        Nor, stand so much on your gentilitie,
                        
                        Which is an aërie, and meere borrow'd thing,
                        From dead mens dust, and bones: and none of yours
                        Except you make, or hold it. Who comes here?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act. I. Scene II.
                     SERVANT, Mr. STEPHEN, KNOWELL, BRAYNE-WORME.
                     
                        SAue you, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Nay, we do' not stand much on our gentilitie, friend; yet, you are wel-come, and I assure you mine vncle, here, is a man of a thousand a yeare, Middlesex land: hee has but one sonne in all the world, I am his next heire (at the common law) master STEPHEN, as simple as I stand here, if my cossen die (as there's hope he will) I haue a prettie liuing o' mine owne too, beside, hard-by here.
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        In good time, sir.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        In good time, sir? why! and in a very good time, sir. You doe not stout, friend, doe you?
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        Not I, sir.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Not you sir? you were not best, sir; an' you should, here bee them can perceiue it, and that quicky to: goe to. And they can giue it againe soundly to, and neede be.
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        Why, sir, let this satisfie you: good faith, I had no such intent.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Sir, an' I thought you had, I would talke with you, and that presently.
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        Good master STEPHEN, so you may, sir, at your pleasure.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        And so I would sir, good my fancie companion! an' you were out o' mine vncles ground, I can tell you; though I doe not stand vpon my gentilitie neither in't.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Cossen! cossen! will this nere be left?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Whorson base fellow! a mechanicall seruing-man! By this cudgell, and 't were not for shame, I would—
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        What would you doe, you peremptorie gull?
                        If you cannot be quiet, get you hence.
                        You see, the honest man demeanes himselfe
                        Modestly to'ards you, giuing no replie
                        To your vnseason'd, quarrelling, rude fashion:
                        And, still you huffe it, with a kind of cariage,
                        As voide of wit, as of humanitie.
                        Goe, get you in; fore heauen, I am asham'd
                        Thou hast a kinsmans interest in me.
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        I pray you, sir. Is this master KNO'WELL'S house?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Yes, marie, is it sir.
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        I should enquire for a gentleman, here, one master EDWARD

KNO'WELL: doe you know any such, sir, I pray you?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        I should forget my selfe else, sir.
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        Are you the gentleman? crie you mercie sir: I was requir'd by a gentleman i' the citie, as I rode out at this end o' the towne, to deliuer you this letter, sir.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        To me, sir! What doe you meane? pray you remember your court'sie.
(To his most selected friend, master EDWARD KNO'WELL.)
What might the gentlemans name be, sir, that sent it? nay, pray you be couer'd.
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        One master WELL-BRED, sir.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Master WELL-BRED! A yong gentleman? is he not?
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        The same sir, master KITELY married his sister: the rich merchant i' the old Iewrie.
                        
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        You say very true. BRAINE-WORME,
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Sir.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Make this honest friend drinke here: pray you goe in.
                        This letter is directed to my sonne:
                        Yet, I am EDWARD KNO'WELL too, and may
                        With the safe conscience of good manners, vse
                        The fellowes error to my satisfaction.
                        Well, I will breake it ope (old men are curious)
                        Be it but for the stiles sake, and the phrase,
                        To see, if both doe answere my sonnes praises,
                        Who is, almost, growne the idolater
                        Of this yong WELL-BRED: what haue we here? what's this?
                        
                           
                              The letter.
                              Why, NED, I beseech thee; hast thou for-sworne all thy friends i'the old Iewrie? or dost thou thinke vs all Iewes that inhabit there, yet? If thou dost, come ouer, and but see our frip perie: change an olde shirt, for a whole smocke, with vs. Doe not conceiue that antipathy betweene vs, and Hogs-den; as was betweene Iewes, and hogs-flesh. Leaue thy vigilant father, alone, to number ouer his greene apricots, euening, and morning, o' the north-west wall: An' I had beene his sonne, I had sau'd him the labor, long since; if, taking in all the yong wenches, that passe by, at the back-dore, and codd'ling euery kernell of the fruit for'hem, would ha' seru'd. But, pr'y thee, come ouer to me, quickly, this morning: I haue such a present for thee (our Turkie companie neuer sent the like to the Grand-SIGNIOR.) One is a Rimer sir, o' your owne batch, your owne leuin; but doth think himselfe Poet-maior, o' the towne: willing to be showne, and worthy to be seene. The other—I will not venter his description with you, till you come, because I would ha' you make hether with an appetite. If the worst of 'hem be not worth your iorney, draw your bill of charges,

as vnconscionable, as any Guild-hall verdict will giue it you, and you shall be allow'd your viaticum.
                              
                              
                                 From the wind-mill.
                              
                           
                        
                        From the Burdello, it might come as well;
                        The Spittle: or Pict-hatch. Is this the man,
                        My sonne hath sung so, for the happiest wit,
                        The choysest braine, the times hath sent vs forth?
                        I know not what he may be, in the arts;
                        Nor what in schooles: but surely, for his manners,
                        I iudge him a prophane, and dissolute wretch:
                        Worse, by possession of such great good guifts,
                        Being the master of so loose a spirit.
                        Why, what vnhallow'd ruffian would haue writ,
                        In such a scurrilous manner, to a friend!
                        Why should he thinke, I tell my Apri-cotes?
                        Or play th' Hesperian Dragon, with my fruit,
                        To watch it? Well, my sonne, I'had thought
                        Y' had had more iudgement, t' haue made election
                        Of your companions, t' haue tane on trust,
                        Such petulant, geering gamsters, that can spare
                        No argument, or subiect from their iest.
                        But I perceiue, affection makes a foole
                        Of any man, too much the father. BRAYNE-WORME,
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Sir.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Is the fellow gone that brought this letter?
                     
                     
                        BRA.
                        Yes, sir, a pretie while since.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        And, where's your yong master?
                     
                     
                        BRA.
                        In his chamber sir.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        He spake not with the fellow! did he?
                     
                     
                        BRA.
                        No sir, he saw him not.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Take you this letter, and deliuer it my sonne
                        But with no notice, that I haue open'd it, on your life.
                     
                     
                        BRA.
                        O lord, sir, that were a iest, indeed!
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        I am resolu'd, I will not stop his iourney;
                        Nor practise any violent meane, to stay
                        The vnbridled course of youth in him: for that,
                        Restrain'd, growes more impatient, and, in-kind,
                        Like to the eager, but the generous grey-hound;
                        Who ne're so little from his game with-held,
                        Turnes head, and leapes vp at his holders throat.
                        There is a way of winning, more by loue,
                        And vrging of the modestie, then feare:
                        Force workes on seruile natures, not the free.
                        He, that's compell'd to goodnesse, may be good;
                        
                        But 'tis but for that fit: where others drawne
                        By softnesse, and example, get a habit.
                        Then, if they stray, but warne 'hem: and, the same
                        They should for vertu'haue done, they'll doe for shame.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I.Scene II.
                     EDW. KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME, Mr. STEPHEN.
                     
                        DId he open it, sayest thou?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Yes, o' my word sir, and read the contents.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        That scarse contents me. What countenance (pr'y thee) made he, i' the reading of it? was he angrie, or pleas'd?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Nay sir, I saw him not reade it, nor open it, I assure your worship.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        No? how know'st thou, then, that he did either?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Marie sir, because he charg'd me, on my life, to tell nobodie, that he open'd it: which, vnlesse hee had done, hee would neuer feare to haue it reueal'd.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        That's true: well I thanke thee, BLAYNE-WORME.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        O, BRAYNE-WORME, did'st thou not see a fellow here in a what-sha'-call-him doublet! he brought mine vncle a letter e'en now.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Yes, master STEPHEN, what of him?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        O, I ha' such a minde to beate him—Where is hee? canst thou tell?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Faith, he is not of that mind: he is gone, master STEPHEN.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Gone? which way? when went he! how long since?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        He is rid hence. He tooke horse, at the streete dore.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        And, I staid i' the fields! horson scander-bag rogue! Ô that I had but a horse to fetch him backe againe.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Why, you may ha' my mrs. gelding, to saue your longing, sir.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        But, I ha' no bootes, that's the spight on't.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Why, a fine wispe of hay, rould hard, master STEPHEN.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        No faith, it's no boote to follow him, now: let him eene goe, and hang. 'Pray thee, helpe to trusse me, a little. He dos so vexe me—
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        You'll be worse vex'd, when you are truss'd, master STEPHEN. Best, keepe vn-brac'd; and walke your selfe, till you be cold: your choller may foundre you else.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        By my faith, and so I will, now thou tell'st me on't: How dost thou like my legge, BRAYNE-WORME?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        A very good leg! master STEPHEN! but the woollen stocking do's not commend it so well.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Foh, the stockings be good inough, now summer is comming on, for the dust: Ile haue a paire of silke, again'winter, that I goe to dwell

i' the towne. I thinke my legge would shew in a silke-hose.
                     
                     
                        BRAP.
                        Beleeue me, master STEPHEN, rarely well,
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        In sadnesse, I thinke it would: I haue a reasonable good legge.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        You haue an excellent good legge, master STEPHEN, but I cannot stay, to praise it longer now, and I am very sorie for't.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Another time wil serue, BRAYNE-WORME. Gramercie for this.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Knowell laughes hauing read the letter.
                         Ha, ha, ha!
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Slid, I hope, he laughes not at me, and he doe —
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Here was a letter, indeede, to be intercepted by a mans father, and doe him good with him! Hee cannot but thinke most vertuously, both of me, and the sender, sure; that make the carefull Costar'-monger of him in our familiar Epistles. Well, if he read this with patience, Ile be gelt, and troll ballads for Mr. IOHN TRVNDLE, yonder, the rest of my mortalitie. It is true, and likely, my father may haue as much patience as another man; for he takes much physicke: and, oft taking physicke makes a man very patient. But would your packet, master WEL-BRED, had arriu'd at him, in such a minute of his patience; then, we had knowne the end of it, which now is doubtfull, and threatens—What! my wise cossen! Nay, then, Il efurnish our feast with one gull more to'ard the messe. He writes to me of a brace, and here's one, that's three: O, for a fourth; Fortune, if euer thou'lt vse thine eyes, I intreate thee—
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        O, now I see, who hee laught at. Hee laught at some-body in that letter. By this good light, and he had laught at me —
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        How now, coussen STEPHEN, melancholy'?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Yes, a little. I thought, you had laught at me, cossen.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Why, what an' I had cousse, what would you ha' done?
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        By this light, I would ha' told mine vncle.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Nay, if you wold ha'told your vncle, I did laugh at you, cousse.
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        Did you, indeede?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Yes, indeede.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Why, then—
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        What then?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I am satisfied, it is sufficient.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Why, bee so gentle cousse. And, I pray you let me intreate a courtesie of you. I am sent for, this morning, by a friend i' the old Iewrie to come to him; It's but crossing ouer the fields to More-gate: Will you beare me companie? I protest, it is not to draw you into bond, or any plot against the state, cousse.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Sir, that's all one, and't were; you shall command me, twise so farre as More-gate to doe you good, in such a matter. Doe you thinke I would leaue you? I protest—
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        No, no, you shall not protest, cousse.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        By my fackins, but I will, by your leaue; Ile protest more to my friend, then Ile speake off, at this time.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        You speake very well, cousse.
                     
                     
                        
                        STEP.
                        Nay, not so neither, you shall pardon me: but I speake, to serue my turne.
                     
                     
                        E.KN.
                        Your turne, couss? Doe you know, what you say? A gentleman of your sort, parts, carriage, and estimation, to talke o' your turne i' this companie, and to me, alone, like a tankard-bearer, at a conduit! Fie. A wight, that (hetherto) his euery step hath left the stampe of a great foot behind him, as euery word the fauour of a strong spirit! and he! this man! so grac'd, guilded, or (to vse a more fit metaphore) so tin-foild by nature, as not ten house-wiues pewter (again' a good time) shew's more bright to the world then he! and he (as I said last, so I say againe, and still shall say it) this man! to conceale such reall ornaments as these, and shaddow their glorie, as a Millaners wife do's her wrought stomacher, with a smokie lawne, or a black cypresse? O couss! It cannot be answer'd, goe not about it. DRAKES old ship, at Detford, may sooner circle the world againe. Come, wrong not the qualitie of your desert, with looking downeward, couz; but hold vp your head, so: and let the Idea of what you are, be pourtray'd i' your face, that men may reade i' your physnomie, (Here, within this place, is to be seene the true, rare, and accomplish'd monster, or miracle of nature, which is all one.) What thinke you of this, couss?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Why, I doe thinke of it; and I will be more prowd, and melancholy, and gentleman-like, then I haue beene: I'le ensure you.
                     
                     
                        E.KN.
                        Why, that's resolute master STEPHEN! Now, if I can but hold him vp to his height, as it is happily begunne, it will doe well for a suburbe-humor: we may hap haue a match with the citie, and play him for fortie pound. Come, couss.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I'le follow you.
                     
                     
                        E.KN.
                        Follow me? you must goe before.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Nay, an' I must, I will. Pray you, shew me, good cousin.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene IIII.
                     Mr. MATTHEW, COB.
                     
                        I Thinke, this be the house: what, hough?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Who's there? O, master MATTHEW! gi' your worship good morrow.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        What! COB! how do'st thou, good COB? do'st thou inhabite here, COB?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        I, sir, I and my linage ha' kept a poore house, here, in our dayes.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Thy linage, Monsieur COB, what linage? what linage?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Why sir, an ancient linage, and a princely. Mine ance'trie came from a Kings belly, no worse man: and yet no man neither (by your worships leaue, I did lie in that) but Herring the King of fish (from his belly, I proceed) one o' the Monarchs o' the world, I assure you. The first red herring, that was broil'd in ADAM, and EVE'S kitchin, doe I fetch my

pedigree from, by the Harrots bookes. His COB, was my great-great-mighty-great Grand father.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Why mightie? why mightie? I pray thee.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        O, it was a mightie while agoe, sir, and a mightie great COB.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        How know'st thou that?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        How know I? why, I smell his ghost, euer and anon.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Smell a ghost? Ô vnsauoury iest! and the ghost of a herring COB!
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        I sir, with 
                              •
                           auour of your worships nose, Mr. MATHEW, why not the ghost of a herring-cob, as well as the ghost of rasher-bacon?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        ROGER BACON, thou wouldst say?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        I say rasher-bacon. They were both broyl'd o' the col
                              •
                           s? and a man may smell broyld-meate, I hope? you are a scholler, vpsolue me that, now.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        O raw ignorance! COB, canst thou shew me of a gentleman, one Captayne BOBADILL, where his lodging is?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        O, my guest, sir! you meane.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Thy guest! Alas! ha, ha.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Why doe you laugh, sir? Doe you not meane Captayne BOBADILL?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        COB, 'pray thee, aduise thy selfe well: doe not wrong the gentleman, and thy selfe too. I dare bee sworne, hee scornes thy house: hee! He lodge in such a base, obscure place, as thy house! Tut, I know his disposition so well, he would not lye in thy bed, if tho'uldst gi'it him.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        I will not giue it him, though, sir. Masse, I thought somewhat was in't, we could not get him to bed, all night! Well, sir, though he lye not o' my bed, he lies o' my bench: an 't please you to goe vp, sir, you shall find him with two cushions vnder his head, and his cloke wrapt about him, as though he had neither wun nor lost, and yet (I warrant) he ne're cast better in his life, then he has done, to night.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Why? was he drunke?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Drunke, sir? you heare not me say so. Perhaps, hee swallow'd a tauerne-token, or some such deuice, sir: I haue nothing to doe withall. I deale with water, and not with wine. Gi'me my tankard there, hough. God b'w'you, sir. It's sixe a clocke: I should ha' carried two turnes, by this. What hough? my stopple? come.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Lye in a water-bearers house! A gentleman of his hauings! Well, I'le tell him my mind.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        What TIB, shew this gentleman vp to the Captayne. O, an' my house were the Brasen-head now! faith, it would eene speake, Mo fooles yet. You should ha' some now would take this Mr. MATTHEW to be a gentleman, at the least. His father's an honest man, a worshipfull fishmonger, and so forth; and now dos he creepe, and wriggle into acquaintance with all the braue gallants about the towne, such as my guest is: (Ô, my guest is a fine man) and they flout him invincibly. Hee vseth

euery day to a Merchants house (where I serue water) one master KITELY'S, i' the old Iewry; and here's the iest, he is in loue with my masters sister, (mistris BRIDGET) and calls her mistris: and there hee will sit you a whole after-noone some-times, reading o' these same abominable, vile, (a poxe on 'hem, I cannot abide them) rascally verses, poyetrie, poyetrie, and speaking of enterludes, 'twill make a man burst to heare him. And the wenches, they doe so geere, and ti-he at him—well, should they do so much to me, Ild for-sweare them all, by the foot of PHARAOH. There's an oath! How many water-bearers shall you heare sweare such an oath? Ô, I haue a guest (he teaches me) he dos sweare the legiblest, of any man christned: By St. GEORGE, the foot of PHARAOH, the body of me, as I am gentleman, and a souldier: such daintie oathes! and withall, he dos take this same filthy roguish tabacco, the finest, and cleanliest! it would doe a man good to see the fume come forth at 's tonnells! Well, he owes mee fortie shillings (my wife lent him out of her purse, by sixe-pence a time) besides his lodging: I would I had it. I shall ha' it, he saies, the next Action. Helter skelter, hang sorrow, care 'll kill a cat, vp-tailes all, and a louse for the hang-man.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene V.
                     BOBADILL, TIB, MATTHEW.  
                     Bobad. is discouered lying on his bench.
                     
                        HOstesse, hostesse.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        What say you, sir?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        A cup o' thy small beere, sweet hostesse.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Sir, there's a gentleman, below, would speake with you.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        A gentleman! 'ods so, I am not within.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        My husband told him you were, sir.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        What a plague—what meant he?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Captaine BOBADILL?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Who's there? (take away the bason, good hostesse) come vp, sir.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        He would desire you to come vp, sir. You come into a cleanly house, here.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        'Saue you, sir. 'Saue you, Captayne.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Gentle master MATTHEW! Is it you, sir? Please you sit downe.
                     
                     
                        MAR.
                        Thanke you, good Captaine, you may see, I am some-what audacious.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Not so, sir. I was requested to supper, last night, by a sort of gallants, where you were wish'd for, and drunke to, I assure you.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Vouchsafe me, by whom, good Captaine.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Mary, by yong WELL-BRED, and others: Why, hostesse, a stoole here, for this gentleman.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        No haste, sir, 'tis very well.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Body of me! It was so late ere we parted last night, I can scarse open my eyes, yet; I was but new risen, as you came: how passes the day abroad, sir? you can tell.
                     
                     
                        
                        MAT.
                        Faith, some halfe houre to seuen: now trust mee, you haue an exceeding fine lodging here, very neat, and priuate!
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        I, sir: sit downe, I pray you. Master MATTHEW (in any case) possesse no gentlemen of our acquaintance, with notice of my lodging.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Who? I sir? no.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Not that I need to care who know it, for the Cabbin is conuenient, but in regard I would not be too popular, and generally visited, as some are.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        True, Captaine, I conceiue you.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        For, doe you see, sir, by the heart of valour, in me, (except it be 
                              •
                           o some peculiar and choice spirits, to whom I am extraordinarily ingag'd, as your selfe, or so) I could not extend thus farre.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        O Lord, sir, I resolue so.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        I confesse, I loue a cleanely and quiet priuacy, aboue all the tumult, and roare of fortune. What new booke ha' you there? What! Goe by, HIERONYMO!
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        I, did you euer see it acted? is't not well pend?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Well pend? I would faine see all the Poets, of these times, pen such another play as that was! they'll prate and swagger, and keepe a stir of arte and deuices, when (as I am a gentleman) reade 'hem, they are the most shallow, pittifull, barren fellowes, that liue vpon the face of the earth, againe!
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Indeed, here are a number of fine speeches in this booke! O eyes, no eyes, but fountaynes fraught with teares! There's a conceit! fountaines fraught with teares! O life, no life, but liuely forme of death! Another! O world, no world, but masse of publique wrongs! A third! Confus'd and sil'd with murder, and misdeeds! A fourth! O, the Muses! Is't not excellent? Is't not simply the best that euer you heard, Captayne? Ha? How doe you like it?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        'Tis good.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        To thee, the purest obiect to my sense,
                        The most refined essence heauen couers,
                        Send I these lines, wherein I doe commence
                        The happy state of turtle-billing louers.
                        If they prone rough, vn-polish't, harsh, and rude,
                        Hast made the vast. Thus, mildly, I conclude.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Bobadill is making him ready all this while.
                         Nay, proceed, proceed. Where's this?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        This, sir? a toy o' mine owne, in my nonage: the infancy of my Muses! But, when will you come and see my studie? good faith, I can shew you some very good things, I haue done of late—That boot becomes your legge, passing well, Captayne, methinkes!
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        So, so, It's the fashion, gentlemen now vse.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Troth, Captayne, an' now you speake o' the fashion, master WELL-
                              •
                           RED'S elder brother, and I, are fall'n out exceedingly: this other day, I hapned to enter into some discourse of a hanger, which I assure you, both for fashion, and worke-man-ship, was most peremptory-beautifull,

and gentleman-like! Yet, he condemn'd, and cry'd it downe, for the most pyed, and ridiculous that euer he saw.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Squire DOWNE-RIGHT? the halfe-brother? was't not?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        I sir, he.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Hang him, rooke, he! why, he has no more iudgement then a malt-horse. By S. GEORGE, I wonder youl'd loose a thought vpon such an animal: the most peremptory absurd clowne of christendome, this day, he is holden. I protest to you, as I am a gentleman, and a souldier, I ne're chang'd wordes, with his like. By his discourse, he should eate nothing but hay. He was borne for the manger, pannier, or pack-saddle! He ha's not so much as a good phrase in his belly, but all old iron, and rustie prouerbes! a good commoditie for some smith, to make hob-nailes of.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        I, and he thinks to carry it away with his man-hood still, where he comes. He brags he will gi' me the bastinado, as I heare.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        How! He the bastinado! how came he by that word, trow?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Nay, indeed, he said cudgell me; I term'd it so, for my more grace.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        That may bee: For I was sure, it was none of his word. But, when? when said he so?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Faith, yesterday, they say: a young gallant, a friend of mine told me so.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        By the foot of PHARAOH, and 't were my case now, I should send him a chartel, presently. The bastinado! A most proper, and sufficient dependance, warranted by the great CARANZA. Come hither. You shall chartel him. I'll shew you a trick, or two, you shall kill him with, at pleasure: the first stoccata, if you will, by this ayre.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Indeed, you haue absolute knowledge i' the mysterie, I haue heard, sir.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Of whom? Of whom ha' you heard it. I beseech you?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Troth, I haue heard it spoken of diuers, that you haue very rare, and vn-in-one-breath-vtter-able skill, sir.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        By heauen, no, not I; no skill i' the earth: some small rudiments i' the science, as to know my time, distance, or so. I haue profest it more for noblemen, and gentlemens vse, then mine owne practise, I assure you. Hostesse, accommodate vs with another bed-staffe here, quickly: Lend vs another bed-staffe. The woman do's not vnderstand the wordes of Action. Looke you, sir. Exalt not your point aboue this state, at any hand, and let your poynard maintayne your defence, thus: (giue it the gentleman, and leaue vs) so, sir. Come on: O twine your body more about, that you may fall to a more sweet comely gentleman-like guard. So, indifferent. Hollow your body more sir, thus. Now, stand fast o' your left leg, note your distance, keepe your due proportion of time— Oh, you disorder your point, most irregularly!
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        How is the bearing of it, now, sir?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        O, out of measure ill! A well-experienc'd hand would passe vpon you, at pleasure.
                     
                     
                        
                        MAT.
                        How meane you, sir, passe vpon me?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Why, thus sir (make a thrust at me) come in, vpon the answere, controll your point, and make a full carreere, at the body. The best-practis'd gallants of the time, name it the passada: a most desperate thrust, beleeue it!
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Well, come, sir.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Why, you doe not manage your weapon with any facilitie, or grace to inuite mee: I haue no spirit to play with you. Your dearth of iudgement renders you tedious.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        But one venue, sir.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        
                           Venue! Fie. Most grosse denomination, as euer I heard. O, the stoccata, while you liue, sir. Note that. Come, put on your cloke, and wee'll goe to some priuate place, where you are acquainted, some tauerne, or so—and haue a bit— Ile send for one of these Fencers, and hee shall breath you, by my direction; and, then, I will teach you your tricke. You shall kill him with it, at the first, if you please. Why, I will learne you, by the true iudgement of the eye, hand, and foot, to controll any enemies point i' the world. Should your aduersarie confront you with a pistoll, 'twere nothing, by this hand, you should, by the same rule, controll his bullet, in a line: except it were hayle-shot, and spred. What money ha' you about you, Mr. MATTHEW?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Faith, I ha' not past a two shillings, or so.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        'Tis some what with the least: but, come. We will haue a bunch of redish, and salt, to tast our wine; and a pipe of t
                                 •
                              bacco, to close the orifice of the stomach: and then, wee'll call vpon yong WEL-BRED. Perhaps wee shall meet the CORIDON, his brother, there: and put him to the question.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act II.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     KITELEY, CASH, DOWNE-RIGHT.
                     
                        THOMAS, Come hither,
                        There lyes a note, within vpon my deske,
                        Here, take my key: It is no matter, neither.
                        Where is the Boy?
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Within, sir, i' the ware-house.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Let him tell ouer, straight, that Spanish gold,
                        And weigh it, with th' pieces of eight. Doe you
                        See the deliuery of those siluer stuffes,
                        To Mr. LVCAR. Tell him, if he will,
                        He shall ha' the grogran's, at the rate I told him,
                        And I will meet him, on the Exchange, anon.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Good, sir.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Doe you see that fellow, brother DOWNE-RIGHT?
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        I, what of him?
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        He is a iewell, brother.
                        
                        I tooke him of a child, vp, at my dore,
                        And christned him, gaue him mine owne name, THOMAS,
                        Since bred him at the Hospitall; where prouing
                        A toward impe, I call'd him home, and taught him
                        So much, as I haue made him my Cashier,
                        And giu'n him, who had none, a surname, CASH:
                        And find him, in his place so full of faith,
                        That, I durst trust my life into his hands.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        So, would not I in any bastards, brother,
                        As, it is like, he is: although I knew
                        My selfe his father. But you said yo' had somewhat
                        To tell me, gentle brother, what is't? what is't?
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Faith, I am very loath, to vtter it,
                        As fearing, it may hurt your patience:
                        But, that I know, your iudgement is of strength,
                        Against the neerenesse of affection—
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        What need this circumstance? pray you be direct.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        I will not say, how much I doe ascribe
                        Vnto your friendship; nor, in what regard
                        I hold your loue: but, let my past behauiour,
                        And vsage of your sister, but confirme
                        How well I'aue beene affected to your—
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        You are too tedious, come to the matter, the matter.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Then (without further ceremonie) thus.
                        My brother WELL-BRED, sir, (I know not how)
                        Of late, is much declin'd in what he was,
                        And greatly alter'd in his disposition.
                        When he came first to lodge here in my house,
                        Ne're trust me, if I were not proud of him:
                        Me thought he bare himselfe in such a fashion,
                        So full of man, and sweetnesse in his carriage,
                        And (what was chiefe) it shew'd not borrowed in him,
                        But all he did, became him as his owne,
                        And seem'd as perfect, proper, and possest
                        As breath, with life, or colour, with the bloud.
                        But, now, his course is so irregular,
                        So loose, affected, and depriu'd of grace,
                        And he himselfe withall so farre falne off
                        From that first place, as scarse no note remaines,
                        To tell mens iudgements where he lately stood.
                        Hee's growne a stranger to all due respect,
                        Forgetfull of his friends, and not content
                        To stale himselfe in all societies,
                        He makes my house here common, as a Mart,
                        A Theater, a publike receptacle
                        
                        For giddie humour, and diseased riot;
                        And here (as in a tauerne, or a stewes)
                        He, and his wild associates, spend their houres,
                        In repetition of lasciuious iests,
                        Sweare, leape, drinke, dance, and reuell night by night,
                        Controll my seruants: and indeed what not?
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        'Sdeynes, I know not what I should say to him, i' the whole world! He values me, at a crackt three-farthings, for ought I see: It will neuer out o' the flesh that's bred i' the bone! I haue told him inough, one would thinke, if that would serue: But, counsell to him, is as good, as a shoulder of mutton to a sicke horse. Well! he knowes what to trust to, for GEORGE. Let him spend, and spend▪ and domineere, till his heart ake; an' hee thinke to bee relieu'd by me, when he is got into one o'your citie pounds, the Counters, he has the wrong sow by the eare, ifaith: and claps his dish at the wrong mans dore. I'le lay my hand o' my halfe-peny, e're I part with 't, to fetch him out, I'le assure him.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Nay, good brother, let it not trouble you, thus.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        'S death, he mads me, I could eate my very spur-lethers, for anger! But, why are you so tame? Why doe not you speake to him, and tell him how he disquiets your house?
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        O, there are diuers reasons to disswade, brother.
                        But, would your selfe vouchsafe to trauaile in it,
                        (Though but with plaine, and easie circumstance)
                        It would, both come much better to his sense,
                        And sauour lesse of stomack, or of passion.
                        You are his elder brother, and that title
                        Both giues, and warrants you authoritie;
                        Which (by your presence seconded) must breed
                        A kinde of dutie in him, and regard▪
                        
                        Whereas, if I should intimate the least,
                        It would but adde contempt, to his neglect,
                        Heape worse on ill, make vp a pile of hatred
                        That, in the rearing, would come tottring downe,
                        And, in the ruine, burie all our loue.
                        Nay, more then this, brother, if I should speake
                        He would be readie from his heate of humor,
                        And ouer-flowing of the vapour, in him,
                        To blow the eares of his familiars,
                        With the false breath, of telling, what disgraces,
                        And low disparadgments, I had put vpon him.
                        Whilst they, sir, to relieue him, in the fable,
                        Make their loose comments, vpon euery word,
                        Gesture, or looke, I vse; mocke me all ouer,
                        From my flat cap, vnto my shining shooes:
                        And, out of their impetuous rioting phant'sies,
                        
                        Beget some slander, that shall dwell with me.
                        And what would that be, thinke you? mary, this.
                        They would giue out (because my wife is faire,
                        My selfe but lately married, and my sister
                        Here soiourning a virgin in my house)
                        That I were iealous! nay, as sure as death,
                        That they would say. And how that I had quarrell'd
                        My brother purposely, thereby to finde
                        An apt pretext, to banish them my house.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Masse perhaps so: They' are like inough to doe it.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Brother, they would, beleeue it: so should I
                        (Like one of these penurious quack-saluers)
                        But set the bills vp, to mine owne disgrace,
                        And trie experiments vpon my selfe:
                        Lend scorne and enuie, oportunitie,
                        To stab my reputation, and good name—
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene II.
                     MATTHEW, BOBADIL, DOWNE-RIGHT, KITELY.
                     
                        I Will speake to him—
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Speake to him? away, by the foot of PHARAOH, you shall not, you shall not doe him that grace. The time of day, to you, Gentleman o'the house. Is Mr. WELL-BRED stirring?
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        How then? what should he doe?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Gentleman of the house, it is to you: is he within, sir?
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        He came not to his lodging to night sir, I assure you.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Why, doe you heare? you.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        The gentleman-citizen hath satisfied mee, Ile talke to no scauenger.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        How, scauenger? stay sir, stay?
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Nay, brother DOWNE-RIGHT.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        'Heart! stand you away, and you loue me.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        You shall not follow him now, I pray you, brother,
                        Good faith you shall not: I will ouer-rule you.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Ha? scauenger? well, goe to, I say little: but, by this good day (god forgiue me I should sweare) if I put it vp so, say, I am the rankest cow, that euer pist. 'Sdeynes, and I swallow this, Ile ne're draw my sword in the sight of Fleet-street againe, while I liue; Ile sit in a barne, with Madge-howlet, and catch mice first. Scauenger? 'Heart, and Ile goe neere to fill that huge tumbrell-slop of yours, with somewhat, and I haue good lucke: your GARAGANTVA breech cannot carry it away so.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Oh doe not fret your selfe thus, neuer think
                              •
                            on't.
                     
                     
                        
                        DOW.
                        These are my brothers consorts, these! these are his Cam'rades, his walking mates! hee's a gallant, a Caualiero too, right hang-man cut! Let me not liue, and I could not finde in my heart to swinge the whole ging of 'hem, one after another, and begin with him first. I am grieu'd, it should be said he is my brother, and take these courses. Wel as he brewes, so he shall drinke, for GEORGE, againe. Yet, he shall heare on't, and that tightly too, and I liue, Ifaith.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        But, brother, let your reprehension (then)
                        Runne in an easie current, not ore-high
                        Carried with rashnesse, or deuouring choller;
                        But rather vse the soft perswading way,
                        Whose powers will worke more gently, and compose
                        Th'imperfect thoughts you labour to reclaime:
                        More winning, then enforcing the consent.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Bell rings.
                        I, I, let me alone for that, I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        How now? oh, the bell rings to breakefast.
                        Brother, I pray you goe in, and beare my wife
                        Companie, till I come; Ile but giue order
                        Forsome dispatch of businesse, to my seruants—
                     
                  
                  
                      
                        Act II.Scene III.
                     KITELY, COB, DAME KITELY.
                     To them.
                     
                        WHat, COB? our maides will haue you by the back (Ifaith)
                        For comming so late this morning.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        I'le passes by with his tankard.
                        Perhaps so, sir, take heed some body haue not them by the belly, for walking so late in the euening.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Well, yet my troubled spirit's somewhat eas'd,
                        Though not repos'd in that securitie,
                        As I could wish: But, I must be content.
                        How e're I set a face on't to the world,
                        Would I had lost this finger, at a venter,
                        So WELL-BRED had ne're lodg'd within my house.
                        Why't cannot be, where there is such resort
                        Of wanton gallants, and yong reuellers,
                        That any woman should be honest long.
                        I'st like, that factious beautie will preserue
                        The publike weale of chastitie, vn-shaken,
                        When such strong motiues muster, and make head
                        Against her single peace? no, no. Beware,
                        When mutuall appetite doth meet to treat,
                        And spirits of one kinde, and qualitie,
                        Come once to parlee, in the pride of bluod:
                        It is no slow conspiracie, that followes.
                        
                        Well (to be plaine) if I but thought, the time
                        Had answer'd their affections: all the world
                        Should not perswade me, but I were a cuckold.
                        Mary, I hope, they ha' not got that start:
                        For oportunitie hath balkt 'hem yet,
                        And shall doe still, while I haue eyes, and eares
                        To attend the impositions of my heart.
                        My presence shall be as an iron barre,
                        'Twixt the conspiring motions of desire:
                        Yea, euery looke, or glance, mine eye eiects,
                        Shall checke occasion, as one doth his slaue,
                        When he forgets the limits of prescription.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Sister BRIDGET, pray you fetch downe the rose-water aboue in the closet. Sweet heart, will you come in, to breakefast.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        An' shee haue ouer-heard me now?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        I pray thee (good MVSSE) we stay for you.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        By heauen I would not for a thousand angells.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        What aile you sweet heart, are you not well, speake good MVSSE.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Troth my head akes extremely, on a sudden.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Oh, the lord!
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        How now? what?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Alas, how it burnes? MVSSE, keepe you warme, good truth it is this new disease! there's a number are troubled withall! for loues sake, sweet heart, come in, out of the aire.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        How simple, and how subtill are her answeres?
                        A new disease, and many troubled with it!
                        Why, true: shee heard me, all the world to nothing.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        I pray thee, good sweet heart, come in; the aire will doe you harme in, troth.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        The aire! shee has me i' the wind! sweet heart!
                        Ile come to you presently: 't will away, I hope.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Pray heauen it doe.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        A new disease? I know not, new, or old,
                        But it may well be call'd poore mortalls plague:
                        For, like a pestilence, it doth infect
                        The houses of the braine. First, it begins
                        Solely to worke vpon the phantasie,
                        Filling her seat with such pestiferous aire,
                        As soone corrupts the iudgement; and from thence,
                        Sends like contagion to the memorie:
                        Still each to other giuing the infection.
                        Which, as a subtle vapor, spreads it selfe,
                        Confusedly, through euery sensiue part,
                        Till not a thought, or motion, in the mind,
                        
                        Be free from the blacke poyson of suspect.
                        Ah, but what miserie' is it, to know this?
                        Or, knowing it, to want the mindes erection,
                        In such extremes? Well, I will once more striue,
                        (In spight of this black cloud) myselfe to be,
                        And shake the feauer off, that thus shakes me.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene IIII.
                     BRAYNE-WORME, ED. KNO'WELL, Mr. STEPHEN.
                     
                        S'Lid, I cannot choose but laugh, to see myselfe translated thus, from a poore creature to a creator; for now must I create an intolerable sort of lyes, or my present profession looses the grace: and yet the lye to a man of my coat, is as ominous a fruit, as the Fico. O sir, it holds for good politie euer, to haue that outwardly in vilest estimation, that inwardly is most deare to vs. So much, for my borrowed shape. Well, the troth is, my old master intends to follow my yong, drie foot, ouer More-fields, to London, this morning: now I, knowing, of this hunting-match, or rather conspiracie, and to insinuate with my yong master (for so must we that are blew-waiters, and men of hope and seruice doe, or perhaps wee may weare motley at the yeeres end, and who weares motley, you know) haue got me afore, in this disguise, determining here to lye in ambuscado, and intercept him, in the mid-way. If I can but get his cloke, his purse, his hat, nay, anything, to cut him off, that is, to stay his iourney, Veni, vidi, vici, I may say with Captayne CAESAR, I am made for euer, ifaith. Well, now must I practice to get the true garb of one of these Lance-knights, my arme here, and my—yong master! and his cousin, Mr. STEPHEN, as I am true counterfeit man of warre, and no souldier!
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        So sir, and how then, couss?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        'Sfoot, I haue lost my purse, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        How? lost your purse? where? when had you it?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I cannot tell, stay.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        'Slid, I am afeard, they will know mee, would I could get by them.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        What? ha' you it?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        No, I thinke I was bewitcht, I—
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Nay, doe not weepe the losse, hang it, let it goe.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Oh, it's here: no, and it had beene lost, I had not car'd, but for a iet ring mistris MARY sent me.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        A iet ring? oh, the poesie, the poesie?
                        
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Fine, ifaith! Though fancie sleep, my loue is deepe. Meaning that though I did not fancie her, yet shee loued me dearely.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Most excellent!
                     
                     
                        
                        STEP.
                        And then, I sent her another, and my poesie was: The deeper, the sweeter, Ile be iudg'd by St. PETER.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        How, by St. PETER? I doe not conceiue that!
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Mary, St. PETER, to make vp the meeter.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        He is come back.
                        Well, there the Saint was your good patron, hee help't you at your need: thanke him, thanke him.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I cannot take leaue on 'hem, so: I will venture, come what will. Gentlemen, please you change a few crownes, for a very excellent good blade, here? I am a poore gentleman, a souldier, one that (in the better state of my fortunes) scorn'd so meane a refuge, but now it is the humour of necessitie, to haue it so. You seeme to be gentlemen, well affected to martiall men, else I should rather die with silence, then line with shame: how euer, vouchsafe to remember, it is my want speakes, not my selfe. This condition agrees not with my spirit—
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Where hast thou seru'd?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        May it please you, sir, in all the late warres of Bohemia, Hungaria, Dalmatia, Poland, where not, sir? I haue beene a poore seruitor, by sea and land, any time this fourteene yeeres, and follow'd the fortunes of the best Commanders in christendome. I was twice shot at the taking of Alepo, once at the reliefe of Vienna; I haue beene at Marseilles, Naples, and the Adriatique gulfe, a gentleman-slaue in the galleys, thrice, where I was most dangerously shot in the head, through both the thighs, and yet, being thus maym'd, I am void of maintenance, nothing left me but my scarres, the noted markes of my resolution.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        How will you sell this rapier, friend?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Generous sir, I referre it to your owne iudgement; you are a gentleman, giue me what you please.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        True, I am a gentleman, I know that friend: but what though? I pray you say, what would you aske?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I assure you, the blade may become the side, or thigh of the best prince, in Europe.
                        
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        I, with a veluet scabberd, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Nay, and 't be mine, it shall haue a veluet scabberd, Couss, that's flat: I'de not weare it as 'tis, and you would giue me an angell.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        At your worships pleasure, sir; nay, 'tis a most pure Toledo.
                        
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I had rather it were a Spaniard! but tell me, what shall I giue you for it? An' it had a siluer hilt—
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Come, come, you shall not buy it; hold, there's a shilling fellow, take thy rapier.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Why, but I will buy it now, because you say so, and there's another shilling, fellow. I scorne to be out-bidden. What, shall I walke with a cudgell, like Higgin-Bottom? and may haue a rapier, for money?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        You may buy one in the citie.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Tut, Ile buy this i'the field, so I will, I haue a mind to't, because 'tis a field rapier. Tell me your lowest price.
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                        
                        E. KN.
                        You shall not buy it, I say.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        By this money, but I will, though I giue more then 'tis worth.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Come away, you are a foole.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Friend, I am a foole, that's granted: but Ile haue it, for that words sake. Follow me, for your money.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        At your seruice, sir.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene V.
                     KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME.
                     
                        I Cannot loose the thought, yet, of this letter,
                        Sent to my sonne: nor leaue t'admire the change
                        Of manners, and the breeding of our youth,
                        Within the kingdome, since my selfe was one.
                        When I was yong, he liu'd not in the stewes,
                        Durst haue conceiu'd a scorne, and vtter'd it,
                        On a grey head; age was authoritie
                        Against a buffon: and a man had, then,
                        A certaine reuerence pai'd vnto his yeeres,
                        That had none due vnto his life. So much
                        The sanctitie of some preuail'd, for others.
                        But, now, we all are fall'n; youth, from their feare:
                        And age, from that, which bred it, good example.
                        Nay, would our selues were not the first, euen parents,
                        That did destroy the hopes, in our owne children:
                        Or they not learn'd our vices, in their cradles,
                        And suck'd in our ill customes, with their milke.
                        Ere all their teeth be borne, or they can speake,
                        We make their palats cunning! The first wordes,
                        We forme their tongues with, are licentious iests!
                        Can it call, whore? crie, bastard? Ô, then, kisse it,
                        A wittie child! Can't sweare? The fathers dearling!
                        Giue it two plums. Nay, rather then 't shall learne
                        No bawdie song, the mother' her selfe will teach it!
                        But, this is in the infancie; the dayes
                        Of the long coate: when it puts on the breeches,
                        It will put off all this. I, it is like:
                        When it is gone into the bone alreadie.
                        No, no: This die goes deeper then the coate,
                        Or shirt, or skin. It staines, vnto the liuer,
                        And heart, in some. And, rather, then it should not,
                        Note, what we fathers doe! Looke, how we liue!
                        What mistresses we keepe! at what expense,
                        In our sonnes eyes! where they may handle our gifts,
                        
                        Heare our lasciuious courtships, see our dalliance,
                        Tast of the same prouoking meates, with vs,
                        To ruine of our states! Nay, when our owne
                        Portion is fled, to prey on their remainder,
                        We call them into fellowship of vice!
                        Baite 'hem with the yong chamber-maid, to seale!
                        And teach 'hem all bad wayes, to buy affiction!
                        This is one path! but there are millions more,
                        In which we spoile our owne, with leading them.
                        Well, I thanke heauen, I neuer yet was he,
                        That trauail'd with my sonne, before sixteene,
                        To shew him, the Venetian cortezans.
                        
                        Nor read the grammar of cheating, I had made
                        To my sharpe boy, at twelue: repeating still
                        The rule, Get money; still, Get money, Boy;
                        No matter, by what meanes; Money will doe
                        
                           More, Boy, then my Lords letter. Neither haue I
                        Drest snailes, or mushromes curiously before him,
                        Perfum'd my sauces, and taught him to make 'hem;
                        Preceding still, with my grey gluttonie,
                        At all the ordinaries: and only fear'd
                        His palate should degenerate, not his manners.
                        These are the trade of fathers, now! how euer
                        My sonne, I hope, hath met within my threshold,
                        None of these houshold precedents; which are strong,
                        And swift, to rape youth, to their precipice.
                        But, let the house at home be nere so cleane
                        Swept, or kept sweet from filth; nay, dust, and cob-webs:
                        If he will liue, abroad, with his companions,
                        In dung, and leystalls; it is worth a feare.
                        Nor is the danger of conuersing lesse,
                        Then all that I haue mention'd of example.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        My master? nay, faith haue at you: I am flesht now, I haue sped so well. Worshipfull sir, I beseech you, respect the estate of a poore souldier; I am asham'd of this base course of life (god's my comfort) but extremitie prouokes me to't, what remedie?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        I haue not for you, now.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        By the faith I beare vnto truth, gentleman, it is no ordinarie custome in me, but only to preserue manhood. I protest to you, a man I haue beene, a man I may be, by your sweet bountie.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        'Pray thee, good friend, be satisfied.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Good sir, by that hand, you may doe the part of a kind gentleman, in lending a poore souldier the price of two cannes of beere (a matter of small value) the king of heauen shall pay you, and I shall rest thankfull: sweet worship—
                     
                     
                        
                        KNO.
                        Nay, and you be so importunate—
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Hee weepes.
                        Oh, tender sir, need will haue his course: I was not made to this vile vse! well, the edge of the enemie could not haue abated mee so much: It's hard when a man hath seru'd in his Princes cause, and be thus— Honorable worship, let me deriue a small piece of siluer from you, it shall not bee giuen in the course of time, by this good ground, I was faine to pawne my rapier last night for a poore supper, I had suck'd the hilts long before, I am a pagan else: sweet honor.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Beleeue me, I am taken with some wonder,
                        To thinke, a fellow of thy outward presence
                        Should (in the frame, and fashion of his mind)
                        Be so degenerate, and sordid-base!
                        Art thou a man? and sham'st thou not to beg?
                        To practise such a seruile kind of life?
                        Why, were thy education ne're so meane,
                        Hauing thy limbs, a thousand fairer courses
                        Offer themselues, to thy election.
                        Either the warres might still supply thy wants,
                        Or seruice of some vertuous gentleman,
                        Or honest labour: nay, what can I name,
                        But would become thee better then to beg?
                        But men of thy condition feed on sloth,
                        As doth the beetle, on the dung shee breeds in,
                        Not caring how the mettall of your minds
                        Is eaten with the rust of idlenesse▪
                        
                        Now, afore me, what e're he be, that should
                        Relieue a person of thy qualitie,
                        While thou insist's in this loose desperate course,
                        I would esteeme the sinne, not thine, but his.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Faith sir, I would gladly finde some other course, if so—
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        I, you'ld gladly 
                              •
                           inde it, but you will not seeke it.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Alas sir, where should a man seeke? in the warres, there's no ascent by desert in these dayes, but—and for seruice, would it were as soone purchast, as wisht for (the ayre's my comfort) I know, what I would say—
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        What's thy name?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Please you, FITZ-SWORD, sir.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        FITZ-SWORD?
                        Say, that a man should entertayne thee now,
                        Would'st thou be honest, humble, iust, and true?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Sir, by the place, and honor of a souldier—
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Nay, nay, I like not those affected othes;
                        Speake plainely man: what think'st thou of my wordes?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Nothing, sir, but wish my fortunes were as happy, as my seruice should be honest.
                     
                     
                        
                        KNO.
                        Well, follow me, Ile proue thee, if thy deedes
                        Will carry a proportion to thy words.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Yes sir, straight, Ile but garter my hose. Oh that my belly were hoopt now, for I am readie to burst with laughing! neuer was bottle, or bag-pipe fuller. S'lid, was there euer seene a foxe in yeeres to betray himselfe thus? now shall I be possest of all his counsells: and, by that conduit, my yong master. Well, hee is resolu'd to proue my honestie; faith, and I am resolu'd to proue his patience: oh I shall abuse him intollerably. This small piece of seruice, will bring him cleane out of loue with the souldier, for euer. He will neuer come within the signe of it, the sight of a cassock, or a musket-rest againe. Hee will hate the musters at Mile-end for it, to his dying day. It's no matter, let the world thinke me a bad counterfeit, If I cannot giue him the slip, at an instant: why, this is better then to haue staid his iourney! well, Ile follow him: oh, how I long to bee imployed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act III.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     MATTHEW, WELL-BRED, BOBADILL, ED. KNO'WELL, STEPHEN.
                     
                        YEs faith, sir, we were at your lodging to seeke you, too.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Oh, I came not there to night.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Your brother deliuered vs as much.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Who? my brother DOWNE-RIGHT?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        He. Mr. WELL-BRED, I know not in what kind you hold me, but let me say to you this: as sure as honor, I esteeme it so much out of the sunne-shine of reputation, to through the least beame of reguard, vpon such a—
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Sir, I must heare no ill wordes of my brother.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        I, protest to you, as I haue a thing to be sau'd about me, I neuer saw any gentleman-like part—
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Good Captayne, faces about, to some other discourse.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        With your leaue, sir, and there were no more men liuing vpon the face of the earth, I should not fancie him, by S. GEORGE.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Troth, nor I, he is of a rusticall cut, I know not how: he doth not carry himselfe like a gentleman of fashion—
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Oh, Mr. MATTHEW, that's a grace peculiar but to a few; quos aquus amauit IVPITER.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        I vnderstand you sir.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Yong Kno'well enters.
                        No question, you doe, or you doe not, sir. NED KNO'WELL! by my soule welcome; how doest thou sweet spirit, my Genius? S'lid I shall loue APOLLO, and the mad Thespian girles the better, while I liue, for this; my deare furie: now, I see there's some loue in thee! Sirra, these bee the two I writ to thee of (nay, what a drowsie humour is this now? why doest thou not speake?)
                     
                     
                        
                        E. KN.
                        Oh, you are a fine gallant, you sent me a rare letter!
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Why, was't not rare?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Yes, Ile bee sworne, I was ne're guiltie of reading the like; match it in all PLINIE, or SYMMACHVS epistles, and Ile haue my iudgement burn'd in the eare for a rogue: make much of thy vaine, for it is inimitable. But I marle what camell it was, that had the carriage of it? for doubtlesse, he was no ordinarie beast, that brought it!
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Why?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Why, faiest thou? why doest thou thinke that any reasonable creature, especially in the morning (the sober time of the day too) could haue mis-tane my father for me?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        S'lid, you iest, I hope?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Indeed, the best vse wee can turne it too, is to make a iest on't, now: but Ile assure you, my father had the full view o' your flourishing stile, some houre before I saw it.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        What a dull slaue was this? But, sirrah, what said hee to it, Ifaith?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Nay, I know not▪ what he said: but I haue a shrewd gesse what hee thought.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        What? what?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Mary, that thou art some strange dissolute yong fellow, and I a graine or two better, for keeping thee companie.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Tut, that thought is like the moone in her last quarter, 'twill change shortly: but, sirrha, I pray thee be acquainted with my two hangby's, here; thou wilt take exceeding pleasure in 'hem if thou hear'st 'hem once goe: my wind-instruments. Ile wind 'hem vp— but what strange piece of silence is this? the signe of the dumbe man?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Oh, sir, a kinsman of mine, one that may make your musique the fuller, and he please, he has his humour, sir.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Oh, what ist? what ist?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Nay, Ile neither doe your iudgement, nor his folly that wrong, as to prepare your apprehension: Ile leaue him to the mercy o' your search, if you can take him, so.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        To Master Stephen.
                        Well, Captaine BOBADILL, Mr. MATTHEW, pray you know this gentleman here, he is a friend of mine, and one that will deserue your affection. I know not your name sir, but I shall be glad of any occasion, to render me more familiar to you
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        My name is Mr. STEPHEN, sir, I am this gentlemans owne cousin, sir, his father is mine vnckle, sir, I am somewhat melancholy, but you shall command me, sir, in what soeuer is incident to a gentleman.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        To Kno'well.
                         Sir, I must tell you this, I am no generall man, but for Mr. WEL-BRED'S sake (you may embrace it, at what height of fauour you please) I doe communicate with you: and conceiue you, to bee a gentleman of some parts, I loue few wordes.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        And I fewer, sir. I haue scarce inow, to thanke you.
                     
                     
                        
                        MAT.
                        To Master Stephen.
                        But are you indeed. Sir? so giuen to it?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I, truely, sir, I am mightily giuen to melancholy.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Oh, it's your only fine humour, sir, your true melancholy, breeds your perfect sine wit, sir: I am melancholy my selfe diuers times, sir, and then doe I no more but take pen, and paper presently, and ouerflow you halfe a score, or a dozen of sonnets, at a sitting.
                     
                     
                        (E. KN.
                        Sure, he vtters them then, by the grosse.)
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Truely sir, and I loue such things, out of measure.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        I faith, better then in measure, Ile vnder-take.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Why, I pray you, sir, make vse of my studie, it's at your seruice.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I thanke you sir, I shall bee bold, I warrant you; haue you a stoole there, to be melancholy' vpon?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        That I haue, sir, and some papers there of mine owne doing, at idle houres, that you'le say there's some sparkes of wit in 'hem, when you see them.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Would the sparkes would kindle once, and become a fire a
                           
                              •
                           ongst 'hem, I might see selfe-loue burn't for her heresie.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Cousin, is it well? am I melancholy inough?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Oh I, excellent!
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Captaine BOBADILL: why muse you so?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        He is melancholy, too.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Faith, sir, I was thinking of a most honorable piece of seruice, was perform'd tomorrow, being St. MARKES day: shall bee some ten yeeres, now?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        In what place, Captaine?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Why, at the beleag'ring of Strigonium, where, in lesse then two houres, seuen hundred resolute gentlemen, as any were in Europe, lost their liues vpon the breach. Ile tell you, gentlemen, it was the first, but the best leagure, that euer I beheld, with these eies, except the taking in of—what doe you call it, last yeere, by the Genowayes, but that (of all other) was the most fatall, and dangerous exploit, that euer I was rang'd in, since I first bore armes before the face of the enemie, as I am a gentleman, & souldier.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        'So, I had as liefe, as an angell, I could sweare as well as that gentleman!
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Then, you were a seruitor, at both it seemes! at Strigonium? and what doe you call't?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Oh lord, sir? by S. GEORGE, I was the first man, that entred the breach: and, had I not effected it with resolution, I had beene slaine, if I had had a million of liues.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        'Twas pittie, you had not ten; a cats, and your owne, ifaith. But, was it possible?
                     
                     
                        (MAT.
                        'Pray you, marke this discourse, sir.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        So, I doe.)
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        I assure you (vpon my reputation) 'tis true, and your selfe shall confesse.
                     
                     
                        
                        E. KN.
                        You must bring me to the racke, first.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Obserue me iudicially, sweet sir, they had planted mee three demi-culuerings, iust in the mouth of the breach; now, sir (as we were to giue on) their master gunner (a man of no meane skill, and marke, you must thinke) confronts me with his linstock, readie to giue fire; I spying his intendment, discharg'd my petrionel in his bosome, and with these single armes, my poore rapier, ranne violently, vpon the Moores, that guarded the ordinance, and put'hem pell-mell to the sword.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        To the sword? to the rapier, Captaine?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Oh, it was a good figure obseru'd, sir! but did you all this, Captaine, without hurting your blade.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Without any impeach, o' the earth: you shall perceiue sir. It is the most fortunate weapon, that euer rid on poore gentlemans thigh: shal I tell you, sir? you talke of Morglay, Excalibur, Durindana, or so? tut, I lend no credit to that is fabled of 'hem, I know the vertue of mine owne, and therefore I dare, the boldlier, maintaine it.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I mar'le whether it be a Toledo, or no?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        A most perfect Toledo, I assure you, sir.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I haue a countriman of his, here.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Pray you, let's see, sir: yes faith, it is!
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        This a Toledo? pish.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Why doe you pish, Captaine?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        A Fleming, by heauen, Ile buy them for a guilder, a piece, an' I would haue a thousand of them.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        How say you, cousin? I told you thus much?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Where bought you it, Mr. STEPHEN?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Of a souruie rogue souldier (a hundred of lice goe with him) he swore it was a Toledo.
                        
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        A poore prouant rapier, no better.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Masse, I thinke it be, indeed! now I looke on't, better.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Nay, the longer you looke on't, the worse. Put it vp, put it vp.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Well, I will put it vp, but by—(I ha' forgot the Captaynes oath, I thought to ha' sworne by it) an' ere I meet him—
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        O, it is past helpe now, sir, you must haue patience.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Horson connie-catching raskall! I could eate the very hilts for anger!
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        A signe of good digestion! you haue an ostrich stomack, cousin.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        A stomack? would I had him here, you should see, an' I had a stomack.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        It's better as 'tis: come, gentlemen, shall we goe?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act III. Scene II.
                     E. KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME, STEPHEN, WELL-BRED, BOBADILL, MATTHEW.
                     
                        A Miracle, cousin, looke here! looke here!
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Oh, gods lid, by your leaue, doe you know me, sir?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I sir, I know you, by sight.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        You sold me a rapier, did you not?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Yes, marie, did I sir.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        You said, it was a Toledo, ha?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        True, I did so.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        But, it is none?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        No sir, I confesse it, it is none.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Doe you confesse it? gentlemen, beare witnesse, he has confest it. By gods will, and you had not confest it—
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Oh cousin, forbeare, forbeare.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Nay, I haue done, cousin.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Why you haue done like a gentleman, he ha's confest it, what would you more?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Yet, by his leaue, he is a raskall, vnder his sauour, doe you see?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        I, by his leaue, he is, and vnder sauour: a prettie piece of ciuilitie! Sirra, how doest thou like him?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Oh, it's a most pretious foole, make much on him: I can compare him to nothing more happily, then a drumme; for euery one may play vpon him.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        No, no, a childes whistle were farre the fitter.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Sir, shall I intreat a word with you?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        With me, sir? you haue not another Toledo to sell, ha' you?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        You are conceipted, sir, your name is Mr. KNO'WELL, as I take it?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        You are, i' the right? you meane not to proceede in the catechisme, doe you?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        No sir, I am none of that coat.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Of as bare a coat, though? well, say sir.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Faith sir, I am but seruant to the drum extraordinarie, and indeed (this smokie varnish being washt off, and three or foure patches remou'd) I appeare your worships in reuersion, after the decease of your good father, BRAYNE-WORME.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        BRAYNE-WORME! S'light, what breath of a coniurer, hath blowne thee hither in this shape.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        The breath o' your letter, sir, this morning: the same that blew you to the wind-mill, and your father after you.
                     
                     
                        
                        E. KN.
                        My father?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Nay, neuer start, 'tis true, he has follow'd you ouer the field's, by the foot, as you would doe a hare i' the snow.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Sirra, WEL-BRED, what shall we doe, sirra? my father is come ouer, after me.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Thy father? where is he?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        At Iustice CLEMENTS house here, in Colman-street, where he but staies my returne; and then—
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Who's this? BRAYNE-WORME?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        The same, sir.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Why how, i' the name of wit, com'st thou trans-muted, thus?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Faith, a deuise, a deuise: nay, for the loue of reason, gentlemen, and auoiding the danger, stand not here, withdraw, and Ile tell you all.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        But, art thou sure, he will stay thy returne?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Doe I liue, sir? what a question is that?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Wee'le prorogue his expectation then, a little: BRAYNE-WORME, thou shalt goe with vs. Come on, gentlemen, nay, I pray thee, sweet NED, droope not: 'heart, and our wits be so wretchedly dull, that one old plodding braine can out-strip vs all, would we were eene prest, to make porters of; and serue out the remnant of our daies, in Thames-street, or at Custome-house key, in a ciuill warre, against the car-men.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        AMEN, AMEN, AMEN, say I.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene III.
                     KITELY, CASH.
                     
                        WHat saies he, THOMAS? Did you speake with him?
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        He will expect you, sir, within this halfe houre.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Has he the money readie, can you tell?
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Yes, sir, the money was brought in, last night.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        O, that's well: fetch me my cloke, my cloke.
                        Stay, let me see, an houre, to goe and come;
                        I, that will be the least: and then 'twill be
                        An houre, before I can dispatch with him;
                        Or very neere: well, I will say two houres.
                        Two houres? ha? things, neuer dreamt of yet,
                        May be contriu'd, I, and effected too,
                        In two houres absence: well, I will not goe.
                        Two houres; no, fleering oportunitie,
                        I will not giue your subtiltie that scope.
                        Who will not iudge him worthie to be rob'd▪
                        
                        That sets his doores wide open to a thiefe,
                        And shewes the fellon, where his treasure lies?
                        Againe, what earthie spirit but will attempt
                        
                        To the taste fruit of beauties golden tree,
                        When leaden sleepe seales vp the Dragons eyes?
                        I will not goe. Businesse, goe by, for once.
                        No beautie, no; you are of too good caract,
                        To be left so, without a guard, or open!
                        Your lustre too'll enflame, at any distance,
                        Draw courtship to you, as a iet doth strawes,
                        Put motion in a stone, strike fire from ice,
                        Nay, make a porter leape you, with his burden!
                        You must be then kept vp, close, and well-watch'd,
                        For, giue you oportunitie, no quick-sand
                        Deuoures, or swallowes swifter! He that lends
                        His wife (if shee be faire) or time, or place;
                        Compells her to be false. I will not goe.
                        The dangers are to many. And, then, the dressing
                        Is a most mayne attractiue! Our great heads,
                        Within the citie, neuer were in safetie,
                        Since our wiues wore these little caps: Ile change 'hem,
                        Ile change 'hem, streight, in mine. Mine shall no more
                        Wea
                              •
                           e three-pild akornes, to make my hornes ake.
                        Nor, will I goe. I am resolu'd for that.
                        Carry'in my cloke againe. Yet, stay. Yet, doe too.
                        I wil
                              •
                            deferre going, on all occasions.
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        Sir. SNARE, your scriuener, will be there with th'bonds.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        That's true! foole on me! I had cleane forgot it,
                        I must goe. What's a clocke?
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        
                           Exchange time, sir.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        'Heart, then will WELL-BRED presently be here, too,
                        With one, or other of his loose consorts.
                        I am a knaue, if I know what to say,
                        What course to take, or which way to resolue.
                        My braine (me thinkes) is like an houre-glasse,
                        Wherein, my imaginations runne, like sands,
                        Filling vp time; but then are turn'd, and turn'd:
                        So, that I know not what to stay vpon,
                        And lesse, to put in act. It shall be so.
                        Nay, I dare build vpon his secrecie,
                        He knowes not to deceiue me. THOMAS?
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        Sir.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Yet now, I haue bethought me, too, I will not.
                        THOMAS, is COB within?
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        I thinke he be, sir.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        But hee'll prate too, there's no speech of him.
                        No, there were no man o' the earth to THOMAS,
                        If I durst trust him; there is all the doubt.
                        But, should he haue a chinke in him, I were gone,
                        Lost i' my fame for euer: talke for th'Exchange.
                        The manner he hath stood with, till this present,
                        
                        Doth promise no such change! what should I feare then?
                        Well, come what will, Ile tempt my fortune, once.
                        THOMAS—you may deceiue me, but, I hope—
                        Your loue, to me, is more—
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Sir, if a seruants
                        Duetie, with faith, may be call'd loue, you are
                        More then in hope, you are possess'd of it.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        I thanke you, heartily, THOMAS; Gi' me your hand:
                        With all my heart, good THOMAS. I haue, THOMAS,
                        A secret to impart, vnto you—but
                        When once you haue it, I must seale your lips vp:
                        (So farre, I tell you, THOMAS.)
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Sir, for that—
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Nay, heare me, out. Thinke, I esteeme you, THOMAS,
                        When, I will let you in, thus, to my priuate.
                        It is a thing fits, neerer, to my crest,
                        Then thou art ware of, THOMAS. If thou should'st
                        Reueale it, but—
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        How? I reueale it?
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Nay,
                        I doe not thinke thou would'st; but if thou should'st:
                        'Twere a great weakenesse.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        A great trecherie.
                        Giue it no other name.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Thou wilt not do't, then?
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Sir, if I doe, mankind disclaime me, euer.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        He will not sweare, he has some reseruation,
                        Some conceal'd purpose, and close meaning sure:
                        Else (being vrg'd so much) how should he choose,
                        But lend an oath to all this protestation?
                        His no precisian, that I am certaine of.
                        Nor rigid Roman-catholike. Hee'll play,
                        At Fayles, and Tick-tack, I haue heard him sweare.
                        What should I thinke of it? vrge him againe,
                        And by some other way? I will doe so.
                        Well, THOMAS; thou hast sworne not to disclose;
                        Yes, you did sweare?
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Not yet, sir, but I will,
                        Please you—
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        No, THOMAS, I dare take thy word.
                        But; if thou wilt sweare, doe, as thou think'st good;
                        I am resolu'd without it; at thy pleasure.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        By my soules safetie then, sir, I protest.
                        My tongue shall ne're take knowledge of a word,
                        Deliuer'd me in nature of your trust.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        It's too much, these ceremonies need not,
                        I know thy faith to be as firme as rock.
                        THOMAS, come hither, neere: we cannot be
                        Too priuate, in this businesse. So it is,
                        (Now, he ha's sworne, I dare the safelier venter)
                        I haue of late, by diuers obseruations—
                        (But, whether his oath can bind him, yea, or no',
                        Being not taken lawfully? ha? say you?
                        
                        I will aske counsell, ere I doe proceed:)
                        THOMAS, it will be now too long to stay,
                        Ile spie some fitter time soone, or to morrow.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Sir, at your pleasure?
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        I will thinke. And, THOMAS,
                        I pray you search the bookes 'gainst my returne,
                        For the receipts 'twixt me, and TRAPS.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        I will, sir.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        And, heare you, if your mistris brother, WEL-BRED,
                        Chance to bring hither any gentlemen,
                        Ere I come backe; let one straight bring me word.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Very well, sir.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        To the Exchange; doe you heare?
                        Or here in Colman-street, to Iustice CLEMENTS.
                        Forget it not, nor be not out of the way.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        I will not, sir.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        I pray you haue a care on't.
                        Or whether he come, or no, if any other,
                        Stranger, or else, faile not to send me word.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        I shall not, sir.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Be't your speciall businesse
                        Now, to remember it.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Sir. I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        But, THOMAS, this is not the secret, THOMAS,
                        I told you of.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        No, sir. I doe suppose it.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Beleeue me, it is not.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Sir. I doe beleeue you.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        By heauen, it is not, that's enough. But, THOMAS,
                        I would not, you should vtter it, doe you see?
                        To any creature liuing, yet, I care not.
                        Well, I must hence. THOMAS, conceiue thus much.
                        It was a tryall of you, when I meant
                        So deepe a secret to you, I meane not this,
                        But that I haue to tell you, this is nothing, this.
                        But, THOMAS, keepe this from my wife, I charge you,
                        Lock'd vp in silence, mid-night, buried here.
                        No greater hell, then to be slaue to feare.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Lock'd vp in silence, mid-night, buried here.
                        Whence should this floud of passion (trow) take head? ha?
                        Best, dreame no longer of this running humour,
                        For feare I sinke! the violence of the streame
                        Alreadie hath transported me so farre,
                        That I can feele no ground at all! but soft,
                        Oh, 'tis our water-bearer: somewhat ha's crost him, now.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III Scene IIII.
                     COB, CASH.
                     
                        FAsting dayes? what tell you me of fasting dayes? S'lid, would they were all on a light fire for me: They say, the whole world shall bee consum'd with fire one day, but would I had these ember-weekes, and villanous fridayes burnt, in the meane time, and then—
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Why, how now COB, what moues thee to this choller? ha?
                     
                     
                        
                        COB.
                        Collar, master THOMAS? I scorne your collar, I sir, I am none o'your cart-horse, though I carry, and draw water. An' you offer to ride me, with your collar, or halter either, I may hap shew you a jades trick, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        O, you'll slip your head out of the collar? why, goodman COB, you mistake me.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Nay, I haue my rewme, & I can be angrie as well as another, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Thy rewme, COB? thy humour, thy humour? thou mistak'st.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Humour? mack, I thinke it be so, indeed: what is that humour? some rare thing, I warrant.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Mary, Ile tell thee, COB: It is a gentleman-like monster, bred, in the speciall gallantrie of our time, by affectation; and fed by folly.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        How? must it be fed?
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Oh I, humour is nothing, if it bee not fed. Didst thou neuer heare that? it's a common phrase, Feed my humour.
                        
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Ile none on it: Humour, auant, I know you not, be gone. Let who will make hungrie meales for your monster-ship, it shall not bee I. Feed you, quoth he? S'lid, I ha'much adoe, to feed my selfe; especially, on these leane rascally dayes, too; and't had beene any other day, but a fasting day (a plague on them all for mee) by this light, one might haue done the common-wealth good seruice, and haue drown'd them all i' the floud, two or three hundred thousand yeeres agoe. O, I doe stomack them hugely! I haue a maw now, and't were for Sr BEVIS his horse, against 'hem.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        I pray thee, good COB, what makes thee so out of loue with fasting-dayes?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Mary that, which will make any man out of loue with 'hem, I thinke: their bad conditions, and you will needs know. First, they are of a Flemmish breed, I am sure on't, for they rauen vp more butter, then all the dayes of the weeke, beside; next, they stinke of fish, and leeke-porridge miserably: thirdly, they'le keepe a man deuoutly hungrie, all day, and at night send him supperlesse to bed.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Indeed, these are faults, COB.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        He pulls out a red herring.
                        Nay, and this were all, 'twere something, but they are the only knowne enemies, to my generation. A fasting-day, no sooner comes, but my lineage goes to racke, poore cobs they smoke for it, they are made martyrs o'the gridiron, they melt in passion: and your maides too know this, and yet would haue me turne HANNIBAL, and eate my owne fish, and bloud: My princely couz, fear nothing; I haue not the hart to deuoure you, & I might be made as rich as King COPHETVA. O, that I had roome for my teares, I could weepe salt-water enough, now, to preserue the liues of ten thousand of my kin. But, I may curse none but these filthie Almanacles, for an't were not for them, these dayes of persecution would ne're be knowne. Ile bee hang'd, an'some Fish-mongers sonne doe not make of hem; and puts in more fasting-dayes then he should doe, because hee would vtter his fathers dryed stock-fish, and stinking conger.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        S'light, peace, thou'lt bee beaten like a stock-fish, else: here is Mr. MATTHEW. Now must I looke out for a messenger to my master.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act III. Scene V.
                     WELL-BRED, ED. KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME, BOBADILL, MATTHEW, STEPHEN, THOMAS, COB.
                     
                        BEshrew me, but it was an absolute good iest, and exceedingly well carried!
                     
                     
                        E. KNO.
                        I, and our ignorance maintain'd it as well, did it not?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Yes faith, but was't possible thou should'st not know him? I forgiue Mr. STEPHEN, for he is stupiditie it selfe!
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        'Fore god, not I, and I might haue been ioyn'd patten with one of the seuen wise masters, for knowing him. He had so writhen himselfe, into the habit of one of your poore Infanterie, your decay'd, ruinous, worme-eaten gentlemen of the round: such as haue vowed to sit on the skirts of the citie, let your Prouost, and his halfe-dozen of halberdeirs doe what they can; and haue translated begging out of the old hackney pace, to a fine easie amble, and made it runne as smooth, of the tongue, as a shoue-groat shilling. Into the likenesse of one of these Reformado's had he moulded himselfe so perfectly, obseruing euery tricke of their action, as varying the accent, swearing with an emphasis, indeed all, with so speciall, and exquisite a grace, that (hadst thou seene him) thou would'st haue sworne, he might haue beene Serieant-Maior, if not Lieutenant-Coronell to the regiment.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Why, BRAYNE-WORME, who would haue thought thou hadst beene such an artificer?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        An artificer? An architect! except a man had studied begging all his life-time, and beene a weauer of language, from his infancie, for the clothing of it! I neuer saw his riuall.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Where got'st thou this coat, I marl'e?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Of a Hounds-ditch man, sir. One of the deuil's neere kinsmen, a broker.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        That cannot be, if the prouerbe hold; for, a craftie knaue needs no broker.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        True sir, but I did need a broker, Ergo.
                        
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        (Well put off) no craftie knaue, you'll say,
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Tut, he ha's more of these shifts.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        And yet where I haue one, the broker ha's ten, sir,
                     
                     
                        THO.
                        FRANCIS, MARTIN, ne're a one to be found, now? what a spite's this?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        How now, THOMAS? is my brother KITELY, within?
                     
                     
                        THO.
                        No sir, my master went forth eene now: but master DOWNERIGHT is within. COB, what COB? is he gone too?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        VVhither went your master? THOMAS, canst thou tell?
                     
                     
                        THO.
                        I know not, to Iustice CLEMENTS, I thinke, sir. COB.
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                        
                        E. KN.
                        Iustice CLEMENT, what's he?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Why, doest thou not know him? he is a citie-magistrate, a Iustice here, an excellent good Lawyer, and a great scholler: but the onely mad, merrie, old fellow in Europe! I shew'd him you, the other day.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Oh, is that he? I remember him now. Good faith, and he ha's a very strange presence, mee thinkes; it shewes as if hee stood out of the ranke, from other men: I haue heard many of his iests i' vniuersitie. They say, he will commit a man, for taking the wall, of his horse.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        I, or wearing his cloke of one shoulder, or seruing of god: any thing indeed, if it come in the way of his humour.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Cash goes in and out calling.
                         GASPER, MARTIN, COB: 'heart, where should they be, trow?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Master KITELY'S man, 'pray thee vouchsafe vs the lighting of this match.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Fire on your match, no time but now to vouchsafe? FRANCIS. COB.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Bodie of me! here's the remainder of seuen pound, since yesterday was seuen-night. 'Tis your right Trinidado! did you neuer take any, master STEPHEN?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        No truely, sir? but I'le learne to take it now, since you commend it, so.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Sir, beleeue mee (vpon my relation) for what I tell you, the world shal not reproue. I haue been in the Indies (where this herb growes) where neither my selfe, nor a dozen gentlemen more (of my knowledge) haue receiued the tast of any other nutriment, in the world, for the space of one and twentie weekes, but the fume of this simple onely. Therefore, it cannot be, but 'tis most diuine! Further, take it in the nature, in the true kind so, it makes an antidote, that (had you taken the most deadly poysonous plant in all Italy, it should expell it, and clarifie you, with as much ease, as I speake. And, for your greene wound, your Balsamum, and your St. IOHN'S woort are all mere gulleries, and trash to it, especially your Trinidado: your Nicotian is good too. I could say what I know of the vertue of it, for the expulsion of rhewmes, raw humours, crudities, obstructions, with a thousand of this kind, but I professe my selfe no quack-saluer. Only, thus much, by HERCVLES, I doe hold it, and will affirme it (before any Prince in Europe) to be the most soueraigne, and precious weede, that euer the earth tendred to the vse of man.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        This speech would ha' done decētly in a tabacco-traders mouth!
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        At Iustice CLEMENTS, hee is: in the middle of Colman-street.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        O, oh?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Where's the match I gaue thee? Master KITELIES man?
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Would his match, and he, and pipe, and all were at SANCTO DOMINGO! I had forgot it.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        By gods mee, I marle, what pleasure, or felicitie they haue in taking this roguish tabacco! it's good for nothing, but to choke a man, and fill him full of smoke, and embers: there were foure dyed out of one

house, last weeke, with taking of it, and two more the bell went for, yester-night; one of them (they say) will ne're scape it: he voided a bushell of soot yester-day, vpward, and downeward. By the stocks, an' there were no wiser men then I, I'ld haue it present whipping, man, or woman, that should but deale with a tabacco-pipe; why, it will stifle them all in the end, as many as vse it; it's little better then rats bane, or rosaker.
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        Bobadil beates him with a cudgell.
                        Oh, good Captayne, hold, hold.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        You base cullion, you.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Sir, here's your match: come, thou must needs be talking, too, tho'art well inough seru'd.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Nay, he will not meddle with his match, I warrant you: well it shall be a deare beating, and I liue.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Doe you prate? Doe you murmure?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Nay, good Captayne, will you regard the humour of a foole? away, knaue.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        THOMAS, get him away.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        A horson filthie slaue, a dung-worme, an excrement! Body o' CAESAR, but that I scorne to let forth so meane a spirit, I'ld ha' stab'd him, to the earth.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Mary, the law forbid, sir.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        By PHAROAHS foot, I would haue done it.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Oh, he sweares admirably! (by PHAROAHS foot) (body of CAESAR) I shall neuer doe it, sure (vpon mine honor, and by Saint GEORGE) no, I ha' not the right grace.
                     
                     
                        MAY.
                        Master STEPHEN, will you any? By this aire, the most diuine tabacco, that euer I drunke!
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        None, I thanke you, sir. O, this gentleman do's it, rarely too! but nothing like the other. By this aire, as I am a gentleman: by—
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Master Stephen is practising, to the post.
                        Master, glance, glance! Master WELL-BRED!
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        As I haue somewhat to be saued, I protest—
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        You are a foole: It needes no affidauit.
                        
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Cousin, will you any tabacco?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I sir! vpon my reputation—
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        How now, cousin!
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I protest, as I am a gentleman, but no souldier, indeed—
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        No, Master STEPHEN? as I remember your name is entred in the artillerie garden?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I sir, that's true: Cousin, may I swear, as I am a souldier, by that?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Oh yes, that you may. It's all you haue for your money.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Then, as I am a gentleman, and a souldier, it is diuine tabacco!
                        
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        But soft, where's Mr. MATTHEW? gone?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        No, sir, they went in here.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        O, let's follow them: master MATTHEW is gone to salute his mistris, in verse. VVee shall ha' the happinesse, to heare some of his poetrie, now. Hee neuer comes vnfurnish'd. BRAYNE-WORME?
                     
                     
                        
                        STEP.
                        BRAYNE-WORME? Where? Is this BRAYNE-WORME?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        I, cousin, no wordes of it, vpon your gentilitie.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Not I, body of me, by this aire, S. GEORGE, and the foot of PHAROAH.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Rare! your cousins discourse is simply drawn out with oathes.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        'Tis larded with 'hem. A kind of french dressing, if you loue it.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene VI.
                     KITELY, COB.
                     
                        HA? how many are there, sayest thou?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Mary sir, your brother, master VVELL-BRED—
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Tut, beside him: what strangers are there, man?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Strangers? let me see, one, two; masse I know not well, there are so many.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        How? so many?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        I, there's some fiue, or sixe of them, at the most.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        A swarme, a swarme,
                        Spight of the deuill, how they sting my head
                        VVith forked stings, thus wide, and large! But, COB,
                        How long hast thou beene comming hither, COB?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        A little while, sir.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Did'st thou come running?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        No, sir.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Nay, then I am familiar with thy haste!
                        Bane to my fortunes: what meant I to marry?
                        I, that before was rankt in such content,
                        My mind at rest too, in so soft a peace,
                        Being free master of mine owne free thoughts,
                        And now become a slaue? VVhat? neuer sigh,
                        Be of good cheere, man: for thou art a cuckold,
                        'Tis done, 'tis done! nay, when such flowing store,
                        Plentie it selfe, falls in my wiues lap,
                        The Cornu-copiae will be mine, I know. But, COB,
                        VVhat entertaynement had they? I am sure
                        My sister, and my wife, would bid them welcome! ha?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Like inough, sir, yet, I heard not a word of it.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        No: their lips were seal'd with kisses, and the voyce
                        Drown'd in a floud of ioy, at their arriuall,
                        Had lost her motion, state, and facultie.
                        COB, which of them was't, that first kist my wife?
                        (My sister, I should say) my wife, alas,
                        I feare not her: ha? who was it, say'st thou?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        By my troth, sir, will you haue the truth of it?
                     
                     
                        
                        KIT.
                        Oh I, good COB: I pray thee, heartily.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Then, I am a vagabond, and fitter for Bride-well, then your worships companie, if I saw any bodie to be kist, vnlesse they would haue kist the post, in the middle of the ware-house; for there I left them all, at their tabacco, with a poxe.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        How? were they not gone in, then, e're thou cam'st?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Oh no sir.
                     
                     
                        KIT.
                        Spite of the deuill▪ what doe I stay here, then? COB, follow me.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Nay, soft and faire, I haue egges on the spit; I cannot goe yet, sir. Now am I for some fiue and fiftie reasons hammering, hammering reuenge: oh, for three or foure gallons of vineger, to sharpen my wits. Reuenge, vineger reuenge: vineger, and mustard reuenge: nay, and hee had not lyen in my house, 't would neuer haue grieu'd me, but being my guest, one, that Ile be sworne, my wife ha's lent him her smock off her back, while his one shirt ha's beene at washing; pawn'd her neckerchers for cleane bands for him; sold almost all my platters, to buy him tabacco; and he to turne monster of ingratitude, and strike his lawfull host! well, I hope to raise vp an host of furie for't: here comes Iustice CLEMENT.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene VII.
                     CLEMENT, KNO'WELL, FORMALL, COB.
                     
                        WHat's master KITELY gone? ROGER?
                     
                     
                        FOR.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        'Hart of me! what made him leaue vs so abruptly! How now, sirra? what make you here? what would you haue, ha?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        And't please your worship, I am a poore neighbour of your worships—
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        A poore neighbour of mine? why, speake poore neighbour.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        I dwell, sir, at the signe of the water-tankerd, hard by the greene lattice: I haue paid scot, and lot there, any time this eighteene yeeres.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        To the greene lattice?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        No, sir, to the parish: mary, I haue seldome scap't scot-free, at the lattice.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        O, well! what businesse ha's my poore neighbour with me?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        And't like your worship, I am come, to craue the peace of your worship.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Of mee knaue? peace of mee, knaue? did I e're hurt thee? or threaten thee? or wrong thee? ha?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        No, sir, but your worships warrant, for one that ha's wrong'd me, sir: his armes are at too much libertie, I would faine haue them bound to a treatie of peace, an' my credit could compasse it, with your worship.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Thou goest farre inough about for't, I am sure.
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                        
                        KNO.
                        Why, doest thou goe in danger of thy life for him? friend?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        No sir; but I goe in danger of my death, euery houre, by his meanes: an' I die, within a twelue-moneth and a day, I may sweare, by the law of the land, that he kill'd me.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        How? how knaue? sweare he kill'd thee? and by the law? what pretence? what colour hast thou for that?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Mary, and't please your worship, both black, and blew; colour inough, I warrant you. I haue it here, to shew your worship.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        What is he, that gaue you this, sirra?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        A gentleman, and a souldier, he saies he is, o'the citie here.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        A souldier o' the citie? What call you him?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Captayne BOBADIL.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        BOBADIL? And why did he bob, and beate you, sirrah? How began the quarrell betwixt you? ha: speake truely knaue, I aduise you.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Mary, indeed, and please your worship, onely because I spake against their vagrant tabacco, as I came by 'hem, when they were taking on't, for nothing else.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Ha? you speake against tabacco? FORMALL, his name.
                     
                     
                        FORM.
                        What's your name, sirra?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        OLIVER, sir, OLIVER COB, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Tell OLIVER COB, he shall goe to the iayle, FORMALL.
                     
                     
                        FORM.
                        OLIVER COB, my master, Iustice CLEMENT, saies, you shall goe to the iayle.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        O, I beseech your worship, for gods sake, deare master Iustice.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Nay, gods pretious: and such drunkards, and tankards, as you are, come to dispute of tabacco once; I haue done! away with him.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        O, good master Iustice, sweet old gentleman.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Sweet OLIVER, would I could doe thee any good: Iustice CLEMENT, let me intreat you, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        What? a thred-bare rascall! a begger! a slaue that neuer drunke out of better then pisse-pot mettle in his life! and he to depraue, and abuse the vertue of an herbe, so generally receiu'd in the courts of princes, the chambers of nobles, the bowers of sweet ladies, the cabbins of souldiers! ROGER, away with him, by gods pretious—I say, goe too.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Deare master Iustice; Let mee bee beaten againe, I haue deseru'd it: but not the prison, I beseech you.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Alas, poore OLIVER!
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        ROGER, make him a warrant (hee shall not goe) I but feare the knaue.
                     
                     
                        FORM.
                        Doe not stinke, sweet OLIVER, you shall not goe, my master will giue you a warrant.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        O, the Lord maintayne his worship, his worthy worship.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Away, dispatch him. How now, master KNO'WEL! In dumps? In dumps? Come, this becomes not.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Sir, would I could not feele my cares—
                     
                     
                        
                        CLEM.
                        Your cares are nothing! they are like my cap, soone put on, and as soone put off. What? your sonne is old inough, to gouerne himselfe: let him runne his course, it's the onely way to make him a stay'd man. If he were an vnthrift, a ruffian, a drunkard, or a licentious liuer, then you had reason; you had reason to take care: but, being none of these, mirth's my witnesse, an' I had twise so many cares, as you haue, I'ld drowne them all in a cup of sacke. Come, come, let's trie it: I muse, your parcell of a souldier returnes not all this while.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act IIII.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     DOWNE-RIGHT, DAME KITELY.
                     
                        WEll sister, I tell you true: and you'll finde it so, in the end.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Alas brother, what would you haue mee to doe? I cannot helpe it: you see, my brother brings 'hem in, here, they are his friends.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        His friends? his fiends. S'lud, they doe nothing but hant him, vp and downe, like a sort of vnluckie sprites, and tempt him to all manner of villanie, that can be thought of. Well, by this light, a little thing would make me play the deuill with some of 'hem; and 'twere not more for your husbands sake, then any thing else, I'ld make the house too hot for the best on hem: they should say, and sweare, hell were broken loose, e're they went hence. But, by gods will, 'tis no bodies fault, but yours: for, an' you had done, as you might haue done, they should haue beene perboyl'd, and bak'd too, euery mothers sonne, e're they should ha' come in, e're a one of 'hem.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        God's my life! did you euer heare the like? what a strange man is this! Could I keepe out all them, thinke you? I should put my selfe, against halfe a dozen men? should I? Good faith, you'ld mad the patient'st body in the world, to heare you talke so, without any sense, or reason!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene II.
                     Mrs. BRIDGET, Mr. MATTHEW, DAME KITELY, DOWNE-RIGHT, WEL-BRED, STEPHEN, ED. KNO'WELL, BOBADIL, BRAYNE-WORME, GASH.
                     
                        SEruant (in troth) you are too prodigall
                        Of your wits treasure, thus to powre it forth,
                        Vpon so meane a subiect, as my worth?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        You say well, mistris; and I meane, as well.
                     
                     
                        
                        DOWN.
                        Hoy-day, here is stuffe!
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        O, now stand close: pray heauen, shee can get him to reade:
                        He should doe it, of his owne naturall impudencie.
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Seruant, what is this same, I pray you?
                     
                     
                        MATT.
                        Mary, an Elegie, an Elegie, an odde toy—
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        To mock an ape withall. O, I could sow vp his mouth, now.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Sister, I pray you let's heare it.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        Are you rime-giuen, too?
                     
                     
                        MATT.
                        Mistris, Ile reade it, if you please.
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Pray you doe, seruant.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        O, here's no fopperie! Death, I can endure the stocks, better.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        What ayles thy brother? can he not hold his water, at reading of a ballad?
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        O, no: a rime to him, is worse then cheese, or a bag-pipe. But, marke, you loose the protestation.
                     
                     
                        MATT.
                        Faith, I did it in an humour; I know not how it is: but, please you come neere, sir. This gentleman ha's iudgement, hee knowes how to censure of a—pray you sir, you can iudge.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Not I, sir: vpon my reputation, and, by the foot of PHAROAH.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        O, chide your cossen, for swearing.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Not I, so long as he do's not for sweare himselfe.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Master MATTHEW, you abuse the expectation of your deare mistris, and her faire sister: Fie, while you liue, auoid this prolixitie.
                     
                     
                        MATT.
                        I shall, sir: well, In
                                 •
                              ipere dulce.
                        
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        How! Insipere dulce? a sweet thing to be a foole, indeed.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        What, doe you take Insipere, in that sense?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        You doe not? you? This was your villanie, to gull him with a mo
                                 •
                              te.
                        
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        O, the Benchers phrase: pauca verba, pauca verba.
                        
                     
                     
                        MATT.
                        Rare creature, let me speake without offence,
                        Would god my rude wordes had the influence,
                        To rule thy thoughts, as thy faire lookes doe mine,
                        Then should'st thou be his prisoner, who is thine.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        This is in HERO and LEANDER?
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        O, I! peace, we shall haue more of this.
                     
                     
                        MATT.
                        Be not vnkinde, and faire, mishapen stuffe
                        Is of behauiour boysterous, and rough:
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        Master Stephen answeres with shaking his head.
                        How like you that, sir?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        S'light, he shakes his head like a bottle, to feele and there be any braine in it!
                     
                     
                        MATT.
                        But obserue the catastrophe, now,
                        And I in dutie will exceede all other,
                        As you in beautie doe excell loues mother.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Well, Ile haue him free of the wit-brokers, for hee vtters nothing, but stolne remnants.
                     
                     
                        
                        WEL.
                        O, forgiue it him.
                     
                     
                        E.KN.
                        A filtching rogue? hang him. And, from the dead? it's worse then sacrilege.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Sister, what ha' you here? verses? pray you, lets see. Who made these verses? they are excellent good!
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        O, master WEL-BRED, 'tis your disposition to say so, sir. They were good i' the morning, I made 'hem, extempore, this morning.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        How? extempore?
                        
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        I, would I might bee hang'd else: aske Captayne BOBADILE. He saw me write them, at the—(poxe on it) the starre, yonder.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Can he find, in his heart, to curse the starres, so?
                     
                     
                        E.KN.
                        Faith, his are euen with him: they ha' curst him ynough alreadie.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Cosen, how doe you like this gentlemans verses?
                     
                     
                        E.KN.
                        O, admirable! the best that euer I heard, cousse!
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Body o' CAESAR! they are admirable!
                        The best, that euer I heard, as I am a souldier.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        I am vext, I can hold ne're a bone of mee still! Heart, I thinke, they meane to build, and breed here!
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Sister, you haue a simple seruant here, that crownes your beautie, with such encomions, and deuises: you may see, what it is to be the mistris of a wit! that can make your perfections so transparent, that euery bleare eye may looke through them, and see him drown'd ouer head, and eares, in the deepe well of desire. Sister KITELY, I maruaile, you get you not a seruant, that can rime, and doe tricks, too.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        Oh monster! impudence it selfe! tricks?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Tricks, brother? what tricks?
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Nay, speake, I pray you, what tricks?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        I, neuer spare any body here: but say, what tricks?
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Passion of my heart! doe tricks?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        S'light, here's a trick vyed, and reuyed! why, you munkies, you? what a catter-waling doe you keepe? ha's hee not giuen you rimes, and verses, and tricks?
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        O, the fiend!
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Nay, you, lampe of virginitie, that take it in snuffe so! come, and cherish this tame poeticall furie, in your seruant, you'll be begg'd else, shortly, for a concealement: goe to, reward his muse. You cannot giue him lesse then a shilling, in conscience, for the booke, he had it out of, cost him a teston, at least. How now, gallants? Mr. MATTHEW? Captayne? What? all sonnes of silence? no spirit?
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Come, you might practise your ruffian-tricks somewhere else, and not here, I wusse: this is no tauerne, nor drinking-schole, to vent your exploits in.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        How now! whose cow ha's calu'd?
                     
                     
                        
                        DOW.
                        Mary, that ha's mine, sir. Nay, Boy, neuer looke askance at me, for the matter; Ile tell you of it, I, sir, you, and your companions, mend your selues, when I ha' done?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        My companions?
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Yes sir, you companions, so I say, I am not afraid of you, nor them neither: your hang-byes here. You must haue your Poets, and your potlings, your soldado's, and foolado's, to follow you vp and downe the citie, and here they must come to domineere, and swagger. Sirrha, you, ballad-singer, and slops, your fellow there, get you out; get you home: or (by this steele) Ile cut off your eares, and that, presently.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        S'light, stay, let's see what he dare doe: cut off his eares? cut a whetstone. You are an asse, doe you see? touch any man here, and by this hand, Ile runne my rapier to the hilts in you.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        They all draw, and they of the house make out to part them.
                         Yea, that would I faine see, boy.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        O Iesu! murder. THOMAS, GASPAR!
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Helpe, helpe, THOMAS.
                     
                     
                        E.KN.
                        Gentlemen, forbeare, I pray you.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        They offer to fight againe, and are parted.
                        Well, sirrah, you, HOLOFERNES: by my hand, I will pinck your flesh, full of holes, with my rapier for this; I will, by this good heauen: Nay, let him come, let him come, gentlemen, by the body of Saint GEORGE, Ile not kill him.
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        Hold, hold, good gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        You whorson, bragging coystrill:
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene III.
                     KITELY.
                     To them.
                     
                        WHy, how now? what's the matter? what's the stirre here?
                        Whence springs the quarrell? THOMAS! where is he?
                        Put vp your weapons, and put off this rage.
                        My wife and sister, they are cause of this,
                        What, THOMAS? where is this knaue?
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        Here, sir.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Come, let's goe: this is one of my brothers ancient humours, this.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I am glad, no body was hurt by his ancient humour.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Why, how now, brother, who en
                              •
                           orst this brawle?
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        A sort of lewd rake-hells, that care neither for god, nor the deuill! And, they must come here to reade ballads, and rogery, and trash! Ile marre the knot of 'hem ere I sleepe, perhaps: especially BOB, there: he that's all manner of shapes! and Songs, and sonnets, his fellow.
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Brother, indeed, you are too violent,
                        To sudden, in your humour: and, you know
                        
                        My brother WEL-BREDS temper will not beare
                        Anie reproofe, chiefly in such a presence,
                        Where euery slight disgrace, he should receiue,
                        Might wound him in opinion, and respect.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        Respect? what talke you of respect 'mong such,
                        As ha' nor sparke of manhood, nor good manners?
                        'Sdeynes I am asham'd, to heare you! respect?
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Yes, there was one a ciuill gentleman,
                        And very worthily demean'd himselfe!
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        O, that was some loue of yours, sister!
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        A loue of mine? I would it were no worse, brother!
                        You'lld pay my portion sooner, then you thinke for.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Indeed, he seem'd to be a gentleman of an exceeding faire disposition, and of verie excellent good parts!
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Her loue, by heauen! my wifes minion!
                        Faire disposition? excellent good parts?
                        Death, these phrases are intollerable!
                        Good parts? how should shee know his parts?
                        His parts? Well, well, well, well, well, well!
                        It is too plaine, too cleere: THOMAS, come hither.
                        What, are they gone?
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        I, sir, they went in.
                        My mistris, and your sister—
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Are any of the gallants within!
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        No, sir, they are all gone.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Art thou sure of it?
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        I can assure you, sir.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        What gentleman was that they prais'd so, THOMAS?
                     
                     
                        CASH.
                        One, they call him master KNO'WELL, a handsome yong gentleman, sir.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        I, I thought so: my mind gaue me as much.
                        Ile die, but they haue hid him i' the house,
                        Somewhere; Ile goe and search: goe with me, THOMAS.
                        Be true to me, and thou shalt find me a master.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene IIII.
                     COB, TIB.
                     
                        WHat TIB, TIB, I say.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        How now, what cuckold is that knocks so hard? O, husband, ist you? what's the newes?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Nay, you haue stonn'd me, I faith! you ha' giu'n me a knock o' the forehead, will stick by me! cuckold? 'Slid, cuckold?
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Away, you foole, did I know it was you, that knockt?
                        
                        Come, come, you may call me as bad, when you list.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        May I? TIB, you are a whore.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        You lye in your throte, husband.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        How, the lye? and in my throte too? doe you long to bee stab'd, ha?
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Why, you are no souldier, I hope?
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        O, must you be stab'd by a souldier? Masse, that's true! when was BOBADILL here? your Captayne? that rogue, that foist, that fencing Burgullian? Ile tickle him, ifaith.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Why, what's the matter? trow!
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        O, he has bast
                              •
                           d me, rarely, sumptiously! but I haue it herein black and white; for his black, and blew: shall pay him. O, the Iustice! the honestest old braue Troian in London! I doe honour the very flea of his dog. A plague on him though, he put me once in a villanous filthy feare; mary, it vanisht away, like the smoke of tabacco: but I was smok't soundly first. I thanke the deuill, and his good angell, my guest. Well, wife, or TIB (which you will) get you in, and lock the doore, I charge you, let no body in to you; wife, no body in, to you: those are my wordes. Not Captayne BOB himselfe, nor the fiend, in his likenesse; you are a woman; you haue flesh and bloud enough in you, to be tempted: therefore, keepe the doore, shut, vpon all commers.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        I warrant you, there shall no body enter here, without my consent.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Nor, with your consent, sweet TIB, and so I leaue you.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        It's more, then you know, whether you leaue me so.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        How?
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Why, sweet.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Tut, sweet, or sowre, thou art a flowre,
                        Keepe close thy dore, I aske no more.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene V.
                     ED. KNO'WELL, WELL-BRED, STEPHEN, BRAYNE-WORME.
                     
                        WEll BRAYNE-WORME, performe this businesse, happily,
                        And thou makest a purchase of my loue, for-euer,
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Ifaith, now let thy spirits vse their best faculties. but, at any hand, remember the message, to my brother: for, there's no other meanes, to start him.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I warrant you, sir, feare nothing: I haue a nimble soule ha's wakt all forces of my phant'sie, by this time, and put 'hem in true motion. What you haue possest mee withall, Ile discharge it amply, sir. Make it no question.
                     
                     
                        
                        WEL.
                        Forth, and prosper, BRAYNE-WORME. Faith, NED, how dost thou approue of my abilities in this deuise?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Troth, well, howsoeuer: but, it will come excellent, if it take.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Take, man? why, it cannot choose but take, if the circumstances miscarrie not: but, tell me, ingenuously, dost thou affect my sister BRIDGET, as thou pretend'st?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Friend, am I worth beliefe?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Come, doe not protest. In faith, shee is a maid of good ornament, and much modestie: and, except I conceiu'd very worthily of her, thou shouldest not haue her.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Nay, that I am afraid will bee a question yet, whether I shall haue her, or no?
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Slid, thou shalt haue her; by this light, thou shalt.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Nay, doe not sweare.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        By this hand, thou shalt haue her: Ile goe fetch her, presently. Point, but where to meet, and as I am an honest man, I'll bring her.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Hold, hold, be temperate.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Why, by—what shall I sweare by? thou shalt haue her, as I am—
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        'Pray thee, be at peace, I am satisfied: and doe beleeue, thou wilt omit no offered occasion, to make my desires compleat.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Thou shalt see, and know, I will not.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VI.
                     FORMALL, KNO'WELL, BRAYNE-WORME.
                     
                        WAs your man a souldier, sir?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        I, a knaue, I tooke him begging o' the way,
                        This morning, as I came ouer More-fields!
                        O, here he is! yo' haue made faire speed, beleeue me:
                        Where, i' the name of sloth, could you be thus—
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Mary, peace be my comfort, where I thought I should haue had little comfort of your worships seruice.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        How so?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        O, sir! your comming to the citie, your entertainement of me, and your sending me to watch—indeed, all the circumstances either of your charge, or my imployment, are as open to your sonne, as to your selfe!
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        How should that be! vnlesse that villaine, BRAYNE-WORME,
                        Haue told him of the letter, and discouer'd
                        All that I strictly charg'd him to conceale? 'tis so!
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I am, partly, o' the faith, 'tis so indeed.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        But, how should he know thee to be my man?
                     
                     
                        
                        
                        BRAY.
                        Nay, sir, I cannot tell; vnlesse it bee by the black art! Is not your sonne a scholler, sir?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Yes, but I hope his soule is not allied
                        Vnto such hellish practise: if it were, 
                        I had iust cause to weepe my part in him,
                        And curse the time of his creation.
                        But, where didst thou find them, FITZ-SWORD?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        You should rather aske, where they found me, sir, for, Ile bee
sworne I was going along in the street, thinking nothing, when (of a suddain) a voice calls, Mr KNO-WEL's man; another cries, souldier: and thus, halfe a dosen of 'hem, till they had cal'd me within a house where I no sooner came, but thy seem'd men, and out flue al their rapiers at my bosome, with some three or foure score oathes to accompanie 'hem, & al to tel me, I was but a dead man, if I did not confesse where you were, and how I was imployed, and about what; which, when they could not get out of me (as I protest, they must ha' dissected, and made an Anatomie o'me, first, and so I told 'hem) the lockt mee vp into a roome i' the top of a high house, whence, by a great miracle (hauing a light heart) I slid downe, by a bottom of pack-thred, into the street, and so scapt. But, sir, thus much I can assure you, for I heard it, while I was lockt vp, there were a great many rich merchants, and braue citizens wiues with 'hem at a feast, and your sonne, Mr. EDWARD, with-drew with one of 'hem, and has pointed to meet her anon, at one COBS house, a water-bearer, that dwells by the wall. Now, there, your worship shall be sure to take him, for there he preyes, and faile he will not.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Nor, will I faile, to breake his match, I doubt not.
                        Goe thou, along with Iustice CLEMENT'S man,
                        And stay there for me. At one COBS house, sai'st thou?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I sir, there you shall haue him. Yes? Inuisible? Much wench,
or much sonne! 'Slight, when hee has staid there, three or foure houres,
trauelling with the expectation of wonders, and at length be deliuer'd of
aire: ô, the sport, that I should then take, to looke on him, if I durst! But,
now, I meane to appeare no more afore him in this shape. I haue another
trick, to act, yet. O, that I were so happy, as to light on a nupson, now,
of this Iustices nouice. Sir, I make you stay somewhat long.
                     
                     
                        FORM.
                        Not a whit, sir. 'Pray you, what doe you meane? sir?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I was putting vp some papers—
                     
                     
                        FORM.
                        You ha' beene lately in the warres, sir, it seemes.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Mary haue I, sir; to my losse: and expence of all, almosst—
                     
                     
                        FORM.
                        Troth sir, I would be glad to bestow a pottle of wine o'you,
if it please you to accept it—
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        O, sir—
                     
                     
                        FORM.
                        But, to heare the manner of your seruices, and your deuices in
the warres, they say they be very strange, and not like those a man reades
in the Romane histories, or sees, at Mile-end.
                        
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        No, I assure you, sir, why, at any time when it please you, I shall
be readie to discourse to you, all I know: and more too, somewhat.
                     
                     
                        FORM.
                        No better time, then now, sir; wee'll goe to the wind-mill:
there we shall haue a cup of neate grift, wee call it. I pray you, sir, let mee
request you, to the wind-mill.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Ile follow you, sir, and make grift o'you, if I haue good lucke.
                     
                  
                  
                     Act IIII. Scene VII.
                     MATTHEW, ED. KNO'WELL, BOBADILL, STEPHEN, DOWNE-RIGHT.
                     To them.
                     
                        SIr, did your eyes euer tast the like clowne of him, where we were to
day, Mr. WEL-BRED's halfe brother? I thinke, the whole earth
cannot shew his paralell, by this day-light.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        We were now speaking of him: Captayne BOBADIL tells me,
he is fall'n foule o'you too.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        O, I, sir, he threatned me, with the bastinado.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        I, but I thinke, I taught you preuention, this morning, for that—
You shall kill him, beyond question: if you be so generously minded.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Indeed, it is a most excellent trick!
                     
                     He practises at a post.
                     
                        BOB.
                        O, you doe not giue spirit enough, to our motion, you are too
tardie, too heauie! Ô, it must be done like lightning, hay?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Rare Captaine!
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Tut, 'tis nothing, and 't be not done in a—punto!
                        
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Captaine, did you euer proue your selfe, vpon any of our masters
of defence, here?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        O, good sir! yes, I hope, he has.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        I will tell you, sir. Vpon my first comming to the citie, after
my long trauaile, for knowledge (in that mysterie only) there came three,
of foure of 'hem to me, at a gentlemans house, where it was my chance to
be resident, at that time, to intreat my presence at their scholes, and withall
so much importun'd me, that (I protest to you as I am a gentleman) I
was asham'd of their rude demeanor, out of all measure: well, I told 'hem,
that to come to a publike schoole, they should pardon me, it was opposite
(in diameter) to my humour, but, if so they would giue their attendance
at my lodging, I protested to doe them what right or fauour I could, as I
was a gentleman, and so forth.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        So, sir, then you tried their skill?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Alas, soone tried! you shall heare sir. Within two or three
daies after , they came; and, by honestie; faire sir, beleeue mee, I grac't
them exceedingly, shew'd them some two or three tricks of preuention,
haue purchas'd 'hem, since, a credit, to admiration! they canot denie this:
and yet now, they hate mee, and why? because I am excellent, and for no
other vile reason on earth.
                     
                     
                        
                        E. KN.
                        This is strange, and barbarous! as euer I heard!
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Nay, for a more instance of their preposterous natures, but note, sir. They haue assaulted me some three, foure, fiue, sixe of them together, as I haue walkt alone, in diuers skirts i' the towne, as Turne-bull, White-chappell, Shore-ditch, which were then my quarters, and since vpon the Exchange, at my lodging, and at my ordinarie: where I haue driuen them afore me, the whole length of a street, in the open view of all our gallants, pittying to hurt them, beleeue me. Yet, all this lenitie will not ore-come their spleene: they will be doing with the pismier, raysing a hill, a man may spurne abroad, with his foot, at pleasure. By my selfe, I could haue slaine them all, but I delight not in murder. I am loth to beare any other then this bastinado for 'hem: yet, I hold it good politie, not to goe disarm'd, for though I bee skilfull, I may bee oppress'd with multitudes.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        I, beleeue me, may you sir: and (in my conceit) our whole nation should sustaine the losse by it, if it were so.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Alas, no: what's a peculiar man, to a nation? not seene.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        O, but your skill, sir!
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Indeed, that might be some losse; but, who respects it? I will tell you, sir, by the way of priuate, and vnder seale; I am a gentleman, and liue here obscure, and to my selfe: but, were I knowne to her Maiestie, and the Lords (obserue mee) I would vnder-take (vpon this poore head, and life) for the publique benefit of the state, not only to spare the intire lines of her subiects in generall, but to saue the one halfe, nay, three parts of her yeerely charge, in holding warre, and against what enemie soeuer. And, how would I doe it, thinke you?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Nay, I know not, nor can I conceiue.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Why thus, sir. I would select nineteene, more, to my selfe, throughout the land; gentlemen they should bee of good spirit, strong, and able constitution, i would choose them by an instinct, a character, that I haue: and I would teach these nineteene, the speciall rules, as your Punto, your Reuerso, your Stoccata, your Imbroccata, your Passada, your Montanto: till they could all play very neare, or altogether as well as my selfe. This done, say the enemie were fortie thousand strong, we twentie would come into the field, the tenth of March, or thereabouts; and wee would challenge twentie of the enemie; they could not, in their honour, refuse vs, well, wee would kill them: challenge twentie more, kill them; twentie more, kill them; twentie more, kill them too; and thus, would wee kill, euery man, his twentie a day, that's twentie score; twentie score, that's two hundreth; two hundreth a day, fiue dayes a thousand; fortie thousand; fortie times fiue, fiue times fortie, two hundreth dayes kills them all vp, by computation. And this, will I venture my poore gentleman-like carcasse, to performe (prouided, there bee no treason practis'd vpon vs) by faire, and discreet manhood, that is, ciuilly by the sword.
                     
                     
                        
                        E. KN.
                        Why, are you so sure of your hand, Captaine, at all times?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Tut, neuer misse thrust, vpon my reputation with you.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        I would not stand in DOWNE-RIGHTS state, then, an' you meet him, for the wealth of any one street in London.
                        
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Why, sir, you mistake me! if he were here now, by this welkin, I would not draw my weapon on him! let this gentleman doe his mind: but, I will bastinado him (by the bright sunne) where-euer I meet him.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Faith, and Ile haue a 
                              •
                           ling at him, at my distance.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Downe-right walkes ouer the stage.
                        Gods so', looke, where he is: yonder he goes.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        What peeuish luck haue I, I cannot meet with these bragging raskalls?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        It's not he? is it?
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Yes faith, it is he?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Ile be hang'd, then, if that were he.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Sir, keepe your hanging good, for some greater matter, for I assure you, that was he.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Vpon my reputation, it was hee.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Had I thought it had beene he, he must not haue gone so: but I can hardly be induc'd, to beleeue, it was he, yet.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        That I thinke, sir. But see, he is come againe!
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        O, PHAROAHS foot, haue I found you? Come, draw, to your tooles: draw, gipsie, or Ile thresh you.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Gentleman of valour, I doe beleeue in thee, heare me—
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Draw your weapon, then.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Tall man, I neuer thought on it, till now (body of me) I had a warrant of the peace, serued on me, euen now, as I came along, by a water-bearer; this gentleman saw it, Mr. MATTHEW.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        'Sdeath, you will not draw, then?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        He beates him, and disarmes him: Matthew runnes away.
                        Hold, hold, vnder thy fauour, forbeare.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Prate againe, as you like this, you whoreson foist, you. You'le controll the point, you? Your consort is gone? had he staid, he had shar'd with you, sir.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Well, gentlemen, beare witnesse, I was bound to the peace, by this good day.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        No faith, it's an ill day, Captaine, neuer reckon it other: but, say you were bound to the peace, the law allowes you, to defend your selfe: that'll proue but a poore excuse.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        I cannot tell, sir. I desire good construction, in faire sort. I neuer sustain'd the like disgrace (by heauen) sure I was strooke with a plannet thence, for I had no power to touch my weapon.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        I, like inough, I haue heard of many that haue beene beaten vnder a plannet: goe, get you to a surgean. 'Slid, an' these be your tricks, your passada's, and your mountanto's, Ile none of them. O, manners! that

this age should bring forth such creatures! that Nature should bee at leisure to make hem! Come, cousse.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Masse, Ile ha' this cloke.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Gods will, 'tis DOWNE-RIGHT'S.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Nay, it's mine now, another might haue tane vp, aswell as I: Ile weare it, so I will.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        How, an' he see it? hee'll challenge it, assure your selfe.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I, but he shall not ha' it; Ile say, I bought it.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Take heed, you buy it not, too deare, cousse.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VIII.
                     KITELY, WEL-BRED, DAME KIT. BRIDGET, BRAYNE-WORME, CASH.
                     
                        NOw, trust me brother, you were much to blame,
                        T'incense his anger, and disturbe the peace,
                        Of my poore house, where there are sentinells,
                        That euery minute watch, to giue alarmes,
                        Of ciuill warre, without adiection
                        Of your assistance, or occasion.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        No harme done, brother, I warrant you: since there is no harme done. Anger costs a man nothing: and a tall man is neuer his owne man, till he be angrie. To keepe his valure in obscuritie, is to keepe himselfe, as it were, in a cloke-bag. What's a musitian, vnlesse he play? what's a tall man, vnlesse he fight? For, indeed, all this, my wise brother stands vpon, absolutely: and, that made me fall in with him, so resolutely.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        I, but what harme might haue come of it, brother?
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        Might, sister? so, might the good warme clothes, your husband weares, be poyson'd, for any thing he knowes: or the wholesome wine he drunke, euen now, at the table—
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Now, god forbid: O me. Now, I remember,
                        My wife drunke to me, last; and chang'd the cup:
                        And bade me weare this cursed sute to day.
                        See, if heau'n suffer murder vndiscour'd!
                        I feele me ill; giue me some mithridate,
                        Some mithridate and oile, good sister, fetch me;
                        O, I am sicke at heart! I burne, I burne.
                        If you will saue my life, goe, fetch it me.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        O, strange humour! my verie breath ha's poyson'd him.
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Good brother, be content, what doe you meane?
                        The strength of these extreme conceits, will kill you.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Beshrew your heart-bloud, brother WELL-BRED, now;

for putting such a toy into his head.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        Is a fit simile, a toy? will he be poyson'd with a simile? Brother KITELY, what a strange, and idle imagination is this? For shame, bee wiser. O' my soule, there's no such matter.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Am I not sicke? how am I, then, not poyson'd?
                        Am I not poyson'd? how am I, then, so sicke?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        If you be sicke, your owne thoughts make you sicke.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        His iealousie is the poyson, he ha's taken.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        He comes disguis'd like Iustice Clements man.
                        Mr. KITELY, my master, Iustice CLEMENT, salutes you; and desires to speake with you, with all possible speed.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        No time, but now? when, I thinke, I am sicke? very sicke! well, I will wait vpon his worship. THOMAS, COB, I must seeke them out, and set 'hem sentinells, till I returne. THOMAS, COB, THOMAS.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        This is perfectly rare, BRAYNE-WORME! but how got'st thou this apparell of the Iustices man?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Mary sir, my proper fine pen-man, would needs bestow the grist o'me, at the wind-mil, to hear some martial discourse; where so I marshal'd him, that I made him drunke, with admiration! &, because, too much hear was the cause of his distemper, I stript him starke naked, as he lay along asleepe, and borrowed his sute, to deliuer this counterfeit message in, leauing a rustie armor, and an old browne bill to watch him, till my returne: which shall be, when I ha' pawn'd his apparell, and spent the better part o' the money, perhaps.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        Well, thou art a successefull merry knaue, BRAYNE-WORME, his absence will be a good subiect for more mirth. I pray thee, returne to thy yong master, and will him to meet me, and my sister BRIDGET, at the tower instantly: for, here, tell him, the house is so stor'd with iealousie, there is no roome for loue, to stand vpright in. We must get our fortunes committed to some larger prison, say; and, then the tower, I know no better aire: nor where the libertie of the house may doe vs more present seruice. Away.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Come hether, THOMAS. Now, my secret's ripe,
                        And thou shalt haue it; lay to both thine eares.
                        Harke, what I say to thee. I must goe forth, THOMAS.
                        Be carefull of thy promise, keepe good watch,
                        Note euery gallant, and obserue him well,
                        That enters in my absence, to thy mistris:
                        If shee would shew him roomes, the iest is stale,
                        Follow 'hem, THOMAS, or else hang on him,
                        And let him not goe after; marke their lookes;
                        Note, if shee offer but to see his band,
                        Or any other amorous toy, about him;
                        But praise his legge; or foot; or if shee say,
                        The day is hot, and bid him feele her hand,
                        
                        
                        How hot it is; ô, that's a monstrous thing!
                        Note me all this, good THOMAS, marke their sighes,
                        And, if they doe but whisper, breake 'hem off:
                        Ile beare thee out in it. Wilt thou doe this?
                        Wilt thou be true, my THOMAS?
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        As truth's selfe, sir.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Why, I beleeue thee: where is COB, now? COB?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Hee's euer calling for COB! I wonder, how hee imployes COB, so!
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        Indeed, sister, to aske how hee imploies COB, is a necessarie
question for you, that are his wife, and a thing not very easie for you to be
satisfied in us: but this Ile assure you, COBS wife is an excellent bawd, sister,
and, often-times, your husband hants her house, mary, to what end, I cannot
altogether accuse him, imagine you what you thinke conuenient. But,
I haue knowne, faire hides haue foule hearts, E're now, sister.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Neuer said you truer then that, brother, so much I can tell
you for your learning. THOMAS, fetch your cloke, and goe with me, Ile
after him presently: I would to fortune, I could take him there, ifaith. Il'd
returne him his owne, I warrant him.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        So, let hem goe: this may make sport anon. Now, my faire
sister in-law, that you knew, but how happie a thing it were to be faire, and
beautifull?
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        That touches not me, brother.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        That's true; that's euen the fault of it: for indeede, beautie
stands a woman in no stead, vnlesse it procure her touching. But, sister,
whether it touch you, or no, it touches your beauties; and, I am sure, they
will abide the touch; an' they doe not, a plague of all ceruse, say I: and, it
touches mee to in part, though not in the — Well, there's a deare and
respected friend of mine, sister, stands very strongly, and worthily affected
toward you, and hath vow'd to inflame whole bone-fires of zeale, at his
heart, in honor of your perfections. I haue alreadie engag'd my promise
to bring you, where you shall heare him confirme much more. NED
KNO'WELL is the man, sister. There's no exception against the partie.
You are ripe for a husband; and a minutes losse to such an occasion, is a
great trespasse in a wise beautie. What say you, sister? On my soule hee
loues you. Will you giue him the meeting?
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Faith, I had very little confidence in mine owne constancie,
brother, if I durst not meet a man: but this motion of yours, sauours of
an old knight-aduenturers seruant, a little too much, me thinkes.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        What's that, sister?
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Mary, of the squire.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        No matter if it did, I would be such an one for my friend, but
see! who is return'd to hinder vs?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        What villanie is this? call'd out on a false message?
                        This was some plot! I was not sent for. BRIDGET,
                        
                        
                        Where's your sister?
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        I thinke shee be gone forth, sir.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        How! is my wife gone forth? whether for gods sake?
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        Shee's gone abroad with THOMAS.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Abroad with THOMAS? oh, that villaine dors me.
                        He hath discouer'd all vnto my wife!
                        Beast that I was, to trust him: whither, I pray you, went shee?
                     
                     
                        BRID.
                        I know not, sir.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        Ile tell you, brother, whither I suspect shee's gone.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Whither, good brother?
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        To COBS house, I beleeue: but, keepe my counsaile.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        I will, I will: to COBS house? doth shee hant COBS?
                        Shee's gone a'purpose, now, to cuckold me,
                        With that lewd raskall, who, to win her fauour,
                        Hath told her all.
                     
                     
                        WEL.
                        Come, hee's once more gone.
                        Sister, let's loose no time; th'affaire is worth it.
                     
                  
                  
                     Act III. Scene IX.
                     MATTHEW, BOBADIL, BRAYNE-WORMe, DOWNE-RIGHT.
                     To them.
                     
                        I Wonder, Captayne, what they will say of my going away? ha?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Why, what should they say? but as of a discreet gentleman?
quick, warie, respectfull of natures faire lineaments: and that's all?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Why, so! but what can they say of your beating?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        A rude part, a touch with soft wood, a kind of grosse batterie
vs'd, laid on strongly, borne most paciently: and that's all.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        I, but, would any man haue offered it in Venice? as you say?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Tut, I assure you, no: you shall haue there your Nobilis,
your Gentelezza, come in brauely vpon your reuerse, stand you close, stand you
firme, stand you faire, saue your retricato with his left legge, come to the
assalto with the right, thrust with braue steele, defie your base wood! But,
wherefore doe I awake this remembrance? I was fascinated, by IVPITER:
fascinated: but I will be vn-witch'd, and reueng'd, by law.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Doe you heare? ist not best to get a warrant, and haue him
arrested, and brought before Iustice CLEMENT?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        It were not amisse, would we had it.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Why, here comes his man, let's speake to him.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Agreed, doe you speake.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Saue you, sir.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        With all my heart, sir?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Sir, there is one DOWNE-RIGHT, hath abus'd this gentleman,
and my selfe, and we determine to make our amends by law; now, if you
would doe vs the fauour, to procure a warrant, to bring him afore your



master, you shall bee well considered, I assure you, sir.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Sir, you know my seruice is my liuing, such fauours as these, gotten of my master, is his only preferment, and therefore, you must consider me, as I may make benefit of my place.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        How is that? sir.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Faith sir, the thing is extraordinarie, and the gentleman may be, of great accompt: yet, bee what hee will, if you will lay mee downe a brace of angells, in my hand, you shall haue it, otherwise not.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        How shall we doe, Captayne? he askes a brace of angells, you haue no monie?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Not a crosse, by fortune.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Nor I, as I am a gentleman, but two pence, left of my two shillings in the morning for wine, and redish: let's find him some pawne.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Pawne? we haue none to the value of his demand.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        O, yes. I'll pawne this iewell in my eare, and you may pawne your silke stockings, and pull vp your bootes, they will ne're be mist: It must be done, now.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Well, an' there be no remedie: Ile step aside, and pull 'hem off.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Doe you heare, sir? wee haue no store of monie at this time, but you shall haue good pawnes: looke you, sir, this iewell, and that gentlemans silke stockings, because we would haue it dispatcht, e're we went to our chambers.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I am content, sir; I will get you the warrant presently, what's his name, say you? DOWNE-RIGHT?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        I, I, GEORGE DOWNE-RIGHT.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        What manner of man is he?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        A tall bigge man, sir; hee goes in a cloke, most commonly, of silke russet, laid about with russet lace.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        'Tis very good, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Here sir, here's my iewell?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        And, here, are stockings.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Well, gentlemen, Ile procure you this warrant presently, but, who will you haue to serue it?
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        That's true, Captaine: that must be consider'd.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Bodie o' me, I know not! 'tis seruice of danger?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Why, you were best get one o' the varlets o' the citie, a serieant. Ile appoint you one, if you please.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        Will you, sir? why, we can wish no better.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Wee'll leaue it to you, sir.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        This is rare! now, will I goe pawne this cloke of the Iustice's mans, at the brokers, for a varlets sute, and be the varlet my selfe; and get either more pawnes, or more mouie of DOWNE-RIGHT, for the arrest.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene X.
                     KNO'WEL, TIB, CASH, DAME KITELY, KITELY, COB.
                     
                        OH, here it is, I am glad: I haue found it now.
                        Ho? who is within, here?
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        I am within, sir, what's your pleasure?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        To know, who is within, besides your selfe.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Why, sir, you are no constable, I hope?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        O! feare you the constable? then, I doubt not.
                        You haue some guests within, deserue that feare,
                        Ile fetch him straight.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        O' gods name, sir.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Goe to. Come, tell me, Is not yong KNO'WEL, here?
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Yong KNO-WELL? I know none such, sir, o' mine honestie!
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Your honestie? dame, it flies too lightly from you:
                        There is no way, but, fetch the constable.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        The constable? the man is mad, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Ho, who keepes house, here?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        O, this is the female copes-mate of my sonne?
                        Now shall I meet him straight.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Knock, THOMAS, hand.
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        Ho, good wife?
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Why, what's the matter with you?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Why, woman, grieues it you to ope' your doore?
                        Belike, you get something, to keepe it shut.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        What meane these questions, 'pray yee?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        So strange you make it? is not my husband, here?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Her husband!
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        My tryed husband, master KITELY.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        I hope, he needes not to betryed, here.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        No, dame: he do's it not for need, but pleasure.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Neither for need, nor pleasure, is he here.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        This is but a deuice, to balke me withall.
                        Soft, who is this? 'Tis not my sonne, disguisd?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Shee spies her husband come: and runnes to him.
                        O, sir, haue I fore-stald your honest market?
                        Found your close walkes? you stand amaz'd, now, doe you?
                        I faith (I am glad) I haue smokt you yet at last!
                        What is your iewell trow? In: come, lets see her;
                        (Fetch forth your huswife, dame) if shee be fairer,
                        In any honest iudgement, then my selfe,
                        Ile be content with it: but, shee is change,
                        Shee feedes you fat, shee soothes your appetite,
                        
                        And you are well? your wife, an honest woman,
                        Is meat twice sod to you, sir? O, you trecher!
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Shee cannot counterfeit thus palpably.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Out on thy more then strumpets impudence!
                        Steal'st thou thus to thy haunts? and, haue I taken
                        Thy bawd, and thee, and thy companion,
                        Pointing to old Knowell.
                        This horie-beaded letcher, this old goat,
                        Close at your villanie, and would'st thou 'scuse it,
                        With this stale harlots iest, accusing me?
                        To him.
                        O, old incontinent, do'st not thou shame,
                        When all thy powers in chastitie is spent,
                        To haue a mind so hot? and to entice,
                        And feede th'enticements of a lustfull woman?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Out, I defie thee, I, dissembling wretch.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        By Thomas.
                        Defie me, strumpet? aske thy pandar, here,
                        Can be denie it? or that wicked older?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Why, heare you, sir.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Tut, tut, tut: neuer speake.
                        Thy guiltie conscience will discouer thee.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        What lunacie is this, that hants this man?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Well, good-wife BA'D, COBS wife; and you,
                        That make your husband such a hoddie-doddie;
                        And you, yong apple-squire; and old ouckold-maker;
                        He ha'you euery one before a Iustice:
                        Nay, you shall answere it, I charge you goe.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Marie, with all my heart, sir: I goe willingly.
                        Though I doe tast this as a trick, put on me,
                        To punish my impertinent search; and iustly:
                        And halfe forgiue my sonne, for the deuice.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Come, will you goe?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        Goe? to thy shame, beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Why, what's the matter, here? What's here to doe?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        O, COB, art thou come? I haue beene abus'd,
                        And i' thy house. Neuer was man so, wrong'd!
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Slid, in my house? my master KITELY? Who wrongs you in my house?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Marie, yong lust in old; and old in yong, here:
                        Thy wife's their bawd, here haue I taken 'hem.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        He falls vpon his wife and beates her.
                         How? bawd? Is my house come to that? Am I prefer'd thether? Did I charge you to keepe your dores shut, Is 'BEL? and doe you let 'hem lie open for all commers?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Friend know some cause, before thou beat'st thy wife,
                        This 's madnesse, in thee.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Why? is there no cause?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Yes, Ile shew cause before the Iustice, COB:
                        
                        Come, let her goe with me.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Nay, shee shall goe.
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Nay, I will goe. Ile see, an' you may bee allow'd to make a bundle o' hempe, o' your right and lawfull wife thus, at euery cuckoldly knaues pleasure. Why doe you not goe?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        A bitter queane. Come, wee'll ha' you tam'd.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene XI.
                     BRAYNE-WORME, MATTHEW, BOBADIL, STEPHEN, DOWNE-RIGHT.
                     
                        WEll, of all my disguises, yet, now am I most like my selfe: being in this Serjeants gowne. A man of my present profession, neuer counterfeits, till hee layes hold vpon a debter, and sayes, he rests him, for then hee brings him to all manner of vnrest. A kinde of little kings wee are, bearing the diminutiue of a mace, made like a yong artichocke, that alwayes carries pepper and salt, in it selfe. Well, I know not what danger I vnder-goe, by this exploit, pray heauen, I come well of.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        See, I thinke, yonder is the varlet, by his gowne.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Let's goe, in quest of him.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        'Saue you, friend, are not you here, by appointment of Iustice CLEMENTS man.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Yes, an't please you, sir: he told me two gentlemen had will'd him to procure a warrant from his master (which I haue about me) to be seru'd on one DOWNE-RIGHT.
                     
                     
                        MAT.
                        It is honestly done of you both; and see, where the partie comes, you must arrest: serue it vpon him, quickly, afore hee bee aware—
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Beare backe, master MATTHEW.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Master DOWNE-RIGHT, I arrest you, i'the queenes name, and must carry you afore a Iustice, by vertue of this warrant.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Mee, friend? I am no DOWNE-RIGHT, I. I am master STEPHEN, you doe not well, to arrest me, I tell you, truely: I am in nobodies bonds, nor bookes, I, would you should know it. A plague on you heartily, for making mee thus afraid afore my time.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Why, now are you deceiued, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        He weares such a cloke, and that deceiued vs: But see, here a comes, indeed! this is he, officer.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        Why how now, signior gull! are you turn'd filtcher of late? come, deliuer my cloke.
                     
                     
                        
                        STEP.
                        Your cloke, sir? I bought it, euen now, in open market.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Master DOVVNE-RIGHT, I haue a warrant I must serue vpon you, procur'd by these two gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        These gentlemen? these rascals?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Keepe the peace, I charge you, in her Maiesties name.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        I obey thee. What must I doe, officer?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Goe before, master Iustice CLEMENT, to answere what they can obiect against you, sir. I will vse you kindly, sir.
                     
                     
                        MATT.
                        Come, let's before, and make the Iustice, Captaine—
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        The varlet's a tall man! afore heauen!
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        Gull, you'll gi' me my cloke?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Sir, I bought it, and I'le keepe it.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        You will.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        I, that I will.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        Officer, there's thy fee, arrest him.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Master STEPHEN, I must arrest you.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Arrest mee, I scorne it. There, take your cloke, I'le none ou't.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        Nay, that shall not serue your turne, now, sir. Officer, I'le goe with thee, to the Iustices: bring him along.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Why, is not here your cloke? what would you haue?
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        I'le ha'you answere it, sir.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Sir, I'le take your word; and this gentlemans, too: for his apparance.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        I'le ha' no words taken. Bring him along.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Sir, I may choose, to doe that: I may take bayle.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        'Tis true, you may take baile, and choose; at another time: but you shall not, now, varlet. Bring him along, or I'le swinge you.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Sir, I pitty the gentlemans case. Here's your money againe.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        'Sdeynes, tell not me of my money, bring him away, I say.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I warrant you he will goe with you of himselfe, sir.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Yet more adoe?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I haue made a faire mash on't.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Must I goe?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I know no remedie, master STEPHEN.
                     
                     
                        DOWN.
                        Come along, afore mee, here. I doe not loue your hanging looke behind.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Why, sir. I hope you cannot hang mee for it. Can hee, fellow?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        I thinke not, sir. It is but a whipping matter, sure!
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        Why, then, let him doe his worst, I am resolute.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Act V. 
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     CLEMENT, KNO'WEL, KITELY, DAME KITELY, TIB, CASH, COB, SERVANTS.
                     
                        NAy, but stay, stay, giue me leaue: my chaire, sirrha. You, master KNO'WELL, say you went thither to meet your sonne.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        But, who directed you, thither?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        That did mine owne man, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Where is he?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Nay, I know not, now; I left him with your clarke: And appointed him, to stay here for me.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        My darke? about what time, was this?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Mary, betweene one and two, as I take it.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        And, what time came my man with the false message to you, master KITELY?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        After two, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Very good: but, mistris KITELY, how that you were at Cons? ha?
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        An' please you, s
                              •
                           r, Ile tell you: my brother, WEL-BRED, told me, that COBS house, was a suspected place—
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        So it appeares, me thinkes: but, on.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        And that my husband vs'd thither, daily.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        No matter, so he vs'd himselfe well, mistris.
                     
                     
                        DAME.
                        True sir, but you know, what growes, by such hants, often-times.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        I see, ranke fruits of a iealous braine, mistris KITELY: but, did you find your husband there, in that case, as you suspected?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        I found her there, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Did you so? that alters the case. Who gaue you knowledge, of your wiues being there?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Marie, that did my brother WEL-BRED.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        How? WEL-BRED first tell her? then tell you, after? where is WEL-BRED?
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Gone with my sister, sir, I know not whither.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Why, this is a meere trick, a deuice; you are gull'd in this most grosly, all! alas, poore wench, wert thou beaten for this?
                     
                     
                        TIB.
                        Yes, most pittifully, and 't please you.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        And worthily, I hope: if it shall proue so.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        I, that's like, and a piece of a sentence. How now, sir? what's the matter?
                     
                     
                        SER.
                        Sir, there's a gentleman, i' the court without, desires to speake with your worship.
                     
                     
                        
                        CLEM.
                        A gentleman? what's he?
                     
                     
                        SER.
                        A souldier, sir, he saies.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        He armes himselfe.
                        A souldier? take downe my armor, my sword, quickly: a souldier speake with me! why, when knaues? come on, come on, hold my cap there, so; giue me my gorget, my sword: stand by, I will end your matters, anou—Let the souldier enter, now, sir, what ha'you to say to me?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene II.
                     BOBADILL, MATTHEW.
                     
                        BY your worships fauour—
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Nay, keepe out, sir, I know not your pretence, you send me word, sir, you are a souldier: why, sir, you shall bee answer'd, here, here be them haue beene amongst souldiers. Sir, your pleasure.
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Faith, sir, so it is, this gentleman, and my selfe, haue beene most vnciuilly wrong'd, and beaten, by one DOWNE-RIGHT, a course fellow, about the towne, here, and for mine owne part, I protest, being a man, in no sort, giuen to this filthie humour of quarrelling, he hath a
                              ••
                           aulted mee in the way of my peace; dispoil'd mee of mine honor; dis-arm'd mee of my weapons; and rudely, laid me along, in the open streets: when, I not so much as once offer'd to resist him.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        O, gods precious! is this the souldier? here, take my armour of quickly, 'twill make him swonne, I feare; hee is not 
                              •
                           it to looke on't, that will put vp a blow.
                     
                     
                        MATT.
                        An't please your worship, he was bound to the peace.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Why, and he were, sir, his hands were not bound, were they?
                     
                     
                        SER.
                        There's one of the varlets of the citie, sir, ha's brought two gentlemen, here, one, vpon your worships warrant.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        My warrant?
                     
                     
                        SER.
                        Yes, sir. The officer say's, procur'd by these two.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Bid him, come in. Set by this picture. What, Mr. DOWNE-RIGHT! are you brought at Mr. FRESH-WATERS suite, here!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene III.
                     DOWNE-RIGHT, STEPHEN, BRAYNE-WORME.
                     
                        I Faith, sir. And here's another brought at my suite.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        What are you, sir?
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        A gentleman, sir? Ô, vncle!
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Vncle? who? master KNO'W
                              •
                           LL?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        I, sir! this is a wise kinsman of mine.
                     
                     
                        
                        STEP.
                        God's my witnesse, vncle, I am wrong'd here monstrously, hee charges me with stealing of his cloke, and would I might neuer stirre, if I did not find it in the street, by chance.
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        O, did you find it, now? you said, you bought it, ere-while.
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        And, you said, I stole it; nay, now my vncle is here, I'll doe well inough, with you.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Well, let this breath a while; you, that haue cause to complaine, there, stand forth: had you my warrant for this gentlemans apprehension?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        I, an't please your worship.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Nay, doe not speake in passion so: where had you it?
                     
                     
                        BOB.
                        Of your clarke, sir?
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        That's well! an' my clarke can make warrants, and my hand not at 'hem! Where is the warrant? Officer, haue you it?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        No, sir, your worship's man, master FORMAL, bid mee doe it, for these gentlemen, and he would be my discharge.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Why, master DOWNE-RIGHT, are you such a nouice, to bee seru'd, and neuer see the warrant?
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Sir. He did not serue it on me.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        No? how then?
                     
                     
                        DOW.
                        Mary, sir, hee came to mee, and said, hee must serue it, and hee would vse me kindly, and so—
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        He flourishes ouer him with his long-sword.
                        O, gods pittie, was it so, sir? he must serue it? giue me my long-sword there, and helpe me of; so. Come on, sir varlet, I must 
                              •
                           ut off your legs, sirrha: nay, stand vp, Ile vse you kindly; I must 
                              •
                           ut off your legs, I say.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        O, good sir, I beseech you; nay, good master Iustice.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        I must doe it; there is no remedie. I must cut off your legs, sirrha, I must cut off your eares, you rascall, I must doe it; I must cut off your nose, I must cut off your head.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        O, good your worship.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Well, rise, how doest thou doe, now? doest thou feele thy selfe well? hast thou no harme?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        No, I thanke your good worship, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Why, so! I said, I must cut off thy legs, and I must cut off thy armes, and I must cut off thy head; but, I did not doe it: so, you said, you must serue this gentleman, with my warrant, but, you did not serue him. You knaue, you slaue, you rogue, doe you say you must? sirrha, away with him, to the iayle, Ile teach you a trick, for your must, sir.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Good, sir, I beseech you, be good to me.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Tell him he shall to the iayle, away with him, I say▪
                        
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Nay, sir, if you will commit mee, it shall bee for committing more then this: I will not loose, by my trauaile, any graine of my fame certaine.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        How is this!
                     
                     
                        
                        KNO.
                        My man, BRAYNE-WORME!
                     
                     
                        STEP.
                        O yes, vncle. BRAYNE-WORME ha's beene with my cossen EDWARD, and I, all this day.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        I told you all, there was some deuice!
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Nay, excellent Iustice, since I haue laid my selfe thus open to you; now, stand strong for mee: both with your sword, and your ballance.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Bodie o'me, a merry knaue! Giue me a bowle of sack: If hee belong to you, master KNO'WELL, I bespeake your patience.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        That is it, I haue most need of. Sir, if you'll pardon me, only; I'll glorie in all the rest, of my exploits.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Sir, you know, I loue not to haue my fauours come hard, from me. You haue your pardon: though I suspect you shrewdly for being of counsell with my sonne, against me.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Yes, faith, I haue, sir; though you retain'd me doubly this morning, for your selfe: first, as BRAYNE-WORME; after, as FITZ-SWORD. I was your reform'd souldier, sir. 'Twas I sent you to COBS, vpon the errand, without end.
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        Is it possible! or that thou should'st disguise thy language so, as I should not know thee?
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        O, sir, this ha's beene the day of my metamorphosis! It is not that shape alone that I haue runne through, to day. I brought this gentleman, master KITELY, a message too, in the forme of master Iustices man, here, to draw him out o' the way, as well as your worship: while master WELL-BRED might make a conueiance of mistris BRIDGET, to my yong master.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        How! my sister 
                              ••
                           olne away?
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        My sonne is not married, I hope!
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Faith, sir, they are both as sure as loue, a priest, and three thousand pound (which is her portion) can make 'hem: and by this time are readie to bespeake their wedding supper at the wind-mill, except some friend, here, preuent 'hem, and inuite 'hem home.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Marie, that will I (I thanke thee, for putting me in mind o
                              •
                           't.) Sirrah, goe you, and fetch 'hem hither, vpon my warrant. Neithers friends haue cause to be 
                              •
                           orrie, if I know the yong couple, aright. Here, I drinke to thee, for thy good newes. But, I pray thee, what hast thou done with my man FORMALL.
                     
                     
                        BRAY.
                        Faith, sir, after some ceremonie past, as making him drunke, first with storie, and then with wine (but all in kindnesse) and stripping him to his shirt: I left him in that coole vaine, departed, sold your worships warrant to these two, pawn'd his liuerie for that varlets gowne, to serue it in; and thus haue brought my selfe, by my actiuitie, to your worships consideration.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        And I will consider thee, in another cup of sack. Here's to thee, which hauing drunke of, this is my sentence. Pledge me. Thou hast done,

or assisted to nothing, in my iudgement, but deserues to bee pardon'd for the wit o' the offence. If thy master, or anie man, here, be angrie with thee, I shall suspect his ingine, while I know him for't. How now? what noise is that!
                     
                     
                        SER.
                        Sir, it is ROGER is come home.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Bring him in, bring him in. What! drunke in armes, against me? Your reason, your reason for this.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene IIII.
                     FORMALL.  
                     To them.
                     
                        I Beseech your worship to pardon me; I happen'd into ill companie by chance, that cast me into a sleepe, and stript me of all my clothes—
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Well, tell him, I am Iustice CLEMENT, and doe pardon him: but, what is this to your armour! what may that signifie?
                     
                     
                        FORM.
                        And 't please you, sir, it hung vp 'i the roome, where I was stript; and I borrow'd it of one o' the drawers, to come home in, because I was loth, to doe penance through the street, i' my shirt.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Well, stand by a while. Who be these? O, the yong companie, welcome, welcome. Gi' you ioy. Nay, mistris BRIDGET, blush not; you are not so fresh a bride, but the newes of it is come hither a
                              •
                           ore you. Master Bridegroome, I ha' made your peace, giue mee your hand: so will I for all the rest, ere you forsake my roofe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene V.
                     ED. KNO'WEL,  WEL-BRED, BRIDGET.
                     To them.
                     
                        WE are the more bound to your humanitie, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Only these two, haue so little of man in 'hem, they are no part of my care.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        Yes, sir, let mee pray you for this gentleman, hee belongs, to my sister, the bride.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        In what place, sir?
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        Of her delight, sir, below the staires, and in publike: her poet, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        A poet? I will challenge him my selfe, presently, at extempore.
                           
                              Mount vp thy Phlegon muse, and testifie,
                              How SATVRNE, sitting in an 
                                    •
                                 bo
                                    •
                                  cloud,
                              Disro
                                    •
                                 'd his podex white as iuorie,
                              And, through the welkin, thundred all aloud.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        Hee is not for extempore, sir. Hee is all for the pocket-muse, please you command a sight of it.
                     
                     
                        
                        CLEM.
                        Yes, yes, search him for a tast of his veine.
                     
                     
                        WELL.
                        You must not denie the Queenes Iustice, Sir, vnder a writ o' rebellion.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        What! all this verse? Bodie o' me, he carries a whole realme, a common-wealth of paper, in's hose! let's see some of his subiects!

                              Vnto the boundlesse Ocean of thy face,
                              Runnes this poore ri
                                    •
                                 er chang'd with streames of eyes.
                           
How? this is stolne!
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        A Parodie! a parodie! with a kind of miraculous gift, to make it ab
                              •
                           urder then it was.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Is all the rest, of this batch? Being me a torch; lay it together, and giue 
                              •••
                           e. Clense the aire. He was enough to haue infected, the whole citie, if it had not beene taken in time! See, see, how our Poets glorie shines! brighter, and brighter! 
                              •
                           ull it increases! Ô, now, it's at the highest: and, now, it declines as fast. You may see. Sic transi
                                 •
                               gloria mundi.
                        
                     
                     
                        KNO.
                        There's an embleme for you, sonne, and your studies!
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Nay, no speech, or act of mine be drawne against such as professe it worthily. They are not borne eu
                              •
                           rie yeere, as an Alderman. There goes more to the making of a good Poet, then a Sheriffe, Mr. KITELY. You looke vpon me! though, I liue i' the citie here, amongst you, I will doe more reuerence, to him, when I meet him, then I will to the Major, out of his yeere. But, these paper-pedlers! these inke-dablers! They cannot expect reprehension, or reproch. They haue it with the fact.
                     
                     
                        E. KN.
                        Sir, you haue sau'd me the labour of a defence.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        It shall be discourse for supper; betweene your father and me, if he dare vnder-take me. But, to dispatch away these, you signe o' the Souldier, and picture o' the Poet (but, both so false, I will not ha' you hang'd out at my dore till midnight) while we are at supper, you two shal penitently fa
                              ••
                            it out in my court, without; and, if you will, you may pray there, that we may be so merrie within, as to forgiue, or forget you▪ when we come out. Here's a third, because, we tender your safetie, shall watch you, he is prouided for the purpose. Looke to your change, sir.
                     
                     
                        S
                              •
                           E
                              •
                           .
                        And what shall I doe?
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        O! I had lost a sheepe, an he had not bleated! Why, sir, you shall giue Mr. DOWNE-RIGHT his cloke: and I will intreat him to take it. A trencher, and a napkin, you shall haue, i' the buttrie, and keepe COB, and his wife companie, here; whom, I will intreat first to bee reconcil'd: and you to endeuour with your wit, to keepe 'hem so.
                     
                     
                        S
                              •••
                           .
                        Ile doe my best.
                     
                     
                        COB.
                        Why, now I see thou art honest, TIB, I receiue thee as my dea
                              •
                           e, and mortall wi
                              •
                           e, againe.
                     
                     
                        TI
                              •
                           .
                        And, I you, as my louing, and obedient husband.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        Good complement! It will bee their bridale night too. They

are married anew. Come, I coniure the rest, to put of all discontent. You, Mr. DOWNE-RIGHT, your anger; you, master KNO'WELL, your cares; master KITELY, and his wife, their iealousie.
                        For, I must tell you both, while that is fed,
                        Hornes i' the mind are worse then o' the head.
                     
                     
                        KITE.
                        Sir, thus they goe from me, kisse me, sweet heart.

                              See, what a droue of hornes flye, in the ayre,
                              Wing'd with my densed, and my credulous breath!
                              Watch 'hem, suspicious eyes, watch, where they fall.
                              See, see! on hends, that thinke th'haue none at all!
                              O, what a plenteous world of this, will come!
                              When ayre raynes hornes, all m
                                    •
                                 y be sure of same.
                           
I ha' learn'd so much verse out of a iealous mans part, in a play.
                     
                     
                        CLEM.
                        'Tis well, 'tis well! This night wee'll dedicate to friendship, loue, and laughter. Master bride-groome, take your bride, and leade: euery one, a fellow. Here is my mistris. BRAYME-WORME! to whom all my addresses of courtship shall haue their reference. Whose aduentures, this day, when our grand-children shall heare to be made a fable, I doubt not, but it shall find both spectators, and applause.
                     
                  
               
               THE END.
            
            
               
                  
                  This Comoedie was first Acted, in the yeere 1598.
                  By the then L. CHAMBERLAYNE his Seruants.
                  
                     The principall Comoedians were.
                     WILL SHAKESPEARE.
                     AVG. PHILIPS.
                     HEN. CONDEL.
                     WILL. SLYE.
                     WILL. KEMPE.
                     RIC. BVRBADGE.
                     IOH. HEMINGS.
                     THO. POPE.
                     CHR. BEESTON.
                     IOH. DVKE.
                  
                  With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  Euery MAN OVT OF HIS HVMOVR. A Comicall Satyre. Acted in the yeere 1599. By the then Lord CHAMBERLAINE his Seruants.
                  The Author B. I.
                   Non aliena meo pressi pede | * si propius sles, Tec apient magis | * & deries repetat
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for I. Smithwicke.
                  
                  1616
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE NOBLEST NOVRCERIES OF HVMANITY, AND LIBERTY, IN THE KINGDOME: The Innes of Court.
                  
                     I Vnderstand you, Gentlemen, no
                        •
                      your houses: and a worthy succession of you, to all time, as being borne the Iudges of these studies. When I wrote this Poeme, I had friendship with diuers in your societies; who, as they were great Names in learning, so they were no lesse Examples of liuing. Of them, and then (that I say no more) it was not despis'd. Now that the Printer, by a doubled charge, thinkes it worthy a longer life, then commonly the ayre of such things doth promise; I am carefull to put it a seruant to their pleasures, who are the inheriters of the first fauour borne it. Yet, I command, it lye not in the way of your more noble, and vse-full studies to the publike. For so I shall suffer for it: But, when the gowne and cap is off, and the Lord of liberty raignes; then, to take it in your hands, perhaps may make some Bencher, tincted with humanity, reade: and not repent him.
                  
                     By your true Honorer, BEN. IONSON.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Names of the Actors.
                  
                     ASPER, The Presenter.
                     MACILENTE.
                     PVNTERVOLO.
 
                           His Lady.
                           Waiting-Gent.
                           Huntsman.
                           Seruingmen 2.
                           Dog and Cat.
                        
                     
                     CARLO BVFFONE.
                     FASTID. BRISKE.
 
                           
                              Cinedo his Page.
                        
                     
                      
                        
                           DELIRO.
                           FALLACE.
                           Fido their Seruant.
                           Musicians.
                        
                     
                     SAVIOLINA.
                     SORDIDO.
 
                           His Hinde.
                        
                     
                     FVNGOSO.
 
                           Taylor.
                           Haberdasher.
                           Shomaker.
                        
                     
                     SOGLIARDO.
                     SHIFT.
                     CLOVE.
 
                           
                              Rustici.
                           
                           A Groome.
                           Drawers.
                           Constable, and
                           
                           Officers.
                        
                     
                     ORENGE.
                     
                        GREX.
                        
                           CORDATVS.
                           MITIS.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ASPER his Character.
                     HE is of an ingenious and free spirit, eager and constant in reproofe, without feare controuling the worlds abuses. One, whom no seruile hope of gaine, or frosty apprehension of danger, can make to be a Parasite, either to time, place▪ or opinion.
                     MACILENTE.
                     
                        A Man well parted, a sufficient Scholler, and trauail'd; who (wanting that place in the worlds account, which he thinks his merit capable of) falls into such an enuious apoplexie, with which his iudgement is so dazeled, and distasted, that he growes violently impatient of any opposite happinesse in another.
                     PVNTARVOLO.
                     
                        A Vaine glorious Knight, ouer-Englishing his trauels, and wholly consecrated to singularity; the very Iacobs staffe of complement: a Sir, that hath liu'd to see the reuolution of time in most of his apparell. Of presence good ynough, but so palpably affected to his owne praise, that (for want of flatterers) he commends himselfe, to the flo
                           •
                        tage of his owne family. He deales vpon returnes, and strange performances, resoluing (in despight of publike derision) to sticke to his owne particular fashion, phrase, and gesture.
                     CARLO BVFFONE.
                     
                        A Publike, scurrilous, and prophane Iester; that (more swift then Circe) with absurd simile's will transforme any person into deformity. A good Feast-hound, or Banket-beagell, that will sent you out a supper some three mile off, and sweare to his Patrons (Dam him) hee came in Oares, when hee was but wafted ouer in a Sculler. A slaue, that hath an extraordinary gift in pleasing his palat,

and will swill vp more sacke at a sitting, then would make all the Guard a posset. His religion is rayling, and his discourse riba
                           •
                        dry. They stand highest in his respect, whom he studies most to reproch.
                     FASTIDIVS BRISKE.
                     
                        A Neat, spr
                           •
                        ce, affecting Courtier, one that weares clothes well, and in fashion; practiseth by his glasse how to salute; speakes good remnants (notwithstanding the Base-violl and Tabacco:) sweares tersely, and with variety; cares not what Ladies fauour he belyes, or great Mans familiarity: a good property to perfume the boot of a coach. Hee will borrow another mans borse to praise, and backs him as his owne. Or, for a neede, on foot can post himselfe into credit with his marchant, only with the gingle of his spurre, and the jerke of his wand.
                     DELIRO.
                     
                        A Good doting Citizen, who (it is thought) might be of the common Councell for his wealth: a fellow sincerely besotted on his owne wife, and so rapt with a conceit of her perfections, that be simply holds himselfe vnworthy of her. And in that hood-winkt humour, 
                           〈◊〉
                         more like a suter then a husband; standing in as true dread of her displeasure, as when he first made loue to her. He doth sacrifice two-pence in iuniper to her, euery morning, before shee rises, and wakes her, with villanous-out-of-tune musick, which shee out of her contempt (though not out of her iudgement) is sure to dislike.
                     FALLACE.
                     
                        DEliro's wife, and Idoll: a proud mincing Peat, and as peruerse as he is officious. Shee dotes as perfectly vpon the Courtier, as her husband doth on her, and only wants the face to be dishonest.
                     SAVIOLINA.
                     
                        A Court Lady, whose weightiest praise is a light wit, admir'd by herselfe, and one more, her seruant Briske.
                     
                     
                     SORDIDO.
                     
                        A Wretched hob-nail'd Chuffe, whose recreation, is reading of Almanacks; and felicity, foule, weather. One that neuer pray'd, but for a leane dearth, and euer wept in a fat haruest.
                     FVNGOSO.
                     THe sonne of Sordido, and a student: one that has reuel'd in his time, and followes the fashion a farre off, like a spie. He makes it the whole bent of his endeuours, to wring sufficient meanes from his wretched father, to put him in the Courtiers cut: at which he earnestly aimes, but so vnluckily, that he still lights short a sute.
                     SOGLIARDO.
                     AN essentiall Clowne, brother to Sordido, yet so enamour'd of the name of a Gentleman, that he will haue it, though he buyes it. He comes vp euery Terme to learne to take Tabacco, and see new Motions. He is in his kingdome when he can get himselfe into company, where he may be well laught at.
                     SHIFT.
                     
                        A Thred-bare Sharke. One that neuer was Souldier, yet liues vpon lendings. His profession is skeldring and odling, his banke Poules, and his ware-house Pict-hatch. Takes vp single testons vpon othes, till Doomes day. Falls vnder executions of three shillings, and enters into fiue-groat bonds. He way-layes the reports of seruices, and connes them without booke, damming himselfe he came new from them, when all the while he was taking the dyet in a bawdy house, or lay pawn'd in his chamber for rent, and victuals. He is of that admirable and happy memory, that he will salute one for an old acquaintance, that he ne
                           •
                        er saw in his life before. He vsurps vpon cheats, quarrels, and robberies, which he neuer did, only to get him a name. His chiefe exercises are, taking the Whiffe, squiring a Cockatrice, and making priuy searches for Imparters.
                     CLOVE, and ORANGE.
                     
                     
                     AN inseparable case of Coxcombs, City-borne; The Gemini or
Twins of foppery: that like a paire of woodden soyles, are fit for
nothing, but to be practis'd vpon. Being well flatter'd, they'le lend
money, and repent when they ha' done. Their glory is to inuite Plaiers,
and make suppers. And in company of better ranke (to auoide the suspect
of insufficiency) will inforce their ignorance, most desperately,
to set vpon the vnderstanding of any thing. Orange is the more
humorous of the two (whose small portion of iuyce being squeez'd out)
Cloue serues to sticke him, with commendations.
                     CORDATVS.
                     THe Authors friend; A man inly acquainted with the scope and
drift of his Plot: Of a discreet, and vnderstanding iudgement;
and has the plase of a Moderator.
                     MITIS.
                     IS a person of no action, and therefore we haue reason to affoord
him no Character.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
EVERY MAN OVT OF HIS HVMOVR.
               
                  
                     After the second Sounding. 
                     GREX. CORDATVS, ASPER, MITIS.
                     
                        NAy, my deare ASPER,
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        Stay your mind:
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        Away.
                        Who is so patient of this impious world,
                        That he can checke his spirit, or reine his tongue?
                        Or who hath such a dead vnfeeling sense,
                        That heauens horrid thunders cānot wake?
                        To see the earth, crackt with the weight of sinne,
                        Hell gaping vnder vs, and o're our heads
                        Blacke rau'nous ruine, with her saile-stretcht wings,
                        Ready to sinke vs downe, and couer vs.
                        Who can behold such prodigies as these,
                        And haue his lips seal'd vp? not I: my soule
                        Was neuer ground into such oyly colours,
                        To flatter vice and daube iniquitie:
                        But (with an armed, and resolued hand)
                        Ile strip the ragged follies of the time,
                        
                        Naked, as at their birth:
                     
                     
                        COR.
                        (Be not too bold.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        You trouble me) and with a whip of steele,
                        Print wounding lashes in their yron ribs.
                        I feare no mood stampt in a priuate brow,
                        When I am pleas'd t'vnmaske a publicke vice.
                        I feare no strumpets drugs, nor ruffians stab,
                        Should I detect their hatefull luxuries;
                        No brokers, vsurers, or lawyers gripe,
                        Were I dispos'd to say, they're all corrupt.
                        I feare no courtiers frowne, should I applaud
                        The easie flexure of his supple hummes.
                        Tut, these are so innate, and popular,
                        That drunken custome would not shame to laugh
                        (In scorne) at him, that should but dare to taxe'hem.
                        And yet, not one of these but knowes his workes,
                        Knowes what damnation is, the deuill, and hell,
                        Yet, howerly they persist, grow ranke in sinne,
                        Puffing their soules away in perj'rous aire,
                        To cherish their extortion, pride, or lusts.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        Forbeare, good ASPER, be not like your name.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        O, but to such, whose 
                              •
                           aces are all zeale,
                        And (with the words of HERCVLES) invade
                        Such crimes as these! that will not smell of sinne,
                        But seeme as they were made of Sanctifie!
                        Religion in their garments, and their haire
                        Cut shorter than their eye-browes! when the conscience
                        Is vaster than the Ocean, and deuoures
                        More wretches than the Counters.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        Gentle ASPER,
                        Containe your spirit in more stricter bounds,
                        And be not thus transported with the violence
                        Of your strong thoughts.
                     
                     
                        COR.
                        Vnlesse your breath had power
                        To melt the world, and mould it new againe,
                        It is in vaine; to spend it in these moods.
                        Here hee makes adresse to the People.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        I not obseru'd this thronged round till now.
                        Gracious, and kind spectators, you are welcome,
                        APOLLO, and the MVSES feast your eyes
                        With gracefull obiects, and may our MINERVA
                        Answere your hopes, vnto their largest straine.
                        Yet here, mistake me not, iudicious friends.
                        I doe not this, to begge your patience,
                        Or seruilely to fawne on your applause,
                        Like some drie braine, despairing in his merit:
                        Let me be censur'd, by th'austerest brow,
                        
                        Where I want arte, or iudgement, taxe me freely:
                        Let envious Censors with their broadest eyes
                        Looke through and through me; I pursue no fauour.
                        Onely vouchsafe me your attentions,
                        And I will giue you musicke worth your eares.
                        O, how I hate the monstrousnesse of time,
                        Where euery seruile imitating spirit,
                        (Plagu'd with an itching leprosie of wit)
                        In a meere halting fury, striues to fling
                        His 
                              •
                           lc'rous body in the Thespian spring,
                        And streight leap's forth a Poet! but as lame
                        As VULCAN, or the founder of Cripple-gate.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        In faith, this Humour will come ill to some,
                        You will be thought to be too peremptory.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        This Humour? good; and why this Humour, MITIS?
                        Nay doe not turne, but answere.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        Answere? what?
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        I will not stirre your patience, pardon me,
                        I vrg'd it for some reasons, and the rather
                        To giue these ignorant well-spoken dayes,
                        Some taste of their abuse of this word Humour.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        O doe not let your purpose fall, good ASPER,
                        It cannot but arriue most acceptable,
                        Chiefly to such, as haue the happinesse,
                        Daily to see how the poore innocent word
                        Is rackt, and tortur'd.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        I; I pray you proceede.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        Ha? what? what is't?
                     
                     
                        COR.
                        For the abuse of Humour.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        O, I craue pardon, I had lost my thoughts.
                        Why Humour (as 'tis ens) we thus define it
                        To be a quality of aire or water,
                        And in it selfe holds these two properties,
                        Moisture and fluxure: As, for demonstration,
                        Powre water on this floore, 'twill wet and runne:
                        Likewise the aire (forc't through a horne or trumpet)
                        Flowes instantly away, and leaues behind
                        A kind of dew; and hence we doe conclude,
                        That what soe're hath fluxure, and humiditie,
                        As wanting power to containe it selfe,
                        Is Humour: so in euery humane body
                        The choller, melancholy, flegme, and bloud,
                        By reason that they flow continually
                        In some one part, and are not continent,
                        Receiue the name of Humours. Now thus farre
                        
                        It may, by Metaphore, apply it selfe
                        Vnto the generall disposition:
                        As when some one peculiar quality
                        Doth so possesse a man, that it doth draw
                        All his affects, his spirits, and his powers,
                        In their confl
                              •
                           ctions, all to runne one way,
                        This may be truly said to be a Humour.
                        But that a Rooke, in wearing a pyed feather,
                        The cable hat-band, or the three-pild ruffe,
                        A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
                        On his French garters, should affect a Humour!
                        O, 'tis more then most ridiculous.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        He speakes pure truth: now if an Idiot
                        Haue but an apish, or phantasticke straine,
                        It is his Humour.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        Well I will scourge those Apes;
                        And to these courteous eyes oppose a mirrour,
                        As large as is the stage, whereon we act:
                        Where they shall see the times deformity
                        Anatomiz'd in euery nerue, and sinnew,
                        With constant courage, and contempt of feare.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        ASPER (I vrge it as your friend) take heed,
                        The dayes are dangerous, full of exception,
                        And men are growne impatient of reproofe.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        Ha, ha:
                        You might as well haue told me, yond is heauen,
                        This earth, these men; and all had mou'd alike.
                        Doe not I know the times condition?
                        Yes MITIS, and their soules, and who they be
                        That either will, or can except against me.
                        None, but a sort of fooles, so sicke in taste,
                        That they contemne all phisicke of the mind,
                        And like gald camels kicke at euery touch.
                        Good men, and vertuous spirits, that lothe their vices,
                        Will cherish my free labours, loue my liues,
                        And with the feruour of their shining grace,
                        Make my braine fruitfull to bring forth more obiects,
                        Worthy their serious, and intentiue eyes.
                        But why enforce I this? as fainting? no.
                        If any here chance to behold himselfe,
                        Let him not dare to challenge me of wrong,
                        For, if he shame to haue his follies knowne,
                        First he should shame to act 'hem: my strict hand
                        Was made to ceaze on vice, and with a gripe
                        Squeeze out the humour of such spongie soules,
                        As licke vp euery idle vanitie.
                     
                     
                        
                        CORD.
                        Why this is right Furor Poeticus!
                        
                        Kind gentlemen, we hope your patience
                        Will yet conceiue the best, or entertaine
                        This supposition, that a mad-man speakes.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        What? are you ready there? MITIS sit downe:
                        And my CORDATVS. Sound hough, and begin.
                        I leaue you two, as censors, to sit here:
                        Obserue what I present, and liberally
                        Speake your opinions, vpon euery Scene,
                        As it shall passe the view of these spectators.
                        Nay, now, y'are tedious Sirs, for shame begin.
                        And MITIS, note me, if in all this front,
                        You can espy a gallant of this marke,
                        Who (to be thought one of the iudicious)
                        Sits with his armes thus wreath'd, his hat pull'd here,
                        Cryes meaw, and nods, then shakes his empty head,
                        Will shew more seueral motions in his face,
                        Then the new London, Rome, or Niniueh,
                        And (now and then) breakes a drie bisquet iest,
                        Which that it may more easily be chew'd,
                        He sleeps in his owne laughter.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        Why? will that
                        Make it be sooner swallow'd?
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        O, assure you.
                        Or if it did not, yet as HORACE sings,
                        " Ieiunus raro stomachus vulgaria temnit,
                        " Meane cares are welcome still to hungry guests.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        'Tis true, but why should we obserue 'hem, ASPER?
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        O I would know 'hem, for in such assemblies,
                        Th'are more infectious then the pestilence:
                        And therefore I would giue them pills to purge,
                        And make 'hem fit for faire societies.
                        How monstrous, and detested is't, to see
                        A fellow, that has neither arte, nor braine,
                        Sit like an ARISTARCHVS, or starke-asse,
                        Taking mens lines, with a tabacco face,
                        In snuffe, still spitting, vsing his wryed lookes
                        (In nature of a vice) to wrest, and turne
                        The good aspect of those that shall sit neere him,
                        From what they doe behold! O, 'tis most vile.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        Nay, ASPER.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        Peace, MITIS, I doe know your thought.
                        You'le say, your guests here will except at this:
                        Pish, you are too timorous, and full of doubt.
                        Then, he, a patient, shall reiect all physicke,
                        'Cause the physicion tels him, you are sicke:
                        
                        
                        Or, if I say, That he is vicious,
                        You will not heare of vertue. Come, y'are fond.
                        Shall I be so extrauagant to thinke,
                        That happy iudgements, and composed spirits,
                        Will challenge me for taxing such as these?
                        I am asham'd.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        Nay, but good pardon vs:
                        We must not beare this peremptorie saile,
                        But vse our best endeuours how to please.
                     
                     
                        ASP.
                        Why, therein I commend your carefull thoughts,
                        And I will mixe with you in industrie
                        To please, but whom? attentiue auditors,
                        Such as will ioyne their profit with their pleasure,
                        And come to feed their vnderstanding parts:
                        For these, Ile prodigally spend my selfe,
                        And speake away my spirit into ayre;
                        For these, Ile melt my braine into inuention,
                        Coine new conceits, and hang my richest words
                        As polisht jewels in their bounteous eares.
                        But stay, I loose my selfe, and wrong their patience;
                        If I dwell here, they'le not begin, I see:
                        Friends sit you still, and entertaine this troupe
                        With some familiar, and by-conference,
                        Ile haste them sound. Now gentlemen, I goe
                        To turne an actor, and a Humorist,
                        Where (ere I doe resume my present person)
                        We hope to make the circles of your eyes
                        Flow with distilled laughter: if we faile,
                        We must impute it to this onely chance,
                        "Arte hath an enemy cal'd Ignorance.
                        
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        How doe you like his spirit, MITIS?
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        I should like it much better, if he were lesse confident.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        Why, doe you suspect his merit?
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        No, but I feare this will procure him much enuie.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        O, that sets the stronger seale on his desert, if he had no enemies,
I should esteeme his fortunes most wretched at this instant.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        You haue seene his play, CORDATVS? pray you, how is't?
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        Faith sir, I must refraine to iudge, only this I can say of it, 'tis
strange, and of a particular kind by it selfe, somewhat like Vetus Comoedia:
a worke that hath bounteously pleased me, how it will answere the generall
expectation, I know not.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        Does he obserue all the lawes of Comedie in it?
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        What lawes meane you?
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        Why, the equall diuision of it into Acts, and Scenes, according
to the Terentian manner, his true number of Actors; the furnishing of the


                           

                           Scene with GREX, or CHORVS, and that the whole Argument fall within
compasse of a dayes businesse.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        O no, these are too nice obseruations.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        They are such as must be receiued, by your fauour, or it cannot
be authentique.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        Troth, I can discerne no such necessity.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        No?
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        No, I assure you, Signior. If those lawes you speake of, had
beene deliuered vs, ab initio, and in their present vertue and perfection,
there had beene some reason of obeying their powers: but 'tis extant, that
that which we call Comoedia, was at first nothing but a simple, and continued
Song, sung by one only person, till SVSARIO inuented a second,
after him EPICHARMVS a third; PHORMVS, and CHIONIDES deuised
to haue foure Actors, with a Prologue and Chorus; to which CRATINVS
(long after) added a fift, and sixt; EVPOLIS more; ARISTOPHANES
more then they: euery man in the dignitie of his spirit and
iudgement, supplyed some-thing. And (though that in him this kinde of
Poeme appeared absolute, and fully perfected) yet how is the face of it
chang'd since, in MENANDER, PHILEMON, CECILIVS, PLAVTVS,
and the rest; who haue vtterly excluded the Chorus, altered the property
of the persons, their names, and natures, and augmented it with all liberty,
according to the elegancie and disposition of those times, wherein they
wrote? I see not then, but we should enioy the same licence, or free power,
to illustrate and heighten our inuention as they did; and not bee tyed to
those strict and regular formes, which the nicenesse of a few (who are nothing
but forme) would thrust vpon vs.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        Well, we will not dispute of this now: but what's his Scene?
                     
                     
                        COR.
                        Marry, Insula Fortunata, Sir.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        O, the fortunate Iland? masse, he has bound himselfe to a strict
law there.
                     
                     
                        COR.
                        Why so?
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        He cannot lightly alter the Scene, without crossing the seas.
                     
                     
                        COR.
                        He needs not, hauing a whole Iland to run through, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        No? how comes it then, that in some one Play we see so many
seas, countries, and kingdomes, past ouer with such admirable dexteritie?
                     
                     
                        COR.
                        O, that but shewes how well the Authors can trauaile in their
vocation, and out-run the apprehension of their auditorie. But leauing
this, I would they would begin once: this protraction is able to sowre the
best-settled patience in the Theatre.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        They haue answered your wish Sir: they sound.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        O, here comes the Prologue: Now sir! if you had staid a little
longer, I meant to haue spoke your prologue for you, I faith.
                     
                     
                     The third sounding.
                     PROLOGVE.
                     
                        PROL.
                        Mary, with all my heart, Sir, you shall doe it yet, and I thanke you.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        Nay, nay, stay, stay, heare you?
                     
                     
                        PROL.
                        You could not haue studied to ha' done me a greater benefit at the instant, for I protest to you, I am vnperfect, and (had I spoke it) I must of necessity haue beene out.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        Why, but doe you speake this seriously?
                     
                     
                        PROL.
                        Seriously! I (wit's my helpe doe I) and esteeme my selfe in debted to your kindnesse for it.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        For what?
                     
                     
                        PROL.
                        Why, for vndertaking the prologue for me.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        How? did I vndertake it for you?
                     
                     
                        PROL.
                        Did you! I appeale to all these gentlemen, whether you did or no? Come, it pleases you to cast a strange looke on't now; but 'twill not serue.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        'Fore me, but it must serue: and therefore speake your prologue.
                     
                     
                        PROL.
                        And I doe, let me die poyson'd with some venemous hisse, and neuer liue to looke as high as the two-penny roome againe.
                     
                     
                        MIT.
                        He has put you to it, sir.
                     
                     
                        COR.
                        Sdeath, what a humorous fellow is this? Gentlemen, good 
                              ••
                           ith I can speake no prologue, howsoeuer his weake wit has had the fortune to make this strong vse of me, here before you: but I protest—
                     
                     CARLO BVFFONE.
                     
                        CARL.
                        He enters with a boy, and wine.
                        Come, come, leaue these fustian protestations: away, come, I cannot abide these gray-headed ceremonies. Boy, fetch me a glasse, quickly, I may bid these gentlemen welcome; giue 'hem a health here: I marl'e whose wit 'twas to put a prologue in you'd 
                              •
                           ack-buts mouth: they might well thinke hee'd be out of tune, and yet you'ld play vpon him too.
                     
                     
                        CORD.
                        Hang him, dull blocke.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O good words, good words, a well-timberd fellow, he would ha' made a good columne, and he had beene thought on, when the house was a building. O, art thou come? well said; giue mee boy, fill, so. Here's a cup of wine sparkles like a diamond. Gentlewomen (I am sworne to put them in first) and Gentlemen, a round, in place of a bad prologue, I drinke this good draught to your health here, Canarie, the very Elixir and spirit of wine. This is that our Poet calls Castalian liquor, when hee comes abroad (now

and then) once in a fortnight, and makes a good meale among Players, where he has Caninum appetitum: mary, at home he keepes a good philosophicall diet, beanes and butter-milke: an honest pure Rogue, hee will take you off three, foure, fiue of these, one after another, and looke vilanously when he has done, like a one-headed CR
                              •
                           BERVS (he do not heare me I hope) and then (when his belly is well ballac't, and his braine rigg'd a little) he sailes away withall, as though he would worke wonders when he comes home. He has made a Play here, and he calls it, Euery Man out of his humour: Sbloud, and he get me out of the humour hee has put mee in, Ile trust none of his Tribe againe, while I liue. Gentles, all I can say for him, is, you are welcome. I could wish my bottle here amongst you: but there's an old rule, No pledging your owne health. Mary, if any here be thirsty for it, their best way (that I know) is, sit still, seale vp their lips, and drinke so much of the play, in at their eares.
Exit.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              What may this fellow be, CORDATVS?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Faith, if the time will suffer his description, Ile giue it you. He is one, the Author calls him CARLO BVFFONE, an impudent common iester, a violent rayler, and an incomprehensible Epicure; one, whose company is desir'd of all men, but belou'd of none; hee will sooner lose his soule then a iest, and prophane euen the most holy things, to excite laughter: no honourable or reuerend personage whatsoeuer, can come within the reach of his eye, but is turn'd into all manner of varietie, by his adult'rate simile's.
                              
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              You paint forth a monster.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              He will preferre all Countries before his natiue, and thinkes he can neuer sufficiently, or with admiration enough, deliuer his affectionate conceit of forraine Atheistical policies: but stay—Obserue these, hee'le appeare himselfe anon.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              O, this is your enuious man (MACILENTE) I thinke.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              The same, sir.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act I.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     MACILENTE.
                     
                        VIri est, fortunae caecuatem facilè ferre.
                        Tis true; but, Stoique, where (in the vast world)
                        Doth that man breathe, that can so much command
                        His bloud, and his affection? well: I see,
                        I striue in vaine to cure my wounded soule;
                        For euery cordiall that my thoughts apply,
                        Turnes to a cor'siue, and doth eate it farder.
                        There is no taste in this Philosophie,
                        Tis like a potion that a man should drinke,
                        
                        But turnes his stomacke with the sight of it.
                        I am no such pild Cinique, to beleeue
                        That beggery is the onely happinesse;
                        Or (with a number of these patient fooles)
                        To sing: My minde to me a kingdome is,
                        
                        When the lanke hungrie belly barkes for foode.
                        I looke into the world, and there I meet
                        With obiects, that doe strike my bloud-shot eyes
                        Into my braine: where, when I view my selfe;
                        Hauing before obseru'd, this m
                              •
                           n is great,
                        Mighty, and fear'd: that, lou'd and highly fauour'd:
                        A third, thought wise and learned: a fourth, rich,
                        And therefore honor'd: a fifth, rarely featur'd:
                        A sixth, admir'd for his nuptiall fortunes:
                        When I see these (I say) and view my selfe,
                        I wish the organs of my 
                              •
                           ight were crackt;
                        And th
                              •
                           t the engine of my griefe could cast
                        Mine eye-balls, like two globes of wild-fire forth,
                        To melt this vnproportion'd frame of nature.
                        Oh, they are thoughts that haue transfixt my heart,
                        And often (i'the strength of apprehension)
                        Made my cold passion stand vpon my face,
                        Like drops of dew on a stiffe cake of yce.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              This alludes well to that of the Poet,
                              Inuidus suspirat, ge
                                    ••
                                 it, in
                                    ••
                                 tit
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  demes,
                              S
                                    •
                                 d
                                    •
                                 t frigidus, intuem quod odit.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              O peace, you breake the Scene.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Soft, who be these?
                        I'le lay me downe a while till they be past.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              Signior, note this gallant, I pray you.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              What is he?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              A tame Rooke, youle take him presently: List.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene II.
                     SOGLIARDO, CARLO BVFFONE, MACILENTE.
                     
                        NAy looke you CARLO: this is my Humour now! I haue land and money, my friends left me well, and I will be a Gentleman whatsoeuer it cost me.
                     
                     
                        
                        SOG.
                        Tut, and I take an humour of a thing once, I am like your taylors needle, I goe through: but, for my name, Signior, how thinke you? will it not serue for a gentlemans name, when the Signior is put to it? Ha?
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Let me heare: how is't?
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        
                           Signior In
                                 •
                              ulso Sogliardo: me thinkes it sounds well.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        O excellent! tut, and all fitted to your name, you might very well stand for a gentleman: I know many Sogliardos gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Why, and for my wealth I might be a Iustice of Peace.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        I, and a Constable for your wit.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        All this is my Lordship you see here, and those Farmes you came by.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Good steps to gentility too, mary: but SOGLIARDO, if you affect to be a gentleman indeede, you must obserue all the rare qualities, humours, and complements of a gentleman.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        I know it, signior, and if you please to instruct, I am not too good to learne, He assure you.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Inough sir: Ile make admirable vse i'the proiection of my medicine vpon this lumpe of copper here. Ile bethinke me, for you sir.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Signior, I will both pay you, and pray you, and thanke you, and thinke on you.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              CORD.
                              Is not this purely good?
                           
                           
                              MACIL.
                              Sbloud, why should such a prick-card hine as this,
                              Berich? Ha? a foole? such a transparent gull
                              That may be scene through? wherefore should he haue land,
                              Houses, and lordships? O, I could eate my entrailes,
                              And sinke my soule into the earth with sorrow.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        First (to be an accomplisht gentleman, that is, a gentleman of the time) you must giue o're house-keeping in the countrey, and liue altogether in the city amongst gallants; where, at your first apparance, 'twere good you turn'd foure or fiue hundred acres of your best land into two or three trunks of apparel (you may doe it without going to a coniurer) and be sure, you mixe your selfe stil, with such as flourish in the spring of the fashion, and are least popular; studie their carriage, and behauiour in all: learne to play at Primero and Passage, and (euer when you lose) ha'two or three peculiar othes to sweare by, that no man else sweares: but aboue all, protest in your play, and affirme, Vpon your credit; As you are a true gentleman (at euery cast) you may doe it with a safe conscience, I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        O admirable rare! he cannot choose but be a gentleman, that ha's these excellent gifts: more, more, I beseech you.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        You must endeuour to feede cleanly at your Ordinarie, sit melancholy, and picke your teeth when you cannot speake: and when you come to Playes, be humorous, looke with a good startch't face, and ruffle

                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           

                           
your brow like a new boot; laugh at nothing but your owne iests, or else as the Noblemen laugh. That's a speciall grace you must obserue.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        I warrant you, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        I, and 
                              •
                           it o'the stage, and stout: prouided, you haue a good suit.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        O, I'le haue a suit only for that, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        You must talke much of your kinred, and allies.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Lies! no Signior, I shall not neede to doe so, I haue kinred i'the city to talke of: I haue a neece is a marchants wife; and a nephew, my brother SORDIDOS sonne, of the Innes of Court.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        O, but you must pretend alliance with Courtiers and great persons: and euer when you are to dine or suppe in any strange presence, hire a fellow with a great chaine (though it be copper it's no matter) to bring you letters, feign'd from such a Nobleman, or such a Knight, or such a Ladie, To their worshipfull, right rare, and noble qualified friend or kinsman, Signior In
                                 •
                              ulso Sogliardo; giue your selfe stile enough. And there (while you intend circumstances of newes, or enquiry of their health, or so) one of your familiars (whom you must carry about you still) breakes it vp (as 'twere in a iest) and reades it publikely at the table: at which, you must seeme to take as vnpardonable offence, as if he had torne your Mistris colours, or breath'd vpon her picture; and pursue it with that hot grace, as if you would aduance a challenge vpon it presently.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Stay, I doe not like that humour of challenge, it may be accepted; but I'le tell you what's my humour now: I will doe this. I will take occasion of sending one of my suites to the Taylors to haue the pocke
                              •
                            repaired, or so; and there such a letter, as you talke of (broke open and all) shall be left: O, the Taylor vvill presently giue out what I am, vpon the reading of it, vvorth twentie of your Gallants.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        But then you must put on an extreme face of discontentment at your mans negligence.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        O, so I vvill, and beat him too: I'le haue a man for the purpose.
                     
                     
                        MACIL.
                        You may; you haue land and crownes: O partiall fate!
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Masse well remembred, you must keepe your men gallant, at the first, fine py
                              •
                           d liueries, laid vvith good gold lace, there's no losse in it, they may tip't off and pawne it, vvhen they lacke victuals.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        By'r Ladie, that is chargeable Signior, 'twill bring a man in debt.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Debt? why, that's the more for your credit sir: it's an excellent policy to owe much in these daies, if you note it.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        As how good Signior? I would faine be a Polititian.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        O! looke where you are indebted any great summe, your creditor obserues you with no lesse regard, then if hee were bound to you for some huge benefit, and will quake to giue you the least cause of offence, lest he loose his money. I assure you (in these times) no man has his seruant more obsequious and pliant, then gentlemen their creditors: to whom (if at any time) you pay but a moitie, or a fourth part, it comes more acceptedly, then if you gaue them a new-yeares gift.
                     
                     
                        
                        SOG.
                        I perceiue you, sir: I will take vp, and bring my selfe in credit sure.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Mary this, alwaies beware you commerce not with bankrupts, or poore needie Ludgathians
                           ▪ they are impudent creatures, turbulent spirits, they care not what violent tragedies they stirre, nor how they play fast and loose with a poore gentlemans fortunes, to get their owne. Mary, these rich fellowes (that ha' the vvorld, or the better part of it, sleeping in their counting-houses) they are ten times more placable, they; either feare, hope, or modestie, restraines them from offering any outrages: but this is nothing to your followers, you shall not run a penny more in arrerage for them, and you list your selfe.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        No? how should I keepe 'hem then?
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Keepe 'hem? Sbloud let them keepe themselues, they are no sheepe, are they? What? you shall come in houses, where plate, apparrell, iewels, and diuers other pretie commodities lye negligently scattered, and I would ha' those Mercuries follow me (I trow) should remember they had not their fingers for nothing.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        That's not so good, me thinkes.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Why, after you haue kept 'hem a fortnight, or so, and shew'd 'hem ynough to the world, you may turne 'hem away, and keepe no more but a boy, it's ynough.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Nay, my humour is not for boyes, Ile keepe men, and I keepe any; and Ile giue coats, that's my humour: but I lacke a cullisen.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Why, now you ride to the citie, you may buy one, Ile bring you where you shall ha' your choise for money.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Can you, sir?
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        O, I: you shall haue one take measure of you, and make you a Co
                                 ••
                               of armes, to fit you of vvhat fashion you vvill.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        By word of mouth, I thanke you, Signior; Ile be once a little prodigall in a humour, i' faith, and haue a most prodigious coat.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Torment and death! breake head and braine at once,
                        To be deliuer'd of your fighting issue.
                        Who can endure to see blinde Fortune dote thus?
                        To be enamour'd on this dustie turfe?
                        This clod? a whorson puck-fist? O god, god, god, god, &c.
                        I could runne wild vvith griefe now, to behold
                        The ranknesse of her bounties, that doth breed
                        Such bull-rushes; these mushrompe gentlemen,
                        That shoot vp in a night to place, and vvorship.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Let him alone, some stray, some stray.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Nay, I will examine him before I goe, sure.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        The Lord of the soile ha's al vvests, and straies here? ha's he not?
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Faith, then I pitty the poore fellow, he's falne into a fooles hands.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Sirrah, who gaue you commission to lye in my lordship?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Your lordship?
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        How? my lordship? doe you know me, sir?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I doe know you, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        S'heart, he answeres him like an eccho.
                        
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Why, who am I, Sir?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        One of those that fortune fauours.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        The Perphrasis of a foole; Ile obserue this better.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        That fortune fauours? how meane you that, friend?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I meane simply. THat you are one that liues not by your vvits.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        By my wits? No sir, I scorne to liue by my wits, I. I haue better
meanes, I tell thee, then to take such base courses, as to liue by my wits.
Sbloud, doest thou thinke I liue by my wits?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Me thinkes, Iester, you should not relilsh this well.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Ha? does he know me?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Though yours bee the worst vse a man can put his wit to, of
thousands, to prostitute it at euery tauerne and ordinarie; yet (mee
thinkes) you should haue turn'd your broad side at this, and haue beene
readie with an Apologie, able to sinke this hulke of ignorance into the bottome,
and depth of his contempt.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Sbloud 'tis MACILENTE! Signior, you are well encountred,
how is't? O, we must not regard what he saies man, a trout, a shallow
foole, he ha's no more braine then a butter-flie, a meere stuft suit, he looks
like a mustie bottle, new vvickerd, his head's the corke, light, light. I am
glad to see you so well return'd, Signior.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        You are? Gramercie, good IANVS.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Is he one of your acquaintance? I loue him the better for that.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Gods precious, come away man, what doe you meane? and
you knew him as I doe, you'ld shun him, as you'ld doe the plague?
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Why, sir?
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        O, hee's a blacke fellow, take heed on him.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Is he a Scholler, or a Souldier?
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Both, both; a leane mungrell, he lookes as if he were chapfalne,
with barking at other mens good fortunes: 'ware how you offend
him, he carries oile and fire in his pen, vvill scald vvhere it drops: his spirit's
like powder, quick, violent: hee'le blow a man vp with a jest: I feare
him vvorse then a rotten wall do's the cannon, shake an houre after, at the
report. Away, come not neere him.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        For Gods sake let's be gone, and he be a Scholler, you know I
cannot abide him, I had as leeue see a Cockatrice, specially as cockatrices
goe now.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        What, you'le stay, signior? this gentleman SOGLIARDO, and I,
are to visit the knight PVNTARVOLO, and from thence to the citie, wee
shall meet there.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I, vvhen I cannot shun you, vve will meet.
                        'Tis strange! of all the creatures I haue seene,
                        I enuie not this BVFFON, for indeede
                        Neither his fortunes, nor his parts deserue it:
                        But I doe hate him, as I hate the deuill,
                        Or that brasse-visag'd monster Barbarisme.
                        
                        O, 'tis an open-throated, black-mouth'd curre,
                        That bites at all, but eates on those that feed him.
                        A slaue, that to your face will (serpent-like)
                        Creepe on the ground, as he would eate the dust;
                        And to your backe will turne the taile, and sting
                        More deadly then a scorpion: Stay, who's this?
                        Now for my soule, another minion
                        Of the old lady Chance's: I'le obserue him.
                     
                  
                  
                     Act I. Scene III.
                     SOLDIDO, MACILENTE, HINE.
                     
                        O Rare! good, good, good, good, good! I thanke my Starres, I
thanke my Starres for it.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Said I not true? doth not his passion speake
                        Out of my diuination? O my senses,
                        Why loose you not your powers, and become
                        Dull'd, if not deadded vvith this spectacle?
                        I know him, 'tis SORDIDO, the farmer,
                        A Boore, and brother to that swine vvas here.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        Excellent, excellent, excellent! as I vvould wish, as I vvould vvish.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        See how the strumpet Fortune tickles him,
                        And makes him swoune vvith laughter, ô, ô, ô.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        Ha, ha, ha, I vvill not sow my grounds this yeere. Let mee see,
vvhat hauest shall vve haue? Iune, Iuly, August?
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        What is't, a Prognostication rap's him so?
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        The xx, xxi, xxij, daies, raine and vvinde, O good, good! the
xxiij, and xxiiij, raine and some winde, good! the xxvi, raine, good still!
xxvi, xxvij, xxviij, winde and some raine; vvould it had been raine and
some vvinde: vvell 'tis good (when it can be no better) xxix, inclining to
raine: inclining to raine? that's not so good now. xxx, and xxxi, vvinde
and no raine: no raine? S'lid stay; this is vvorse and vvorse: what saies
he of S. Swithins? turne back, looke, S. Swithins: no raine?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, here's a precious durty damned rogue,
                        That fats himselfe vvith expectation
                        Of rotten weather, and vnseason'd howers;
                        And he is rich for it, an elder brother!
                        
                        His barnes are full! his reekes, and mowes vvell trod!
                        His garners cracke vvith store! O, tis vvell; ha, ha, ha:
                        A plague consume thee, and thy house.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        O here, S. Swithins, the xv day, variable vveather, for the most part raine, good; for the most part raine: Why, it should raine fortie daies after, now, more or lesse, it vvas a rule held, afore I vvas able to hold a plough, and yet here are two daies, no raine; ha? it makes me muse. Weele see how the next moneth begins, if that bee better. September, first, second, third, and fourth daies, rainy, and blustering; this is vvell now: fift, sixt, seuenth, eight, and ninth, rainy, vvith some thunder; I mary, this is excellent; the other was false printed sure: the tenth, and eleuenth, great store of raine; O good, good, good, good, good! the twelth, thirteenth, and fourteenth daies, raine; good still: fifteenth, and sixteenth, raine; good still: seuenteenth, and eighteenth, raine, good still; nineteenth, and twentieth, good still, good still, good still, good still, good still! one and twentieth, some raine; some raine? vvell, vve must be patient, and attend the heauens pleasure, vvould it vvere more though: the one and tvventieth, tvvo and tvventieth, three and tvventieth, great tempest of raine, thunder, and lightning.

                              O good againe, past expectation good!
                              I thanke my blessed angell; neuer, neuer,
                              Laid I penny better out, then this,
                              To purchase this deare booke: not deare for price,
                              And yet of me as dear
                                    •
                                 ly priz'd as life,
                              Since in it, is contain'd the very life,
                              Bloud, strength, and sinnewes of my happinesse.
                              Blest be the houre, vvherein I bought this booke,
                              His studies happy, that compos'd the booke,
                              And the man fortunate, that sold the booke.
                              Sleepe vvith this charme, and be as true to me,
                              As I am ioy'd, and confident in thee.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        The 
                              •
                           ine e
                              •
                           ters with a pay
                              ••
                           .
                        Ha, ha, ha? I' not this good? Is't not pleasing this?
                        Ha, ha, ha! God pardon me! ha, ha!
                        Is't possible that such a spacious villaine
                        Should liue, and not be plagu'd? or lies he hid
                        Within the vvrinckled bosome of the vvorld,
                        Where heauen cannot see him? Sbloud (me thinkes)
                        'Tis rare, and strange, that he should breathe, and vvalke,
                        Feede vvith disgestion, sleepe, enjoy his health,
                        And (like a boistrous vvhale, svvallowing the poore)
                        Still swimme in vvealth, and pleasure! is 't not strange?
                        Vnlesse his house, and skin were thunder-proofe,
                        I vvonder at it! Me thinkes, novv, the hecticke,
                        Gout, leprosie, or some such loth'd disease
                        Might light vpon him; or that fire (from heauen)
                        
                        Might fall vpon his barnes; or mice, and rats
                        Eate vp his graine; or else that it might rot
                        Within the hoary reekes, e'ne as it stands:
                        Me thinkes this might be well; and after all
                        The deuill might come and fetch him. I, 'tis true!
                        Meane time he sursets in prosperitie,
                        And thou (in enuie of him) gnaw'st thy selfe,
                        Peace, foole, get hence, and tell thy vexed spirit,
                        "Wealth in this age will scarcely looke on merit.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        Who brought this same, sirha?
                     
                     
                        HINE.
                        Mary, sir, one of the Iustices men, he saies 'tis a precept, and all their hands be at it:
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        I, and the prints of them sticke in my flesh,
                        Deeper then i'their letters: They haue sent me
                        Pils wrapt in paper here, that should I take 'hem,
                        Would poison all the sweetness of my booke,
                        And turne my honey into homlocke juyce.
                        But I am wiser then to serue their precepts,
                        Or follow their prescriptions. Here's a deuice,
                        To charge me bring my graine vnto the markets:
                        I, much, when I haue neither barne nor garner,
                        Nor earth to hide it in, I'le bring it; till then,
                        Ech corne I send shall be as big as Pa
                                 •
                              les.
                        
                        O, but (say some) the poore are like to starue.
                        Why let 'hem starue, what's that to me? are bees
                        Bound to keepe life in drones, and idle moths? no:
                        Why such are these (that terme themselues the poore,
                        Only because they would be pittied,
                        But are indeed a sort of lazie beggers)
                        Licencious rogues, and sturdie vagabonds,
                        Bred (by the sloth of a fat plentious yeere)
                        Like snakes, in heat of summer, out of dung,
                        And this is all that these cheape times are good for:
                        Whereas a holsome, and penurious dearth
                        Purges the soile of such vile excrements,
                        And kils the vipers vp.
                     
                     
                        HINE.
                        O, but master,
                        Take heed they heare you not.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        Why so?
                     
                     
                        HINE.
                        They will exclaime against you.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        I, their exclaimes
                        Moue me as much, as thy breath moues a mountaine!
                        Poore wormes, they hisse at me, whilst I at home
                        Can be contented to applaud my selfe,
                        To fit and clap my hands, and laugh, and leape,
                        Knocking my head against my roofe, with ioy
                        To see how plumpe my bags are, and my barnes.
                        Sirrah, goe, hie you home, and bid your fellowes,
                        
                        Get all their flailes readie, again' I come.
                     
                     
                        HINE.
                        I will, Sir.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        I'le instantly set all my hines to thrashing
                        Of a whole reeke of corne, which I will hide
                        Vnder the ground; and with the straw thereof
                        I'le stuffe the out-sides of my other mowes:
                        That done, I'le haue 'hem emptie all my garners,
                        And i' the friendly earth bury my store,
                        That, when the searchers come, they may suppose
                        All's spent, and that my fortunes were belied.
                        And, to lend more opinion to my want,
                        And stop that many-mouthed vulgar dog,
                        (Which else would still be baying at my dore)
                        Each market day, I will be seene to buy
                        Part of the purest wheat, as for my houshold:
                        Where when it comes, it shall encrease my heapes,
                        Twill yeeld me treble gaine, at this deare time,
                        Promis
                              •
                           d in this deare booke: I haue cast all.
                        Till then I will not sell an eare. I'le hang first.
                        O, I shall make my prizes as I list,
                        My house and I can feed on pease, and barley,
                        What though a world of wretches starue the while?
                        "He that will thriue, must thinke no courses vile.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              Now, Signior, how approue you this? haue the Humorists exprest themselues truly or no?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Yes (if it be well prosecuted) 'tis hitherto happy ynough: but me thinks, MACILENTE went hence too soone, hee might haue beene made to stay, and speake somewhat in reproofe of SORDIDO'S wretchednesse, now at the last.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, no, that had beene extremely improper, besides, he had continued the Scene too long with him, as't was, being in no more action.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              You may enforce the length, as a necessary reason; but for propriety, the Scene would very well haue borne it, in my iudgement.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, worst of both: why, you mistake his Humour vtterly then.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              How? doe I mistake it? is't not enuie?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Yes, but you must vnderstand, Signior, he enuies him not as he is a villaine, a wolfe i' the common-wealth, but as he is rich, and fortunate; for the true condition of enuie, is, Dolor altenae foelicitatis, to haue our eyes continually sixt vpon another mans prosperitie, that is, his chiefe happinesse, and to grieue at that. Whereas, if we make his monstrous, and abhord actions our obiect, the griefe (we take then) comes neerer the nature of hate, then enuie, as being bred out of a kinde of contempt and lothing, in our selues.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              So you'le infer it had beene hate, not enuie in him, to reprehend

the humour of SORDIDO?
                           
                           
                              CORD.
                              Right, for what a man truly enuies in another, he could alwaies loue, and cherish in himselfe: but no man truly reprehends in another, what he loues in himselfe; therefore reprehension is out of his hate. And this distinction hath he himselfe made in a speech there (if you markt it) where he saies, I enuie not this BVFFON, but I hate him.
                              
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Stay, sir: I enuie not this BVFFON, but I hate him: why might he not as well haue hated SORDIDO, as him?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              No, sir, there was subiect for his enuie in SORDIDO; his wealth: So was there not in the other. He stood possest of no one eminent gift, but amostodious, and fiend-like disposition, that would turne charitie it selfe into hate, much more enuie, for the present.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              You haue satisfied mee, sir; O, here comes the Foole and the Iester, againe, me thinkes.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              'Twere pitty they should be parted, sir.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              What bright-shining gallant's that with them? the knight they went to?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              No, sir, this is one Monsieur FASTIDIVS BRISKE, otherwise cal'd the fresh Frenchefied courtier.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              A humorist too?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              As humorous as quick-siluer, doe but obserue him, the Scene is the cou
                                    •
                                 try still, remember.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act II.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     FAST. BRISKE, CINEDO, CARLO BVFFONE, SOGLIARDO.
                     
                        CINEDO, watch when the knight comes, and giue vs word.
                     
                     
                        CINE.
                        I will, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        How lik'st thou my boy, CARLO?
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        O, well, well. He lookes like a colonell of the Pigmies horse, or one of these motions, in a great antique clock: he would shew well vpon a hab
                              •
                           erdashers stall, at a corner shop, rarely.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        S'heart, what a damn'd witty rogne's this? how he confounds with his simile's?
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Better with simile's, then smiles: and whither were you riding now, Signior?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Who, I? what a silly iest's that? whither should I ride, but to the court?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, pardon me, sir, twentie places more: your hot-house, or your whore-house—
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        By the vertue of my soule, this knight dwels in Elizium, here.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Hee's gone 
                              •
                           ow, I thought he would flie out presently. These be our nimble-spirited Ca
                                 •
                              so's, that ha' their euasions at pleasure, will run

ouer a bog like your wild Irish: no sooner started, but they'le leape from one thing to another, like a squirrell, heigh: dance! and doe tricks i' their discourse, from fire to water, from water to aire, from aire to earth, as if their tongues did but e'en licke the foure elements ouer, and away.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Sirrha, CARLO, thou neuer 
                              •
                           aw'st my grey-hobbie yet, didst thou?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        No: ha' you such a one?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        The best in Europe (my good villaine) thou'lt say, when thou seest him.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        But when shall I see him?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        There was a noble man i' the court offered me 100. pound for him, by this light: a fine little fiery slaue, he runs like a (oh) excellent, excellent! with the very sound of the spurre.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        How? the sound of the spurre?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, it's your only humour now extant, sir: a good gingle, a good gingle.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Sbloud, you shall see him turne morris-dancer, he ha's got him bels, a good sute, and a hobby-horse.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Signior, now you talke of a hobby-horse, I know where one is, will not be giuen for a brace of angels.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        How is that, Sir?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Mary, sir, I am telling this gentleman of a hobby-horse, it was my fathers indeed, and (though I say it—
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        That should not say it) on, on.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        He did dance in it, with as good humour, and as good regard, as any man of his degree what soeuer, being no gentleman: I haue danc't in it my selfe too.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Not since the humour of gentilitie was vpon you? did you?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Yes, once; mary, that was but to shew what a gentleman might doe, in a humour.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, very good.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              Why, this fellowes discourse were nothing, but for the word Humour.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, beare with him, and he should lacke matter, and words too, 'twere pittifull.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Nay, looke you, sir, there's ne're a gentleman i' the countrey has the like humours, for the hobby-horse, as I haue; I haue the method for the threeding of the needle and all, the—
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        How, the method.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        I, the leigeritie for that, and the wigh-hie, and the daggers in the nose, and the trauels of the egge from singer to singer, all the humours incident to the quality. The horse hangs at home in my parlor. I'le keepe it for a monument, as long as I liue, sure.
                     
                     
                        
                        CAR.
                        Doe so; and when you die, 'twill be an excellent trophee, to hang ouer your tombe.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Masse, and I'le haue a tombe (now I thinke on't) 'tis but so much charges.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Best build it in your life time then, your heires may hap to forget it else.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Nay, I meane so, Ile not trust to them.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        No, for heires, and executors, are growne damnably carelesse, specially, since the ghosts of testators left walking: how like you him, Signior?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Fore heauens, his humour arrides me exceedingly.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Arrides you?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I, pleases me (a pox on't) I am so haunted at the count, and at my lodging, with your refin'd choise spirits, that it makes me cleane of another garbe, another sheafe, I know not how! I cannot frame me to your harsh vulgar phrase, 'tis against my genius.
                        
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Signior CARLO.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              This is right to that of HORACE, D
                                       •
                                    m vitant sl
                                       •
                                    l
                                       •
                                    i vitis, in contraria currunt: so this gallant, labouring to anoid popularitie, fals into a habit of affection, ten thousand times hatefuller then the former.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Who, hee? a gull, a foole, no salt in him i' the earth, man: hee looks like a fresh salmon kept in a tub, hee'le be spent shortly. His braine's lighter then his feather already, and his tongue more subiect to lie, then that's to wag: he sleepes with a muske-cat euery night, and walkes all day hung'd in pomander chaines for penance: he ha's his skin tan'd in ciuet, to make his complexion strong, and the sweetnesse of his youth lasting in the sense of his sweet lady. A good emptie puffe, he loues you well, Signior.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        There shall be no loue lost, sir, Ile assure you.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nay, CARLO, I am not happy i' thy loue, I see: pr'y thee suffer me to enioy thy company a little (sweet mischiefe) by this aire, I shall enuy this gentlemans place in thy affections, if you be thus priuate, yfaith. How now? is the knight arriu'd?
                     
                     CINEDO.
                     
                        CINE.
                        No, sir, but 'tis guest he will arriue presently, by his fore-runners.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        His bounds! by MINERVA an excellent figure; a good boy.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        You should giue him a french crowne for it: the boy would finde two better figures i' that, and a good figure of your bounty beside.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Tut, the boy wants no crownes.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        No crowne: speake i' the singular number, and wee'le beleeue you.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nay, thou art so capriciously conceited now. Sirra (damnation) I haue heard this knight PVNTARVOLO, reported to bee a gentleman of

exceeding good humour; thou know'st him: pr'ythee, how is his disposition? I ne're was so fauour'd of my starres, as to see him yet. Boy, doe you looke to the hobby?
                     
                     
                        CINE.
                        I, sir, the groome has set him vp.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        'Tis well: I rid out of my way of intent to visit him, and take knowledge of his— Nay, good wickednesse, his humour, his humour.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Why, he loues dogs, and hawkes, and his wife, well: he has a good riding face, and he can fit a great horse; hee will taint a staffe well at tilt: when he is mounted, he lookes like the signe of the George, that's all I know; saue, that in stead of a dragon, he will brandish against a tree, and breake his sword as con
                              •
                           idently vpon the knottie barke, as the other did vpon the skales of the beast.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, but this is nothing to that's deliuerd of him. They say hee has dialogues, and discourses betweene his horse, himselfe, and his dogge: and that he will court his owne lady; as shee were a stranger neuer encounter'd before.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, that he will, and make fresh loue to her euery morning: this gentleman has beene a spectator of it, Signior Insulso.
                        
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                            from whispring with the boy.
                         I am resolute to keepe a page: say you sir?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        You haue seene Signior Puntaruolo accost his lady?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O, I sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        And how is the manner of it, pr'ythee, good Signior?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Faith sir, in very good sort, he has his humours for it, sir: as first, (suppose he were now to come from riding, or hunting, or so) he has his trumpet to sound, and then the waiting gentlewoman, shee lookes out, and then hee speakes, and then shee speakes—very pretty yfaith, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Why, but doe you remember no particulars, Signior?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O, yes sir: first, the gentlewoman, shee lookes out at the window.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        After the trumpet has summon'd a parle? not before?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        No, sir, not before: and then saies he—ha, ha, ha, ha, &c.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What saies he? be not rapt so.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Saies he—ha, ha, ha, ha, &c.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nay, speake, speake.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Ha, ha, ha, saies he: God saue you, saies he: ha, ha, &c.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Was this the ridiculous motiue to all this passion?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Nay, that, that comes after, is—ha, ha, ha, ha, &c.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Doubtlesse, he apprehends more then he vtters, this fellow: or else.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        
                           
                              〈1 paragraph〉
                           
                        
                         List, list, they are come from hunting: stand by, close vnder this 
                              〈◊〉
                           , and you shall see it done, better then I can shew it.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        So it had need, 'twill scarce poize the obseruation else.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Faith I remember all, but the manner of it is quite out of my head.
                     
                     
                        
                        FAST.
                        O, with-draw, with-draw, it cannot bee but a most pleasing obiect.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act. II. Scene II.
                     PVNTARVOLO,  HVNTSMAN, GENTLEWOMAN.
                     To the rest.
                     
                        FOrrester, giue winde to thy borne. Inough, by this, the sound hath toucht the eares of the enclosed: Depart, leaue the dogge, and take with thee what thou hast deseru'd, the horne, and thankes.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, mary, there's some taste in this.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Is't not good?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Ah, peace, now aboue, now aboue!
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        The gentlewoman appeares at the window.
                        Stay: mine eye hath (on the instant) through the bountie of the window, receiu'd the forme of a Nymph. I will step forward three pases: of the which, I will barely retire one; and (after some little flexure of the knee) with an erected grace salute her (one, two, and three.) Sweet lady, God saue you.
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        No, forsooth: I am but the waiting gentlewoman.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        He knew that before.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Pardon me: Humanum est errare.
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        He learn'd that of his chaplaine.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        To the perfection of complement (which is the Diall of the thought, and guided by the Sunne of your beauties) are requir'd these three specials: the gnomon, the puntilio's, and the superficies: the superficies, is that we call, place; the puntilio's, circumstance; and the gnomon, ceremony: in either of which, for a stranger to erre, 'tis easie and facile, and such am I.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        True, not knowing her horizon, he must needes erre: which I feare, he knowes too well.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        What call you the lord of the castle? sweet face.
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        The lord of the castle is a knight, sir; Signior PVNTARVOLO.
                     
                     
                        PVNT:
                        PVNTARVOLO? O.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Now must he ruminate.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Does the wench know him all this while, then?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, doc you know me, man? why, therein lies the sirrup of the iest, it's a proiect, a designement of his owne, a thing studied, and rehearst as ordinarily at his comming from hawking, or hunting, as a jigge after a play.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I, e'en like your jigge, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        'Tis a most sumptuous and stately edifice! of what yeeres is the knight, faire damsell?
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        Faith, much about your yeeres, sir.
                     
                     
                        
                        PVNT.
                        What complexion, or what stature beares he?
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        Of your stature, and very neere vpon your complexion.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Mine is melancholy:
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        So is the dogges, iust.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        And doth argue constancie, chie
                              •
                           ly in loue. What are his endowments? Is he courteous?
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        O, the most courteous knight in Christian land, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Is he magnanimous?
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        As the skin betweene your browes, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Is he bountifull?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        'Slud, he takes an inuentory of his owne good parts.
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        Bountifull? I, sir, I would you should know it; the poore are seen'd at his gate, early, and late, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Is he learned?
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        O, I sir, he can speake the French, and Italian.
                        
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Then he is trauail'd?
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        I, forsooth, he hath beene beyond-sea, once, or twise.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        As far as Paris, to fetch ouer a fashion, and come back againe.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Is he religious?
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        Religious? I know not what you call religious, but hee goes to church, I am sure.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        S'lid, methinkes, these answeres should offend him.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        T'ut, no; he knowes they are excellent, and to her capacity, that speakes 'hem.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Would I might see his face.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Shee should let down a glasse from the window at that word, and request him to looke in't.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Doubtlesse, the gentleman is most exact, and absolutely qualified? doth the castle containe him?
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        No, sir, he is from home, but his lady is within.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        His lady? what, is shee faire? splendidious? and amiable?
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        O, Lord, sir!
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Pr'ythee, deare Nymph, intreat her beauties to shine on this side of the building.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Gent. leaues the window.
                         That he may erect a new dyall of complement, with his gnomons, and his puntilio's.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nay, thou art such another Cinique now, a man had need walke vprightly before thee.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Heart, can any man walke more vpright then hee does? Looke, looke; as if he went in a frame, or had a sute of wanescot on: and the dogge watching him, let he should leape out on't.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, villaine!
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Well, and e'er I meet him in the city, I'le ha'him ioynted, I'le pawne him in east cheape, among the butchers else.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Peace, who be these, CARLO?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act II. Scene III.
                     SORDIDO,  FVNGOSO, LADY.
                     To the rest.
                     
                        YOnder's your god-father; doe your duty to him, sonne.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        This, sir? a poore elder brother of mine, sir, a y
                              •
                           oman, may dispend some seuen or eight hundred a yeere: that's his son, my nephew, there.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        You are not ill-come, neighbour SORDIDO, though I haue not yet said, well-come: what, my god-sonne is growne a great proficient by this?
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        I hope he will grow great one day, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        What does he studie? the law?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I sir, he is a gentleman, though his father be but a yeoman.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What call you your nephew, signior?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Mary, his name is FVNGOSO.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        FVNGOSO? O, he lookt somwhat like a spunge in that pinck
                              •
                            yellow doublet, me thought: well, make much of him; I see he was neuer borne to ride vpon a moile.
                     
                     
                        GENT.
                        Returnd aboue.
                        My lady will come presently, sir. 
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O, now, now.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Sordido & Fungoso with-draw to the other part of the stage, while the lady is come to the window.
                        Stand by, retire your selues a space: nay, pray you, forget not the vse of your hat; the aire is piercing.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        What? will not their presence preuaile against the current of his humour?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, no: it's a meere floud, a torrent, carries all afore it.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        What more then heauenly pulchritude is this?
                        What magazine, or treasurie of blisse?
                        Dazle, you organs to my optique sense,
                        To view a creature of such eminence:
                        O, I am planet-strooke, and in yond sphere,
                        A brighter sharre then VENVS doth appeare!
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        How? in verse!
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        An extasie, an extasie, man.
                     
                     
                        LADY.
                        Is your desire to speake with me, sir knight?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        He will tell you that anon; neither his braine, nor his body, are yet moulded for an answere.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Most debonaire, and luculent lady, I decline mee low, as the basis of your altitude.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              CORD.
                              He makes congies to his wife in geometricall proportions.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Is't possible there should be any such Humorist?
                           
                           
                              CORD.
                              Very easily possible, Sir, you see there is.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I haue scarse collected my spirits, but lately scatter'd in the admiration

of your forme; to which (if the bounties of your minde be any way responsible) I doubt not, but my desires shall finde a smooth, and secure passage. I am a poore knight errant (lady) that hunting in the adjacent forrest, was by aduenture in the pursuit of a hart, brought to this place; which hart (deare Madame) escaped by enchantment: the euening approching (my selfe, and seruant wearied) my suit is, to enter your faire castle, and refresh me.
                     
                     
                        LADY.
                        Sir knight, albeit it be not vsuall with me (chiefly in the absence of a husband) to admit any entrance to strangers, yet in the true regard of those innated vertues, and faire parts, which so striue to expresse themselues, in you; I am resolu'd to entertaine you to the best of my vnworthy power which I acknowledge to bee nothing, valew'd with what so worthy a person may deserue. Please you but stay, while I descend.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                            falls in with Sordido, and his sonne.
                         Most admir'd lady, you astonish me!
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What? with speaking a speech of your owne penning?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nay, looke; pry thee peace.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Pox on't▪ I am impatient of such fopperie.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, let's heare the rest.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What? a tedious chapter of courtship, after sir LANCELOT, and queene GVEVENER? away. I mar'le in what dull cold nooke he found this lady out? that (being a woman) shee was blest with no more copie of wit, but to serue his humour thus. 'Slud, I thinke he feeds her with porridge, I: shee could ne're haue such a thick braine else.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Why, is porridge so hurtfull, signior?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, nothing vnder heauen more preiudiciall to those ascending subtile powers, or doth sooner abate that which we call, acumen ingenij, then your grosse fare: why, I'le make you an instance: your city wiues, but obserue 'hem, you ha'not more perfect true fooles i' the world bred, then they are generally; and yet you see (by the finenesse and delicacy of their diet, liuing into the far capons, drinking your rich wines, feeding on larkes, sparrowes, potato-pies, and such good vnctuous meats) how their wits are refin'd, and rarefi'd! and sometimes a very quintessence of conceit flowes from 'hem, able to drowne a weake apprehension.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Peace, here comes the lady.
                     
                     
                        LADY.
                        Lady with her gent. seeing them, turnes in againe.
                         Gods me, here's company: turne in againe.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Slight, our presence has cut off the conuoy of the iest.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        All the better; I am glad on't: for the issue was very perspicuous Come, let's discouer, and salute the knight.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Carlo, and the other two, step forth.
                         Stay: who be these that addresse themselues towards vs? what, CARLO? now, by the sincerity of my soule, welcome; welcome gentlemen: and how doest thou, thou grand scourge; or, second vntrusse of the rime?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Faith, spending my mettall, in this reeling world (here and there) as the sway of my affection carries me, and perhaps stumble vpon a yeoman pheuterer, as I doe now; or one of Fortunes moiles, laden with

treasure, and an empty cloke-bagge following him, gaping when a bagge will vntie.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Peace, you, ban-dogge, peace: what briske Nimfadoro is that in the white virgin boot there?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Mary, sir, one, that I must entreat you take a very particular knowledge of, and with more then ordinary respect: Monsieur FASTIDIVS.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Sir, I could wish that for the time of your vouchsaft abiding here, and more reall entertainment, this my house stood on the Muses hill; and these my orchards were those of the Hesperide's.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I possesse as much in your wish, sir, as if I were made lord of the Indies; and I pray you, beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I haue a better opinion of his faith, then to thinke it will be so corrupted.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Come, brother, I'le bring you acquainted with gentlemen, and good fellowes, such as shall doe you more grace, then—
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        Carlo is coming toward them.
                        Brother, I hunger not for such acquaintance:
                        Doe you take heede, lest—
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Husht: my brother, sir, for want of education, sir, somewhat nodding to the boore, the clowne: but I request you in priuate, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        By heauen, it's a very fine sute of clothes!
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              Doe you obserue that, signior? there's another humour has new crackt the shell.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              What? he is enamour'd of the fashion, is he?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, you forestall the iest.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        FVN.
                        I mar'le what it might stand him in!
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Nephew?
                     
                     
                        FVN.
                        'Fore mee, it's an excellent sute, and as neatly becomes him. What said you, vncle?
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        When saw you my neece?
                     
                     
                        FVN.
                        Mary, yester-night I supt there. That kinde of boot does very rare too!
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        And what newes heare you?
                     
                     
                        FVN.
                        The guilt spurre and all! would I were hang'd, but 'tis exceeding good. Say you, vncle?
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        Your minde is carried away with somewhat else: I aske what newes you heare?
                     
                     
                        FVN.
                        Troth, we heare none. In good faith, I was neuer so pleas'd with a fashion, daies of my life! O (and I might haue but my wish) I'ld aske no more of god now, but such a suit, such a hat, such a band, such a doublet, such a hose, such a boot, and such a—
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        They say, there's a new Motion of the city of Niniueh, with

IONAS, and the whale, to be seene at Fleet-bridge? you can tell, cousin?
                     
                     
                        FVN.
                        Here's such a world of question with him, now: Yes, I thinke there be such a thing, I saw the picture: would he would once be satisfi'd. Let me see, the doublet, say fifty shillings the doublet, and betweene three or foure pound the hose; then bootes, hat, and band: some ten or eleuen pound would doe it all, and suit me for the heauens.
                        
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        I'le see all those deuices, and I come to London once.
                     
                     
                        FVN.
                        Gods s'lid, and I could compasse it, 'twere rare: harke you, vncle.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        What saies my nephew?
                     
                     
                        FVN.
                        Faith vncle, I'ld ha' desir'd you to haue made a motion for me to my father in a thing, that—walke aside and I'le tell you, sir, no more but this: there's a parcell of law—bookes, (some twenty pounds worth) that lie in a place for little more then halfe the money they cost; and I thinke for some twelue pound, or twenty marke, I could goe neere to redeeme 'hem; there's PLOWDEN, DIAR, BROOKE, and FITZ-HERBERT, diuers such, as I must haue ere long: and you know, I were as good saue fiue or sixe pound as not, vncle. I pray you, moue it forme.
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        That I will: when would you haue me doe it? presently?
                     
                     
                        FVN,
                        O, I, I pray you, good vncle: God send mee good luck; Lord (and
                              •
                           t be thy will) prosper it: O, my starres, now, now, if it take now, I am made foreuer.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Shall I tell you, sir? by this aire, I am the most beholding to that lord, of any gentleman liuing; hee does vse mee the most honorably, and with the greatest respect, more indeed, then can be vtter'd with any opinion of truth.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Then, haue you the count GRATIATO?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        As true nobles gentleman too, as any breathes; I am exceedingly endear'd to his loue: by this hand (I protest to you, signior, I speake it not gloriously, nor out of affectation, but) there's hee, and the count FRVGALE, signior ILLVSTRE, signior LVCVLENTO, and a sort of 'hem; that (when I am at court) they doe share me amongst 'hem. Happy is he can enioy me most priuate. I doe wish my selfe sometime an vbiquitarie for their loue, in good faith.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        There's ne're a one of these, but might lie a weeke on the rack, ere they could bring forth his name; and yet he powres them out as familiarly, as if he had scene 'hem stand by the fire i' the presence, or ta
                              •
                           ne tabacco with them, ouer the stage, i' the lords roome.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Then you must of necessity know our court-starre there? that planet of wit, MADDONA SAVIOLINA?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, lord sir! my mistris.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Is shee your mistris?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Faith, here be some slight fauours of hers, sir, that doe speake it, shee is: as this scarfe, sir, or this ribb and in mine eare, or so; this feather grew in her sweet sanne sometimes, though now it be my poore fortunes to weare it, as you see, sir: flight, flight, a foolish toy.
                     
                     
                        
                        PVNT.
                        Well, shee is the lady of a most exalted, and ingenious spirit.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Did you euer heare any woman speake like her? or enricht with a more plentifull discourse?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, villanous! nothing but sound, sound, a meere eccho; shee speakes as shee goes tir'd, in cob-web lawne, light, thin: good enough to catch flies withall.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        O, manage your affections.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Well, if thou beest not plagu'd for this blasphemie, one day—
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Come, regard not a iester: it is in the power of my purse, to make him speake well, or ill, of me.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Sir, I affirme it to you (vpon my credit, and iudgement) shee has the most harmonious, and musicall straine of wit, that euer tempted a true eare; and yet to see, a rude tongue would profine heauen, if it could.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I am not ignorant of it, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Oh, it flowes from her like nectar, and shee doth giue it, that sweet, quick grace, and exornation in the composure, that (by this good aire, as I am an honest man, would I might neuer stirre, sir, but) shee does obserue as pure a phrase, and vse as choise figures in her ordinary conferences, as any be i' the Arcadia.
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Or rather in Greenes workes, whence she may steale with more security.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        Well, if ten pound will fetch 'hem, you shall haue it, but I'le part with no more.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I'le trie what that will doe, if you please.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        Doe so: and when you haue 'hem, studie hard.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Yes, sir. And I could studie to get forty shillings more now! well, I will put my selfe into the fashion, as farre as this will goe presently.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        I wonder it raines not! the Almanack saies wee should haue store of raine, today.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Why, sir, to morrow I will associate you to court my selfe; and from thence to the city, about a businesse, a proiect I haue, I will expose it to you, sir: CARLO, I am sure, has heard of it.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What's that, sir?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I doe intend, this yeere of Iubile, comming on, to trauaile: and (because I will not altogether goe vpon expence) I am determined to put forth some fiue thousand pound, to be paid me, fiue for one, vpon the returne of my selfe, my wife, and my dog, from the Turkes court in Constantinople. If all, or either of vs miscarry in the iourney, 'tis gone: if we be successefull, why, there will be fiue and twenty thousand pound, to entertaine time withall. Nay, goe not neighbour SORDIDO, stay to night, and helpe to make our societie the fuller. Gentlemen, frolick: CARLO? what? dull now?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I was thinking on your proiect, sir, and you call it so: is this the dog goes with you?
                     
                     
                        
                        PVNT.
                        This is the dogge, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        He do' not goe bare-foot, does he?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Away, you traitor, away.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Nay, afore god, I speake simply; he may pricke his foot with a thorne, and be as much as the whole venter is worth. Besides, for a dog that neuer trauail'd before, it's a large iourney to Constantinople: I'le tell you now (and he were mine) I'ld haue some present conference with a physicion, what antidotes were good to giue him, preseruatiues against poison: for (assure you) if once your money be out, there'll be diuers attempts made against the life of the poore animal.
                        
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Thou art still dangerous.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Is signior DELIROS wife your kinswoman?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I, sir, shee is my neece, my brothers daughter here, and my nephewes sister.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        Doe you know her, sir?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, God sir, Signior DELIRO, her husband, is my marchant.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I, I haue seene this gentleman there, often.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I crie you mercy, sir: let me craue your name, pray you.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        FVNGOSO, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Good signior FVNGOSO, I shall request to know you better, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I am her brother, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        In faire time, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Come, gentlemen, I will be your conduct.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nay, pray you, sir; we shall meet at signior DELIRO'S often.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        You shall ha' me at the Heralds office, sir, for some weeke or so, at my first comming vp. Come, CARLO.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              Methinkes, CORDATVS, he dwelt somewhat too long on this Scene; it hung i' the hand.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              I see not where he could haue insisted lesse, and t' haue made the humours perspicuous enough.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              True, as his subiect lies: but hee might haue altered the shape of his argument, and explicated 'hem better in single Scenes.
                              
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              That had beene single indeed: why? be they not the same persons in this, as they would haue beene in those? and is it not an obiect of more state, to behold the Scene full, and relieu'd with varietie of speakers to the end, then to see a vast emptie stage, and the actors come in (one by one) as if they were dropt downe with a feather, into the eye of the spectators?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Nay, you are better traded with these things then I, and therefore I'le subscribe to your iudgement; mary, you shall giue mee leaue to make obiections.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, what else? it's the speciall intent of the author, you should

doe so: for thereby others (that are present) may as well be satisfied, who happily would obiect the same you doe.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              So, sir: but when appeares MACILENTE againe?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Mary, hee staies but till our silence giue him leaue: here hee comes, and with him signior DELIRO, a marchant, at whose house hee is come to sojourne: Make your owne obseruation now, onely transferre your thoughts to the city, with the Scene; where, suppose they speake.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene IIII.
                     DELIRO, MACILENTE, FIDO, FALLACE.
                     
                        I'Le tell you by and by, sir.
                        Welcome (good MACILENTE) to my house,
                        To sojourne euen for euer: if my best
                        In cares, and euery sort of good intreaty
                        Deliro cometh. His ho
                              •
                            stre
                              •
                           es flowres.
                        May moue you stay with me. 
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I thanke you, sir:
                        And yet the muffled fates (had it pleas'd them)
                        Might haue suppli'd me, from their owne full store,
                        Without this word (I thanke you) to a foole.
                        I see no reason, why that dog (call'd Chaunce)
                        Should fawne vpon this fellow, more then me:
                        I am a man, and I haue limmes, flesh, bloud,
                        Bones, sinewes, and a soule, as well as he:
                        My parts are euery way as good as his,
                        If I said better? why, I did not lie.
                        Nath'lesse, his wealth (but nodding on my wants)
                        Must make me bow, and crie: (I thanke you, sir.)
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Dispatch, take heed your mistris see you not.
                     
                     
                        FIDO.
                        I warrant you, sir. I'le steale by her softly.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Nay, gentle friend, be merry, raise your lookes
                        Out of your bosome, I protest (by heauen)
                        You are the man most welcome in the world.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        (I thanke you, sir,) I know my cue, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        FIDO.
                        With more perfumes and herbes.
                        Where wil you haue 'hem burne, sir?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Here, good FIDO▪
                        
                        What? shee did not see thee?
                     
                     
                        FIDO.
                        No, sir.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        That's well:
                        Strew, strew, good FIDO, the freshest flowres, so.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        What meanes this, signior DELIRO? all this censing?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Cast in more frankincense, yet more, well said.
                        O, MACILENTE, I haue such a wife!
                        So passing faire, so passing farre vnkind,
                        But of such worth, and right to be vnkind,
                        (Since no man can be worthy of her kindnesse.)
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        What can there not?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        No, that is sure as death,
                        
                        
                        No man aliue! I doe not say, is not,
                        But cannot possibly be worth her kindnesse!
                        Nay, it is certain, let me doe her right.
                        How, said I? doe her right? as though I could,
                        As though this dull grosse tongue of mine could vtter
                        The rare, the true, the pure, the infinite rights,
                        That sit (as high as I can looke) within her!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        This is such dotage, as was neuer heard.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Well, this must needs be granted.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Granted, quoth you?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Nay, MACILENTE; doe not so discredit
                        The goodnesse of your iudgement to denie it,
                        For I doe speake the very least of her.
                        And I would craue, and beg no more of heauen,
                        For all my fortunes here, but to be able
                        To vtter first in fit termes, what shee is,
                        And then the true ioyes I conceiue in her.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Is't possible, shee should deserue so well,
                        As you pretend?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        I, and shee knowes so well
                        Her owne deserts, that (when I striue t'enioy them)
                        Shee weighs the things I doe, with what shee merits:
                        And (seeing my worth out-weigh'd so in her graces)
                        Shee is so solemne, so precise, so froward,
                        That no obseruance I can doe to her,
                        Can make her kind to me: if shee find fault,
                        I mend that fault; and then she saies, I faulted,
                        That I did mend it. Now, good friend, aduise me,
                        How I may temper this strange splene in her.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        You are too amorous, too obsequious,
                        And make her too assur'd, shee may command you.
                        When women doubt most of their husbands loues,
                        They are most louing. Husbands must take heed
                        They giue no gluts of kindnesse to their wiues,
                        But vse them like their horses; whom they feed
                        Not with a manger—full of meat together,
                        But halfe a pecke at once: and keep them so
                        Still with an appetite to that they giue them.
                        He that desires to haue a louing wife,
                        Must bridle all the shew of that desire:
                        Be kind, not amorous; nor bewraying kindnesse,
                        As if loue wrought, but considerate duty.
                        " Offer no loue-rites, but let wiues still seeke them,
                        " For when they come vnsought, they seldome like them.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Beleeue me, MACILENTE, this is gospell.
                        O, that a man were his owne man so much,
                        To rule himselfe thus. I will striue i'faith,
                        
                        
                        To be more strange and carelesse: yet, I hope
                        I haue now taken such a perfect course,
                        To make her kind to me, and liue contented,
                        That I shall find my kindnesse well return'd,
                        And haue no need to fight with my affections.
                        Shee (late) hath found much fault with euery roome
                        Within my house; one was too big (shee said)
                        Another was not furnisht to her mind,
                        And so through all: all which, now, I haue alter'd.
                        Then here, shee hath a place (on my backe-side)
                        Wherein shee loues to walke; and that (shee said)
                        Had some ill smels about it. Now, this walke
                        Haue I (before shee knowes it) thus perfum'd
                        With herbes, and flowres, and laid in diuers places,
                        (AS 'twere on altars, consecrate to her)
                        Perfumed gloues, and delicate chaines of amber,
                        To keepe the aire in awe of her sweet nostrils:
                        This haue I done, and this I thinke will please her.
                        Behold, shee comes.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Here's a sweet stinke indeed:
                        What, shall I euer be thus crost, and plagu'd?
                        And sicke of husband? O, my head doth ake,
                        As it would cleaue asunder with these fauours,
                        All my room's alter'd, and but one poore walke
                        That I delighted in, and that is made
                        So fulsome with perfumes, that I am fear'd
                        (My braine doth sweat so) I haue caught the plague.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Why (gentle wife) is now thy walke too sweet?
                        Thou said'st of late, it had sowre aires about it,
                        And found'st much fault, that I did not correct it.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Why, and I did find fault, sir?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Nay, deare wife;
                        I know, thou hast staid, thou hast lou'd perfumes,
                        No woman better.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        I, long since perhaps,
                        But now that sense is alter'd: you would haue me
                        (Like to a puddle, or a standing poole)
                        To haue no motion, nor no spirit within me.
                        No, I am like a pure, and sprightly riuer,
                        That moues for euer, and yet still the same;
                        Or fire, that burnes much wood, yet still one flame.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        But yesterday, I saw thee at our garden,
                        Smelling on roses, and on purple flowres,
                        And since, I hope, the humour of thy sense
                        Is nothing chang'd.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Why, those were growing flowres,
                        And these, within my walke, are cut and strew'd.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        But yet they haue one sent.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        I! haue they so?
                     
                     
                        
                        In your grosse iudgement. If you make no difference
                        Betwixt the sent of growing flowres, and cut ones,
                        You haue a sense to taste lamp-oile, yfaith.
                        And with such iudgement haue you chang'd the chambers,
                        Leauing no roome, that I can ioy to be in,
                        In all your house: and now my walke, and all,
                        You smoke me from, as if I were a foxe,
                        And long, belike, to driue me quite away.
                        Well, walke you there, and I'le walke where I list.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        What shall I doe? Ô, I shall neuer please her,
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Out on thee, dotard! what starre rul'd his birth?
                        That brought him such a starre? blind Fortune still
                        Bestowes her gifts on such as cannot vse them:
                        How long shall I liue, ere I be so happy,
                        To haue a wi
                              •
                           e of this exceeding forme?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Away, with 'hem, would I had broke a ioynt,
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            bea
                              •
                           es all away.
                        When I deuis'd this, that should so dislike her.
                        Away, beare all away.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        I, doe: for feare
                        Ought that is there should like her. O, this man,
                        How cunningly he can conceale himselfe!
                        As though he lou'd? nay, honour'd, and ador'd?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Why, my sweet heart?
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Sweetheart! Ô! better still!
                        And asking, why? wherefore? and looking strangely,
                        As if he were as white as innocence.
                        Alas, you'r simple, you: you cannot change,
                        Looke pale at pleasure, and then red with wonder:
                        No, no, not you! 'tis pitty o'your naturalls.
                        I did but cast an amorous eye, e'en now,
                        Vpon a paire of gloues, that somewhat lik't me,
                        And straight he noted it, and gaue command,
                        All should be ta'ne away.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Be they nay bane then.
                        What, sirra, FIDO, bring in those gloues againe,
                        You tooke from hence.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        S'body, sir, but doe not,
                        Bring in no gloues, to spite me: if you doe—
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Ay, me, most wretched; how am I misconstru'd?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, how shee tempts my heart-strings, with her eye,
                        To knit them to her beauties, or to breake?
                        What mou'd the heauens, that they could not make
                        Me such a woman? but a man, a beast,
                        That hath no blisse like to others. Would to heauen
                        (In wreake of my misfortunes) I were turn'd
                        To some faire water-Nymph, that (set vpon
                        The deepest whirle-pit of the rau'nous seas,)
                        
                        My adamantine eyes might head-long hale
                        This iron world to me, and drowne it all.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              Behold, behold, the translated gallant.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              O, he is welcome.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene V.
                     FVNGOSO. 
                     To the rest.
                     
                        SAue you brother, and sister, saue you, sir; I haue commendations for you out ī the countrey: (I wonder they take no knowledge of my sute:) mine vncle SOCLIARDO is in towne. Sister, me thinkes, you are melancholy: why are you so sad? I thinke you tooke me for master FASTIDIVS BRISLE (sister) did you not.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Why should I take you for him?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Nay, nothing—I was lately in master FASTIDIVS his company, and, me thinkes, we are very like.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        You haue a faire sute, brother, 'giue you ioy on't.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Faith, good ynough to ride in, brother, I made it to ride in.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        O, now I see the cause of his idle demand, was his new suit.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Pray you good brother, trie, if you can change her mood.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I warrant you, let mee alone. I'le put her out of her dumps. Sister, how like you my suit?
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        O, you are a gallant in print now, brother.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Faith, how like you the fashion? it's the last edition, I assure you.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        I cannot but like it, to the desert.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Troth, sister, I was faine to borrow these spurres, I ha' le
                              •
                           t my gowne in gage for'hem, pray you lend me an angell.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Now, beshrow my heart, then.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Good truth, I'le pay you againe at my next exhibition: I had but bare ten pound of my father, and it would not reach to put me wholly into the fashion.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        I care not.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I had spurres of mine owne before, but they were not ginglers. Monsieur FASTIDIVS will be here anon, sister.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        You iest?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Neuer lend me penny more (while you line then) and that I'ld be loth to say, in truth.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        When did you see him?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Yesterday, I came acquainted with him at sir PVNTARVOLO'S: nay, sweet sister.
                     
                     
                        
                        MACI.
                        I faine would know of heauen now, why yond foole
                        Should weare a suit of sattin? he? that rooke?
                        That painted jay, with such a deale of out-side?
                        What is his inside trow? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
                        Good heauen, giue me patience, patience, patience.
                        A number of these popen jayes there are,
                        Whom, if a man conferre, and but examine
                        Their inward merit, with such men as want;
                        Lord, lord, what things they are!
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Come, when will you pay me againe, now?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        O god, sister!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Here comes another.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene VI.
                     FASTIDIVS BRISKE.
                     To the rest.
                     
                        SAue you, signior DELIRO: how do'st thou, sweet lady? Let mee kisse thee.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        How? a new sute? Ayme.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        And how do's master FASTIDIVS BRISKE?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Faith, liue in court, signior DELIRO; in grace, I thanke god, both of the noble masculine, and feminine. I must speake with you in priuate, by and by.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        When you please, sir.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Why looke you so pale, brother?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        S'lid, all this money is cast away, now.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I, there's a newer edition come forth.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Tis but my hard fortune! well, I'le haue my sute chang'd, I'le goe fetch my taylor presently, but first I'le deuise a letter to my father. Ha' you any pen, and inke, sister?
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        What would you doe withall?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I would vse it. S'light, and it had come but foure daies sooner, the fashion.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        There was a countesse gaue me her hand to kisse to day, i' the presence: did me more good by that light, then—and yesternight sent her coach twise to my lodging, to intreat mee accompany her, and my sweet mistris, with some two, or three namelesse ladies more: O, I haue beene grac't by 'hem beyond all aime of affection: this 's her garter my dagger hangs in: and they doe so commend, and approue my apparell, with my iudicious wearing of it, it 's aboue wonder.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Indeed sir, 'tis a most excellent sute, and you doe weare it as extraordinary.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Why, I'le tell you now (in good faith) and by this chaire, which (by the grace of god) I intend presently to sit in, I had three sutes in one

yeere, made three great ladies in loue with me: I had other three, vn-did three gentlemen in imitation: and other three, gat three other gentlemen widdowes of three thousand pound a yeere.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Is't possible?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, beleeue it, sir; your good face is the witch, and your apparell the spells, that bring all the pleasures of the world into their circle.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Ah, the sweet grace of a courtier!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Well, would my father had left mee but a good face for my portion yet; though I had shar'd the vnfortunate wit that goes with it, I had not car'd: I might haue past for somewhat i' the world then.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Why, assure you, signior, rich apparell has strange vertues: it makes him that hath it without meanes, esteemed for an excellent wit: he that enioyes it with means, puts the world in remembrance of his means: it helps the deformities of nature, and giues lustre to her beauties; makes continuall holy-day where it shines; sets the wits of ladies at worke, that otherwise would be idle: furnisheth your two-shilling ordinarie; takes possession of your stage at your new play; and enricheth your oares, as scorning to goe with your scull.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Pray you, sir, adde this; it giues respect to your fooles, makes many theeues, as many strumpets, and no fewer bankrupts.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Out, out, vnworthy to speake, where he breatheth.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        What's he, signior?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        A friend of mine, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        By heauen, I wonder at you, citizens, what kinde of creatures you are!
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Why, sir?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        That you can consort your selues, with such poore seame-rent fellowes.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        He saies true.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Sir, I will assure you (how euer you esteeme of him) he's a man worthy of regard.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Why? what has he in him, of such vertue to be regarded? ha?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Mary, he is a scholler, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nothing else?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        And he is well trauail'd.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        He should get him clothes; I would cherish those good parts of trauaile in him, and preferre him to some nobleman of good place.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Sir, such a benefit should bind me to you for euer (in my friends right) and, I doubt not, but his desert shall more then answere my praise.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Why, and he had good clothes, I'ld carry him to court with me to morrow.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        He shall not want for those, sir, if gold and the whole city will furnish him.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        You say well, sir: faith, signior DELIRO, I am come to haue

you play the Alchymist with me, and change the species of my land, into that mettall you talke of.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        With all my heart, sir, what summe will serue you?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Faith, some three, or foure hundred.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Troth, sir, I haue promist to meet a gentleman this morning, in Par
                                 •
                              les, but vpon my returne I'le dispatch you.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I'le accompany you thither.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        As you please, sir; but I goe not thither directly.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        'Tis no matter, I haue no other designement in hand, and therefore as good goe along.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        I were as good haue a quartane feauer follow me now, for I shall ne're bee rid of him: (being mee a cloke there, one) Still, vpon his grace at court, am I sure to bee visited; I was a beast to giue him any hope. Well, would I were in, that I am out with him, once, and— Come, signior MACILENTE, I must conferre with you, as wee goe. Nay, deare wife, I beseech thee, forsake these moods: looke not like winter thus. Here, take my keyes, open my counting houses, spread all my wealth before thee, choose any obiect that delights thee: If thou wilt eate the spirit of gold, and drinke dissolu'd pearle in wine, 'tis for thee.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        So, sir.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Nay, my sweet wife.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Good lord! how you are perfum'd! in your termes, and al! pray you leaue vs.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Come, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Adiew, sweet lady.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        I, I! Let thy words euer sound in mine eares, and thy graces disperse contentment through all my senses! O, how happy is that lady aboue other ladies, that enioyes so absolute a gentleman to her seruant! A countesse giue him her hand to kisse? ah, foolish countesse! hee's a man worthy (if a woman may speake of a mans worth) to kisse the lips of an empresse.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Ret
                              ••
                           nd with his taylor.
                         What's master FASTIDIVS gone, sister?
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        I, brother (he has a face like a Cherubin!)
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Gods me, what lucke's this? I haue fetcht my taylor and all: which way went he, sister? can you tell?
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Not I, in good faith (and he has a body like an angell!)
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        How long is't since he went?
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Why, but e'en now: did you not meet him? (and a tongue able to rauish any woman i' the earth!)
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        O, for gods sake (I'le please you for your paines:) but e'en now, say you? Come, good, sir: S'lid, I had forgot it too: Sister, if any body aske for mine vncle SOGLIARDO, they shall ha' him at the Heralds office, yonder by Paules.
                        
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Well, I will not altogether despaire: I haue heard of a citizens wife, has beene belou'd of a courtier; and why not I? heigh, ho: well, I

will into my priuate chamber, locke the dore to mee, and thinke ouer all his good parts, one after another.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              Well, I doubt, this last Scene will endure some grieuous torture.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              How? you feare 'twill be rackt, by some hard construction?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Doe not you?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              No, in good faith: vnlesse mine eyes could light mee beyond sense. I see no reason, why this should be more liable to the racke, then the rest: you'le say, perhaps, the city will not take it well, that the marchant is made here to dote so perfectly vpon his wife; and shee againe, to bee so Fastidiously affected, as shee is?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              You haue vtter'd my thought, sir, indeed.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Why (by that proportion) the court might as wel take offence at him we call the courtier, and with much more pretext, by how much the place transcends, and goes before in dignitie and vertue: but can you imagine that any noble, or true spirit in court (whose sinowie, and altogether vn-affected graces, very worthily expresse him a courtier) will make any exception at the opening of such an emptie trunke, as this BRISKE is? or thinke his owne worth empeacht, by beholding his motley inside?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              No sir, I doe not.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              No more, assure you, will any graue, wise citizen, or modest matron, take the obiect of this folly in DELIRO, and his wife: but rather apply it as the foile to their owne vertues. For that were to affirme, that a man, writing of NERO, should meane all Emperors: or speaking of MACHIAVEL, comprehend all States-men; or in our SORDIDO, all Farmars; and so of the rest: then which, nothing can be vtter'd more malicious, or absurd. Indeed, there are a sort of these narrow-ey'd decypherers, I confesse, that will extort strange, and abstruse meanings out of any subiect, be it neuer so conspicuous and innocently deliuer'd. But to such (where e're they sit conceal'd) let them know, the author defies them, and their writing-tables; and hopes, no sound or safe iudgement will infect it selfe with their contagious comments, who (indeed) come here only to peruert, and poison the sense of what they heare, and for nought else.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Stay, what new Mute is this, that walkes so suspiciously?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, mary this is one, for whose better illustration; we must desire you to presuppose the stage, the middle isle in Paules; and that, the west end of it.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              So, sir: and what followes?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Faith, a whole volume of humour, and worthy the vnclasping.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              As how? what name doe you giue him first?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              He hath shift of names, sir: some call him APPLE IOHN, some Signior WHIFFE, mary, his maine standing name is CAVALIER SHIFT: the rest are but as cleane shirts to his natures.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              And what makes he in Paules, now?
                           
                           
                              
                              COR.
                              Troth, as you see, for the aduancement of a Siquis, or two; wherein he has so varied himselfe, that if any one of 'hem take, he may hull 
                                    •
                                 p and downe i' the humorous world, a little longer.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              It seemes then, he beares a very changing saile?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, as the wind, sir: here comes more.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act III.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     SHIFT, ORANGE, CLOVE.
                     
                        THis is rare, I haue set vp my bills, without discouery.
                     
                     
                        ORAN.
                        What? Signior WHI
                              ••
                           E? what fortune has brought you into these west parts?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Troth, signior, nothing but your rheume; I haue beene taking an ounce of tabacco hard by here, with a gentleman, and I am come to spit priuate, in Pau
                                 •
                              es. Saue you sir.
                     
                     
                        ORAN.
                        Adieu, good signior WHI
                              ••
                           E.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        Master APPLE IOHN? you are well met: when shall we 
                              •
                           up together; and laugh, and be fat with those good wenches? ha?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Faith, sir, I must now leaue you, vpon a few humours, and occasions: but when you please, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        Farewell, sweet APPLE IOHN: I wonder, there are no more store of gallants here!
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              What be these two, signior?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Mary, a couple sir, that are meere strangers to the whole scope of our play; only come to walke a turne or two, i'this Scene of Paules, by chance.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        ORAN.
                        Same you, good master CLOVE.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        Sweet master ORANGE.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              How? CLOVE, and ORANGE?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              I, and they are well met, for 'tis as drie an ORANGE as euer grew: nothing, but Salutation; and, O god, sir; and, It pleases you to say so, Sir; one that can laugh at a iest for company with a most plausible, and extemporall grace; and some houre after, in priuate, aske you what it was: the other, monsieur CLOVE, is a more spic't youth: he will fit you a whole afternoone sometimes, in a booke-sellers shop, reading the Greeke, Italian, and Spanish; when he vnderstands not a word of either: if he had the tongues, to his sutes, he were an excellent linguist.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        Doe you heare this reported, for certainty?
                     
                     
                        ORAN.
                        O god, sir.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act III. Scene II.
                     PVNTARVOLO, CARLO.
                     
                        SIrrah, take my cloke: and you sir knaue, follow mee closer. If thou losest my dogge, thou shalt die a dogs death; I will hang thee.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Tut, feare him not, hee's a good leane slaue, he loues a dog well, I warrant him; I see by his lookes, I: masse hee's somwhat like him. Slud poison him, make him away with a crooked pinne, or somewhat, men; thou maist haue more security of thy life: and so sir, what? you ha' not put out your whole venter yet? ha' you?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        No, I doe want yet some fifteene, or sixteene hundred pounds: but my lady (my wife) is out of her humour; shee does not now goe.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        No? how then?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Mary, I am now enforc't to giue it out, vpon the returne of my selfe, my dogge, and my cat.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Your cat? where is shee?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        My squire has her there, in the bag: Sirrah, looke to her: How lik'st thou my change, CARLO?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Oh, for the better, sir; your cat has nine lines, and your wife ha' but one.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Besides, shee will neuer bee sea-sicke, which will saue mee so much in conserues: when saw you signior SOGLIARDO?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I came from him but now, he is at the Heralds office yonder: he requested me to goe afore, and take vp a man or two for him in Paules, against his cognisance was ready.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        What? has he purchast armes, then?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, and rare ones too: of as many colours, as e're you saw any 
                              •
                           ooles co
                              ••
                            in your life. I'le goe looke among youd
                              •
                            bille, and I can fit him with legs to his armes—
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        They goe to looke vpon the bills.
                        With legs to his armes! Good: I will goe with you, sir.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene III.
                     FASTIDIVS, DELIRO, MACILENTE.
                     
                        COme, let's walke in Mediterraneo: I assure you, sir, I am not the least respected among ladies; but let that passe: doe you know how to goe into the presence, sir?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, on my feet, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        No, on your head, sir: for 'tis that must beare you out, I assure you: as thus, sir. You must first haue an especial care so to weare your hat, that it oppresse not confusedly this your predominant, or fore-top; because (when you come at the presence dore) you may, with once or twice stroking vp your fore-head thus, enter, with your predominant perfect: that is, standing vp stiffe.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        As if one were frighted?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Which indeed, a true feare of your mistris should doe, rather than gumme water, or whites of egges: is't not so, sir?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        An ingenious obseruation: giue mee leaue to craue your name, Sir.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        His name is, MACILENTE, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Good signior MACILENTE: if this gentleman, signior DELIRO, furnish you (as he saies he will) with clothes, I will bring you, to morrow by this time, into the presence of the most diuine, and acute lady in court: you shall see sweet silent rhetorique, and dumbe eloquence speaking in her eye; but when shee speakes her selfe, such an anatomie of wit, so sinewiz'd and arteriz'd, that 'tis the goodliest modell of pleasure that euer was to behold. Oh! shee strikes the world into admiration of her; (ô, ô, ô) I cannot expresse 'hem, beleuue me.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, your onely admiration, is your silence, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        'Fore god, CARLO, this is good; let's reade 'hem againe.
 If there be any lady, or gentlewoman of good carriage,
 that is desirous to entertaine (to her priuate vses) a
 yong, straight, and vpright gentleman, of the age of fiue, or
 sixe and twenty at the most: who can serue in the nature
 of a gentleman vsher, and hath little legges of purpose,
 and a blacke satten fute of his owne, to goe before her
 in: which fute (for the more sweetning) now lies in lauander:
 and can hide his face with her fanne, if neede require: or
 sit in the cold at the staire foot for her, as well as
 another gentleman: Let her subscribe her name and place, and
 diligent respect shall be giuen.
 This is above measure exellent! ha?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        No, this, this! here's a fine slaue.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        
                           IF this city, or the suburbs of the same, doe affoord any
yong gentleman, of the first, second, or third head, more or lesse, whose friends are but lately deceased, and whose lands are but new come to his hands, that (to bee as exactly qualified as
the best of our ordinary gallants are) is affected to entertaine the most gentlemanlike vse of tabacco: as first, to giue it the most exquisite perfume; then, to know all the delicate sweet formes for the assumption of it: as also the rare corollarie, and practice of the Cuban ebolition, EVRIPVS, and whiffe; which hee shall receiue, or take in, here at London, and euaporate at Vxbridge, or farder, if it please him. If there be any such generous spirit, that is truly enamour'd of these good faculties: May it please him, but
(by a note of his hand) to specifie


                              

the place, or ordinarie where hee vses to eate, and lie; and most
sweet attendance, with tabacco, and pipes of the best sort, shall be
ministred: STET QVAESO CANDIDE LECTOR.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Why this is without paralell, this!
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Well, I'le marke this fellow for SOGLIARDO'S vse presently.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Or rather, SOGLIARDO, for his vse,
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Faith, either of 'hem will serue, they are both good properties:
I'le designe the other a place too, that we may see him.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        No better place, then the Mitre, that we may bee spectators
with you, CARLO. Soft, behold, who enters here: Signior SOGLIARDO!
saue you.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene IIII.
                     
                        SOGLIARDO.
                        To them.
                        SAue you, good sir PVNTARVOLO; your dogge's in health, sir, I see:
how now, CARLO?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Wee haue ta'ne simple paines, to choose you out followers here.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Come hither, signior.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        They shew him the bills.
                        Monsieur ORANGE, yond' gallants obserue vs; pr'y thee
let's talke fustian a little, and gull 'hem: make 'hem beleeue vve are great
schollers.
                     
                     
                        ORANG.
                        O lord, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        Nay, pr'y thee let's, beleeue me, you haue an excellent habit
in discourse.
                     
                     
                        ORANG.
                        It pleases you to say so, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        By this church, you ha' la: nay, come, begin:

 
                              ARISTOTLE in his Daemonologia, approues SCALIGER
 for the best Nauigator in his time:
 and in his Hypercritiques, he reports him to be Heautontimorumenos:

you vnderstand the Greeke, sir?
                     
                     
                        ORANG.
                        O god, sir.
                     
                     
                        MACIL.
                        For societies sake he does. O, here be a couple of
fine tame parrats.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        Now, sir, vvhereas the Ingenuitie of the time, and the soules
Synderisis are but Embrions in nature, added to the panch of Esquiline, and
the Inter-vallum of the Zodiack, besides the Eclipticke line being opticke, and
not mentall, but by the contemplatiue & theoricke part thereof, doth demonstrate
to vs the vegetable circumference, and the ventositie of the Tropicks and
whereas our intellectuall, or mincing capreall (according to the Metaphisicks) as you may reade in PLATO's Histriomastix—You conceiue me, sir?
                     
                     
                        ORANG.
                        O lord, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        Then comming to the pretty Animall, as Reason long since is
fled to animalls, you know, or indeed for the more modellizing, or enamelling,



                           or rather diamondizing of your subiect, you shall perceiue the Hipothesis, or Galaxia, (whereof the Meteors long since had their initiall inceptions and notions) to be meerely Pithagoricall, Mathematicall, and Aristocraticall— For looke you, sir, there is euer a kinde of concinnitie and species— Let vs turne to our former discourse, for they marke vs not.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Masse, yonder 's the knight PVNTARVOLO.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        And my cousin SOGLIARDO, me thinkes.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I, and his familiar that baunts him, the deuill vvith a shining face.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Sogliardo, Puntarvolo, Carlo, 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                         Let 'hem alone, obserue 'hem not.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Nay, I will haue him, I am resolute for that. By this parchment, gentlemen, I haue beene so toil'd among the Harrots yonder, you will not beleeue, they doe speake i' the strangest language, and giue a man the hardest termes for his money, that euer you knew.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        But ha' you armes? ha' your armes?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Y faith, I thanke god, I can write my selfe gentlemen now, here's my pattent, it cost me thirtie pound, by this breath.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        A very saire coat, well charg'd, and full of armorie.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Nay, it has as much varietie of colours in it, as you haue seene a cost haue, how like you the crest, sir?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I vnderstand it not well, what is't?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Mary, sir, it is your Bore without a head Rampant.
                        
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        A Bore without a head, that's very rare!
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, and rampant too: troth, I commend the Heralds wi
                              •
                           , hee has decyphered him well: A Swine without a head, without braine, wit, any thing indeed, ramping to gentilitie. You can blazon the rest, signior? can you not?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O, I, I haue it in writing here of purpose, it cost me two shillings the tricking.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Let's heare, let's heare.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        They salute as they meet in the vallie.
                        It is the most vile, foolish, absurd, palpable, & ridiculous escutcheon, that euer this eye survis'd. Saue you, good monsieur FASTIDIVS.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Silence, good knight: on, on.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        GVRONY, of eight peeces; AZVRE and GVLES, betweene three plates; a CHEV'RON, 
                              
                                 ••
                              grailed checkey, OR, VERT, and ERMINES; on a cheefe ARGENT betweene two ANN'LETS, sables; a Bores head, PROPER.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        How's that? on a cheefe ARGENT?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Here they 
                              〈…〉
                            with Pontar
                              •
                           olo Carlo, and Sogliardo, 
                              〈…〉
                            and Orange, 
                              〈…〉
                           .
                        On a cheefe ARGENT, a Bores head, PROPER betweene two ANN'LETS sables. 
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        S'lud, it's a Hogs-cheeke, and puddings in a pewter field this.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        How like you 'hem, signior?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Let the word bee, Not without mustard; your crest is very rare, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        A frying pan to the crest had had no fellow.
                     
                     
                        
                        FAST.
                        Intreat your poore friend to walke off a little, signior, I will salute the knight.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Come, lap't vp, lap't vp.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        You are right well encountred, sir, how do's your saire dog?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        In reasonable state, sir: what citizen is that you were consorted with? a marchant of any worth?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        'Tis signior DELIRO, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Salute.
                        Is it he? Saue you, sir.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Good sir PVNTARVOLO.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, what copie of foole would this place minister, to one endew'd with patience, to obserue it?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Nay, looke you sir, now you are gentleman, you must carry a more exalted presence, change your mood, and habit, to a more a
                              •
                           stere forme, be exceeding proud, stand vpon your gentilitie, and scorne euery man. Speake nothing humbly, neuer discourse vnder a nobleman, though you ne're saw him butriding to the Starre-chamber, it's all one. Loue no man. Trust no man. Speake ill of no man to his face: nor well of any man behind his backe. Salute fairely on the front, and wish 'hem hang'd vpon the turne. Spread your selfe vpon his bosome publikely, whose heart you would ca
                              •
                           e in priuate. These be principles, thinke on 'hem, I'le come to you againe presently.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Sirra, keepe close; yet not so close: thy breath will thawmy ruffe.
                     
                     
                        SOGI.
                        O, good cousin, I am a little busie, how do's my neece? I am to walke with a knight, here.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene V.
                     FVNGOSO.  TAYLOR.
                     To them.
                     
                        O He is here, looke you sir, that's the gentleman.
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        What, he i'the blush-colour'd sattin?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I, he sir: though his sute blush, hee blushes not, looke you, that's the sute, sir: I would haue mine, such a sute without difference, such stuffe, such a wing, such a sleeue, such a skirt, belly, and all; therefore, pray you obserue it. Haue you a paire of tables?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Why, doe you see, sir? they say I am phantasticall: why, true, I know it, and I pursue my humour still, in contempt of this censorious age. S'light, and a man should doe nothing, but what a sort of stale iudgements about this towne will approue in him, he were a sweet asse: I'ld beg him yfaith. I ne're knew any more find fault with a fashion, then they that knew not how to put themselues in to't. For mine owne part, so I please mine owne appetite, I am carelesse what the fustie world speakes of me. Puh.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Doe you marke, how it hangs at the knee there?
                     
                     
                        
                        TAIL.
                        I warrant you, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        For gods sake, doe, note all: doe you see the collar, sir?
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        Feare nothing, it shall not differ in a stitch, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Pray heau'n, it doe not, you'le make these linings serue? and helpe me to a chapman for the out-side, will you?
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        I'le doe my best, sir: you'le put it off presently?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I, goe with mee to my chamber, you shall haue it—but make haste of it, for the loue of a customer, for I'le fit i'my old sute, or else lie a bed, and reade the Arcadia, till you haue done.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, if euer you were strucke with a iest, gallants, now, now. I doe vsher the most strange peece of militarie profession, that euer was discouer'd in Insula Paulina.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Where? where?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        What is he, for a creature?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        A pimpe, a pimpe, that I haue obseru'd yonder, the rarest superficies of a humour; hee comes euery morning to emptie his hangs in Paules here: and offers vp some fiue, or sixe Hecatomb's of faces, and sighes, and away againe. Here he comes; nay, walke, walke, be not seene to note him, and we shall haue excellent sport.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene VI.
                     SHIFT.
                     To them.
                     
                        PVN.
                        S'Lid, hee vented a sigh
                              •
                           'ne now, I thought he would haue blowne vp the church.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        O, you shall haue him giue a number of those false fires ere hee depart.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        See, now he is expostulating with his rapier! looke, looke.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Did you euer, in your daies, obserue better passion ouer a hilt?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Except it were in the person of a cutlers boy, or that the fellow were nothing but vapour, I should thinke it impossible.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        See, againe, he claps his sword o'the head, as who should say, well, goe to.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O violence! I wonder the blade can containe it selfe, being so prouokt.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        With that, the moody squire thumpt his brest,
                        Andrear'd his eyen to heauen, 
                              •
                           or reuenge.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Troth, and you be good gentlemen let's make 'hem friends, and take vp the matter, betweene his rapier, and him.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Nay, if you intend that, you must lay downe the matter, for this rapier (it seemes) is in the nature a hanger on, and the good gentleman would happily be rid of him.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        By my faith, and 'tis to be suspected, I'le aske him.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, here's rich stuffe, for lifes sake, let vs goe.
                        
                        A man would wish himselfe a senselesse pillar,
                        Rather then view these monstrous prodigies:
                        Nil habet inf
                              •
                           elix paupertas durius in se,
                        Quàm quòd ridiculos homines facit—
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Signior.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        At your seruice.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Will you sell your rapier?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Sbloud, he is turn'd wild vpon the question, hee lookes as hee had seene a serjeant.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Sell my rapier? now fate blesse me.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        
                           Amen.
                        
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        You ask't me, if I would sell my rapier, sir?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I did indeed.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Now, lord haue mercy vpon me.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        
                           Amen, I say still.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        S'lud sir, what should you behold in my face, sir, that should moue you (as they say, sir) to aske me, sir, if I would sell my rapier?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nay (let me pray you, sir) bee not mou'd: I protest, I would rather haue beene silent, then any way offensiue, had I knowne your nature.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Sell my rapier? 'ods lid! Nay, sir (for mine owne part) as I am a man that has seru'd in causes, or so, so I am not apt to injure any gentleman in the degree of falling foule, but (sell my rapier?) I will tell you sir, I haue seru'd with this foolish rapier, where some of vs dare not appeare in haste, I name no man: but let that passe. (Sell my rapier?) death to my lungs. This rapier, sir, has trauail'd by my side, sir, the best part of France and the low Countrey: I haue seene V
                                 •
                              ishing Brill, and the H
                                 •
                              ghe, with this rapier, sir, in my lord of Leysters time: and (by gods will) he that should offer to disrapier me now, I would— Looke you sir, you presume to be a gentleman of sort, and so likewise your friends here, if you haue any disposition to trauell, for the sight of seruice, or so, one, two, or all of you, I can lend you letters to di
                              •
                           ers officers and commanders in the low Countries, that shall for my cause doe you all the good offices, that shall pertaine or belong to gentlemen of your— Please you to shew the bountie of your minde, sir, to impart some ten groates, or halfe a crowne to our vse, till our abilitie be of grow'th to returne it, and we shall thinke our selfe— Sbloud! sell my rapier?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I pray you, what said he, signior, hee's a proper man.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Mary, he tells me, if I please to shew the bountie of my mind, to impart some ten groats to his vse, or so.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Breake his head, and giue it him.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I thought he had beene playing o' the Iewes trump, I.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        My rapier? no sir: my rapier is my guard, my defence, my reuenew, my honour: (if you cannot impart, be secret, I beseech you) and I will maintaine it, where there is a graine of dust, or a drop of water.

(Hard is the choise when the valiant must eat their armes, or clem:) Sell my rapier? no, my deare, I will not bee diuorc't from thee, yet, I haue euer found thee true as steele—and (you cannot impart sir?) Saue you gentlemen: (neuerthelesse if you haue a fancie to it, sir.)
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Pr'y thee away: is Signior DELIRO departed?
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Ha'you seene a pimpe out-face his owne wants better?
                     
                     
                        SOG.
                        I commend him, that can dissemble 'hem so well.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        True, and hauing no better a cloke for it, then he has neither.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Gods precious, what mischieuous lucke is this! adiew gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Whither? in such haste, Monsieur FASTIDIVS?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        After my marchant, signior DELIRO, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O hinder him not, hee may hap lose his tide, a good flounder i'faith.
                     
                     
                        ORAN.
                        Harke you, signior WHIFFE, a word with you.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Orange and Clove call Shif
                              •
                            aside.
                         How? signior WHIFFE?
                     
                     
                        ORAN.
                        What was the difference betweene that gallant that's gone, and you, sir.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        No difference: he would ha'giu'n mee fiue pound for my rapier, and I refus'd it; that's all.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        O, was't no otherwise? wee thought you had beene vpon some termes.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        No other then you saw, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLOVE.
                        Adieu, good Master APPLE-IOHN.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        How? WHIFFE, and APPLE-IOHN too? Heart, what'll you say if this be the appendix, or labell to both youd' indentures?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        It may be.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Resolue vs of it, IANVS, thou that look'st euery way: or thou HE
                              •
                           CVLES, that hast trauail'd all countries.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Nay, CARLO, spend not time in inuocations now, 'tis late.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Signior, here's a gentleman desirous of your name, sir.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Sir, my name is CAVALIER SHIFT: I am knowne sufficiently in this walke, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        SHIFT? I heard your name varied e'en now, as I take it.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        True, sir, it pleases the world (as I am her excellent Tabbacconist) to giue me the stile of signior WHIFFE: as I am a poore esquire about the towne here, they call mee Master APPLE-IOHN. Varierie of good names does well, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, and good parts, to make those good names: out of which I imagine yond' bils to be yours.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Sir, if I should denie the manuscripts, I were worthie to be banisht the middle I'le, for euer.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I take your word, sir: this gentleman has subscrib'd to 'hem, and is most desirous to become your pupill. Mary you must vse expedition. Signior Insulso Sogliardo, this is the professor.
                     
                     
                        
                        SOGL.
                        In good time, sir, nay, good sir, house your head, doe you professe those sleights in tabacco?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        I, doe more then professe, sir, and (if you please to bee a practitioner) I wil vndertake in one fortnight to bring you, that you shal take it plausibly in any ordinarie, theatre, or the tilt-yard, if need be, i'the most popular assembly that is.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        But you cannot bring him to the whiffe so soone?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Yes, as soone, sir, hee shall receiue the first, second, and third whiffe, if it please him, and (vpon the receit) take his horse, drinke his three cups of Canarie, and expose one at Hounslow, a second at Stanes, and a third at Bogshot.
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Baw-waw!
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        You will not ser
                              •
                           e mee, sir, will you
                              •
                            I'le giue you more then countenance.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Pardon me, sir, I doe scorne to serue any man.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Who? he serue? Sbloud he keepes high men, and low men, he; he has a faire liuing at Fullam.
                        
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        But in the nature of a fellow, I'le bee your follower, if you please.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Sir, you shall stay, and dine with mee, and if wee can agree, weele not part in haste: I am verie bountifull to men of qualitie. Where shall we goe, signior?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Your Miter is your best house.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        I can make this dogge take as many whiffes as I list, and hee shall retaine, or efume them at my pleasure.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        By your patience, follow me, fellowes.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Sir, PVNTARVOLO!
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Pardon mee, my dogge shall not eate in his companie for a million.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Nay, bee not you amaz'd, signior WHIFFE, what e're that stiffeneckt gentleman say's.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        No, for you doe not know the humour of the Dogge, as wee doe: where shall we dine, CARLO? I would faine goe to one of these ordinaries, now I am a gentleman.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        So you may, were you neuer at any yet?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        No faith, but they say, there resorts your most choise gallants.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        True, and the fashion is, when any stranger comes in among'st 'hem, they all stand vp and stare at him, as he were some vnknowne beast, brought out of Affrick, but that'll bee help't with a good aduenturous face, you must be impudent ynough, sit downe, and vse no respect; when any thing's propounded aboue your capacitie, smile at it, make two or three faces, and 'tis excellent, they 'le thinke you haue trauail'd: though you argue a whole day in silence thus, and discourse in nothing but laughter, 'twill passe. Onely (now and then) giue fire, discharge a good full oth, and offer a great wager, 'twill be admirable.
                     
                     
                        
                        SOGL.
                        I warrant you, I am resolute: come, good signior, there's a poore french crowne, for your ordinarie.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        It comes well, for I had not so much as the least portcullice of come before.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              I trauell with another obiection, signior, which I feare will bee enforc'd against the author, ere I can be deliuer'd of it.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              What's that, sir?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              That the argument of his Comoedie might haue beene of some other nature, as of a duke to be in loue with a countesse, and that countesse to bee in loue with the dukes sonne, and the sonne to loue the ladies waiting maid: some such crosse wooing, with a clowne to their seruingman, better then to be thus neere, and familiarly allied to the time.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              You say well, but I would faine heare one of these autumne-judgements define once, Quid sit Comoedia? if he cannot, let him content himselfe with CICEROS definition (till hee haue strength to propose to himselfe a better) who would haue a Comoedie to be Imitatio vitae, Speculum consuetudinis, Imago veritatis; a thing throughout pleasant, and ridiculous, and accommodated to the correction of manners: if the maker haue fail'd in any particle of this, they may worthily taxe him, but if not, why— be you (that are for them) silent, as I will bee for him; and giue way to the actors.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene VII.
                     SORDIDO, HINE.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈1 paragraph〉
                           
                        
                         NAy, gods precious, if the weather and season bee so respectlesse, that beggers shall liue as well as their betters; and that my hunger, and thirst for riches, shall not make them hunger and thirst with pouertie; that my sleepes shall be brokes, and their hearts not broken; that my coffers shall bee full, and yet care; theirs emptie, and yet merry! Tis time, that a crosse should beare flesh and bloud, since flesh and bloud cannot beare this crosse.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              What, will he hang himselfe?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Faith I, it seemes his Prognostication has not kept touch with him, and that makes him despaire.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Beshrow me, he will be out of his humour then, indeed.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        SOR.
                        Tut, these star-monger knaues, who would trust 'hem? one saies, darke and rainy, when 'tis as cleere as christall; another saies, tempestuous blasts, and stormes, and 'twas as calme as a milke-bowle; here bee sweet rascals for a man to credit his whole fortunes with: You skie-staring cocks-combs you, you fat braines, out vpon you; you are good for nothing

but to sweat night-caps, and make rug-gownes deare! You learned men, and haue not a legion of deuils, a vostre seruice! a vostre seruice! by heauen, I thinke I shall die a better scholler then they! but soft, how now, sirra.
                     
                     
                        HINE.
                        Here's a letter come from your sonne, sir.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        From my sonne, sir? what would my sonne, sir? some good newes, no doubt.
                        
                           
                              Sweet and deare father (desiring you first to send mee your blessing, which is more worth to me then gold or siluer) I desire you likewise to be aduertised, that this Shrouetide (contrary to custome) we vse alwaies to haue reuels; which is indeed dancing, and makes an excellent shew in truth; especially if wee gentlemen bee well attir'd; which our seniors note, and thinke the better of our fathers, the better we are maintain'd, and that they shall know if they come vp, and haue any thing to doe in the law: therefore, good father, these are (for your owne sake as well as mine) to re-desire you; that you let me not want, that which is fit for the setting vp of our name, in the honorable volume of gentilitie, that I may say to our calumniators, with TVLLIE, Ego sum ortus domus meae, tu occasus tuae. And thus (not doubting of your fatherly beneuolence) I humbly aske you blessing, and pray god to blesse you.
                              
                                 Yours, if his owne.
                              
                           
                        
                        How's this? Yours, if his owne? is he not my sonne, except he be his owne sonne? Belike this is some new kinde of subscription the gallants vse. Wel, wherefore doest thou stay, knaue? Away: goe. Here's a letter indeede; ie
                              •
                           els? and beneuolence? is this a weather to send beneuolence? or is this a season to reuell in? Slid the deuil and all takes part to vexe me, I thinke! this letter would neuer haue come now else, now, now, when the sunne shines, and the aire thus cleere. Soule, if this hold, we shall shortly haue an excellent crop of corne spring out of the high waies: the streets, and houses of the towne will be hid with the ranknesse of the fruits, that grow therein spight of good husbandry. Goe to, I'le preuent the 
                              •
                           ight of it, come as quickly as it can, I will preuent the sight of it. I haue this remedie, heauen. Stay; I'le trie the paine thus a little, Ô, nothing, nothing. Well now, shall my sonne gaine a beneuolence by my death? or any body be the better for my gold, or so forth? No, aliue, I kept it from 'hem, and (dead) my ghost shall walke about it, and preserue it, my son and daughter shall starue ere they touch it, I haue bid it as deep as hell from the sight of heauen, and to it I goe now. Falls off. 
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act III. Scene VIII.
                     RVSTICI.
                     
                        RVST. 1.
                        To him.
                         AYe me, what pittifull sight is this! help, help, help.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 2.
                        How now? what's the matter?
                     
                     
                        RVST. 1.
                        O, here's a man has hang'd himselfe, helpe to get him againe.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 2.
                        Hang'd himselfe? Slid carry him afore a iustice, 'tis chance medley, o' my word.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 3.
                        How now, what's here to doe?
                     
                     
                        RVST. 4.
                        How comes this?
                     
                     
                        RVST. 2.
                        One has executed himselfe, contrary to order of law, and by my consent he shall answer't.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 5.
                        Would he were in case, to answere it.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 1.
                        Stand by, he recouers, giue him breath.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        Oh.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 5.
                        Masse, 'twas well you vvent the foot-way, neighbour.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 1.
                        I, and I had not cut the halter.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        How! cut the halter? Aye me, I am vndone, I am vndone.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 2.
                        Mary, if you had not beene vndone, you had beene hang'd, I can tell you.
                     
                     
                        SORD.
                        You thred-bare horse-bread-eating rascals, if you vvould needes haue beene meddling, could you not haue vntied it, but you must out it? and in the midst too! Aye me.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 1.
                        Out on me, 'tis the catterpiller SORDIDO! how cursed are the poore, that the viper was blest, vvith this good fortune?
                     
                     
                        RVST. 2.
                        Nay, how accurst art thou, that art cause to the curse of the poore?
                     
                     
                        RVST. 3.
                        I, and to saue so wretched a caytife?
                     
                     
                        RVST. 4.
                        Curst be thy fingers that loos'd him.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 2.
                        Some desperate furie possesse thee, that thou maist hang thy selfe too.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 5.
                        Neuer maist thou be sau'd, that sau'd so damn'd a monster.
                     
                     
                        SORDID.
                        What curses breathe these men! how haue my deeds
                        Made my lookes differ from another mans,
                        That they should thus detest, and lothe my life!
                        Out on my wretched humour, it is that
                        Makes me thus monstrous in true humane eyes.
                        Pardon me (gentle friends) I'le make faire mends
                        For my foule errors past, and twenty-fold
                        Restore to all men, vvhat with vvrong I rob'd them:
                        My barnes, and garners shall stand open still
                        To all the poore that come, and my best graine
                        
                        Be made almes-bread, to feed halfe-famisht mouthes.
                        Though hither to amongst you I haue liu'd,
                        Like an unsauourie muck-hill to my selfe,
                        Yet now, my gather'd heapes being spread abroad,
                        Shall turne to better, and more fruitfull vses.
                        Blesse then this man, curse him no more for sauing
                        My life, and soule together. O, how deeply
                        The bitter curses of the poore doe pierce!
                        I am by wonder chang'd; come in with me
                        And witnesse my repentance: now I proue,
                        "No life is blest, that is not grac't with loue.
                     
                     
                        RVST. 2.
                        O miracle! see vvhen a man ha's grace!
                     
                     
                        RVST. 3.
                        Had't not beene pitty, so good a man should haue beene cast away?
                     
                     
                        RVST. 2.
                        Well, I'le get our clarke put his conuersion in the Acts, and Monuments.
                        
                     
                     
                        RVST. 4.
                        Doe, for I warrant him hee's a Martyr.
                        
                     
                     
                        RVST.
                        O god, how he wept, if you mark't it! did you see how the teares trill'd?
                     
                     
                        RVST. 5.
                        Yes, beleeue me, like master vicars bowles vpon the greene, for all the world.
                     
                     
                        3. or 4.
                        O neighbour, god's blessing o' your heart, neighbour, 'twas a good gratefull deed.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              How now, MITIS? what's that you consider so seriously?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Troth, that which doth essentially please me, the vvarping condition of this greene, and soggy multitude: but in good saith, signior, your author hath largely out-stript my expectation in this Scene, I will liberally confesse it. For, when I saw SORDIDO so desperately intended, I thought I had had a hand of him, then.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              What? you suppos'd he should haue hung himselfe, indeed?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              I did, and had fram'd my obiection to it ready, which may yet be very fitly vrg'd, and with some necessity: for though his purpos'd violence lost th' effect, and extended not to death, yet the intent and horror of the obiect, was more then the nature of a Comoedie vvill in any sort admit.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              I? vvhat thinke you of PLAVTVS, in his Comoedie, called Cistellaria, there? vvhere he brings in ALCESIMARCHVS vvith a drawne sword ready to kill himselfe, and as hee is e'ne fixing his brest vpon it, to bee restrain'd from his resolu'd outrage, by SILENIVM, and the bawd: is not his authoritie of power to giue our Scene approbation?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Sir, I haue this only euasion left me, to say, I thinke it bee so indeed, your memorie is happier then mine: but I wonder, what engine hee vvill vse to bring the rest out of their humours!
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              That will appeare anon, neuer preoccupie your imagination

withall. Let your mind keepe companie with the Scene still, which now remoues it selfe from the countrey, to the court. Here comes MACILENTE, and signior BRISKE, freshly suted, lose not your selfe, for now the Epitasis, or busie part of our subiect, is in act.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene IX.
                     MACILENTE, BRISKE, CINEDO, SAVIOLINA.
                     
                        FAST.
                        WEll, now, signior MACILENTE, you are not onely welcome to the court but also to my mistris withdrawing chamber: Boy, get me some tabacco, I'le but goe in, and shew I am here, and come to you presently, sir.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        What's that he said? by heauen, I markt him not:
                        My thoughts, and I, were of another world.
                        I was admiring mine owne out-side here,
                        To thinke what priuiledge, and palme it beares
                        Here, in the court! Be a man ne're so vile
                        In wit, in judgement, manners, or what else;
                        If he can purchase but a silken couer,
                        He shall not only passe, but passe regarded:
                        Whereas, let him be poore, and meanely clad,
                        Though ne're so richly parted; you shall haue
                        A fellow (that knowes nothing but his beefe,
                        Or how to rince his clammy guts in beere)
                        Will take him by the shoulders, or the throat,
                        And kicke him downe the staires. Such is the state
                        Of vertue, in bad clothes! ha, ha, ha, ha,
                        That raiment should be in such high request!
                        How long should I be, ere I should put off
                        To the lord Chancelors tombe, or the Shriues posts?
                        By heauen (I thinke) a thousand, thousand yeere.
                        His grauitie, his wisedome, and his faith,
                        To my dread Soueraigne (graces that suruiue him)
                        These I could well endure to reuerence,
                        But not his tombe: no more then I'ld commend
                        The chappell organ, for the guilt without,
                        Or this base violl, for the varnisht face.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I feare I haue made you stay somewhat long, sir, but is my tabacco readie, boy?
                     
                     
                        CINE.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Giue me, my mistris is vpon comming, you shall see her presently, sir, (Tab.) you'le say you neuer accosted a more piercing wit. This 
                              •
                           abacco is not dryed, boy, or else the pipe's defectiue. Oh, your wits of

                           Italie are nothing comparable to her! her braine's a verie quiuer of iests! and she do's dart them abroad with that sweete loose, and iudiciall aime, that you would—here she comes sir.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        She is seene and goes in againe.
                        'Twas time, his inuention had beene bogd else.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Giue me my fanne there.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        How now, Monsieur BRISKE?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        A kind of affectionate reuerence strikes mee with a cold shiuering (me thinkes.)
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I like such tempers well, as stand before their mistresses with feare and trembling, and before their maker, like impudent mountaines.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        By this hand, I'ld spend twentie pound my vauting-horse stood here now, she might see me doe but one tricke?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, do's she loue actiuitie?
                     
                     
                        CINE.
                        Or if you had but your long stockings on, to be dancing a galliard, as she comes by.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I eyther. O, these stirring humours make ladies mad with desire
                              •
                            shee comes. My good GENIVS embolden me, boy, the pipe quickly.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        What? will he giue her musicke?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        A second good morrow to my faire mistresse.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Faire seruant, I'le thanke you a day hence, when the date of your salutation comes forth.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        How, like you that answere? is't not admirable?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I were a simple courtier, if I could not admire trifles, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        He talkes, and takes tabacco betweene.
                        Troth, sweet ladie, I shall (Tab.) be prepar'd to giue you thanks for those thankes, and (Tab.) studie more officious, and obsequious regards (Tab.) to your faire beauties. (Tab.) mend the pipe, boy.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I ne're knew tabacco taken as a parenthesis, before.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Fore god (sweete ladie) beleeue it, I doe honour the meanest rush in this chamber, for your loue.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        I, you need not tell mee that, sir, I doe thinke, you doe prize a rush, before my loue.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Is this the wonder of nations?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, by this ayre, pardon me, I said, for your loue, by this light: but it is the accustomed sharpnesse of your ingenuitie, sweete mistresse, to—Masse your violl's new strung, methinkes.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        He takes downe the violl, and playes betweene.
                        Ingenuitie. I see his ignorance will not suffer him to slander her, which he had done most notably, if he had said wit, for ingenuitie, as he meant it.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        By the soule of musicke, ladie (hum, hum.)
                        
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Would we might heare it once.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I doe more adore, and admire your (hum, hum) predominant perfections, then (hum, hum) euer I shall haue power, and facultie to expresse (hum.)
                        
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Vpon the violl de Gambo, you meane?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        It's miserably out of tune, by this hand.
                     
                     
                        
                        SAVI.
                        Nay, rather by the fingers.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        It makes good harmonie with her wit.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Sweet ladie, tune it. Boy, some tabacco.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Tabacco againe? he do's court his mistresse with verie exceeding good changes.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Signior MACILENTE, you take none, sir? (Tab.)
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        No, vnlesse I had a Mistresse, signior, it were a great indecorum for me to take tabacco.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        How like you her wit? (Tab.)
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Her ingenuitie is excellent, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        You see the subiect of her sweet fingers, there? (Tab.) Oh, shee tickles it so, that (Tab.) shee makes it laugh most diuinely; (Tab.) I'le tell you a good iest now, and yourselfe shall say it's a good one: I haue wisht my selfe to be that instrument (I thinke) a thousand times, and not so few, by heauen (Tab.)
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Not vnlike, sir: but how? to be cas'd vp, and hung by on the wall?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, no, sir, to be in vse I assure you; as your iudicious eyes may testifie. (Tab.)
                        
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Here, seruant, if you will play, come.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Instantly, sweet ladie. (Tab.) In good faith, here's most diuine tabacco!
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Nay, I cannot stay to dance after your pipe.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Good! nay, deare ladie, stay: by this sweete smoake, I thinke your wit be all fire. (Tab.)
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        And, hee's the Salamander belongs to it.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Is your tabacco perfum'd, seruant? that you sweare by the sweet smoke?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Still more excellent! (before heauen, and these bright lights) I thinke (Tab.) you are made of ingenuitie, I. (Tab.)
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        True, as your discourse is: Ô abominable!
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Will your ladiship take any?
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        O, peace I pray you; I loue not the breath of a woodcockes head.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Meaning my head, ladie?
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Not altogether so, sir; but (as it were fatall to their follies that thinke to grace themselues with taking tabacco, when they want better entertainment) you see your pipe beares the true forme of a woodcockes head.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O admirable simile!
                        
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        'Tis best leauing of you in admiration, sir.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Are these the admired lady-wits, that hauing so good a plaine-song, can runne no better diuision vpon it? S'heart, all her iests are of the stampe, (March was fifteene yeres ago.) Is this the Comet, Monsieur FASTADIVS, that your gallants wonder at so?
                     
                     
                        
                        FAST.
                        Hart of a gentleman, to neglect mee afore presence thus! Sweet sir, I beseech you be silent in my disgrace. By the Muses, I was neuer in so vile a humour in my life, and her wit was at the 
                              •
                           loud too. Report it not for a million, good sir; let me be so farre endear'd to your loue.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              What followes next, signior CORDATVS? this gallants humour is almost spent, me thinkes, it ebbes apace, with this contrarie breath of his mistresse.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, but it will 
                                    •
                                 low againe for all this, till there come a generall drought of humour among all our actors, and then, I feare not but his wil fall as low as any. See, who presents himselfe here!
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              What, i'the old case?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Yfaith, which makes it, the more pittifull, you vnderstand where the Scene is?
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act IIII.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     FALLACE. FVNGOSO.
                     
                        WHy, are you so melancholy, brother?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I am not melancholy, I thanke you, sister.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Why are you not merrie then? there are but two of vs in all the world, and if wee should not bee comforts one to another, god helpe vs.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Faith, I cannot tell, sister, but if a man had any true melancholy in him, it would make him melancholy, to see his yeomanly father cut his neighbours throats, to make his sonne a gentleman: and yet when he has cut 'hem, he will see his sonnes throat cut too, ere he make him a true gentleman indeed, before death cut his owne throat. I must bee the first head of our house, and yet he will not giue me the head till I bee made so. Is any man term'd a gentleman that is not alwayes i'the fashion? I would know but that.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        If you bee melancholy for that, brother, I thinke I haue as much cause to bee melancholy, as one: for I'le be sworne, I liue as little in the fashion, as any woman in London. By the faith of a Gentlewoman, (beast that I am to say it) I ha'not one friend i'the world besides my husband. When saw you master FASTIDIVS BRISKE, brother?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        But a while since, sister, I thinke: I know not well in truth. By this hand, I could fight with all my heart, me thinkes.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Nay, good brother, be not resolute.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I sent him a letter, and he writes me no answere neyther.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Oh, sweete FASTIDIVS BRISKE! Ô fine courtier! thou art hee mak'st me sigh, and say, how blessed is that woman that hath a courtier to her husband! and how miserable a dame shee is, that hath neyther

husband, nor friend i' the court! O, sweet FASTIDIVS! Ô, fine courtier! How comely he bowes him in his court'sie! how full hee hits a woman betweene the lips when hee kisses! how vpright hee sits at the table! how daintily he carues! how sweetly he talkes, and tels newes of this lord, and of that lady! how cleanely he wipes his spoone, at euery spoonfull of any whit-meat he eates, and what a neat case of pick-tooths he carries about him, still! O, sweet FASTIDIVS! Ô, fine courtier!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene II.
                     DELIRO, MVSICIANS, MACILENTE, FVNGOSO.
                     
                        SEe, yonder shee is, gentlemen. Now (as euer you'll beare the name of musicians) touch your instruments sweetly, shee has a delicate eare, I tell you: play not a false note, I beseech you.
                     
                     
                        MVSI.
                        Feare not, siguior DELIRO.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        O, begin, begin, some sprightly thing: Lord, how my imagination labours with the successe of it. Well said, good yfaith! heauen grant it please her. I'le not be seene, for then shee'le be sure to dislike it.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Hey—da! this is excellent! I'le lay my life, this is my husbands dotage. I thought so; nay, neuer play peeke-boe with me, I know, you doe nothing but studie how to anger me, sir.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Anger thee, sweet wife? why didst thou not send for musicians to supper last night, thy selfe?
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        To supper, sir? now, come vp to supper, I beseech you: as though there were no difference between supper time, when folkes should be merry, and this time when they would be melancholy? I would neuer take vpon me to take a wife, if I had no more iudgement to please her.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Be pleas'd, sweet wife, and they shall ha' done: and would to fate, my life were done, if I can neuer please thee.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Saue you, lady, where is master DELIRO?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Here, master MACILENTE: you are welcome from court, sir; no doubt you haue beene grac't exceedingly of master BRISKES Mistris, and the rest of the ladies, for his sake?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Alas, the poore phantasticke! hee's scarce knowne
                        To any lady there; and those that know him,
                        Know him the simplest man of all they know:
                        De
                              •
                           ide, and play vpon his amorous humours,
                        Though he but apishly doth imitate
                        The gallant'st courtiers, kissing ladies pumps.
                        Holding the cloth for them, praising their wits,
                        And seruilely obseruing euery one,
                        May doe them pleasure: fearefull to be seene
                        With any man (though he be ne're so worthy)
                        
                        That's not in grace with some, that are the greatest.
                        Thus courtiers doe, and these he counterfeits.
                        But sets not such a sightly carriage
                        Vpon their vanities, as they themselues;
                        And therefore they despise him: for indeed
                        Hee's like the Zani, to a tumbler,
                        That tries tricks after him, to make men laugh.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Here's an vnthankfull spitefull wretch! the good gentleman vouchsaft to make him his companion (because my husband put him into a few rags) and now see, how the vnrude rascall back-bites him!
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Is he no more grac't amongst 'hem, then? say you?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Faith, like a pawne, at Chesse: fills vp a roome, that's all.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        O monster of men! can the earth beare such an e
                              •
                           uious caytiffe?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Well, I repent me, I e're credited him so much: but (now I see what he is, and that his masking vizor is off) I'le forbeare him no longer. All his lands are morgag'd to me, and forfeited: besides, I haue bonds of his in my hand, for the receit of now fifty pound, now a hundred, now two hundred: still, as he has had a fan but wagg'd at him, he would be in a new sute. Well, I'le salute him by a Sergeant, the next time I see him, yfaith, I'le sute him.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, you may soone see him, sir, for hee is to meet signior PVNTARVOLO at a Notaries, by the Exchange, presently: where he meanes to take vp, vpon returne—
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Now, out vpon thee, IVDAS; canst thou not be content to back-bite thy friend, but thou must betray him? wilt thou seeke the vndoing of any man? and of such a man too? and will you, sir, get your liuing by the counsell of traytors?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Deare wife, haue patience.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        The house will fall, the ground will open, and swallow vs: I'le not bīde here, for all the gold, and siluer in heauen.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        O, good MACILENTE, let's follow and appease her, or the peace of my life is at an end.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Now pease, and not peace, feed that life, whose head bangs so heauily ouer a womans manger.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        
                           Deliro follow's his wife.
                        Helpe me, brother: 'ods body, and you come here, I'le doe my selfe a mischiefe.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Nay, heare me, sweet wife, vnlesse thou wilt haue mee goe, I will not goe.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Tut, you shall ne're ha' that vantage of me, to say, you are vndone by me: I'le not bid you stay, I. Brother, sweet brother, here's foure angels, I'le giue you toward your sute: for the loue of gentry, and as euer you came of christen creature, make haste to the water fide (you know where Master FASTIDIVS vses to land) and giue him warning of my husbands malitious intent; & tel him of that lea
                              •
                           e rascals trechery: O heuens!

how my flesh rises at him! nay, sweet brother, make haste: you may say, I vvould haue writ to him, but that necessitie of the time would not permit. He cannot choose but take it extraordinarily from me: and commend me, to him, good brother, say, I sent you.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Let me see, these foure angels, and then, fortie shillings more I can borrow on my gowne in Fetter-lane. Well, I will goe presently, say on my sute, pay as much money as I haue, and sweare my selfe into credit vvith my taylor, for the rest.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Deliro, and Macilente, passe ouer the stage.
                        O, on my soule you wrong her, MACILENTE,
                        Though shee be froward, yet I know shee is honest.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Well, then haue I no iudgement: would any vvoman (but one that were wild in her affections) haue broke out into that immodest and violent passion against her husband? or is't possible—
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        If you loue me, forbeare; all the arguments i' the world shall neuer wrest my heart to beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              How like you the decyphering of his dotage?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              O, strangely! and of the others enuie too, that labours so seriously to set debate betwixt a man, and his wife. Stay, here comes the knight aduenturer.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              I, and his scriuener vvith him.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene III.
                     PVNTARVOLO, NOTARIE, CARLO, SERVANTS.
                     
                        I Wonder, Monsieur FASTIDIVS comes not! but, NOTARIE, if thou please to draw the indentures the vvhile, I will giue thee thy instructions.
                     
                     
                        NOTA.
                        With all my heart, sir; and I'le fall in hand with 'he
                              •
                            presently.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Well then, first, the summe is to be vnderstood.
                     
                     
                        NOTA.
                        Good, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Next, our seuerall appellations, and character of my dog, and cat, must be knowne: shew him the cat, sirrah.
                     
                     
                        NOTA.
                        So, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Then, that the intended bound, is the Turkes court in Constantinople: the time limited for our returne, a yeere: and that if either of vs miscarry, the whole venter is lost. These are generall, conceiu'st thou? or if either of vs turne Turke.
                        
                     
                     
                        NOTA.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Now for particulars: That I may make my trauails by sea or land, to my best liking: and that (hyring a coach for my selfe) it shall bee lawfull for my dog, or cat, or both, to ride with me in the said coach.
                     
                     
                        
                        NOT.
                        Very good, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        That I may choose to giue my dogge, or cat fish, for feare of bones: or any other nutriment, that (by the iudgement of the most autenticall physicians, where I trauaile) shall be thought dangerous.
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        Well, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        That (after the receit of his monie) he shall neyther in his own person, nor any other, eyther by direct or indirect meanes, as magicke, witchcraft, or other such exoticke artes, attempt, practise, or complot a
                           
                              •
                           iething, to the preiudice of mee, my dogge, or my cat: Neyther shall I vse the helpe of any such forceries, or enchantments, as vnctious, to make our skinnes impenetrable, or to trauaile inuisible by vertue of a powder, or a ring, or to hang any three-forked charme about my dogges necke, secretly conuey'd into his collar: (vnderstand you?) but that all be performed, sincerely, without fraud, or imposture.
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        So, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        That (for testimonie of the performance) my selfe am to bring thence a T
                                 •
                              rkes mustachio, my dogge a Gracian hares lip, and my cat the traine, or taile of a Thracian rat.
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        'Tis done, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        'Tis said, sir, not done, sir: but forward. That vpon my returne, and landing on the Tower-wharfe, with the aforesaid testimonie, I am to receiue fiue for one, according to the proportion of the summes put forth.
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        Well, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        Prouided, that if before our departure, or setting forth, either my selfe, or these be visited with sicknesse, or any other casuall euent, so that the whole course of the aduenture bee hindered, thereby; that then, he is to returne, and I am to receiue the prenominated proportion, vpon faire and equall termes.
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        Verie good, sir, is this all?
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        It is all, sir: and dispatch them, good NOT ARIE.
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        As fast as is possible, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        O, CARLO! welcome: saw you Monsieur BRISKE?
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Not I: did he appoint you, to meet here?
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        I, and I muse he should be so tardie: hee is to take an hundred pounds of mee in venter, if he maintaine his promise.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Is his houre past?
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        Not yet, but it comes on apace.
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Tut, be not iealous of him: he will sooner breake all the commandements, then his houre, vpon my life, in such a case trust him.
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        Me thinkes, CARLO, you looke verie smooth! ha?
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        Why, I come but now from a hot-house, I must needes looke smooth.
                     
                     
                        PVN.
                        From a hot-house!
                     
                     
                        CAR.
                        I, doo you make a wonder on't? why it's your only physicke.

Let a man sweate once a weeke in a hothouse, and be well rub'd, froted, with a good plumpe juicie wench, and sweet linnen: hee shall ne're ha' the poxe.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        What, the French poxe?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        The French poxe! our poxe. S'bloud we haue 'hem in as good forme as they, man: what?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Let mee perish, but thou art a salt one! was your new-created gallant there with you? SOGLIARDO?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, porpuse! hang him, no: hee's a lieger at Hornes ordinarie yonder: his villanous GANIMEDE, and he ha' beene droning a tabacco pipe there, euer sin' yesterday no one.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Who? signior TRIPARTITE, that would giue my dogge the Whiffe?
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, hee. They haue hir'd a chamber, and all priuate to practise in, for the making of the Pato
                                 ••
                              
                           , the Receit reciprocall, and a number of other mysteries, not yet extant. I brought some dozen, or twentie gallants this morning to view 'hem (as you'ld doe a piece of Perspectiue) in at a key-hole: and there wee might see SOGLIARDO sit in a chaire, holding his snowt vp like a sow vnder an apple-tree, while th' other open'd his nostrils with a poking-sticke, to giue the smoke a more free deliuerie. They had spit some three, or fourescore ounces betweene 'hem, afore we came away.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        How! spit three, or fourescore ounces?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, and preseru'd it in porrengers; as a barber does his bloud▪ when he opens a veine.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Out, Pagan: how dost thou open the veine of thy friend?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Friend? Is there any such foolish thing i'the world? ha? S'lid I ne're rellisht it yet.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Thy humour is the more dangerous.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        No, not a whit, Signior: Tut, a man must keepe time in all. I can oyle my tongue when I meet him next, and looke with a good slicke fore-head; 'twill take away all soyle of suspicion, and that's ynough: what LYNCEVS can see my heart? Pish, the title of a friend, it's a vaine idle thing, only venerable among fooles: you shall not haue one that has any opinion of wit affect it.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene IIII.
                     DELIRO, MACILENTE.
                     To them.
                     
                        SAue you, good sir PVNTARVOLO.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Signior DELIRO! welcome.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Pray you, sir, did you see Master FASTIDIVS BRISKE? I heard he was to meet your worship here.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Your heard no sigment, sir, I doe expect him at euery pulse of my watch.
                     
                     
                        
                        DELI.
                        In good time, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        There's a fellow now, lookes like one of the Patricians of Sparta, mary his wit's after tenne i'the hundred. A good bloud-hound, a close-mouth'd dogge, he followes the sent well, mary he's at a fault now, me thinkes.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I should wonder at that creature is free from the danger of thy tongue.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, I cannot abide these limmes of sattin, or rather Sathan indeed, that 'll walke (like the children of darknesse) all day in a melancholy shop, with their pockets full of blankes, readie to swallow vp as manie poore vnthrifts, as come within the verge.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        So! and what hast thou for him that is with him, now?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, (dam' mee) Immortalitie! I'le not meddle with him, the pure element of fire, all spirit, extraction.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        HOW, CARLO? ha, what is he, man?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        A scholler, MACILENTE, doe you not know him? a lanke raw-bon'd anatomie, he walkes vp and downe like a charg'd musket, no man dares encounter him: that's his rest there.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        His rest? why has he a forked head?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Pardon me, that's to be suspended, you are too quicke, too apprehensiue.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Troth (now I thinke on't) I'le deferre it till some other time.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Not, by any meanes, signior, you shall not lose this opportunitie, he will be here presently now.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Yes saith, MACILENTE, 'tis best. For looke you, sir, I shall so exceedingly offend my wife in't, that—
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Your wife? now for shame lose these thoughts, and become the master of your owne spirits. Should I (if I had a wife) suffer my selfe to be thus passionately carried (to and fro) with the streame of her humour? and neglect my deepest affaires, to serue her affections? S'light I would geld my selfe first.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        O but, signior, had you such a wife as mine is, you would—
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Such a wife? Now hate mee, sir, if euer I discern'd any wonder in your wife, yet, with all the speculation I haue: I haue seene some that ha' beene thought fairer then she, in my time; and I haue seene those, ha' not been altogether so tall, esteem'd properer women; and I haue seen lesse noses grow vpon sweeter faces, that haue done verie well too, in my iudgement: but in good faith, signior, for all this, the gentlewoman is a good pretie proud hard-fauour'd thing, mary not so peerelessely to bee doted vpon, I must confesse: nay, be not angrie.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Well, sir, (how euer you please to forget your selfe) I haue not deseru'd to bee thus plai'd vpon, but henceforth, pray you forbeare my house, for I can but faintly endure the fauour of his breath at my table, that shall thus iade me for my courtesies.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Nay, then, signior, let me tell you, your wife is no proper woman,

and, by my life, I suspect her honestie, that's more, which you may likewise suspect (if you please:) doe you see? Ile vrge you to nothing, against your appetite, but if you please, you may suspect it.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Good, sir.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Good sir? Now horne vpon horne pursue thee, thou blinde egregious dotard.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, you shall heare him speake like ennie. Signior MACILENTE, you saw monsieur BRISKE lately? I heard you were with him at court.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I, BVFFONE, I was with him.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        And how is he respected there? (I know youle deale ingenuously with vs) is he made of amongst the sweeter sort of gallants?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Faith I, his ciuet and his casting-glasse,
                        Haue helpt him to a place amongst the rest:
                        And there, his Seniors giue him good sleight lookes,
                        After their garbe, smile, and salute in French
                        
                        With some new complement.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What, is this all?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why say, that they should shew the frothie foole,
                        Such grace, as they pretend comes from the heart,
                        He had a mightie wind-fall out of doubt.
                        Why, all their Graces are not to doe grace
                        To vertue, or desert: but to ride both
                        With their guilt sputres quite breathlesse, from themselues.
                        'Tis now esteem'd Precisianisme in wit;
                        And a disease in nature, to be kind
                        Toward desert, to loue, or seeke good names:
                        Who feeds with a good name? who thriues with louing?
                        Who can prouide feast for his owne desires,
                        With seruing others? ha, ha, ha:
                        'Tis folly, by our wisest worldlings prou'd,
                        (If not to gaine by loue) to be belou'd.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        How like you him? is't not a good spitefull slaue? ha?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Shrewd, shrewd.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Dam'me, I could eat his flesh now: diuine sweet villaine!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Nay, pr'y thee leaue: what's he there?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Who? this i'the starcht beard? it's the dull stiffe knight PVNTARVOLO, man; hee's to trauaile now presently: hee has a good knottie wit, marry he carries little o't out of the land, with him.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        How then?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        He puts it forth in venter, as hee does his monie; vpon the returne of a dogge, and cat.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Is this he?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, this is hee; a good tough gentleman: hee lookes like a shield of brawne, at Shrouetide, out of date, and readie to take his leaue:

or a drie poule of ling vpon Easter-eue, that has furnisht the table all Lent, as he has done the citie this last vacation.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Come, you'le neuer leaue your stabbing smile's: I shall ha' you ayming at me with 'hem by and by, but—
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, renounce me then: pure, honest, good deuill, I loue thee aboue the loue of women: I could e'en melt in admiration of thee, now! gods so, looke here, man; Sir DAGONET, and his squire!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene V.
                     SOGLIARDO,  SHIFT.
                     To them.
                     
                        SAue you, my deare GALLANTO'S: nay, come approch, good CAVALIER: pr'y thee (sweet knight) know this gentleman, hee's one that it pleases mee to vse as my good friend, and companion; and therefore doe him good offices: I beseech you, gentles, know him, know him all ouer.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Sir (for signior SOGLIARDO'S sake) let it suffice, I know you.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Why (as I am true gentleman) I thanke you, knight, and it shall suffice. Harke you, sir PVNTARVOLO, you'ld little thinke it; he's as resolute a peece of flesh, as any's i'the world.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Indeed, sir?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Vpon my gentilitie, sir: CARLO, a word with you; Doe you see that same fellow, there?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What? CAVALIER SHIFT?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O, you know him; crie you mercy: before me, I thinke him the tallest man, liuing within the walls of Europe.
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        The walls of Europe! take heed what you say, signior, Europe's a huge thing within the walls.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Tut, (and 'twere as huge againe) I'ld iustifie what I speake. Slid, he swagger'd e'en now in a place where we were: I neuer saw a man doe it more resolute.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Nay, indeede swaggering is a good argument of resolution. Doe you heare this, signior?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I, to my griefe. O, that such muddy flags,
                        For euery drunken flourish, should atchieue
                        The name of manhood; whil'st true perfect valour
                        (Hating to shew it selfe) goes by despis'd!
                        Heart, I doe know now (in a faire iust cause)
                        I dare doe more then he, a thousand times:
                        Why should not they take knowledge of this? ha?
                        And giue my worth allowance before his?
                        Because I cannot swagger! Now the poxe
                        Light on your Pickt-hatch prowesse.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Why, I tell you, sir, he has beene the only Bid-stand that euer
kept New-market, Salisbury-plaine, Hockley i'the hole, Gads-Hill; all the
high places of any request: he has had his mares and his geldings, he, ha'
been worth fortie, threescore, a hundred pound a horse, would ha' sprung
you ouer hedge, and ditch, like your grey-hound, he has done fiue hundred
robberies in his time, more or lesse, I assure you.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        What? and scapt?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Scapt! yfaith I: he has broken the jayle when he has beene in
yrons, and yrons; and beene out, and in againe; and out, and in; fortie
times, and not so few, he.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        A fit trumpet, to proclaime such a person.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        But can this be possible?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Why, 'tis nothing, sir, when a man giues his affections to it.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Good PYLADES, discourse a robberie, or two, to satisfie these gentlemen of thy worth.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Pardon me, my deare ORESTES: Causes haue their quiddits, and 'tis ill iesting with bell-ropes.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        How? PYLADES, and ORESTES?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I, he is my PYLADES, and I am his ORESTES: how like you the conceit?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, it's an old stale enterlude deuice: No, I'le giue you names my selfe, looke you, he shall be your IVDAS, and you shall bee his Elder tree, to hang on.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Nay, rather, let him be captaine POD, and this his Motion; for he does nothing but shew him.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Excellent: or thus, you shall bee HOLDEN, and hee your Camel.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        You doe not meane to ride, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Faith, let me end it for you, gallants: you shall be his Countenance, and he your Resolution.
                        
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Troth, that's pretty: how say you, Caualier, shalt be so?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, I, most voices.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Faith, I am easily yeelding to any good impressions.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Then giue hands, good Resolution.
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Masse, he cannot say, good Countenance, now (properly) to him againe.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Yes, by an irony.
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, sir, the countenance of Resolution should, as he is, be altogether grim, and vnpleasant.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                     Act IIII. Scene VI.
                     
                        FASTIDIVS BRISKE.
                        GOod houres make musicke with your mirth, gentlemen, and keepe time to your humours: how now, CARLO?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Monsieur BRISKE! many a long looke haue I extended for you, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Good faith, I must craue pardon; I was inuited this morning ere
I was out of my bed, by a beuie of ladies, to a banquet: whence it was
almost one of HERCVLES labours for me, to come away, but that the respect
of my promise did so preuaile with me: I know they'le take it very
ill, especially one that gaue me this bracelet of her haire but ouer-night,
and this pearle another gaue me from her fore-head, mary, shee—what?
are the writings ready?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I will send my man to know. Sirrah, goe you to the Notaries,
and learne if he be readie: leaue the dog, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        And how does my rare qualified friend, SOGLIARDO? oh, signior MACILENTE! by
these eyes, I saw you not, I had saluted you sooner
else, o'my troth: I hope, sir, I may presume vpon you, that you will
not diuulge my late checke, or disgrace, indeed, sir.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        You may, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        S'heart, he knowes some notorious iest by this gull, that hee hath him so obsequious.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Monsieur FASTIDIVS, doe you see this fellow there? does he
not looke like a clowne? would you thinke there's any thing in him?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Anything in him? beshrow me, I; the fellow hath a good ingenious face.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        By this element, he is an ingenious tall man, as euer swagger'd about London: he, and I, call Countenance, and Resolution, but his name is CAVALIER SHIFT.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        CAVALIER, you knew signior CLOG, that was hang'd for the robbery at Harrow o'the hill?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Knew him, sir! why, 'twas hee gaue all the directions for the action.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        How? was't your proiect, sir?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Pardon me, Countenance, you doe me some wrong to make that
publike, which I imparted to you in priuate.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Gods will! here are none but friends, Resolution.
                        
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        That's all one; things of consequence must haue their respects, where, how, and to whom.
Yes, sir, hee shewed himselfe a true CLOG in the coherence of that affaire, sir; for if he had manag'd matters
as they were corroborated to him, it had beene better for him by a fortie, or fiftie score of pounds, sir, and he himselfe might
ha' liu'd (in despight

of fates) to haue fed on wood-cocks, with the rest: but it was his heauie fortune to sinke, poore CLOG, and therefore talke no more of him.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Why, had he more aiders, then?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O god, sir! I, there were some present there, that were the nine Worthies to him, yfaith.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        I, sir, I can satisfie you at more conuenient conference: but (for mine owne part) I haue now reconcil'd my selfe to other courses, and professe a liuing out of my other qualities.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Nay, he has left all now (I assure you) and is able to liue like a gentleman, by his quality. By this dogge, hee has the most rare gift in tabacco, that euer you knew.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        S'heart, hee keepes more adoe with this monster, then euer BANKES did with his horse, or the fellow with the elephant.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        He will hang out his picture shortly, in a cloth, you shall see.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O, hee do's manage a quarrell, the best that euer you saw, for termes, and circumstances.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Good faith, signior, (now you speake of a quarrell) I'le acquaint you with a difference, that happened betweene a gallant, and my selfe sir PVNTARVOLO, you know him if I should name him, signior LVCVLENTO.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        LVCVLENTO! what in-auspicious chance interpos'd it selfe to your two loues?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Faith, sir, the same that sundred AGAMEMNON, and great THETIS sonne; but let the cause escape, sir: Hee sent mee a challenge (mict with some few braues) which I restor'd, and in fine we met. Now indeed, sir, (I must tell you) he did offer at first very desperately, but without iudgement: for looke you, sir. I cast my selfe into this figure: now he, comes violently on, and withall aduancing his rapier to strike, I thought to haue tooke his arme (for he had left his whole body to my election, and I was sure he could not recouer his guard) Sir, I mist my purpose in his arme, rasht his doublet sleeue, ran him close by the left cheek, and through his haire. He againe, lights me here (I had on, a gold cable hatband, then new come vp, which I wore about a murrey French hat I had) cuts my hatband (and yet it was massie, gold-smithes worke) cuts my brimmes, which by good fortune (being thicke embrodered with gold-twist, and spangles) disappointed the force of the blow: Neuerthelesse, it graz'd on my shoulder, takes me away sixe purles of an Italian cut-worke band I wore (cost me three pound in the exchange, but three daies before.)
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        This was a strange encounter!
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nay, you shall heare, sir: with this wee both fell out, and breath'd. Now (vpon the second signe of his assault) I betooke me to the former manner of my defence; he (on the other side) abandon'd his body to the same danger, as before, and followes me still with blowes: But I (being loth to take the deadly aduantage that lay before mee of his left side) made a kind of stramazoun, ranne him vp to the hilts, through the

doublet, through the shirt, and yet mist the skin. Hee (making a reuerse blow) falls vpon my emboss'd girdle (I had throwne off the hangers a little before) strikes off a skirt of a thick—lac't sattin doublet I had (lin'd with some foure taffataes) cuts off two panes, embrodered with pearle, rends through the drawings out of tissew, enters the linings, and skips the flesh.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I wonder he speakes not of his wrought shirt!
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Here (in the opinion of mutuall dammage) wee paus'd: but (ere I proceed) I must tell you, signior, that (in this last encounter) not hauing leisure to put off my siluer spurres, one of the rowels catcht hold of the ru
                              ••
                           le of my boot, and (being Spanish leather, and subiect to teare) ouerthrowes me, rends me two paire of silke stockings (that I put on, being somewhat a raw morning, a peach colour and another) and strikes me some halfe inch deepe into the side of the calfe; Hee (seeing the bloud come) presently takes horse, and away. I (hauing bound vp my wound with a peece of my wrought shirt)—
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O! comes it in there?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Rid after him, and (lighting at the court-gate, both together) embrac'd, and marcht hand in hand vp into the presence: was not this businesse well carried?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Well? yes, and by this we can gesse what apparell the gentleman wore.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Fore valour, it was a designement begun with much resolution, maintain'd with as much prowesse, and ended with more humanitie. How now, what saies the Notarie?
                        
                     
                     
                        SERV.
                        He saies, he is ready, sir, he staies but your worships pleasure.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Come, we will goe to him, Monsieur. Gentlemen, shall we entreat you to be witnesses?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        You shall entreat me, sir: come Resolution.
                        
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        I follow you, good Countenance.
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Come, signior, come, come.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, that there should be fortune
                        To clothe these men, so naked in desert!
                        And that the iust storme of a wretched life,
                        Beats 'hem not ragged, for their wretched soules,
                        And, since as fruitlesse, euen as black as coales!
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              Why, but signior, how comes it, that FVNGOSO appear'd not with his sisters intelligence, to BRISKE?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Mary, long of the euill angels that she gaue him, who haue indeed tempted the good simple youth, to follow the taile of the fashion, and neglect the imposition of his friends. Behold, here hee comes, very worshipfully attended and with good varietie.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VII.
                     FVNGOSO, TAYLOR, SHOO-MAKER, HABERDASHER.
                     
                        GRamercie, good shoo-maker, I'le put to strings my selfe. Now, sir, let me see, what must you haue for this hat?
                     
                     
                        HABER.
                        Here's the bill, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        How does't become me? well?
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        Excellent, sir, as euer you had any hat in your life.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Nay, you'll say so, all.
                     
                     
                        HABE.
                        In faith, sir, the hat's as good as any man i' this towne can serue you; and will maintayne fashion as long: ne're trust me for a groat else.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Do's it apply well to my sute?
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        Exceeding well, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        How lik'st thou my sute, haberdasher?
                     
                     
                        HABE.
                        By my troth, sir, 'tis very rarely well made, I neuer saw a sute sit better, I can tell, on.
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        Nay, we haue no arte to please our friends, we.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Here, haberdasher, tell this fame.
                     
                     
                        HABE.
                        Good faith, sir, it makes you haue an excellent body.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Nay (beleeue me) I thinke I haue as good a body in clothes, as another.
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        You lack points, to bring your apparell together, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I'le haue points anon: how now? is't right?
                     
                     
                        HABE.
                        Faith, sir, 'tis too little, but vpon farther hopes—Good morrow to you, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Farewell, good haberdasher. Well, now master SNIP, let mee see your bill.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              Me thinkes he discharges his followers too thicke.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, therein he fancily imitates some great man. I warrant you, though he turnes off them, he keepes this taylor, in place of a page, to follow him still.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        This bill is very reasonable, in faith (harke you, master SNIP) Troth, sir, I am not altogether so well furnisht at this present, as I could wish I were, but— If you'le doe mee the fauour to take part in hand, you shall haue all I haue, by this hand—
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        Sir—
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        And, but giue mee credit for the rest, till the beginning of the next terme.
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        O lord, sir—
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Fore god, and by this light, I'le pay you to the vtmost, and

acknowledge my selfe verie deeply engag'd to you, by the courtesie.
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        Why, how much haue you there, sir?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Mary I haue here foure angels, and fifteene shillings of white monie: it's all I haue, as I hope to be blest.
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        You will not faile me, at the next tearme, with the rest.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        No, and I doe, pray heauen, I be hang'd. Let me neuer breathe againe, vpon this mortall stage, as the philosopher cals it. By this aire, and (as I am a gentleman) I'le hold.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              CORD.
                              He were an yron-hearted fellow, in my iudgement, that would not credit him vpon this volley of othes.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        Well, sir, I'le not sticke with any gentleman for a trifle: you know what 'tis, remaines?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I, sir, and I giue you thankes in good faith. O fate! how happie am I made in this good fortune! Well, now I'le goe seeke out Monsieur BRISKE. 'Ods so, I haue forgot ribband for my shooes, and points. Slid, what lucke 's this! how shall I doe? Master SNIPPE, pray let me reduct some two or three shillings for points, and ribband: as I am an honest man, I haue vtterly disfurnisht my selfe, in the default of memorie, pray'le me be beholding to you, it shall come home i'the bill, beleeue me.
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        Faith, sir, I can hardly depart with ready mony, but I'le take vp, and send you some by my boy, presently. What colour'd ribband would you haue?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        What you shall thinke meet i'your iudgement, sir, to my sute.
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        Well, I'le send you some presently.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        And points too, sir?
                     
                     
                        TAIL.
                        And points too, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Good lord! how shall I studie to deserue this kindnesse of you, sir? Pray, let your youth make haste, for I should haue done a businesse an houre since, that I doubt I shall come too late. Now, in good faith, I am exceeding proud of my sute.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              Doe you obserue the plunges, that this poore gallant is put to (signior) to purchase the fashion?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              I, and to bee still a fashion behinde with the world, that's the sport.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Stay: O here they come, from seal'd, and deliuer'd.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VIII.
                     PVNTARVOLO, FASTIDIVS BRISKE, SERVANTS CARLO, SOGLIARDO, MACILENTE, SHIFT. FVNGOSO.  
                     To them.
                     
                        WEll, now my whole venter is forth, I will resolue to depart shortly.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Faith, sir PVNTARVOLO, goe to the court, and take leaue of the ladies first.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I care not, if it be this afternoones labour. Where is CARLO?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Here he comes.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Faith, gallants, I am perswading this gentleman to turne courtier. He is a man of faire reuenue, and his estate will beare the charge well. Besides, for his other gifts of the minde, or so, why, they are as nature lent him 'hem, pure, simple, without any artificiall drug or mixture of these two thred-bare beggarly qualities, learning, and knowledge, and therefore the more accommodate, and genuine. Now, for the life it selfe—
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, the most celestiall, and full of wonder, and delight, that can be imagin'd, signior, beyond all thought, and apprehension of pleasure! A man liues there, in that diuine rapture, that hee will thinke himselfe i'the ninth heauen for the time, and lose all sense of mortalitie whatsoeuer; when he shall behold such glorious (and almost immortall) beauties, heare such angelicall and harmonious voyces, discourse with such flowing and ambrosiam spirits, whose wits are as suddaine as lightning, and humorous as nectar, Oh: it makes a man al quintessence, and flame, & lifts him vp (in a moment) to the verie christall crowne of the skie, where (houering in the strength of his imagination) he shall behold all the delights of the HESPERIDES, the Insulae Fortunatae, ADONIS gardens, Tempe or what else (condfin'd within the amplest verge of poesie) to bee meere vmbrae, and imperfect figures, conferr'd with the most essentiall felicitie of your court.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Well, this Encomion was not extemporall, it came too perfectly off.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Besides, sir, you shall neuer need to goe to a hot-house, you shall sweat there with courting your mistresse, or losing your monie at primero, as well as in all the stones in Sweden. Mary this, sir, you must euer be sure to carrie a good strong perfume about you, that your mistresse dogge may smell you out amongst the rest; and (in making loue to her) neuer feare to be out: for you may haue a pipe of tabacco, or a base violl shall hang o'the wall, of purpose, will put you in presently. The trickes your Resolution has taught you in tabacco, (the whisse, and those sleights) will stand you in verie good ornament there?
                     
                     
                        
                        FAST.
                        I, to some perhaps: but, and hee should come to my mistresse with tabacco (this gentleman knowes) shee'ld reply vpon him, yfaith. O, (by this bright sunne) shee has the most acute, readie, and facetious wit, that—tut there's no spirit able to stand her. You can report it, signior, you haue seene her?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Then can hee report no lesse, out of his iudgement, I assure him.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Troth, I like her well enough, but shee's too selfe-conceited, me thinkes.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I indeed, shee's a little too selfe conceited, and 'twere not for that humour, she were the most-to-be-admir'd ladie in the world.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Indeed, it is a humour that takes from her other excellencies.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, it may easily be made to forsake her, in my thought.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Easily, sir? then are all impossibilities easie.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        You conclude too quicke vpon me, signior, what will you say, if I make it so perspicuously appeare now, that your selfe shall confesse nothing more possible?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Mary, I will say, I will both applaud, and admire you for it.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        And I will second him, in the admiration.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        They whisper.
                        Why, I'le shew you, gentlemen. CARLO, come hither.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Good faith, I haue a great humor to the court: what thinkes my Resolution? shall I aduenture?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Troth, Countenance, as you please; the place is a place of good reputation, and capacitie.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O, my trickes in tabacco (as CARLO sayes) will shew excellent there.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Why, you may goe with these gentlemen now, and see fashions: and after, as you shall see correspondence.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        You say true. You will goe with me, Resolution?
                        
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        I will meet you, Countenance, about three or foure of clocke, but, to say to goe with you I cannot, for (as I am APPLE-IOHN) I am to goe before the Cocatrice you saw this morning, and therefore pray', present mee excus'd, good Countenance.
                        
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Farewell, good Resolution, but faile not to meet.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        As I liue.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Admirably excellent!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        If you can but perswade SOGLIARDO to court, there's all now.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O let me alone, that's my taske.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Now, by wit, MACILENTE, it's aboue measure excellent: 'twill be the onely court-exploit that euer prou'd courtier ingenious.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Vpon my soule, it puts the ladie quite out of her humour, and we shall laugh with iudgement.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Come, the gentleman was of himselfe resolu'd to goe with you, afore I mou'd it.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why then, gallants, you two, and CARLO, goe afore to

prepare the iest: SOGLIARDO and I will come some while after you.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Pardon me, I am not for court.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        That's true: CARLO comes not at court indeed. Well, you shall leaue it to the facultie of monsieur BRISKE, and my selfe, vpon our liues wee will manage it happily. CARLO shall bespeake supper, at the miter, against we come backe: where we will meet, and dimple our cheekes with laughter at the successe.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, but will you all promise to come?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        My selfe shall manfrede it for them: he that failes, let his reputation lye vnder the lash of thy tongue.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Gods so, looke who comes here!
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        What, nephew!
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Vncle, god saue you; did you see a gentleman, one monsieur BRISKE? a Courtier, he goes in such a sute as I doe.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Here is the gentleman, nephew, but not in such a sute.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        He swounes.
                         Another sute!
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        How now, nephew?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Would you speake to me, sir?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I, when he has recouered himselfe: poore poll.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Some Rosa-solis.
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        How now, signior?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I am not well, sir.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, this it is, to dogge the fashion.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Nay, come gentlemen, remember your affaires; his disease is nothing but the fluxe of apparell.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Sirs, returne to the lodging, keepe the cat safe; I'le be the dogs Guardian my selfe.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Nephew, will you goe to court with vs? these gentlemen and I are for the court: nay, be not so melancholy.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        By gods lid, I thinke no man in christendome has that rascally fortune that I haue.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Faith, your sute is well enough, signior.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Nay, not for that, I protest; but I had an errand to Monsieur FASTIDIVS, and I haue forgot it.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, goe along to court with vs, and remember it, come. Gentlemen, you three take one boat, and SOGLIARDO and I will take another: we shall be there instantly.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Content: good sir, vouchsafe vs your pleasance.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Farewell, CARLO; remember.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I warrant you: would I had one of Kemps shooes to throw after you.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Good Fortune will close the eyes of our iest, feare not: and we shall frollicke.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              This MACILENTE, signior, begins to bee more sociable on a suddaine, mee thinkes, then hee was before: there's some portent in't, I beleeue.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              O, hee's a fellow of a strange nature. Now do's hee (in this calme of his humour) plot, and store vp a world of malicious thoughts in his braine, till hee is so full with 'hem, that you shall see the very torrent of his enuie breake forth like a land-floud: and, against the course of all their affections oppose it selfe so violently, that you will almost haue wonder to thinke, how 'tis possible the current of their dispositions shall receiue so quick, and strong an alteration.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              I mary, sir, this is that, on which my expectation has dwelt al this while: for I must tel you, signior (though I was loth to interrupt the Scene) yet I made it a question in mine owne priuate discourse, how he should properly call it, Euery man out of his Humour, when I saw all his actors so strongly pursue, and continue their humours?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Why, therein his art appeares most full of lustre, and approcheth neerest the life: especially, when in the flame, and height of their humours, they are laid flat, it fils the eye better, and with more contentment. How tedious a sight were it to behold a proud exalted tree lopt, and cut downe by degrees, when it might bee feld in a moment? and to set the axe to it before it came to that pride, and fulnesse, were, as not to haue it grow.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Well, I shall long till I see this fall, you talke of.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              To helpe your longing, signior, let your imagination be swifter them a paire of oares: and by this, suppose PVNTARVOLO, BRISKE, FVNGOSO, and the dogge arriu'd at the court gate, and going vp to the great chamber. MACILENTE, and SOGLIARDO, wee'le leaue them on the water, till possibilitie and naturall meanes may land 'hem. Here come the gallants, now prepare your expectation.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act V.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     PVNTARVOLO, FASTIDIVS BRISKE, FVNGOSO, GROOME, MACILENTE, SOGLIARDO.
                     
                        COme, gentles. Signior, you are sufficiently instructed.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Who, I, sir?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        No, this gentleman. But stay, I take thought how to bestow my dogge, he is no competent attendant for the presence.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Masse, that's true indeed, knight, you must not carrie him into the presence.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I know it, and I (like a dull beast) forgot to bring one of my cormorants to attend me.
                     
                     
                        
                        FAST.
                        Why, you're best leaue him at the porters lodge.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Not so: his worth is too well knowne amongst them, to bee forth-comming.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Slight, how'll you doe then?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I must leaue him with one, that is ignorant of his qualitie, if I will haue him to be safe. And see! Here comes one that wil carrie coales, ergo, will hold my dogge. My honest friend, may I commit the tuition of this dogge to thy prudent care?
                     
                     
                        GROO.
                        You may, if you please, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Pray thee let me find thee here at my returne: it shall not bee long, till I will ease thee of thy imployment, and please thee. Forth, gentles.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Why, but will you leaue him with so slight command, and infirse no more charge, vpon the fellow?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Charge? no; there were no policie in that: that were to let him know the value of the gemme he holds, and so, to tempt fraile nature against her disposition. No, pray thee let thy honestie be sweet, as it shall be short.
                     
                     
                        GROO.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        But harke you gallants, and chiefely Monsieur BRISKE. When we come in eye-shot, or presence of this ladie, let not other matters carrie vs from our proiect: but (if wee can) single her forth to some place—
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        And bee not too suddaine, but let the deuice induce it selfe with good circumstance. On.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Is this the way? good truth, here be fine hangings.
                     
                     
                        GROO.
                        Honestie sweet, and short? mary it shall, sir, doubt you not: for euen at this instant if one would giue mee twentie pounds, I would not deliuer him; there's for the sweet; but now, if any man come offer me but two pence, he shall haue him; there's for the short now. Slid, what a mad humorous gentleman is this to leaue his dogge with me? I could run away with him now, and hee were worth any thing.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Come on, signior, now prepare to court this all-witted ladie, most naturally, and like your selfe.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Faith, and you say the word, I'le begin to her in tabacco.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, fie on't: no: you shall begin with, How does my sweet ladie? or, Why are you so melancholy, Madame? though shee bee verie merrie, it's all one: be sure to kisse your hand often inough; pray for her health, and tell her, how, more then most faire she is. Screw your face at one side thus, and protest; let her fleere, and looke a skaunce, and hide her teeth with her fanne, when she laughs a fit, to bring her into more matter, that's nothing: you must talke forward (though it be without sense, so it be without blushing) 'tis most court-like, and well.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        But shall I not vse tabacco at all?
                     
                     
                        
                        MACI.
                        O, by no meanes, 'twill but make your breath suspected, and that you vse it onely to confound the rankenesse of that.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Nay, I'le be aduis'd, sir, by my friends.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Gods my life, see, where sir PVNTARS dog is.
                     
                     
                        GROO.
                        I would the gentleman would returne for his follower here, I'le leaue him to his fortunes else.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        S'heart, 'twere the onely true iest in the world to poison him now: ha? by this hand, I'le doe it, if I could but get him of the fellow. Signior SOGLIARDO, walke aside, and thinke vpon some deuice, to entertaine the ladie with.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        So I doe, sir.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        How now, mine honest friend? whose dog-keeper art thou?
                     
                     
                        GROO.
                        Dogge-keeper, sir? I hope I scorne that yfaith.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why? do'st thou not keepe a dogge?
                     
                     
                        GROO.
                        Hee throwes off the dogge.
                        Sir, now I doe, and now I doe not: I thinke this be sweet and short. Make me his dogge-keeper?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        This is excellent, aboue expectation: nay stay, sir, you'ld bee trauailing, but I'le giue you a dramme shall shorten your voyage: here. So sir, I'le be bold to take my leaue of you. Now to the Turkes court in the deuils name, for you shall neuer goe o'gods name. SOGLIARDO, come.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I ha' 't ysaith now, will sting it.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Take heed you leese it not, signior, ere you come there: preserue it.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              CORD.
                              How like you this first exploit of his?
                           
                           
                              MITIS.
                              O, a piece of true enuie: but I expect the issue of the other deuice.
                           
                           
                              CORD.
                              Here they come, will make it appeare.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene II.
                     SAVIOLINA, PVNTARVOLO, FASTIDIVS BRISKE, FVNGOSO, MACILENTE, SOGLIARDO.  
                     To them.
                     
                        WHy, I thought, sir PVNTARVOLO, you had bin gone your voyage?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Deare, and most amiable ladie, your diuine beauties doe bind me to those offices, that I cannot depart when I would.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        'Tis most court-like spoken, sir: but how might we do to haue a sight of your dogge, and cat?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        His dogge is in the court, ladie.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        And not your cat? how dare you trust her behind you, sir?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Troth, madame, shee hath sore eyes, and shee doth keepe her

chamber: mary I haue left vnder sufficient guard, there are two of my followers to attend her.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        I'le giue you some water for her eyes: when doe you goe, sir?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Certes, sweet ladie, I know not.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        He doth stay the rather, madame, to present you acute iudgement with so courtly, and wel-parted a gentleman, as yet your lady-ship hath neuer seene.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        What's hee, gentle Monsieur BRISKE? not that gentleman?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        No ladie, this is a kinsman to iustice Silence.
                        
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Pray' sir, giue me leaue to report him: he's a gentleman (ladie) of that rare and admirable facultie, as (I protest) I know not his like in Europe: hee is exceedingly valiant, an excellent scholler, and so exactly trauail'd, that hee is able in discourse, to deliuer you a modell of any princes court in the world: speakes the languages with that puritie of phrase, and facilitie of accent, that it breeds astonishment: his wit, the most exuberant, and (aboue wonder) pleasant, of all that euer entred the concaue of this eue.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        'Tis most true, ladie: mary, he is no such excellent proper man.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        His trauailes haue chang'd his complexion, madame.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        O, sir PVNTARVOLO, you must thinke, euery man was not borne to haue my seruant BRISKES feature.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        But that which transcends all, ladie; hee doth so peerelessely imitate any manner of person for gesture, action, passion, or whateuer—
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I, especially a rusticke, or a clowne, madame, that it is not possible for the sharpest-sighted wit (in the world) to discerne any sparkes of the gentleman in him, when he does.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        O, Monsieur BRISKE, be not so tyrannous to confine all wits within the compasse of your owne: not find the sparkes of a gentleman in him, if he be a gentleman?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        No in truth (sweet ladie) I beleeue you cannot.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Doe you beleeue so? why, I can find sparkes of a gentleman in you, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I, he is a gentleman, madame, and a reueller.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Indeed, I thinke I haue seene your ladiship at our reuels.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Like enough, sir: but would I might see this wonder you talke of: may one haue a sight of him, for any reasonable summe?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Yes, madame, he will arriue presently.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        What, and shall we see him clowne it?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        I faith (sweet ladie) that you shall: see, here he comes.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        This is he! pray obserue him, ladie.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Be shrew me, he clownes it properly indeed.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Nay, marke his courtship.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        How does my sweet ladie? hote, and moyst? beautifull and lustie? ha?
                     
                     
                        
                        SAVI.
                        Beautifull, and it please you, sir, but not lustie.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O ho, ladie; it pleases you to say so in truth: and how does my sweet ladie? in health? Bonaroba, quaeso, que nouelles? que nouells? sweet creature.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        O excellent: why gallants, is this hee that cannot bee decipher'd? they were verie bleare-witted, yfaith, that could not discerne the gentleman in him.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        But, doe you, in earnest, ladie?
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Doe I, sir? why, if you had any true court-iudgement in the carriage of his eye, and that inward power that formes his countenance, you might perceiue his counterfeiting as cleere, as the noone-day: Alas— Nay, if you would haue tryed my wit, indeed, you should neuer haue told me he was a gentleman, but presented him for a true clowne indeede; and then haue seene if I could haue decipher'd him.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Fore god, her ladiship sayes true (knight:) but does he not affect the clowne most naturally, mistresse?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        O, shee cannot but affirme that, out of the bountie of her iudgement.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Nay, out of doubt hee does well, for a gentleman, to imitate; but I warrant you, he becomes his natural carriage of the gentleman, much better then his clownerie.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        'Tis strange, in truth, her ladiship should see so farre into him.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I, is't not?
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Faith, as easily as may be: not decipher him, quoth you?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Good sadnesse, I wonder at it!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, has she decipher'd him, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        O, most miraculously, and beyond admiration!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Is't possible?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Shee hath gather'd most infallible signes of the gentleman in him, that's certaine.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Why, gallants, let mee laugh at you, a little: was this your deuice, to trie my iudgement in a gentleman?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Nay, ladie, doe not scorne vs, though you haue this gift of perspicacie aboue others: What if hee should bee no gentleman now, but a clowne indeed, ladie?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        How thinke you of that? would not your ladiship bee out of your humour?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, but shee knowes it is not so.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        What if he were not a man, yee may as well say? nay, if your worships could gull me so, indeed, you were wiser then you are taken for.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        In good faith, ladie, hee is a verie perfect clowne, both by father, and mother: that I'le assure you.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        O, sir, you are verie pleasurable.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Nay, doe but looke on his hand, and that shall resolue you: looke you, ladie, what a palme here is.
                     
                     
                        
                        SOGL.
                        Tut, that was with holding the plough.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        The plough! did you discerne any such thing in him, madame?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Faith no, she saw the gentleman as bright, as at noon-day, she: shee decipher'd him at first.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Troth, I am sorrie your ladiships sight should be so suddainly strooke.
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        O, you're goodly beagles!
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        What, is she gone?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Nay, stay, sweet ladie, que nouelles? que nouelles?
                        
                     
                     
                        SAVI.
                        Out, you foole, you.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Shee's out of her humour yfaith.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Nay, let's follow it while 'tis hot, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Come, on mine honour wee shall make her blush in the presence: my splene is great with laughter.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Your laughter wil be a child of a feeble life, I beleeue, sir. Come, signior, your lookes are too deiected, mee thinkes: why mixe you not mirth with the rest?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        By gods will, this sute frets me at the soule. I'le haue it alter'd to morrow, sure.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. scene III.
                     SHIFT. FASTIDIVS, PVNTARVOLO, SOGLIARDO, FVNGOSO, MACILENTE.
                     
                        To 
                              •
                           im.
                         I Am come to the court, to meet with my Countenance SOGLIARDO: poore men must be glad of such countenance, when they can get no better. Wel. Need may insult vpon a man, but it shal neuer make him despaire of consequence. The world wil say, tis base: tush, base! 'tis base to liue vnder the earth, not base to liue aboue it, by any meanes.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        The poore ladie is most miserably out of her humour, yfaith.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        There was neuer so wittie a iest broken, at the tilt of all the court-wits christen'd.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, this applause taints it, fouly.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I thinke, I did my part in courting. O! Resolution!
                        
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Aye me, my dogge.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Where is hee?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        H
                              •
                           send
                              •
                           aw
                              •
                           y F
                              •
                           ngoso.
                         Gods precious, goe seeke for the fellow, good signior.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Here, here I left him.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, none was here when we came in now, but CAVALIER SHIFT, enquire of him.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Did you see sir PVNTARVOLO'S dogge here, Caualier, since you came?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        His dog sir? he may looke his dog, sir, I saw none of his dog, sir.
                     
                     
                        
                        MACI.
                        Vpon my life, he hath stol'ne your dogge, sir, and beene hir'd to it by some that haue ventur'd with you: you may gesse by his peremptorie answeres.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Not vnlike; for he hath beene a notorious thiefe by his owne confession. Sirrah, where is my dogge?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Charge mee with your dogge, sir? I ha' none of your dog, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Villaine, thou lyest.
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Lie, sir? S'bloud, y' are but a man, sir.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Rogue, and thiefe, restore him.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Take heed, sir PVNTARVOLO, what you doe: heele beare no coales, I can tell you (o' my word.)
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        This is rare.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        It's mar'le hee stabs you not: by this light, he hath stab'd forty, for forty times lesse matter, I can tell you, of my knowledge.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I wil make thee stoope, thou abiect.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Make him stoop, sir! gentlemen, pacifi
                              •
                            him or hee'le be kill'd.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Is he so tall a man?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Tall a man? if you loue his life, stand betwixt 'hem: make him stoope!
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        My dogge, villaine, or I will hang thee: thou hast confest robberies, and other fellonious acts, to this gentleman thy Countenance—
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I'le beare no witnesse.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        And, without my dogge, I will hang thee, for them.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Shift kneeles.
                        What? kneele to thine enemies?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        Pardon me, good sir; god is my witnesse, I neuer did robberie in all my life.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        F
                              •
                           ngoso return'd.
                        O, sir PVNTARVOLO, your dogge lies giuing vp the ghost in the wood-yard.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Heart! is he not dead, yet?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        O, my dog, born to disastrous fortune! pray you conduct me, sir.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        How? did you neuer doe any robberie, in your life?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, this is good: so he swore, sir.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I, I heard him. And did you sweare true, sir?
                     
                     
                        SHIFT.
                        I, (as I hope to be forgiuen, sir) I ne're rob'd any man, I neuer stood by the high-way-side, sir, but only said so, because I would get my selfe a name, and be counted a tall man.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Now out, base viliaco: Thou my Resolution? I thy Countenance? By this light, gentlemen, he hath confest to mee the most inexorable companie of robberies, and damn'd himselfe that he did 'hem; you neuer heard the like: out skoundrell, out, follow me no more, I commaund thee: out of my sight, goe, hence, speake not: I wil not heare thee: away camouccio.
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, how I doe feed vpon this now, and fat my selfe! here were a couple vnexpectedly dishumour'd: well, by this time, I hope, sir PVNTARVOLO and his dog are both out of humour to trauaile. Nay, gentlemen,

why doe you not seeke out the knight, and comfort him? our supper at the Mitre must of necessitie hold to night, if you loue your reputations.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        'Fore god, I am so melancholy for his dogs disaster, but I'le goe.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        Faith, and I may goe too, but I know, I shall be so melancholy.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Tush, melancholy? you must forget that now, and remember you lie at the mercy of a furie: CARLO will racke your sinewes asunder, and raile you to dust, if you come not.
                     
                     GREX.
                     
                        MIT.
                        O, then their feare of CARLO, belike, makes them hold their meeting.
                     
                     
                        COR.
                        I, here he comes: conceiue him but to be enter'd the Mitre, and 'tis enough.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene IIII.
                     CARLO, DRAWER, GEORGE.
                     
                        HOlla: where be these shot-sharkes?
                     
                     
                        DRAW.
                        By and by: you're welcome, good master BVFFONE.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Where's GEORGE? calme GEORGE hither, quickly.
                     
                     
                        DRAW.
                        What wine please you haue, sir? I'le draw you that's neat, master BVFFONE.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Away NEOPHITE, do as I bid thee, bring my deare GEORGE to me: Masse, here he comes.
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Welcome, master CARLO.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What! is supper ready, GEORGE?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        I, sir, almost: will you haue the cloth laid, master CARLO?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, what else? are none of the gallants come, yet?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        None yet, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Stay, take mee with you, GEORGE: let mee haue a good faloyne of porke laid to the fire, presently.
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        It shall, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        And withall, heare you? draw me the biggest shaft you haue, out of the butt you wo
                              •
                            of: away, you know my meaning, GEORGE, quicke.
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Done, sir.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I neuer hungred so much for thing in my life, as I doe to know our gallants successe at court: now is that leane bald-rib MACILENTE, that salt villaine, plotting some mischicuous deuice, and lyes a soking in their frothy humours like a drie crust, till he has drunke 'hem all vp: could the pummise but hold vp his eyes at other mens happines, in any reasonable proportion: S'lid, the slaue were to be lou'd next heauen, aboue honour, wealth, rich fare, apparell, wenches, all the delights of the belly, and the groine, whateuer.
                     
                     
                        
                        GEOR.
                        Here, master CARLO.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Is't right, Boy?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        I, sir, I assure you 'tis right.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        He puts forth the drawers, and shuts the dore.
                        Well said, my deare GEORGE, depart: Come, my small gymblet, you in the false scabberd, away, so. Now to you, sir B
                                 •
                              rgomaster, let's taste of your bountie.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              What, will he deale vpon such quantities of wine, alone?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              You will perceiue that, sir.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Hee sets the two cups asunder, and first drinkes with the 
                              〈◊〉
                           , and pledges with the other.
                        I mary, sir, here's puritie: O, GEORGE, I could bite off his nose for this, now: Sweet rogue, he has drawne Nectar, the very soule of the grape! I'le wash my temples with some on't presently, and drinke some halfe a score draughts; 'twill heat the braine, kindle my imagination, I shall talke nothing but crackers, and fire-worke, to night. So, sir! please you to be here, sir, and I here: So.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              This is worth the obseruation, signior.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL. 1. Cap.
                        
                        Now, sir; here's to you; and I present you with so much of my loue.
                     
                     
                        2. Cap.
                        
                        I take it kindly from you, sir, and will returne you the like proportion: but withall, sir, remembring the merry night wee had at the countesses, you know where, sir.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        By heauen, you put me in minde now of a very necessarie office, which I will propose in your pledge, sir: the health of that honorable countesse, and the sweet lady that sate by her, sir.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        I doe vaile to it with reuerence. And now, signior, with these ladies, I'le be bold to mixe the health of your diuine Mistris.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Doe you know her, sir?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        O lord, sir, I: and in the respectfull memorie and mention of her, I could wish this wine were the most precious drugge in the world.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Good faith, sir, you doe honour me in't exceedingly.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              Whom should he personate in this, signior?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Faith, I know not, sir, obserue, obserue him.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        2.
                        If it were the basest filth, or mud that runnes in the channell, I am bound to pledge it, respectiuely, sir. And now, sir, here is a replenisht bowle, which I will reciprocally turne vpon you, to the health of the count FRVGALE.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        The count FRVGALES health, sir? I'le pledge it on my knees, by this light.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Will you, sir? I'le drinke it on my knee, then, by the light.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              Why, this is strange!
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Ha' you heard a better drunken dialogue?
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Nay, doe me right, sir.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        So I doe, in good faith.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Good faith you doe not; mine was fuller.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Why, beleeue me, it was not.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Beleeue me, it was: and you doe lie.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Lie, sir?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        S'wounds!
                     
                     
                        2.
                        O, come, stab if you haue a mind to it.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Stab? dost thou thinke I dare not?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Nay, I beseech you, gentlemen, what meanes this? nay, looke, for shame respect your reputations.
                     
                  
                  
                     Act V. Scene V.
                     MACILENTE, CARLO, GEORGE.
                     
                        WHy, how now CARLO! what humour's this?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, my good Mischiefe! art thou come? where are the rest? where are the rest?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Faith, three of our ordinance are burst.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Burst? how comes that?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Faith, ouer-charg'd, ouer-charg'd.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        But did not the traine hold?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, yes, and the poore lady is irrecouerably blowne vp.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Why, but which of the munition is miscarried? ha?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        
                           Inprimis, sir PVNTARVOLO: next, the COVNTENANCE, and RESOLVTION.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        How? how for the loue of wit?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Troth, the Resolution is prou'd recreant; the Countenance hath
chang'd his copie: and the passionate knight is shedding funerall teares
ouer his departed dogge.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What's his dogge dead?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Poison'd, 'tis thought: mary, how, or by whom, that's left for
some cunning woman here o' the Banke-side to resolue. For my part, I
know nothing, more then that wee are like to haue an exeeding melancholy supper of it.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        S'life, and I had purpos'd to be extraordinarily merry, I had
drunke off a good preparatiue of old sacke here: but will they come, will
they come?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        They will assuredly come: may, CARLO (as thou lou'st me)
run ouer 'hem all freely to night, and especially the knight; spare no sulphurous

                           
iest that may come out of that sweatie forge of thine: but ply
'hem with all manner of shot, minion, saker, culvertine, or any thing what
thou wilt.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        I warrant thee, my deare case of petrionels, so I stand not in
dread of thee, but that thou'lt second me.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, my good Germane tapster, I will.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        What, GEORGE. Lomtero, Lomtero, &c.
                           He dances.
                        
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Did you call, master CARLO?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        More nectar, GEORGE: Lomtero, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Your meat's ready, sir, and your company were come.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Is the loyne of porke enough?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        I, sir, it is enough.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Porke? heart, what dost thou with such a greasie dish? I thinke
thou dost varnish thy face with the fat on't, it lookes so like a glew-pot.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        True, my raw-bon'd-rogue, and if thou would'st farce thy
leane ribs with it too, they would not (like ragged lathes) rub out so many
doublets as they doe: but thou know'st not a good dish, thou. O, it's
the only nourishing meat in the world. No maruaile though that saucie,
stubborne generation, the Iewes, were forbidden it: for what would they
ha' done, well pamper'd with fat porke, that durst murmure at their maker
out of garlicke, and onions. S'light, fed with it, the whorson strummell,
patcht, goggle-ey'd Grumbledories, would ha' Gigantomachiz'd.
Well said, my sweet GEORGE, fill, fill.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              This sauours too much of prophanation.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              
                                 O, seruetur ad imum, qualis ab incepto processerit, & sibi conflet.
The necessite of his vaine compels a toleration: for, barre this, and dash
him out of humour, before his time.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        'Tis an Axiome in naturall philosophie, What comes neerest the
nature of that it feeds, conuerts quicker to nourisment, and doth sooner essentiate.
Now nothing in flesh, and entrailes, assimulates or resembles man more,
then a hog, or swine—
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        True; and hee (to requite their courtesie) oftentimes d'offeth
his owne nature, and puts on theirs; as when hee becomes as churlish
as a hog, or as drunke as a sow: but to your conclusion.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Mary, I say, nothing resembling man more then a swine, it followes,
nothing can be more nourishing: for indeed (but that it abhorres
from our nice nature) if we fed one vpon another, we should shoot vp a
great deale faster, and thriue much better: I referre me to your vsurous
Cannibals, or such like: but since it is so contrary, porke, porke,
is your only feed.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I take it, your deuill be of the same diet; he would ne're ha' desir'd
to beene incorporated into swine else. O, here comes the melancholy
messe: vpon 'hem CARLO, charge, charge.
                     
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        'Fore god, sir PVNTARVOLO, I am sorry for your heauinesse: body a me, a shrewd mischance! why, had you no vnicornes horne, nor bezoars stone about you? ha?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene VI.
                     PVNTARVOLO, CARLO, MACILENTE, FAST. BRISKE, SOGLIARDO, FVNGOSO.
                     
                        SIr, I would request you, be silent.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Nay, to him againe.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Take comfort, good knight, if your cat ha' recouered her catarrhe, feare nothing; your dogges mischance may be holpen.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Say how (sweet CARLO) for so god mend mee, the poore knights moues draw mee into fellowship of his misfortunes. But be not discourag'd, good sir PVNTARVOLO, I am content your aduenture shall be perform'd vpon your cat.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        I beleeue you, muske cod, I beleeue you, for rather then thou would'st make present repayment, thou would'st take it vpon his owne bare returne from Calice.
                        
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Nay, 'ds life, hee'ld bee content (so hee were well rid out of his company) to pay him fiue for one, at his next meeting him in Paules. But for your dogge, sir PVNTAR, if hee bee not out-right dead, there is a friend of mine, a quack-saluer, shall put life in him againe, that's certaine.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        O, no, that comes too late.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Gods precious, knight, will you suffer this?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Drawer, get me a candle, and hard waxe, presently.
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        I, and bring vp supper; for I am so melancholy.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O, signior, where's your Resolution?
                        
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        
                           Resolution! hang him rascall: O, CARLO, if you loue me, doe not mention him.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Why, how so? how so?
                     
                     
                        SOGL.
                        O, the arrant'st crocodile that euer Christian was acquainted with. By my gentrie, I shall thinke the worse of tabacco while I liue, for his sake: I did thinke him to be as tall a man—
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Nay, BVFFONE, the knight, the knight.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        S'hid, hee lookes like an image carued out of boxe, full of knots: his face is (for all the world) like a dutch purse, with the mouth downeward; his beard the tassels: and hee walkes (let mee see) as melancholy as one o' the Masters side in the Counter. Doe you heare, sir PVNTAR?
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Sir, I doe entreat you no more, but enioyne you to silence, as you affect your peace.
                     
                     
                        
                        CARL.
                        Nay, but deare knight, vnderstand (here are none but friends, and such as wish you well) I would ha' you doe this now; Flea me your dogge presently (but in any case keepe the head) and stuffe his skin well with straw, as you see these dead monsters at Bartholmew faire.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I shall be suddaine, I tell you.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Or if you like not that, sir, get me somewhat a lesse dog, and clap into the skin; here's a slaue about the towne here, a Iew, one YOHAN; or a fellow that makes perrukes, will glew it on artificially, it shall ne're be discern'd, besides, 'twill be so much the warmer for the hound to trauaile in, you know.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Sir PVNTARVOLO, 'death, can you be so patient?
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        O
                              •
                            thus, sir: you may haue (as you come through Germany) a familiar for little or nothing, shall turne it selfe into the shape of your dogge, or any thing (what you will) for certaine houres; 'ods my life, knight, what doe you meane? youle offer no violence, will you? hold, hold.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        'Sdeath, you slaue, you bandog, you.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        As you loue wit, stay the enraged knight, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        By my knighthood, he that stirres in his rescue, dies. Drawer, be gone.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Murder, murder, murder.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        I, are you howling, you wolfe? Gentlemen, as you tender your liues, suffer no man to enter, till my reuenge be perfect. Sirha, BVFFONE, lie downe; make no exclamations, but downe: downe, you curre, or I will make thy bloud flow on my rapier hilts.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Sweet knight, hold in thy 
                              •
                           urie, and 'fore heauen, I'le honour thee more, then the Turke do's MAHOMET.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Downe (I say.) Who's there?
                     
                     
                        CONS.
                        Withi
                              •
                           .
                        Here's the Constable, open the dores.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        Good, MACILENTE.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Open no dore, if the ADALANTADO of Spaine were here, he should not enter: On, helpe me with the light, gentlemen: you knocke in vaine, sir officer.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        
                           Et in Brute!
                        
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        Sirha, close your lips, or I will drop it in thine eyes by heauen.
                     
                     
                        CARL.
                        He seales vp his lips.
                        O, O.
                     
                     
                        CONS.
                        Open the dore, or I will breake it open.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Nay, good Constable, haue patience a little, you shall come in presently, we haue almost done.
                     
                     
                        PVNT.
                        They all draw, and disperse.
                        So; now, are you out of your humour, sir? Shift, gentlemen.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act V. Scene VII.
                     CONSTABLE, OFFICERS, DRAVVERS.
                     
                        To them.
                         LAy hold vpon this gallant, and pursue the rest.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Lay hold on me, sir! for what?
                     
                     
                        CONS.
                        Mary, for your not here, sir, with the rest of your companions.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        My riot! master Constable, take heed what you doe. CARLO, did I offer any violence?
                     
                     
                        CONS.
                        O, sir, you see he is not in case to answere you, and that makes you so paramptorie.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Peremptorie, s'life I appeale to the drawers, if I did him any hard measure.
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        They are all gone, there's none of them will bee laid any hold on.
                     
                     
                        CONS.
                        Well, sir, you are like to answere till the rest can be found out.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Slid, I appeare to GEORGE, here.
                     
                     
                        CONS.
                        Tut, GEORGE was not here: away with him to the Counter, sirs. Come, sir, you were best get your selfe drest somewhere.
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Good lord, that master CARLO could not take heed, and knowing what a gentleman the knight is, if hee bee angrie.
                     
                     
                        DRAW.
                        A poxe on 'hem, they haue left all the meate on our hands, would they were choakt with it forme.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        
                           
                              〈1 paragraph〉
                           .
                         What, are they gone, sirs?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        O, here's master MACILENTE.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Sirha, GEORGE, doe you see that concealement there? that napkin vnder the table?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Gods so, signior FVNGOSO!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Her's good pawne for the reckoning, bee sure you keepe him here, and Ice him not goe away till I come againe, though hee offer to discharge all: Ile returne presently.
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Sirrah, we haue a pawne for the reckoning.
                     
                     
                        DRAW.
                        What? of MACILENTE?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        No, looke vnder the table.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I hope, all be quiet now: if I can get but forth of this street, I care not, masters, I pray you tell me, is the Constable gone?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        
                           
                              〈1 paragraph〉
                           .
                         What? master FVNGOSO?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Was't not a good deuice this same of me, sirs?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Yes saith; ha' you beene here all this while?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        O god, I▪ good sir, looke, and the coast be cleere, I'ld faine be going.
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Al's cleere, sir, but the reckoning; and that you must cleare, and pay before you goe, I assure you.
                     
                     
                        
                        FVNG.
                        I pay? Slight, I eate not a bit since I came into the house, yet.
                     
                     
                        DRAW.
                        Why, you may when you please, sir, 'tis all readie below, that was bespoken.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Bespoken? not by me, I hope?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        By you, sir? I know not that: but 'twas for you, and your companie, I am sure.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        My companie? S'lid, I was an inuited guest, so I was.
                     
                     
                        DRAW.
                        Faith, we haue no thing to doe with that, sir, they're all gone but you, and we must be answer'd; that's the short and the long on't.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Nay, if you will grow to extremities, my masters, then would this pot, cup, and all were in my belly, if I haue a crosse about me.
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        What, and haue such apparell? doe not say so, signior, that mightily discredits your clothes.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        As I am an honest man, my taylor had all my monie this morning, and yet I must be faine to alter my sute too: good sirs, let me goe, 'tis friday night, and in good truth I haue no stomacke in the world, to eate anie thing.
                     
                     
                        DRAW.
                        That's no matter, so you pay, sir.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Pay? gods light, with what conscience can you aske me to pay that I neuer dranke for?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        Yes, sir, I did see you drinke once.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        By this cup, (which is siluer) but you did not, you doe mee infinite wrong, I look't in the pot once, indeed, but I did not drinke.
                     
                     
                        DRAW.
                        Well sir, if you can satisfie our master, it shall bee all one to vs. (by and by.)
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              CORD.
                              Lose not your selfe now signior.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene VIII.
                     MACILENTE, DELIRO, FALLACE.
                     
                        TVt, sir, you did beare too hard a conceit of me in that, but I will now make my loue to you most transparent, in spight of any dust of suspition, that may bee raysed to cloud it: and henceforth, since I see it is so against your humour, I will neuer labour to perswade you.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Why, I thanke you, signior, but what's that you tell mee may concerne my peace so much?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Faith, sir, 'tis thus. Your wiues brother, signior FVNGOSO, being at supper to night at a tauerne, with a sort of gallants, there happened some diuision amongst 'hem, and he is left in pawne for the reckoning: now, if euer you looke that time shall present you with a happie occasion to doe your wife some gracious and acceptable seruice, take hold of this opportunitie, and presently goe, and redeeme him; for, being her

brother, and his credit so amply engag'd as now it is, when she shall heare (as hee cannot himselfe, but hee must out of extremitie report it) that you came, and offered your selfe so kindly, and with that respect of his reputation, why, the benefit cannot but make her dote, and grow madde of your affections.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Now, by heauen, MACILENTE, I acknowledge my selfe exceedingly indebted to you, by this kinde tender of your loue; and I am sorrie to remember that I was euer so rude, to neglect a friend of your importance: bring mee shooes, and a cloke there, I was going to bed, if you had not come, what tauerne is it?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        The Mitre, sir.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        O, why FIDO, my shooes. Good faith it cannot but please her exceedingly.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Come, I marle what peece of nightwork you haue in hand now, that you call for your cloke, and your shooes! what, is this your Pandar?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        O, sweet wife, speake lower, I would not he should heare thee for a world—
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Hang him rascall, I cannot abide him for his trecherie, with his wilde quick-set beard there. Whither goe you now with him?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        No whither with him, deare wife, I goe alone to a place, from whence I will returne instantly. Good MACILENTE, acquaint not her with it by any meanes, it may come so much the more accepted, frame some other answere. I'le come backe immediately.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Nay, and I be not worthie to know whither you goe, stay, till I take knowledge of your comming backe.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Heare you, mistresse DELIRO.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        So sir, and what say you?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Faith ladie, my intents will not deserue this slight respect, when you shall know 'hem.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Your intents? why, what may your intents bee, for god sake!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Troth, the time allowes no circumstance, ladie, therefore know, this was but a deuice to remoue your husband hence, and bestow him securely, whilest (with more conueniencie) I might report to you a misfortune that hath happened to Monsieur BRISKE — nay comfort, sweet ladie. This night (being at supper a sort of young gallants committed a riot, for the which he (onely) is apprehended and carried to the Counter, where if your husband, and other creditours should but haue knowledge of him, the poore gentleman were vndone for euer.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Aye me! that he were.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Now therefore, if you can thinke vpon any present meanes for his deliuerie, doe not forslow it. A bribe to the officer that committed him, will doe it.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        O god, sir, he shall not want for a bribe: pray you, will you commend me to him, and say I'le visit him presently?
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        No, ladie, I shall doe you better seruice, in protracting your

husbands returne, that you may goe with more safetie.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Good truth, so you may: farewell, good sir. Lord, how a woman may be mistaken in a man? I would haue sworne vpon all the testaments in the world, he had not lou'd master BRISKE. Bring me my keyes there, maide. Alasse, good gentleman, if all I haue i' this earthly world will pleasure him, it shall be at his seruice.
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              MIT.
                              How MACILENTE sweates i'this busines, if you marke him.
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              I, you shall see the true picture of spight anon: here comes the pawne, and his redeemer.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene IX.
                     DELIRO, FVNGOSO, DRAWERS▪ MACILENTE.
                     
                        COme, brother, be not discourag'd for this, man, what?
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        No truly, I am not discourag'd, but I protest to you, brother, I haue done imitating any more gallants either in purse or apparell, but as shall become a gentleman, for good carriage, or so.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        You say well. This is all, i' the bill here? is't not?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        There's your monie, tell it: and brother, I am glad I met with so good occasion to shew my loue to you.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I will studie to deserue it in good truth, and I liue.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        What, is't right?
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        I, sir, and I thanke you.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Let me haue a capons legge sau'd, now the reckoning is paid.
                     
                     
                        GEOR.
                        You shall, sir.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Where's signior DELIRO?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Here, MACILENTE.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Harke you, sir, ha' you dispatcht this same?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        I marie haue I.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Well then, I can tell you newes, BRISKE is i'the Counter.
                        
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        I'the Counter?
                        
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        'Tis true, sir, committed for the stirre here to night. Now would I haue you send your brother home afore, with the report of this your kindnesse done him, to his sister, which will so pleasingly possesse her, and out of his mouth too, that i' the meane time you may clap your action on BRISKE, and your wife (being in so happie a moode) cannot entertaine it ill, by any meanes.
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        'Tis verie true, she cannot indeed, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Thinke? why 'tis past thought, you shall neuer meet the like opportunitie, I assure you.
                     
                     
                        
                        DELI.
                        I will doe it. Brother, pray you goe home afore, this gentleman, and I haue some priuate businesse; and tell my sweet wife, I'le come presently.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        I will, brother.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        And, signior, acquaint your sister, how liberally and out of his bountie, your brother has vs'd you. (Doe you see?) made you a man of good reckoning; redeem'd that you neuer were possest of, credit; gaue you as gentleman-like termes as might be; found no fault with your comming behind the fashion; nor nothing.
                     
                     
                        FVNG.
                        Nay, I am out of those humours now.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Well, if you be out, keepe your distance, and be not made a shot-clog any more. Come, signior, let's make haste.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene X.
                     FALLACE, FAST. BRISKE.
                     
                        O Master FASTIDIVS, what pitty is't to see so sweet a man as you are, in so sowre a place?
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              As vpon her lips, do's shee meane?
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              O, this is to be imagin'd the Counter, belike?
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Troth, faire lady, 'tis first the pleasure of the Fates, and next of the Constable, to haue it so: but, I am patient, and indeed comforted the more in your kind visitation.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Nay, you shall bee comforted in mee, more then this, if you please, sir. I sent you word by my brother, sir, that my husband laid to rest you this morning, I know not whether you receiu'd it, or no.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        No, beleeue it, sweet creature, your brother gaue me no such intelligence.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        O, the lord!
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        But has your husband any such purpose?
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        O sweet master BRISKE, yes: and therefore be presently discharg'd, for if he come with his actions vpon you (lord deliuer you) you are in for one halfe a score yeere; he kept a poore man in Ludgate once, twelue yeere, for sixteene shillings. Where's your keeper? for loues sake call him, let him take a bribe, and dispatch you. Lord, how my heart trembles! here are no spies? are there?
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        No, sweet mistris, why are you in this passion?
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        O lord, Master FASTIDIVS, if you knew how I tooke vp my husband to day, when hee said hee would arrest you; and how I rail'd at him that perswaded him to't, the scholer there, (who on my conscience loues you now) and what care I tooke to send you intelligence by my brother; and how I gaue him foure soueraignes for his paines; and now,

how I came running out hither without man or boy with me, so soone as I heard on't; you'ld say, I were in a passion indeed: your keeper, for gods sake. O, Master BRISKE (as 'tis in EVPHVES) Hard is the choise, when one is compelled either by silence to die with griefe, or by speaking to liue with shame.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Faire lady, I conceiue you, and may this kisse assure you, that where aduersitie hath (as it were) contracted, prosperitie shall not— gods me! your husband.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        O, me!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene XI.
                     DELIRO, MACILENTE, FALLACE, FAST. BRISKE.
                     
                        I? is't thus!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, how now, signior DELIRO? has the wolfe seene you? ha? hath GORGONS head made marble of you?
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Some Planet strike me dead.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        Why, looke you; sir, I told you, you might haue suspected this long afore, had you pleas'd; and ha' sau'd this labour of admiration now, and passion, and such extremities as this fraile lumpe of flesh is subiect vnto. Nay, why doe you not dote now, signior? Mee thinkes you should say it were some enchantment, deceptio visus, or so, ha? if you could perswade your selfe it were a dreame now, 'twere excellent: saith, trie what you can do, signior; it may be your imagination will be brought to it in time, there's nothing impossible.
                     
                     
                        FALL.
                        Sweet husband:
                     
                     
                        DELI.
                        Out lasciuious strumpet.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        What? did you see, how ill that stale veine became him afore, of sweet wife, and deare heart? and are you falne iust into the same now? with sweet husband. Away, follow him, goe, keepe state, what? Remember you are a woman, turne impudent: gi' him not the head, though you gi' him the hornes. Away. And yet mee thinkes you should take your leaue of Enfans-perdus here, your forlorne hope. How now, Monsieur BRISKE? what? friday night? and in affliction too? and yet your Pulpamenta? your delicate morcels? I perceiue, the affection of ladies and gentlewomen, pursues you wheresoeuer you goe, Monsieur.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        Now, in good faith (and as I am gentle) there could not haue come a thing, i' this world, to haue distracted me more, then the wrinckled fortunes of this poore spinster.
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        O, yes, sir: I can tell you a thing will distract you much better, beleeue it. Signior DELIRO has entred three actions against you, three actions, Monsieur; mary, one of them (I'le put you in comfort) is but three thousand, and the other two, some fiue thousand a peece, trifles, trifles.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, I am vndone.
                     
                     
                        
                        MACI.
                        Nay, not altogether so, sir, the knight must haue his hundred pound repai'd, that 'll helpe too, and then sixe-score pound for a diamond, you know where. These be things will weigh, Monsieur, they will weigh.
                     
                     
                        FAST.
                        O, heauen!
                     
                     
                        MACI.
                        What, doe you sigh? this it is to kisse the hand of a countesse, to haue her coach sent for you, to hang poinards in ladies garters, to weare bracelets of their haire, and for euery one of these great fauours to giue some slight iewell of fiue hundred crownes, or so, why 'tis nothing. Now, Monsieur, you see the plague that treads o' the heeles of your fopperie: well, goe your waies in, remoue your selfe to the two-penny ward quickly, to saue charges, and there set vp your rest to spend sir PVNTARS hundred pound for him. Away, good pomander, goe.
                        Why, here's a change! Now is my soule at peace.
                        I am as emptie of all enuie now,
                        As they of merit to be enuied at.
                        My humour (like a flame) no longer lasts
                        Then it hath stuffe to feed it, and their folly,
                        Being now rak't vp in their repentant ashes,
                        Affords no ampler subiect to my spleene.
                        I am so farre from malicing their states,
                        That I begin to pitty 'hem. It grieues me
                        To thinke they haue a being. I could wish
                        They might turne wise vpon it, and be sau'd now,
                        So heauen were pleas'd: but let them vanish, vapors.
                        Gentlemen, how like you it? has't not beene tedious?
                     
                     
                        
                           GREX.
                           
                              COR.
                              Nay, we ha' done censuring, now.
                           
                           
                              MIT.
                              Yes, faith.
                           
                           
                              MAC.
                              How so?
                           
                           
                              COR.
                              Mary, because wee'le imitate your actors, and be out of our Humours. Besides, here are those (round about you) of more abilitie in censure then wee, whose iudgements can giue it a more satisfying allowance: wee'le refer you to them.
                           
                           
                              MAC.
                              I? is't e'en so? Wel, gentlemen, I should haue gone in, and return'd to you, as I was ASPER at the first: but (by reason the shift would haue beene somewhat long, and we are loth to draw your patience farder) wee'le intreat you to imagine it. And now (that you may see I will be out of humour for companie) I stand wholly to your kind approbation, and (indeed) am nothing so peremptorie as I was in the beginning: Mary, I will not doe as PLAVTVS, in his Amphytrio, for all this (Summi Ionis causa, Plaudite:) begge a Plaudite, for gods sake; but if you (out of the bountie of your good liking) will bestow it; why, you may (in time) make leane MACILENTE as fat, as Sir IOHN FAL-STAFFE.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  THE END.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Which, in the presentation before Queene E. was thus varyed, BY MACILENTE.
                  NEuer till now did obiect greet mine eyes
                  With any light content: but in her graces,
                  All my malicious powers haue lost their stings.
                  Enuie is fled my soule, at sight of her,
                  And shee hath chac'd all black thoughts from my bosome,
                  Like as the sunne doth darkenesse from the world.
                  My streame of humour is runne out of me.
                  And as our cities torrent (bent t'infect
                  The hallow'd bowels of the siluer Thames)
                  Is checkt by strength, and clearnesse of the riuer,
                  Till it hath spent it selfe e'ene at the shore;
                  So, in the ample, and vnmeasur'd floud
                  Of her perfections, are my passions drown'd:
                  And I haue now a spirit as sweet, and cleere,
                  As the most rarefi'd and subtile aire.
                  With which, and with a heart as pure as fire,
                  (Yet humble as the earth) doe I implore,
                  O heauen, that shee (whose presence hath effected
                  This change in me) may suffer most late change
                  In her admir'd and happie gouernement:
                  May still this Land be call'd fortunate,
                  And rugged treason tremble at the sound
                  When Fame shall speake it with an emphasis.
                  
                  Let forraine politie be dull as lead,
                  And pale inuasion come with halfe a heart,
                  When he but lookes vpon her blessed soile.
                  The throat of warre be stopt within her land,
                  And turtle-footed peace dance fayrie rings
                  About her court: where, neuer may there come
                  Suspect, or danger, but all trust, and safetie:
                  Let flatterie be dumbe, and enuie blind
                  In her dread presence: death himselfe admire her:
                  And may her vertues make him to forget
                  The vse of his ineuitable hand.
                  Flie from her age; Sleepe time before her throne,
                  Our strongest wall falls downe, when shee is gone.
               
               
                  
                  This Comicall Satyre vvas first acted in the yeere 1599.
                  By the then Lord Chamberlaine his Seruants.
                  The principall Comoedians were,

                        RIC. BVRBADGE.
                        AVG. PHILIPS.
                        WIL. SLY.
                        IOH. HEMINGS.
                        HEN. CONDEL.
                        THO. POPE.
                     
                  
                  With the allowance of the Master of REVELS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  CYNTHIAS REVELS, OR The Fountayne of selfe-Loue. A Comicall Satyre. Acted, in the yeere 1600. By the then Children of Queene ELIZABETHS CHAPPEL.
                  The Author B. I.
                  
                     MART.
                     Nasutum volo, nolo polyposum.
                  
                  LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.
                  M. DC. XVI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE SPECIALL FOVNTAINE OF MANNERS: The Court.
                  
                     THou art a bountifull, and braue spring: and waterest all the noble plants of this Iland. In thee, the whole Kingdome dresseth it selfe, and is ambitious to vse thee as her glasse. Beware, then, thou render mens figures truly, and teach them no lesse to bate their deformities, then to loue their formes: For, to grace, there should come reuerence; and no man can call that louely, which is not also venerable. It is not pould'ring, perfuming, and euery day smelling of the taylor, that conuerteth to a beautiful obiect: but a mind, shining through any sute, which needes no false light either of riches, or honors to helpe it. Such shalt thou find some here, euen in the raigne of CYNTHIA (a CRITES, and an ARETE.) Now, vnder thy PHOEBVS, it will be thy prouince to make more: Except thou desirest to haue thy source mixe with the Spring of selfe-Loue, and so wilt draw vpon thee as welcome a discouery of thy dayes, as was then made of her nights.
                  
                     
                        Thy seruant, but not slaue, BEN. IONSON.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Persons of the Play.
                  
                     CYNTHIA.
                     MERCVRY.
                     HESPERVS.
                     CRITES.
                     AMORPHVS.
                     ASOTVS.
                     HEDON.
                     ANAIDES.
                     MORPHIDES.
                     PROSAITES.
                     MORVS.
                     CVPID.
                     ECHO.
                     ARETE.
                     PHANTASTE.
                     ARGVRION.
                     PHILAVTIA.
                     MORIA.
                     COS.
                     GELAIA.
                     PHRONESIS. Mutes.
                     THAVMA. Mutes.
                     TIME. Mutes.
                  
                  
                     THE SCENE. GARGAPHIE.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  CYNTHIAS REVELS
                  
                     After the second sounding.
                     INDVCTION. BY THREE OF THE CHILDREN.
                     
                        
                           PRay you away; why fellowes? Gods so? what doe you meane?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Mary that you shall not speake the Prologue, sir.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        Why? doe you hope to speake it?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        I, and I thinke I haue most right to it: I am sure I studied it first.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        That's all one, if the Authour thinke I can speake it better.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        I pleade possession of the cloake: Gentles, your suffrages I pray you.
                        Within.
                        ¶ Why Children are you not asham'd? come in there.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        Slid, I'le play nothing i' the Play: vnlesse I speake it.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Why, will you stand to most voices of the gentlemen! let that decide it.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        O no, sir gallant; you presume to haue the start of vs there, and that makes you offer so prodigally.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        No, would I were whipt, if I had any such thought: trie it by lots either.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Faith, I dare tempt my fortune in a greater venter then this.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        Well said, resolute Iacke, I am content too: so wee draw first. Make the cuts.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        But will you not snatch my cloake, while I am stooping?
                     
                     
                        3.
                        No, we scorne treacherie.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Which cut shall speake it?
                     
                     
                        3.
                        The shortest.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Agreed.
                     
                     
                        Draw.
                        The shortest is come to the shortest. Fortune
                           
was not altogether blind in this. Now, sir, I hope I shall goe forward without your enuie.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        A spite of all mischieuous lucke! I was once plucking at the other.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        Stay, Iacke: Slid, I'le doe somewhat now afore I goe in, though it be nothing but to reuenge my selfe on the Authour: since I speake not his Prologue. Ile goe tell all the argument of his play aforehand, and so stale his inuention to the auditorie before it come forth.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        At the breaches in this speech following, the other two interrupt him, still.
                         O, doe not so.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        By no meanes.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        First, the title of his play is CYNTHIAS Reuels, as any man (that hath hope to bee saued by his booke) can witnesse; the Scene, GARGAPHIE: which I doe vehemently suspect for some sustian countrie, but let that vanish. Here, is the court of CYNTHIA, whither hee brings CVPID (trauailing on foot) resolu'd to turne page. By the way, CVPID meetes with MERCVRIE, (as that's a thing to be noted, take anie of our play-bookes without a CVPID, or a MERCVRY in it, and burne it for an heretique in Poetrie)— Pray thee let me alone. MERCVRY, he (in the nature of a conjurer) raises vp ECCHO, who weepes ouer her loue, or Daffodill, NARCISSVS, a little; sings; curses the spring wherein the prettie foolish gentleman melted himselfe away: and ther's an end of her.—Now I am to informe you, that CVPID, and MERCVRY doe both become pages. CVPID attends on PHILAVTIA, or selfe-Loue, a court-ladie MERCVRY followes HEDON, the voluptuous, and a courtier; one that rankes himselfe euen with ANAIDES, or the impudent, a gallant, (and that's my part:) one that keepes laughter, GELAIA the daughter of folly, (a wench in boyes attire) to waite on him—These, in the court, meet with AMORPHVS, or the deformed; a trauailer that hath drunke of the fountaine, and there tels the wonders of the water. They presently dispatch away their pages with bottles to fetch of it, and themselues goe to visite the ladies. But I should haue told you— (Looke, these emets put me out here) that with this AMORPHVS, there comes along a citizens heire, ASOTVS, or the prodigall, who (in imitation of the traueller, who hath the whetstone following him) entertaines the begger, to be his attendant.—Now, the Nymphs who are mistresses to these gallants, are PHILAVTIA, selfe-Loue; PHANTASTE, a light wittinesse; ARGVRION monie; and their Guardian, mother MORIA; or mistresse folly.—
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Pray thee no more.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        There CVPID strikes monie in loue with the prodigall, makes her dote vpon him, giue him iewels, bracelets, carkenets, &c. all which (hee most ingeniously departs withall) to be made knowne to the other ladies and gallants; and in the heat of this, increases his traine with the foole to follow him, aswell as the begger.— By this time, your begger begins to waite close, who is return'd with the rest of his fellow bottle-men.— There they all drinke, saue ARGVRION, who is falne into a sodaine apoplexie.—
                     
                     
                        
                        1.
                        Stop his mouth.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        And then, there's a retired scholler there, you would not wish a thing to be better contemn'd of a societie of gallants, then it is: and hee applies his seruice (good gentleman) to the ladie ARETE, or vertue, a poore Nymph of CYNTHIAS traine, that's scarce able to buy her selfe a gowne, you shall see her play in a blacke robe anon: A creature, that (I assure you) is no lesse scorn'd, then himselfe. Where am I now? at a stand?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Come, leaue at last, yet.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        O, the night is come, (t'was somewhat darke, mee thought) and CYNTHIA intends to come forth: (That helps it a little yet.) All the courtiers must prouide for reuels; they conclude vpon a Masque, the deuice of which, is—(what, will you rauish mee?) that each of these vices, being to appeare before CYNTHIA, would seeme other then indeed they are: and therefore assume the most neighbouring vertues as their masking habites.— (I'lde crie, a rape, but that you are children.)
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Come, wee'le haue no more of this anticipation: to giue them the inuentorie of their cates aforehand, were the discipline of a tauerne, and not fitting this presence.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Tut, this was but to shew vs the happinesse of his memorie. I thought at first, he would haue plaid the ignorant critique with euerie thing, along as he had gone, I expected some such deuice.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        O, you shall see me doe that, rarely, lend me thy cloake.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Soft, sir, you'le speake my Prologue in it.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        No, would I might neuer stirre then.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Lend it him, lend it him.
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Well, you haue sworne.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        At the breaches he takes his tabacco.
                        I haue. Now, sir, suppose I am one of your gentile auditors, that an come in (hauing paid my monie at the doore, with much adoe) and here I take my place, and sit downe: I haue my three sorts of tabacco in my pocket, my sight by me, and thus I beginne. By this light, I wonder that any man is so mad, to come to see these rascally Tits play here— They doe act like so manie wrens, or pismires—not the fift part of a good face amongst them all—And then their musicke is abominable—able to stretch a mans eares worse then tenne— pillories, and their ditties—most lamentable things, like the pittifull fellowes that make them—Poets. By this vapour, and 'twere not for tabacco—I thinke—the verie stench of 'hem would poison mee, I should not dare to come in at their gates—A man were better visit fifteene jailes,—or a dozen or two of hospitals—then once aduenture to come neere them. How is't? Well?
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Excellent: giue mee my cloake.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        Stay; you shall see me doe another now: but a more sober, or better-gather'd gallant; that is (as it may bee thought) some friend, or welwisher to the house: And here I enter.
                     
                     
                        
                        1.
                        What? vpon the stage, too?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Yes: and I step forth like one of the children, and aske you, Would you haue a stoole, sir?
                     
                     
                        3.
                        A stoole, boy?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        I, sir, if youle giue me six pence, Ile fetch you one.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        For what I pray thee? what shall I doe with it?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        O lord, sir! will you betraie your ignorance so much? why throne your selfe in state on the stage, as other gentlemen vse, sir.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        Away, wagge, what, would'st thou make an implement of me? Slid the boy takes me for a piece of perspectiue (I hold my life) or some silke cortaine, come to hang the stage here! sir cracke, I am none of your fresh pictures, that vse to beautifie the decaied dead arras, in a publike theatre.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        T'is a signe, sir, you put not that confidence in your good clothes, and your better face, that a gentleman should doe, sir. But I pray you sir, let mee bee a suter to you, that you will quit our stage then, and take a place, the play is instantly to beginne.
                     
                     
                        3
                        Most willingly, my good wag: but I would speake with your Authour, where's he?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Not this way, I assure you, sir: wee are not so officiously befriended by him, as to haue his presence in the tiring
                              •
                           house, to prompt vs aloud, stampe at the booke-holder, sweare for our properties, curse the poore tire-man, raile the musicke out of tune, and sweat for euerie veniall trespasse we commit, as some Authour would, if he had such fine engles as we. Well, tis but our hard fortune.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        Nay, cracke, be not dis-heartned.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Not I, sir, but if you please to conferre with our Author, by atturney, you may, sir: our proper selfe here, stands for him.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        Troth, I haue no such serious affaire to negotiate with him, but what may verie safely bee turn'd vpon thy trust. It is in the generall behalfe of this faire societie here, that I am to speake, at least the more iudicious part of it, which seemes much distasted with the immodest and obscene writing of manie, in their playes. Besides, they could wish, your Poets would leaue to bee promoters of other mens iests, and to way-lay all the stale apothegmes, or olde bookes, they can heare of (in print, or otherwise) to farce their Scenes withall. That they would not so penuriously gleane wit, from euerie laundresse, or hackney-man, or deriue their best grace (with seruile imitation) from common stages, or obseruation of the companie they conuerse with; as if their inuention liu'd wholy vpon another mans trencher. Againe, that feeding their friends with nothing of their owne, but what they haue twice or thrice cook'd, they should not want only giue out, how soone they had drest it; nor how manie coaches came to carrie away the broken-meat, besides hobbie-horses, and footcloth nags.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        So, sir, this is all the reformation you seeke?
                     
                     
                        
                        3.
                        It is: doe not you thinke it necessarie to be practiz'd, my little wag?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Yes, where any such ill-habited custome is receiu'd.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        O (I had almost forgot it too) they say, the vmbrae, or ghosts of some three or foure playes, departed a dozen yeeres since, haue bin seene walking on your stage heere: take heed, boy, if your house bee haunted with such hob-goblins, t'will fright away all your spectators quickly.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Good, sir, but what will you say now, if a Poet (vntoucht with any breath of this disease) find the tokens vpon you, that are of the auditorie? As some one ciuet-wit among you, that knowes no other learning, then the price of satten and vellets; nor other perfection, then the wearing of a neat sute; and yet will censure as desperately as the most profess'd critique in the house: presuming, his clothes should beare him out in't. Another (whom it hath pleas'd nature to furnish with more beard, then braine) prunes his mustaccio, lisps, and (with some score of affected othes) sweares downe all that sit about him; That the old Hieronimo, (as it was first acted) was the onely best, and iudiciously pend play of Europe. A third greatbellied juggler talkes of twentie yeeres since, and when MONSIEVR was heere, and would enforce all wits to bee of that fashion, because his doublet is still so. A fourth miscals all by the name of fustian, that his grounded capacitie cannot aspire to. A fift, only shakes his bottle-head, and out of his corkie braine, squeezeth out a pittiful-learned face, and is silent.
                     
                     
                        3.
                        By my faith, Iacke, you haue put mee downe: I would I knew how to get off with any indifferent grace. Heere, take your cloke, and promise some satisfaction in your Prologue, or (I'le be sworne) wee haue marr'd all.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Tut, feare not, child, this wil neuer distaste a true sense: Be not out, and good enough. I would thou hadst some sugar-candied, to sweeten thy mouth.
                     
                  
                  
                     The third sounding. PROLOGVE.
                     IF gracious silence, sweet attention,
                     Quicke sight, and quicker apprehension,
                     (The lights of iudgements throne) shine any where;
                     Our doubtfull authour hopes this is their sphere.
                     And therefore opens he himselfe to those;
                     To other weaker beames, his labours close:
                     As loth to prostitute their virgin straine,
                     To eu'rie vulgar, and adult'rate braine.
                     In this alone, his MVSE her sweetnesse hath,
                     Shee shunnes the print of any beaten path;
                     And proues new wayes to come to learned eares:
                     Pied ignorance she neither loues, nor feares.
                     
                     Nor hunts she after popular applause,
                     Or fomie praise, that drops from common iawes:
                     The garland that she weares, their hands must twine,
                     Who can both censure, vnderstand, define
                     What merit is: Then cast those piercing raies,
                     Round as a crowne, in stead of honour'd bayes,
                     About his poesie; which (he knowes) affoords
                     Words, aboue action: matter, aboue words.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act I.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     CVPID, MERCVRIE.
                     
                        WHo goes there?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Tis I, blind archer.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Who? MERCVRIE?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Farewell.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Stay, CVPID.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Not in your companie, HELMES, except your hands were ri
                           
                              •
                           etted at your backe.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Why so my little rower?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Because I know, you ha' not a finger, but is as long as my quiuer (cousin MERCVRIE) when you please to extend it.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Whence deriue you this speech, boy?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        O! tis your best politie to be ignorant. You did neuer steale MARS his sword out of the sheath, you? nor NEPTVNES trident? nor APOLLOES how? no, not you? Alas, your palmes (IVPITER knowes) they are as tender as the foot of a foundred nagge, or a ladies face new mercuried, the'ile touch nothing.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Goe too (infant) you'le be daring still.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Daring? O IANVS! what a word is there? why, my light fether-heel'd couss', what are you? any more then my vncle IOVES pandar, a lacquey, that runnes on errands for him, and can whisper a light message to a loose wench with some round volubilitie, wait mannerly at a table with a trencher, and warble vpon a crowde a little, fill out nectar, when Ganimed's away, one that sweeps the Gods drinking roome euery morning, and sets the cushions in order againe, which they threw one at anothers headouer-night, can brush the carpets, call the stooles againe to their places, play the cryer of the court with an audible voice, and take state of a President vpon you at wrestlings, pleadings, negotiations, &c. Here's the catalogue o' your imploiments now. O no, I erre, you haue the marshalling of all the ghosts too, that passe the stygian ferrie, and I suspect you for a share with the old sculler there, if the truth were known;

but let that scape. One other peculiar vertue you possesse, in lifting, or lieger-du-maine, (which few of the house of heau'n haue else besides) I must confesse. But (mee thinkes) that should not make you put that extreme distance twixt your selfe and others, that we should be said to ouerdare in speaking to your nimble deitie? So HERCVLES might challenge prioritie of vs both, because he can throw the barre farther, or lift more ioyn'd stooles at the armes end, then we. If this might carry it, then wee who haue made the whole bodie of diuinitie tremble at the twang of our bow, and enforc'd SATVRNIVS himselfe to lay by his curl'd front, thunder, and three-fork'd fires, and put on a masking sute, too light for a reueller of eighteene, to be seene in—
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        How now! my dancing braggart in d
                                 •
                              cimo sexto! charme your skipping tongue, or I'le—
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        What? vse the vertue of your snakie tip-staffe there vpon vs?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        No, boy, but the smart vigor of my palme about your eares. You haue forgot since I tooke your heeles vp into aire (on the very houre I was borne) in sight of all the bench of deities, when the siluerroofe of the Olympi
                                 •
                              
                            palace rung againe with applause of the fact.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        O no, I remember it freshly, and by a particular instance; for my mother VENVS (at the same time) but stoopt to imbrace you, and (to speake by metaphore) you borrowed a girdle of hers, as you did IOVES scepter (while hee was laughing) and would haue done his thunder too, but that 'twas too hot for your itching fingers.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Tis well, sir.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        I heard, you but look't in at VULCANS forge the other day, and intreated a paire of his new tongs along with you, for companie: Tis ioy on you (yfaith) that you will keepe your hook'd tallons in practice with any thing. Slight, now you are on earth, wee shall haue you silch spoones and candle-s
                              •
                           icks, rather then faile: pray IOVE the perfum'd courtiers keepe their casting-bottles, pick-toothes, and shittle-cocks from you; or our more ordinarie gallants their tabacco-boxes, for I am strangely iealous of your nailes.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Ne're trust me, CVPID, but you are turn'd a most acute gallant of late, the edge of my wit is cleere taken off with the f
                              ••
                           e and subtile
stroke of your thin-ground tongue, you fight with too poinant a phrase, for me to deale with.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        O HERMES, your craft cannot make me confident. I know my owne steele to bee almost spent, and therefore intreate my peace with you, in time: you are too cunning for mee to incounter at length▪ and I thinke it my safest ward to close.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Well, for once, I'le suffer you to winne vpon mee, wagge, but vse not these straines too often, they'le stretch my patience. Whither might you march, now?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Faith (to recouer thy good thoughts) I'le discouer my whole proiect. The Huntresse, and Queene of these groues, DIANA (in regard

of some black and enuious slanders hourely breath'd against her, for her diuine iustice on ACTEON, as shee pretends) hath here in the vale of Gargaphy, proclaim'd a solemne reuells, which (her god-head put off) shee will descend to grace, with the full and royall expence of one of her cleerest moones: In which time, it shall bee lawfull for all sorts of ingenuous persons, to visit her palace, to court her NYMPHES, to exercise all varietie of generous and noble pastimes, as well to intimate how farre shee treads such malicious imputations beneath her, as also to shew how cleere her beauties are from the least wrinckle of austerity, they may be charg'd with.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        But, what is all this to CVPID?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Here doe I meane to put off the title of a god, and take the habite of a page, in which disguise (during the interim of these reuells) I will get to follow some one of DIANAES maides, where (if my bow hold, and my shafts flie but with halfe the willingnesse, and aime they are directed) I doubt not, but I shall really redeeme the minutes I haue lost, by their so long and ouer-nice proscription of my deitie, from their court.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Pursue it (diuine CVPID) it will be rare.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        But will HERMES second me?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I am now to put in act, an especiall designement from my father IOVE, but that perform'd, I am for any fresh action that offers it selfe.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Well, then we part.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Farewell, good wag.
                        Now, to my charge, ECCHO, faire ECCHO, speake,
                        Tis MERCVRIE, that calls thee, sorrowfull Nymph,
                        Salute me with thy repercussiue voice,
                        That I may know what cauerne of the earth
                        Containes thy ayrie spirit, how, or where
                        I may direct my speech, that thou maist heare.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ACT I. Scene II.
                     ECCHO, MERCVRIE.
                     
                        HEre.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        So nigh?
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        I.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Know (gentle soule) then, I am sent from IOVE,
                        Who (pittying the sad burthen of thy woes,
                        Still growing on thee, in thy want of wordes,
                        To vent thy passion for NARCISSVS death)
                        Commands, that now (after three thousand yeeres,
                        Which haue beene exercis'd in IVNOES spight)
                        Thou take a corporall figure, and ascend,
                        Enricht with vocall, and articulate power.
                        Make haste, sad Nymph, thrice shall my winged rod
                        Strike th'obsequious earth, to giue thee way.
                        
                        Arise, and speake thy sorrowes, ECCHO, rise,
                        Here, by this fountayne, where thy loue did pine,
                        Whose memorie liues fresh to vulgar fame,
                        Shrin'd in this yellow flowre, that beares his name.
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        His name reuiues, and lifts me vp from earth.
                        O, which way shall I first conuert my selfe?
                        Or in what moode shall I assay to speake,
                        That (in a moment) I may be deliuered
                        Of the prodigious griefe I goe withall?
                        See, see, the mourning fount, whose springs weepe yet,
                        Th' vntimely fate of that too beauteous boy,
                        That trophaee of selfe-loue, and spoile of nature,
                        Who (now transform'd into this drouping flowre)
                        Hangs the repentant head, back from the streame,
                        As if it wish'd, would I had neuer look'd
                        In such a flattering mirrour. O NARCISSVS,
                        Thou that wast once (and yet art) my NARCISSVS;
                        Had ECCHO but beene priuate with thy thoughts,
                        Shee would haue dropt away her selfe in teares,
                        Till shee had all turn'd water, that in her,
                        (As in a 
                              〈◊〉
                            glasse) thou mightst haue gaz'd,
                        And seene thy beauties by more kind reflection:
                        But selfe-loue neuer yet could looke on truth,
                        But with bleard beames; 
                              •
                           lieke flatterie and shee
                        Are twin borne sisters, and so mixe their eyes,
                        As if you se
                              •
                           er one, the other dies.
                        Why did the gods giue thee a heau'nly forme,
                        And earthy thoughts, to make thee proud of it?
                        Why, doe I aske? Tis now the knowne disease
                        That beautie hath, to beare too deepe a sense
                        Of her owne selfe-conceiued excellence.
                        O, hadst thou knowne the worth of heau'ns rich gift,
                        Thou wouldst haue turn'd it to a truer vse,
                        And not (with staru'd, and couetous ignorance)
                        P
                              ••
                           'd in continuall eying that bright gem,
                        The glance whereof to others had beene more,
                        Then to thy famisht mind the wide worlds store:
                        "So wretched is it to be meerely rich.
                        Witnesse thy youths deare sweets, here spent vntasted,
                        Like a faire taper, with his owne flame wasted.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        ECCHO, be briefe, SATVRNIA is abroad,
                        And if shee heare, sheele storme at IOVES high will.
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        I will (kind MERCVRIE) be briefe as time.
                        Vouchsafe me, I may doe him these last rites,
                        But kisse his flowre, and sing some mourning straine
                        
                        Ouer his watrie hearse.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Thou dost obtaine.
                        I were no sonne to IOVE, should I denie thee.
                        Begin, and (more to grace thy cunning voice)
                        The humorous aire shall mixe her solemne tunes,
                        With thy sad words: strike musicque from the spheares,
                        And with your golden raptures swell our eares.
                     
                     SONG.
                     SLow, slow, fresh fount, keepe time with my salt teares;
                     Yet slower, yet, 
                           •
                         faintly gentle springs:
                     List to the heauy part the musique beares,
                     "Woe weepes out her diuision, when shee sings.
                     Droupe hearbs, and flowres;
                     Fall griefe in showres;
                     "Our beauties are not ours:
                     O, I could still
                     (Like melting snow vpon some craggie hill,)
                     drop, drop, drop, drop,
                     Since natures pride is, now, a wither'd daffodill.
                     
                        MER.
                        Now, ha' you done?
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        Done presently (good HERMES) bide a little,
                        Suffer my thirstie eye to gaze a while,
                        But e'ene to taste the place, and I am vanisht.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Forgoe thy vse, and libertie of tongue,
                        And thou maist dwell on earth, and sport thee there.
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        Here yong ACTEON fell, pursu'de, and torne
                        By CYNTHIA'S wrath (more eager, then his hounds)
                        And here, (ay me, the place is fatall) see
                        The weeping NIOBE, translated hither
                        From Phrygian mountaines: and by PHoeBE rear'd
                        As the proud trophaee of her sharpe reuenge.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Nay, but heare.
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        But here, O here, the Fountayne of selfe-Loue,
                        In which LATONA, and her carelesse Nymphs,
                        (Regardles of my sorrowes) bathe themselues
                        In hourely pleasures.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Stint thy babling tongue;
                        Fond ECCHO, thou prophan'st the grace is done thee:
                        So idle worldlings (meerely made of voice)
                        Censure the powers aboue them. Come, away,
                        IOVE calls thee hence, and his will brookes no stay.
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        O, stay: I haue but one poore thought to clothe
                        In ayrie garments, and then (faith) I goe.
                        Henceforth, thou trecherous, and murthering spring,
                        Be euer call'd the Fountayne of selfe-Loue:
                        
                        And with thy water let this curse remaine,
                        
                        (As an inseparate plague) that who but tastes
                        A drop thereof, may, with the instant touch,
                        Grow dotingly enamor'd on themselues.
                        Now, HERMES, I haue finisht.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Then thy speech,
                        Must here forsake thee, ECCHO, and thy voice
                        (As it was wont) rebound but the last wordes.
                        Farewell.
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        Well.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Now, CVPID, I am for you, and your mirth,
                        To make me light before I leaue the earth.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene III.
                     AMORPHVS, ECCHO, MERCVRIE.
                     
                        DEare sparke of beautie, make not so fast away.
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        Away.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Stay, let me obserue this portent yet.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I am neither your Minotaure, nor your Centaure, nor your Satyre, nor your Hyaena, nor your Babion, but your mere trauailer, beleeue me.
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        Leaue me.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I guess'd it should bee some trauailing motion pursude ECCHO so.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Know you from whom you flie? or whence?
                     
                     
                        ECC.
                        Hence.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        This is somewhat aboue strange! a Nymph of her feature, and lineament, to be so preposterously rude! well, I will but coole my selfe at you' spring, and follow her.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Nay, then I am familiar with the issue: I'le leaue you too.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I am a Rhinoceros, if I had thought a creature of her symmetry, could haue dar'd so improportionable, and abrupt a digression. Liberall, and diuine fount, suffer my prophane hand to take of thy bounties. By the puritie of my taste, here is most ambrosiacke water; I will sup of it againe. By thy fauour, sweet fount. See, the water (a more running, subtile, and humorous Nymph then shee) permits me to touch, and handle her. What should I inferre? If my behauiours had beene of a cheape or customarie garbe; my accent, or phrase vulgar; my garments trite; my countenance illiterate; or vnpractiz'd in the encounter of a beautifull and braue-attir'd peece; then I might (with some change of colour) haue suspected my faculties: but (knowing my selfe an offence so sublimated, and refin'd by trauell; of so studied, and well exercis'd a gesture; so alone in fashion; able to tender the face of any states-man liuing; and to speake the mere extraction of language; one that hath now made the sixth returne vpon venter; and was your first that euer enricht his countrey with the true lawes of the duello; whose optiques haue drunke the spirit of beautie, in some eight score and eighteen Princes courts, where I haue resided,

and beene there fortunate in the amours of three hundred fortie and fiue ladies (all nobly, if not princely descended) whose names I haue in catalogue; to conclude, in all so happy, as euen admiration her selfe doth seeme to fasten her kisses vpon me: Certes, I doe neither see, nor feele, nor taste, nor sauour the least steame, or fume of a reason, that should inuite this foolish fastidious Nymph, so peeuishly to abandon me. Well, let the memorie of her fleet into aire; my thoughts and I am for this other element, water.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene IIII.
                     CRITES, ASOTVS, AMORPHVS.
                     
                        WHat! the wel-dieted AMORPHVS become a water-drinker? I see he meanes not to write verses then.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        No, CRITES? why?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Because—Nec placere diu, nec viuere carmina possunt, quae scribuntur aquae potoribus.
                        
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        What say you to your HELICON?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        O, the MVSES well! that's euer excepted.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Sir, your MVSES haue no such water, I assure you; your nectar, or the iuyce of your nepenthe is nothing to it; tis aboue your metheglin, beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        
                           Metheglin! what's that, sir? may I be so audacious to demand?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        A kind of greeke wine I haue met with, sir, in my trauailes: it is the same that DEMOSTHENES vsually drunke, in the composure of all his exquisite, and mellifluous orations.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        That's to be argued (AMORPHVS) if we may credit LVCIAN, who in his Eucomio Demosthenis affirmes, hee neuer drunke but water in any of his compositions.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        LVCIAN is absurd, he knew nothing: I will beleeue mine owne trauailes, before all the LVCIANS of Europe. He doth feed you with sittons, figments, and leasings.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Indeed (I thinke) next a trauailer, he do's prettily well.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I assure you it was wine, I haue tasted it, and from the hand of an Italian Antiquarie, who deriues it authentically from the Duke of Ferrara's bottles. How name you the gentleman you are in ranke with there, sir?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Tis ASOTVS, sonne to the late deceas'd PHILARGYRVS the citizen.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Was his father of any eminent place, or meanes?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        He was to haue beene Praetor next yeere.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Ha! A prettie formall yong gallant, in good sooth: pitty, he is not more gentilely propagated. Harke you, CRITES, you may say to him, what I am, if you please: though I affect not popularitie, yet I would be loth to stand out to any, whom you shall vouchsafe to call friend.
                     
                     
                        
                        CRI.
                        Sir, I feare I may doe wrong to your sufficiencies in the reporting them, by forgetting or misplacing some one; your selfe can best enforme him of your selfe, sir: except you had some catalogue, or list of your faculties readie drawne, which you would request mee to shew him, for you, and him to take notice of.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        This CRITES is sowre: I will thinke, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Doe so, sir. O heauen! that any thing (in the likenesse of man) should suffer these rackt extremities, for the vttering of his sophisticate good parts.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        CRITES, I haue a sute to you; but you must not denie mee: pray you make this gentleman and I friends.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Friends! Why? is there any difference betweene you?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        No, I meane acquaintance, to know one another.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        O, now I apprehend you; your phrase was without me, before▪
                        
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        In good faith, hee's a most excellent rare man, I warrant him!
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Slight, they are mutually inamor'd by this time!
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Will you, sweet CRITES?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Yes, yes.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Nay, but when? you'le defer it now, and forget it.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Why, is't a thing of such present necessitie, that it requires so violent a dispatch?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        No, but (would I might neuer stirre) hee's a most rauishing man! good CRITES, you shall endeare me to you, in good faith-law.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Well, your longing shall be satisfied, sir.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        And withall, you may tell him what my father was, and how well he left me, and that I am his heire.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Leaue it to mee, I'le forget none of your deare graces, I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Nay, I know you can better marshall these affaires then I can— O gods▪ I'de giue all the world (if I had it) for abundance of such acquaintance.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        What ridiculous circumstance might I deuise now, to bestow this reciprocall brace of butter-flies one vpon another?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Since I trode on this side the Alpes, I was not so frozen in my inuention. Let mee see: to accost him with some choice remnant of spanish, or italian? that would indifferently expresse my languages now: marythen, if he should fall out to be ignorant, it were both hard, and harsh. How else? step into some ragioni del stato, and so make my induction? that were aboue him too; and out of his element, I feare. Faine to haue seene him in Venice, or Padua? or some face neere his in similitude? t'is too pointed, and open. No, it must be a more queint, and collaterall deuice. As— stay: to frame some encomiastick speech vpon this our Metropolis, or the wise magistrates thereof, in which politique number, 'tis ods, but his father fill'd vp a roome? descend into a particular admiration of their iustice; for the due measuring of coales, burning of cannes, and such like?

As also their religion, in pulling downe a superstitious crosse, and aduancing a VENVS, or PRIAPVS, in place of it? ha? 'twill doe well. Or to talke of some hospitall, whose walls record his father a Benefactor? or of so many buckets bestow'd on his parish church, in his life time, with his name at length (for want of armes) trickt vpon them? Any of these? Or to praise the cleannesse of the street, wherein hee dwelt? or the prouident painting of his posts against hee should haue beene Praetor? or (leauing his parent) come to some speciall ornament about himselfe, as his rapier, or some other of his accoutrements? I haue it: Thanks, gracious MINERVA.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Would I had but once spoke to him, and then—Hee comes to me.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        'Tis a most curious, and neatly-wrought band, this same, as I haue scene, sir.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O god, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You forgiue the humour of mine eye, in obseruing it.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        His eye waters after it, it seemes.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O lord, sir, there needes no such apologie, I assure you.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        I am anticipated: they'll make a solemne deed of gift of themselues, you shall see.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Your ribband too do's most gracefully, in troth.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Tis the most gentile, and receiu'd weare now, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Beleeue mee, sir (I speake it not to humour you) I haue not seene a young gentleman (generally) put on his clothes, with more iudgement.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O, tis your pleasure to say so, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        No, as I am vertuous (being altogether vn-trauel'd) it strikes me into wonder.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I doe purpose to trauaile, sir, at spring.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I thinke I shall affect you, sir. This last speech of yours hath begun to make you deare to me.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O god, sir. I would there were anything in mee, sir, that might appeare worthy the least worthinesse of your worth, sir. I protest, sir, I should endeuour to shew it, sir, with more then common regard, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        O, here's rare motley, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Both your desert, and your endeuours are plentifull, suspect them not: but your sweet disposition to trauaile (I assure you) hath made you another my-selfe in mine eye, and strooke mee inamor'd on your beauties.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I would I were the fairest lady of France for your sake, sir, and yet I would trauaile too.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        O, you should digresse from your selfe else: for (beleeue it) your trauaile is your only thing that rectifies, or (as the Italian saies) vi rendi pronto all' attioni, makes you fit for action.
                        
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I thinke it be great charge though, sir.
                     
                     
                        
                        AMOR.
                        Charge? why tis nothing for a gentleman that goes priuate, as your selfe, or so; my intelligence shall quit my charge at all times. Good faith, this hat hath possest mine eye exceedingly; tis so prettie, and fantastike: what? ist a beauer?
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        I, sir, Ile assure you tis a beauer, it cost mee eight crownes but this morning.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        After your French account?
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        And so neere his head? beshrow me, dangerous.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        A verie prettie fashion (beleeue me) and a most nouel kind of trimme: your band is conceited too!
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        Sir, it is all at your seruice.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        O, pardon me.
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        I beseech you, sir, if you please to weare it, you shall doe mee a most infinite grace.
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        Slight, will he be praisde out of his clothes?
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        By heauen, sir, I doe not offer it you after the Italian manner; I would you should conceiue so of me.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        Sir, I shall feare to appeare rude in denying your courtesies, especially, being inuited by so proper a distinction: may I pray your name, sir?
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        My name is ASOTVS, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        I take your loue (gentle ASOTVS) but let me winne you to receiue this, in exchange—
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        'Hart, they'll change doublets anon.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        And (from this time) esteeme your selfe, in the first ranke, of those few, whom I professe to loue. What make you in companie of this scholler, here? I will bring you knowne to gallants, as ANAIDES of the ordinarie, HEDON the courtier, and others, whose societie shall render you grac'd, and respected: this is a triuiall fellow, too meane, too cheape, too course for you to conuerse with.
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        Slid, this is not worth a crowne, and mine cost mee eight but this morning.
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        I lookt when he would repent him, he ha's begunne to bee sad a good while.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        Sir, shall I say to you for that hat? be not so sad, be not so sad: it is are lique I could not so easily haue departed with, but as the hieroglyphicke of my affection; you shall alter it to what forme you please, it will take any blocke; I haue receiu'd it varied (on record) to the three thousandth time, and not so sew: It hath these vertues beside; your head shall not ake vnder it; nor your braine leaue you, without licence; It will preserue your complexion to eternitie; for no beame of the sunne (should your weare it vnder Zona torrida) hath power to approch it by two ells. It is proofe against thunder, and inchantment: and was giuen mee by a great man (in Russia) as an especiall-priz'd present; and constantly affirm'd

to bee the hat, that accompanied the politike VLYSSES, in his tedious, and ten yeeres trauels.
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        By IOVE, I will not depart withall, whosoeuer would giue me a million.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene V.
                     COS, CRITICVS, AMORPHVS, ASOTVS, PROSAITES.
                     
                        SAue you, sweet blouds: do's any of you want a creature, or a dependant?
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        Beshrow me, a fine blunt slaue!
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        A page of good timber? it will now bee my grace to entertaine him first, though I casheere him againe in priuate: how art thou cal'd?
                     
                     
                        COS.
                        COS, sir, COS.
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        Cos? How happily hath fortune furnisht him with a whetstone?
                        
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        I doe entertaine you, COS, conceale your qualitie till wee be priuate; if your parts be worthie of me, I will countenance you; if not, catechize you: gentles, shall we goe?
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        Stay, sir; Ile but entertaine this other fellow, and then—I haue a great humour to taste of this water too, but Ile come againe alone for that—marke the place. What's your name, youth?
                     
                     
                        PROS.
                        PROSAITES, sir.
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        PROSAITES? A verie fine name, CRITES? ist not?
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        Yes, and a verie ancient, sir, the begger.
                        
                     
                     
                        ASOT.
                        Follow me, good PROSAITES: Let's talke.
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        He will ranke euen with you (er't be long)
                        If you hold on your course. O vanitie,
                        How are thy painted beauties doted on,
                        By light, and emptie ideots! how pursu'de
                        With open and extended appetite!
                        How they doe sweate, and run themselues from breath,
                        Rais'd on their toes, to catch thy ayrie formes,
                        Still turning giddie, till they reele like drunkards,
                        That buy the merrie madnesse of one houre,
                        With the long irke somenesse of following time!
                        O how despisde and base a thing is a man,
                        If he not striue t'erect his groueling thoughts
                        Aboue the straine of flesh! But how more cheape
                        When, euen his best and vnderstanding part,
                        (The crowne, and strength of all his faculties)
                        Floates like a dead drown'd bodie, on the streame
                        
                        Of vulgar humour, mixt with commonst dregs?
                        I suffer for their guilt now, and my soule
                        (Like one that lookes on il-affected eyes)
                        Is hurt with meere intention on their follies:
                        Why will I view them then? my sense might aske me:
                        Or ist a racitie, or some new obiect,
                        That straines my strict obseruance to this point?
                        O would it were, therein I could affoord
                        My spirit should draw a little neere to theirs,
                        To gaze on nouelties: so vice were one.
                        Tut, she is stale, ranke, foule, and were it not
                        That those (that woo her) greet her with lockt eyes,
                        (In spight of all the impostures, paintings, drugs,
                        Which her bawd custome dawbes her cheekes withall)
                        Shee would betray her loth'd and leprous face,
                        And 
                              •
                           right th'enamor'd dotards from themselues:
                        But such is the peruersenesse of our nature,
                        That if we once but fancie leuitie,
                        (How antike and ridiculous so ere
                        It sute with vs) yet will our muffled thought
                        Choose rather not to see it, then auoide it:
                        And if we can but banish our owne sense,
                        We act our mimicke trickes with that free licence,
                        That lust, that pleasure, that securitie,
                        As if we practiz'd in a paste-boord case,
                        And no one saw the motion, but the motion.
                        Well, checke thy passion, lest it grow too lowd:
                        "While fooles are pittied, they waxe fat, and proud.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act II.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     CVPID, MERCVRY.
                     
                        WHy, this was most vnexpectedly followed (by diuine delicate MERCVRY) by the beard of IOVE, thou art a precious deitie.
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Nay, CVPID, leaue to speake improperly, since wee are turn'd cracks, let's studie to be like cracks; practise their language, and behauiours, and not with a dead imitation: act freely, carelessely, and capriciously, as if our veines ranne with quick-siluer, and not vtter a phrase, but what shall come forth steept in the verie brine of conceipt, and sparkle like salt in fire.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        That's not euerie ones happinesse (HERMES) though you can presume vpon the easinesse and dexteritie of your wit, you shall giue me leaue to be a little jealous of mine; and not desperately to hazard it after your capring humour.
                     
                     
                        
                        MER.
                        Nay, then, CVPID, I thinke wee must haue you hood-winkt againe, for you are growne too prouident, since your eyes were at libertie.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Not so (MERCVRY) I am still blind CVPID to thee.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        And what to the ladie Nymph you serue?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Troth, page, boy, and sirha: these are all my titles.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Then thou hast not altered thy name, with thy disguise?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        O, no, that had beene supererogation, you shall neuer heare your courtier call but by one of these three.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Faith, then both our fortunes are the same.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Why? what parcell of man hast thou lighted on for a master?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Such a one (as before I begin to decipher him) I dare not affirme to be any thing lesse then a courtier. So much hee is, during this open time of reuels, and would be longer, but that his meanes are to leaue him shortly after. His name is HEDON, a gallant wholy consecrated to his pleasures.—
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        HEDON? he vses much to my ladies chamber, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        How is she cal'd, and then I can shew thee?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Madame PHILAVTIA.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O I, he affects her verie particularly indeed. These are his graces. Hee doth (besides me) keepe a barber, and a monkie: Hee has a rich wrought wast
                              •
                           coat to entertaine his visitants in, with a cap almost sutable. His curtaines, and bedding are thought to bee his owne: his bathing-tub is not suspected. Hee loues to haue a fencer, a pedant, and a musician seene in his lodging a mornings.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        And not a poet?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Fye no: himselfe is a rimer, and that's a thought better then a poet. He is not lightly within to his mercer, no, though he come when he takes physicke, which is commonly after his play. He beates a tailour very well, but a stocking-seller admirably: and so consequently any one hee owes monie too, that dares not resist him. Hee neuer makes generall inui
                              •
                           ement, but against the publishing of a new sute, marie then, you shall haue more drawne to his lodging, then come to the lanching of some three ships; especially if he be furnish'd with supplies for the retyring of his old ward-robe from pawne: if not, he do's hire a stocke of apparell, and some fortie, or fiftie pound in gold, for that fore-noone to shew. He's thought a verie necessarie perfume for the presence, and for that onely cause welcome thither: sixe millaners shops affoord you not the like sent. He courts ladies with how many great horse he hath rid that morning, or how oft he hath done the whole, or the halfe pommado in a seuen-night before: and sometime venters so farre vpon the vertue of his pomander, that he dares tell'hem, how many shirts he has sweat at tennis that weeke, but wisely conceales so many dozen of bals hee is on the score. Here hee comes, that is all this.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act II. Scene II.
                     HEDON, MERCVRY, ANAIDES, GELAIA, CVPID.
                     
                        BOy.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Sir.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Are any of the ladies in the presence?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        None yet, sir.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Giue me some gold, more.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Is that thy boy, HEDON?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        I, what think'st thou of him?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'hart, Il'd geld him; I warrant he has the philosophers stone.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Well said, my good melancholy deuill: Sirrah, I haue deuisde one or two of the prettiest othes (this morning in my bed) as euer thou heard'st, to protest withall in the presence.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Pray thee, let's heare 'hem.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Soft, thou'lt vse 'hem afore me.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        No (dam' me then) I haue more othes then I know how to vtter, by this ayre.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Faith, one is, by the tip of your eare, sweet ladie. Is't not prettie, and gentile?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Yes, for the person 'tis applyed to, a ladie. It should bee light, and—
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Nay, the other is better, exceeds it much: the inuention is farder set too. By the white valley that lies betweene the Alpine hils of your bosome, I protest—&c.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Well, you trauel'd for that, HEDON.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I, in a map, where his eyes were but blinde guides to his vnderstanding, it seemes.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        And then I haue a salutation will nicke all, by this caper: hay!
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        How is that?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        You know I call madame PHILAVTIA, my Honour; and shee cals me her Ambition. Now, (when I meet her in the presence anon) I will come to her, and say, sweet Honour, I haue hitherto contented my sense with the lillies of your hand, but now I will taste the roses of your lip; and (withall) kisse her: to which she cannot but blushingly answere, nay, now you are too ambitious. And then doe I reply; I cannot bee too ambitious of honour, sweet ladie. Wil't not be good? ha? ha?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        O, assure your soule.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        By heauen, I thinke 'twill bee excellent, and a verie politike atchiuement of a kisse.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I haue thought vpon one for MORIA, of a sodaine too, if it take.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        What is't, my deare inuention?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Mary, I will come to her, (and shee alwayes weares a muffe, if

you bee remembred) and I will tell her, Madame, your whole selfe cannot but be perfectly wise: for your hands haue wit enough to keepe themselues warme.
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Now, (before IOVE) admirable! looke, thy page takes it too, by Ph
                                 •
                              bus, my sweet facetious rascall, I could eate water-gruell with thee a moneth, for this iest, my deare rogue.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        O, (by HERCVLES) 'tis your onely dish, aboue all your potato's, or oyster-pyes in the world.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        I haue ruminated vpon a most rare wish too, and the prophecie to it, but Ile haue some friend to be the prophet; as thus: I doe wish my selfe one of my mistresse Cioppini. Another demands, Why would he be one of his Mistresse Cioppini? A third answeres, Because he would make her higher. A fourth shall say, That will make her proud. And a fifth shall conclude: Then doe I prophecie, pride will haue a fall, and he shall giue it her.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I'le be your prophet. By gods so, it will be most exquisite, thou art a fine inuentious Rogue, sirrah.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Nay, and I haue poesies for rings too, and riddles that they dreame not of.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Tut, they'll doe that, when they come to sleep on them time enough; but were thy deuices neuer in the presence yet, HEDON?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        O, no, I disdaine that.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Twere good we went afore then, and brought them acquainted with the roome where they shall act, lest the stratagems of it put them out of countenance, when they should come forth.
                     
                     
                        CVR.
                        Is that a courtier too?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Troth no; he has two essentiall parts of the courtier, pride, and ignorance; mary, the rest come somewhat after the ordinarie gallant. Tis impudence it selfe, ANAIDES; one, that speakes all that comes in his checkes, and will blush no more then a sackbut. Hee lightly occupies the iesters roome at the table, and keepes laughter GELAIA (a wench in pages attire) following him in place of a squire, whom he now and then tickles with some strange ridiculous stuffe, vtter'd (as his land came to him) by chance. He will censure or discourse of any thing, but as absurdly as you would wish. His fashion is not to take knowledge of him that is beneath him in clothes. Hee neuer drinkes below the salt. Hee do's naturally admire his wit, that weares gold-lace, or tissue. Stabs any man that speakes more contemptibly of the scholler then he. Hee is a great proficient in all the illiberall sciences, as cheating, drinking, swaggering, whoring, and such like: neuer kneeles but to pledge healths; nor prayes but for a pipe of pudding tabacco. He wil blaspheme in his shirt. The othes which hee vomits at one supper, would maintaine a towne of garrison in good swearing a twelue-moneth. One other genuine qualitie he has, which crownes all these, and that is this: to a friend in want, hee will not depart with the waight of a soldred groat, lest the world might censure him prodigall, or report him a gull: mary, to his cockatrice or punquetto, halfe a dozen taffata

gownes, or sattin kirtles, in a paire or two of moneths, why they are nothing.
                     
                     
                        CVR.
                        I commend him, he is one of my clients.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene III.
                     AMORPHVS, ASOTVS, COS, PROSAITES, CVPID, MERCVRIE.
                     
                        COme, sir. You are now within in regard of the presence, and see, the priuacie of this roome, how sweetly it offers it selfe to our retir'd intendments. Page, cast a vigilant, and enquiring eye about, that we be not rudely surpriz'd, by the approch of some ruder stranger.
                     
                     
                        COS.
                        I warrant you, sir. I'le tell your when the wolfe enters, feare nothing.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, what a masse of benefit shall we possesse, in being the inuisible spectators of this strange shew, now to be acted?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Plant your selfe there, sir: and obserue me. You shall now, as well be the ocular, as the eare-witnesse, how cleerly I can refell that paradox, or rather pseudodox, of those, which hold the face to be the index of the mind, which (I assure you) is not so, in any politique creature: for instance. I will now giue you the particular, and distinct face of euery your most noted species of persons, as your marchant, your scholer, your souldier, your lawyer, courtier, &c. and each of these so truly, as you would sweare, but that your eye shal see the variation of the lineament, it were my most proper, and genuine aspect. First, for your marchant, or citie-face, 'tis thus, a dull, plodding face, still looking in a direct line, forward: there is no great matter in this face. Then haue you your students, or academique face, which is here, an honest, simple, and methodicall face: but somewhat more spread then the former. The third is your souldiers face, a menacing, and astounding face, that lookes broad, and bigge: the grace of this face consisteth much in a beard. The anti-face to this, is your lawyers face, a contracted, subtile, and intricate face, full of quirkes, and turnings, a labyrinthaean face, now angularly, now circularly, euery way aspected. Next is your statists face, a serious, solemne, and supercilious face, full of formall, and square grauitie, the eye (for the most part) deeply and artificially shadow'd: there is great iudgement required in the making of this face. But now, to come to your face of faces, or courtiers face, tis of three sorts, according to our subdiuision of a courtier, elementarie, practique, and theorique. Your courtier theorique, is hee, that hath arriu'd to his fardest, and doth now know the court, rather by speculation, then practice; and this is his face: a fastidious and oblique face, that lookes, as it went with a vice, and were screw'd thus. Your courtier practike, is he, that is yet in his path, his course, his way, & hath not toucht the puntilio, or point of his hopes; his face is here: a most promising, open,

smooth, and ouer-flowing face, that seemes as it would runne, and powre it selfe into you. Somewhat a northerly face. Your courtier elementarie, is one but newly enter'd, or as it were in the alphabet, or vt-re-mi-fa-sol-la of courtship. Note well this face, for it is this you must practice.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Ile practice 'hem all, if you please, sir.
                     
                     
                        ANO.
                        I, hereafter you may: and it will not be altogether an vngratefull study. For, let your soule be assur'd of this (in any ranke, or profession what-euer) the more generall, or maior part of opinion goes with the face, and (simply) respects nothing else. Therefore, if that can be made exactly, curiously, exquisitely, thorowly, it is inough: But (for the present) you shall only apply your selfe to this face of the elementarie courtier, a light, reuelling, and protesting face, now blushing, now smiling, which you may helpe much with a wanton wagging of your head, thus, (a feather will teach you) or with kissing your 
                              •
                           inger that hath the ruby, or playing with some string of your band, which is a most quaint kind of melancholy besides: or (if among ladies) laughing lowd, and crying vp your owne wit, though perhaps borrow'd, it is not amisse. Where is your page? call for your casting-bottle, and place your mirrour in your hat, as I told you: so. Come, looke not pale, obserue me, set your face, and enter.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, for some excellent painter, to haue tane the copy of all these faces!
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        PROSAITES.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Fye, I premonisht you of that: In the court, boy, lacquay, or sirrah.
                     
                     
                        COS.
                        Master, Lupus in— O, t'is PROSAITES.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Sirrha prepare my casting-bottle, I thinke I must be enforc'd to purchase me another page, you see how at hand COS waits, here.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        So will he too, in time.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        What's he, MERCVRIE?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        A notable smelt. One, that hath newly entertain'd the begger to follow him, but cannot get him to wait neere enough. T'is ASOTVS, the heire of PHILARGYRVS; but first I'le giue yee the others character, which may make his the cleerer. He that is with him, is AMORPHVS, a trauailer, one so made out of the mixture and shreds of formes, that himselfe is truly deform
                              •
                           d. He walkes most commonly with a cloue, or pick-tooth in his mouth, hee is the very mint of complement, all his behauiours are printed, his face is another volume of essayes; and his beard an Aristarchus. He speakes all creame, skimd, and more affected then a dozen of waiting women. He is his owne promoter in euery place. The wife of the ordinarie giues him his diet, to maintaine her table in discourse, which (indeed) is a meere tyrannie ouer her other guests, for hee will vsurpe all the talke: ten constables are not so tedious. He is no great shifter, once a yeere his apparell is readie to reuolt. He doth vse much to arbitrate quarrels, and fights himselfe, exceeding well (out at a window.) He will

lye cheaper then any begger, and lowder then most clockes: for which he is right properly accommodated to the whetstone, his page. The other gallant is his Zani, and doth most of these trickes after him; sweates to imitate him in euery thing (to a haire) except a beard, which is not yet extant. He doth learne to make strange sauces, to eat aenchouies, maccaroni, bouoli, fagioli, and cauiare, because hee loues 'hem; speakes as hee speakes, lookes, walkes, goes so in clothes, and fashion: is in all, as if he were moulded of him. Mary (before they met) he had other verie prettie sufficiencies, which yet he retaines some light impression of: as frequenting a dancing schoole, and grieuously torturing strangers, with inquisition after his grace in his galliard. He buyes a fresh acquaintance at any rate. His eye and his rayment confer much together as he goes in the street. He treades nicely, like the fellow that walkes vpon ropes; especially the first sunday of his silke-stockings: and when he is most neat, and new, you shall strip him with commendations.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Here comes another.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Cri
                              •
                           es passeth by.
                        I, but one of another straine, CVPID: This fellow weighs somewhat. 
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        His name, HERMES?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        CRITES. A creature of a most perfect and diuine temper. One, in whom the humours and elements are peaceably met, without emulation of precedencie: he is neyther to phantastikely melancholy, too slowly phlegmaticke, too lightly sanguine, or too rashly cholericke, but in all, so composde & order'd, as it is cleare, Nature went about some ful worke, she did more then make a man, when she made him. His discourse is like his behauiour, vncommon, but not vnpleasing; hee is prodigall of neyther. Hee striues rather to bee that which men call iudicious, then to bee thought so: and is so truly learned, that he affects not to shew it. Hee will thinke, and speake his thought, both freely: but as distant from deprauing another mans merit, as proclaiming his owne. For his valour, tis such, that he dares as little to offer an iniurie, as receiue one. In summe, he hath a most ingenuous and sweet spirit, a sharp and season'd wit, a straight iudgment, and a strong mind. Fortune could neuer breake him, nor make him lesse. He counts it his pleasure, to despise pleasures, and is more delighted with good deeds, then goods. It is a competencie to him that hee can bee vertuous. He doth neyther couet nor feare; hee hath too much reason to doe eyther: and that commends all things to him.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Not better then MERCVRY commends him.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, CVPID, tis beyond my deitie to giue him his due prayses: I could leaue my place in heauen, to liue among mortals, so I were sure to be no other then he.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        S'light, I beleeue he is your minion, you seeme to be so rauisht with him.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        He's one, I would not haue a wry thought darted against, willingly.
                     
                     
                        
                        CVP.
                        No, but a straight shaft in his bosome, Ile promise him, if I am CITHEREAS sonne.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Shall we goe, CVPID?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Stay, and see the ladies now: they'll come presently. Ile helpe to paint them.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        What! lay colour vpon colour? that affords but an ill blazon.
                        
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Argurion passeth by.
                         Here comes mettall to helpe it, the ladie ARGVRION.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Monie, monie.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        The same. A Nymph of a most wandring and giddy disposition, humorous as the aire, shee'le runne from gallant to gallant (as they sit at primero in the presence) most strangely, and seldome stayes with any. Shee spreads as shee goes. To day you shall haue her looke as cleere and fresh as the morning, and to morrow as melancholike as mid-night. Shee takes speciall pleasure in a close obscure lodging, and, for that cause, visites the city so often, where shee has many secret true-concealing fauourites. When shee comes abroad, shee's more loose and scattering then dust, and will flie from place to place, as shee were rapt with a whirle-winde. Your yong student (for the most part) shee affects not, only salutes him, and away: a poet, nor a philosopher, shee is hardly brought to take any notice of; no, though he be some part of an alchemist. Shee loues a player well, and a lawyer infinitely: but your foole aboue all. Shee can doe much in court for the obtayning of any sute whatsoeuer, no doore but flies open to her, her presence is aboue a charme. The worst in her is want of keeping state, and too much descending into inferior and base offices, she's for any coorse imployment you will put vpon her, as to be your procurer, or pandar.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Peace, CVPID, here comes more worke for you, another character or two.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene IIII.
                     PHANTASTE, MORIA, PHILAVTIA, MERCVRIE, CVPID.
                     
                        STay, sweet PHILAVTIA, I'le but change my fanne, and goe presently.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Now (in very good serious) ladies, I will haue this order reuerst, the presence must be better maintayn'd from you: a quarter past eleuen, and ne're a Nymph in prospectiue? beshrew my hand, there must be a reform'd discipline. Is that your new ruffe, sweet lady-bird? By my truth, 'tis most intricately rare.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Good IOVE, what reuerend gentlewoman in yeeres might this be?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        This, Madam MORIA, guardian of the Nymphs. One that is not now to be perswaded of her wit, shee will thinke her selfe wise against all the iudgements that come. A lady made all of voice, and aire, talkes any thing of any thing. Shee is like one of your ignorant Poetasters of the

time, who when they haue got acquainted with a strange word, neuer rest till they haue wroong it in, though it loosen the whole fabricke of their sense.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        That was pretty and sharply noted, CVPID.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Shee will tell you, Philosophie was a fine reueller, when shee was yong, and a gallant, and that then (though she say it) she was thought to be the Dame-DIDO, and HELLEN of the court: As also, what a sweet dogge shee had this time foure yeeres, and how it was call'd Fortune, and that (if the sates had not cut his thred) he had beene a dogge to haue giuen entertainement to any gallant in this kingdome: and, vnlesse shee had whelpt it her selfe, shee could not haue lou'd a thing better i'this world.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, I pray thee no more, I am full of her.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Yes (I must needes tell you) shee composes a sack-posset well; and would court a yong page sweetly, but that her breath is against it.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Now, her breath (or something more strong) protect mee from her: th'other, th'other, CVPID.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        O, that's my lady and mistris, Madam PHILAVTIA. Shee admires not her selfe for any one particularity, but for all: shee is faire, and shee knowes it: shee has a pretty light wit too, and shee knowes it: shee can dance, and shee knowes that too: play at shittle-cock, and that too: no quality shee has, but shee shall take a very particular knowledge of, and most lady-like commend it to you. You shall haue her at any time reade you the historie of her selfe, and very subtilly runne ouer another ladies sufficiencies, to come to her owne. Shee has a good superficiall iudgement in painting; and would seeme to haue so in poetry. A most compleat lady in the opinion of some three, beside her-selfe.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Faith, how lik'd you my quippe to HEDON, about the garter? was't not witty?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Exceeding witty and integrate: you did so aggrauate the iest withall.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        And did I not dance mouingly the last night?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Mouingly? out of measure (in troth) sweet charge.
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        A happy commendation, to dance out of measure.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Saue only you wanted the swim i' the turne: Ô! when I was at fourteene—
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Nay, that's mine owne from any Nymph in the court (I am sure on't) therefore you mistake me in that, Guardian: both the swimme and the trip, are properly mine, euery body will affirme it, that has any iudgement in dancing: I assure you.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Come now, PHILAVTIA, I am for you, shall we goe?
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        I, good PHANTASTE: What! haue you chang'd your head-tire?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Yes faith, th'other was so neere the common: it had no extraordinary grace; besides, I had worne it almost a day, in good troth.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        I'le bee sworne, this is most excellent for the deuice, and rare. 'Tis after the italian print, we look'd on t'other night.
                     
                     
                        
                        PHA.
                        'Tis so: By this fanne, I cannot abide any thing that sauours the poore ouer-worne cut, that has any kindred with it; I must haue variety, I: this mixing in fashion I hate it worse, then to burne juniper in my chamber, I protest.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        And yet we cannot haue a new peculiar court-tire, but these retainers will haue it; these Suburbe-sunday-waiters; these courtiers for high dayes; I know not what I should call 'hem—
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        O, I, they doe most pittifully imitate, but I haue a tire a comming (yfaith) shall—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        In good certaine, Madam, it makes you looke most heauenly; but (lay your hand on your heart) you neuer skin'd a new beautie more prosperously in your life, nor more metaphysically: looke, good lady, sweet lady, looke.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Tis very cleere, and well, beleeue me. But if you had seene mine yesterday, when t'was yong, you would haue— who's your Doctor, PHANTASTE?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Nay, that's counsell, PHILAVTIA, you shall pardon mee: yet (I'le assure you) hee's the most daintie, sweet, absolute rare man of the whole colledge. O! his very lookes, his discourse, his behauiour, all hee doo's is physicke, I protest.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        For heauens sake, his name; good, deare PHANTASTE —
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        No, no, no, no, no, no, (beleeue me) not for a million of heauens: I will not make him cheape. Fie—
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        There is a Nymph too, of a most curious and elaborate straine, light, all motion, an vbiquitarie, shee is euery where, PHANTASTE—
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Her very name speakes her, let her passe. But are these (CVPID) the starres of CYNTHIAS court? doe these Nymphs attend vpon DIANA?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        They are in her court (MERCVRIE) but not as starres, these neuer come in the presence of CYNTHIA. The Nymphs that make her traine, are the diuine ARETE, TIME, PHRONESIS, THAVMA, and others of that high sort. These are priuately brought in by MORIA in this licentious time, against her knowledge: and (like so many meteors) will van
                              •
                           sh, when shee appeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene V.
                     PROSAITES, GELAIA, COS, MERCVRIE, CVPID.
                     
                        
                           SONG.
                           
                              COme follow me, my wagges, and say as I say.
                              There's no riches but in ragges; hey day, hey day.
                              You that professe this arte, come away, come away,
                              And helpe to beare a part. Hey day; hey day, &c.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        MER.
                        What! those that were our fellow pages but now, so soone preferr'd to be yeomen of the bottles? the mysterie, the mysterie, good wagges?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Some dyet-drinke, they haue the guard of.
                     
                     
                        PRO.
                        No, sir, we are going in quest of a strange fountayne, lately found out.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        By whom?
                     
                     
                        COS.
                        My master, or the great discouerer, AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Thou hast well intitled him, COS, for hee will discouer all hee knowes.
                     
                     
                        GEL.
                        I, and a little more too, when the spirit is vpon him.
                     
                     
                        PRO.
                        O, the good trauailing gentleman yonder has caus'd such a drought i' the presence, with reporting the wonders of this new water▪ that all the ladies, and gallants, lie languishing vpon the rushes, like so many pounded cattle i' the midst of haruest, sighing one to another, and gasping, as if each of them expected a cocke from the fountayne, to bee brought into his mouth: and (without we returne quickly) they are all (as a youth would say) no better then a few trowts cast a-shore, or a dish of eeles in a sand-bagge.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Well then, you were best dispatch, and haue a care of them. Come, CVPID, thou and I'le goe peruse this drie wonder.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act III.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     AMORPHVS, ASOTVS.
                     
                        SIt, let not this dis-countenance, or dis-gallant you a whit: you must not sinke vnder the first disaster. It is with your young grammaticall courtier, as with your neophyte-player, a thing vsuall to bee daunted at the first presence, or enter-view: you saw, there was HEDON, and ANAIDES, (farre more practis'd gallants then your selfe) who were both out, to comfort you. It is no disgrace, no more, then for your aduentrous reueller, to fall by some in-auspicious chance in his galliard, or for some subtile politique, to vnder-take the bastinado, that the state might thinke worthily of him, and respect him as a man well beaten to the world. What! hath your taylor prouided the propertie (wee spake of) at your chamber, or no?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I thinke he has.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Nay (I intreat you) be not so flat, and melancholique. Erect your mind: you shall redeeme this with the courtship I will teach you against after-noone. Where eate you to day?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Where you please, sir, any where, I.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Come, let vs goe and taste some light dinner, a dish of slic'd c
                                 •
                              uiare, or so, and after, you shall practise an houre at your lodging, some

few formes that I haue recall'd. If you had but so farre gathered your spirits to you, as to haue taken vp a rush (when you were out) and wagg'd it thus, or clensd your teeth with it: or but turn'd aside, and fain'd some businesse to whisper with your page, till you had recouer'd your selfe, or but found some slight staine in your stocking, or any other prettie inuention (so it had beene sodaine,) you might haue come off with a most cleere, and courtly grace.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        A poyson of all, I thinke I was forespoke, I.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        No, I must tell you, you are not audacious inough, you must frequent ordinaries, a moneth more, to initiate your selfe: In which time, it will not bee amisse, if (in priuate) you keepe good your acquaintance with CRITES, or some other, of his poore coate; visite his lodging secretly, and often: become an earnest suter to heare some of his labours.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O IOVE! sir, I could neuer get him to reade a line to me.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You must then wisely mixe your selfe in ranke, with such, as you know can; and, as your eares doe meet with a new phrase, or an acute jest, take it in: a quicke nimble memory will lift it away, and, at your next publique meale, it is your owne.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        But I shall neuer vtter it perfectly, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        No matter, let it come lame. In ordinary talke you shall play it away, as you doe your light crownes at primero: It will passe.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I shall attempt, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Doe. It is your shifting age for wit, and I assure you, men must bee prudent. After this, you may to court, and there fall in, first with the wayting-woman, then with the lady. Put case they doe retaine you there, as a fit property, to hire coaches some paire of months, or so; or to read them asleep in afternoones vpon some pretty pamphlet, to breathe you; why, it shall in time imbolden you to some farther archivement: In the interim, you may fashion your selfe to bee carelesse, and impudent.—
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        How if they would haue me to make verses? I heard Hedon spoke to for some.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Why, you must prooue the aptitude of your Genius; if you find none, you must harken out a veine, and buy: prouided you pay for the silence, as for the worke. Then you may securely call it your owne.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Yes, and I'le giue out my acquaintance with all the best writers, to countenance me the more.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Rather seeme not to know 'hem, it is your best. I. Be wise, that you neuer so much as mention the name of one, nor remember it mention'd, but if they be offerd to you in discourse, shake your light head, make betweene a sad and a smiling face, pittie some, raile at all, and commend your selfe: 't is your onely safe, and vnsuspected course. Come, you shall looke back vpon the court againe to day, and be restor'd to your colours: I doe now partly aime at the cause of your repulse— (which was omenous indeed) for as you enter at the doore, there is oppos'd to you the

frame of a woolfe in the hangings, which (surprizing your eye sodainely) gaue a false alarme to the heart; and that was it call'd your bloud out of your face, and so rowted the whole ranke of your spirits: I beseech you labour to forget it. And remember (as I inculcated to you before, for your comfort) HEDON, and ANAIDES.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene II.
                     HEDON, ANAIDES.
                     
                        HArt, was there euer so prosperous an inuention thus vnluckily peruerted, and spoyl'd by a whore-sonne booke-worme, a candle-waster?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Nay, be not impatient, HEDON.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        S'light, I would faine know his name.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Hang him, poore grogran-rascall, pray thee thinke not of him: I'le send for him to my lodging, and haue him blanketted when thou wilt, man.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Crites passeth by.
                        By gods so; I would thou could'st. Looke, here hee comes. Laugh at him, laugh at him, ha, ha, ha.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Fough, he smels all lamp-oyle, with studying by candle-light.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        How confidently he went by vs, and carelesly! neuer moou'd! nor stirr'd at any thing! did you obserue him?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I, a poxe on him, let him goe, dormouse: he is in a dreame now. He has no other time to sleepe, but thus, when hee walkes abroad, to take the ayre.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Gods precious, this afflicts mee more then all the rest, that wee should so particularly direct our hate, and contempt against him, and hee to carrie it thus without wound, or passion! 'tis insufferable.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'lid, (my deare enuie) if thou but saist the word now, Ile vndoe him eternally for thee.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        How, sweet ANAIDES?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Mary halfe a score of vs get him in (one night) and make him pawne his wit for a supper.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Away, thou hast such vnseasonable jests. By this heauen, I wonder at nothing more then our gentlemen-vshers, that will suffer a piece of serge, or perpetuana, to come into the presence: mee thinkes they should (out of their experience) better distinguish the silken disposition of courtiers, then to let such terrible coorse ragges mixe with vs, able to fret any smooth or gentile societie to the threeds with their rubbing deuices.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Vnlesse 'twere Lent, Ember weekes, or Fasting dayes, when the place is most penuriously emptie of all other good outsides. Dam' mee, if I should aduenture on his companie once more, without a sute of buffe, to defend my wit; he does nothing but stab the slaue: how mischieuously he cross'd thy deuice of the prophesie there? And MORIA, shee comes without her muffe too, and there my inuention was lost.
                     
                     
                        
                        HED.
                        Well, I am resolu'd what Ile doe.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        What, my good spirituous sparke?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Mary, speake all the venome I can of him; and poyson his reputation in euery place, where I come.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        'Fore god, most courtly.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        And if I chance to bee present where any question is made of his sufficiencies, or of any thing he hath done priuate, or publike, Ile censure it slightly, and ridiculously.—
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        At any hand beware of that, so thou maist draw thine owne iudgement in suspect. No, Ile instruct thee what thou shalt doe, and by a safer meanes: Approue any thing thou hearest of his, to the receiu'd opinion of it; but if it bee extraordinarie, giue it from him to some other, whom thou more particularly affect'st. That's the way to plague him, and he shall neuer come to defend himselfe. S'lud, Ile giue out, all he does is dictated from other men, and sweare it too (if thou'lt ha'mee) and that I know the time, and place where he stole it, though my soule bee guiltie of no such thing; and that I thinke, out of my heart, hee hates such barren shifts: yet to doe thee a pleasure, and him a disgrace, I'le dam'my selfe, or doe any thing.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Gramercies, my deare deuill: weele put it seriously in practice, ysaith.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene III.
                     CRITES.
                     
                        DOe, good detraction, doe, and I the while
                        Shall shake thy spight off with a carelesse smile.
                        Poore pittious gallants! What leane idle sleights
                        Their thoughts suggest to flatter their staru'd hopes?
                        As if I knew not how to entertaine
                        These straw-deuices: but, of force, must yeeld
                        To the weake stroke of their calumnious tongues.
                        What should I care what euery dor doth buzze
                        In credulous cares? it is a crowne to me,
                        That the best iudgements can report me wrong'd;
                        Them lyars; and their slanders impudent.
                        Perhaps (vpon the rumour of their speeches)
                        Some grieued friend will whisper to me, CRITES,
                        Men speake ill of thee; so they be ill men,
                        If they spake worse, 'twere better: for of such
                        To be disprais'd, is the most perfect praise.
                        What can his censure hurt me, whom the world
                        Hath censur'd vile before me? If good CHRESTVS,
                        EVTHVS, or PHRONIMVS, had spoke the words,
                        They would haue moou'd me, and I should haue call'd
                        
                        My thoughts, and actions, to a strict accompt
                        Vpon the hearing: But when I remember,
                        'Tis HEDON, and ANAIDES: alasse, then,
                        I thinke but what they are, and am not stirr'd.
                        The one, a light voluptuous reueller,
                        The other a strange arrogating puffe,
                        Both impudent, and ignorant inough;
                        That talke (as they are wont) not as I merit:
                        Traduce by custome, as most dogges doe barke,
                        Doe nothing out of judgement, but disease,
                        Speake ill, because they neuer could speake well.
                        And who'ld be angry with this race of creatures?
                        What wise physician haue we euer seene
                        Moou'd with a frantike man? the same affects
                        That he doth beare to his sicke patient,
                        Should a right minde carrie to such as these:
                        And I doe count it a most rare reuenge,
                        That I can thus (with such a sweet neglect)
                        Plucke from them all the pleasure of their malice.
                        For that's the marke of all their inginous drifts,
                        To wound my patience, howsoe're they seeme
                        To aime at other obiects: which if miss'd,
                        Their enui's like an arrow, shot vpright,
                        That, in the fall, indangers their owne heads.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene IIII.
                     ARETE, CRITES.
                     
                        WHat, CRITES! where haue you drawne forth the day?
                        You haue not visited your jealous friends?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Where I haue seene (most honour'd ARETE,)
                        The strangest pageant, fashion'd like a court,
                        (At least I dream't I saw it) so diffus'd,
                        So painted, pyed, and full of rainbow straines,
                        As neuer yet (eyther by time, or place)
                        Was made the food to my distasted sence:
                        Nor can my weake imperfect memorie
                        Now render halfe the formes vnto my tongue,
                        That were conuolu'd within this thriftie roome.
                        Here, stalkes me by a proud, and spangled sir,
                        That lookes three hand-fuls higher then his fore-top;
                        Sauours himselfe alone, is onely kind
                        And louing to himselfe: one that will speake
                        More darke, and doubtfull then six oracles;
                        Salutes a friend, as if he had a stitch,
                        
                        Is his owne chronicle, and scarce can eat
                        For registring himselfe: is waited on
                        By mimiques, jesters, pandars, parasites,
                        And other such like prodigies of men.
                        He past, appeares some mincing marmoset
                        Made all of clothes, and face; his limbes so set
                        As if they had some voluntarie act
                        Without mans motion, and must mooue iust so
                        In spite of their creation: one that weighes
                        His breath betweene his teeth, and dares not smile
                        Beyond a point, for feare t'vnstarch his looke;
                        Hath trauell'd to make legs, and seene the cringe
                        Of seuerall courts, and courtiers; knowes the time
                        Of giuing titles, and of taking wals;
                        Hath read court-common-places; made them his:
                        Studied the grammar of state, and all the rules
                        Each formall vsher in that politike schoole,
                        Can teach a man. A third comes giuing nods
                        To his repenting creditors, protests
                        To weeping sutors, takes the comming gold
                        Of insolent, and base ambition,
                        That hourely rubs his dry, and itchie palmes:
                        Which grip't, like burning coales, he hurles away
                        Into the laps of bawdes, and buffons mouthes.
                        With him there meets some subtle PROTEVS, one
                        Can change, and varie with all formes he sees;
                        Be any thing but honest; serues the time;
                        Houers betwixt two factions, and explores
                        The drifts of both; which (with crosse face) he beares
                        To the diuided heads, and is receiu'd
                        With mutuall grace of eyther: one that dares
                        Doe deeds worthie the hurdle, or the wheele,
                        To be thought some bodie; and is (in sooth)
                        Such as the Satyrist points truly forth,
                        That onely to his crimes owes all his worth.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        You tell vs wonders, CRITES.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        This is nothing.
                        There stands a Neophyte glazing of his face,
                        Pruning his clothes, perfuming of his haire,
                        Against his idoll enters; and repeates
                        (Like an vnperfect prologue, at third musike)
                        His part of speeches, and confederate iests,
                        In passion to himselfe. Another sweares
                        His Scene of courtship ouer; bids, beleeue him,
                        Twentie times, 
                              •
                           re they will; anon, doth seeme
                        
                        As he would kisse away his hand in kindnesse;
                        Then walkes of melancholike, and stands wreath'd,
                        As he were pinn'd vp to the arras, thus.
                        A third is most in action, swimmes, and friskes,
                        Playes with his mistresse pappes, salutes her pumps,
                        Adores her hems, her skirts, her knots, her curles,
                        Will spend his patrimonie for a garter,
                        Or the least feather in her bounteous fanne.
                        A fourth, he onely comes in for a mute:
                        
                        Diuides the act with a dumbe shew, and exit.
                        
                        Then must the ladies laugh, straight comes their Scene,
                        A sixt times worse confusion then the rest.
                        Where you shall heare one talke of this mans eye;
                        Another, of his lip; a third, his nose;
                        A fourth commend his legge; a fift his foot;
                        A sixt his hand; and euery one a limme:
                        That you would thinke the poore distorted gallant
                        Must there expire. Then fall they in discourse
                        Of tires, and fashions, how they must take place,
                        Where they may kisse, and whom, when to sit downe,
                        And with what grace to rise; if they salute,
                        What curt'sie they must vse: such cob-web stuffe,
                        As would enforce the common'st sense abhorre
                        Th' Arachnean workers.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        Patience, gentle CRITES.
                        This knot of spiders will be soone dissolu'd,
                        And all their webs swept out of CYNTHIAS court,
                        When once her glorious deitie appeares,
                        And but presents it selfe in her full light:
                        Till when, goe in, and spend your houres with vs
                        Your honour'd friends, TIME, and PHRONESIS,
                        In contemplation of our goddesse name.
                        Thinke on some sweet, and choice inuention, now,
                        Worthie her serious, and illustrous eyes,
                        That from the merit of it we may take
                        Desir'd occasion to preferre your worth,
                        And make your seruice knowne to CYNTHIA.
                        It is the pride of ARETE to grace
                        Her studious louers; and (in scorne of time,
                        Enuie, and ignorance) to lift their state
                        Aboue a vulgar height. True happinesse
                        Consists not in the multitude of friends,
                        But in the worth, and choice. Nor would I haue
                        Vertue a popular regard pursue:
                        Let them be good that loue me, though but few.
                     
                     
                        
                        CRI.
                        I kisse thy hands, diuinest ARETE,
                        And vow my selfe to thee, and CYNTHIA.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene V.
                     AMORPHVS, ASOTVS.
                     
                        A Little more forward: So, sir. Now goe in, dis-cloke your selfe, and come forth. Taylor, bestow thy absence vpon vs; and bee not prodigall of this secret, but to a deare customer. 'Tis well entend, sir. Stay, you come on too fast; your pase is too impetuous. Imagine this to be the palace of your pleasure, or place, where your lady is pleas'd to bee seene. First, you present your selfe, thus: and spying her, you fall off, and walke some two turnes; in which time, it is to bee suppos'd, your passion hath sufficiently whited your face: then (stifling a sigh or two, and closing your lips) with a trembling boldnesse, and bold terrour, you aduance your selfe forward. Proue thus much, I pray you.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Yes, sir, (pray IOVE I can light on it) Here, I come in, you say, and present my selfe?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Good.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        And then I spie her, and walke off?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Very good.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Now, sir, I stifle, and aduance forward?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Trembling.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Yes, sir, trembling: I shall doe it better when I come to it. And what must I speake now?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Mary, you shall say: Deare beautie, or, sweet honour (or by what other title you please to remember her) me thinkes you are melancholy. This is, if shee be alone now, and discompanied.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Well, sir, Ile enter againe; her title shall be, My deare LINDABRIDES.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        LINDABRIDES?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I, sir, the Emperour ALICANDROES daughter, and the Prince MERIDIANS sister (in the Knight of the Sunne) shee should haue beene married to him, but that the Princesse CLARIDIANA—
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        O, you betray your reading.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Nay, sir, I haue read historie, I am a little humanitian. Interrupt me not, good sir. My deare LINDABRIDES, My deare LINDABRIDES, My deare LINDABRIDES, me thinkes you are melancholy.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I, and take her by the rosie-finger'd hand.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Must I so? O, my deare LINDABRIDES, mee thinkes you are melancholy.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Or thus, sir. All varietie of diuine pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique, rich fare, braue attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts attend this deare beautie.
                     
                     
                        
                        ASO.
                        Beleeue mee, that's pretty. All varietie of diuine pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique, rich fare, braue attires, soft beds, and silken thoughts, attend this deare beautie.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        And then, offring to kisse her hand, if shee shall coily recoile, and signifie your repulse; you are to re-enforce your selfe, with, More then most faire ladie, let not the rigour of your iust disdaine thus coursly censure of your seruants zeale: and, withall, protest her, to be the onely, and absolute vnparalell'd creature you do adore and admire, and respect, and reuerence, in this court, corner of the world, or kingdome.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        This is hard, by my faith. I'le begin it all, againe.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Doe so, and I will act it for your ladie.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Will you vouchsafe, sir? All varietie of diuine pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique, rich fare, braue attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts attend this deare beautie.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        So, sir, pray you away.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        More then most faire ladie, let not the rigour of your iust disdaine, thus courtly censure of your seruants zeale, I protest, you are the onely, and absolute, vnapparelled—
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Vnparalelld.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Vnparalelld creature, I doe adore, and admire, and respect, and reuerence, in this court, corner of the world, or kingdome.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        This is, if shee abide you. But now, put case shee should bee passant when you enter, as thus: you are to frame your gate thereafter, and call vpon her, Ladie, Nymph, Sweet refuge, Star
                              •
                           e of our court. Then if shee be guardant, here: you are to come on, and (laterally disposing your selfe) sweare, by her blushing and well coloured cheeke, the bright die of her haire, her morie teeth (though they be ebonie) or some such white, and innocent oth, to induce you. If reguardant, then maintaine your station, briske, and irpe, shew the supple motion of your plian
                              •
                            bodie, but (in chiefe) of your knee, and hand, which cannot but arride her proud humour exceedingly.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I conceiue you, sir, I shall performe all these things in good time, I doubt not, they doe so hit me.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Well, sir, I am your ladie; make vse of any of these beginnings, or some other out of your owne inuention: and proue, how you can hold vp, and follow it. Say, say.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Yes, sir, my deare LINDABRIDES.—
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        No, you affect that LINDABRIDES too much. And (let mee tell you) it is not so courtly. Your pedant should prouide you some parcells of french, or some pretty commoditie of italian to commence with, if you would be exoticke, and exquisite.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Yes, sir, he was at my lodging t'other morning, I gaue him a doublet.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Double your beneuolence, and giue him the hose too, clothe you his bodie, he will helpe to apparell your mind. But now, see what

your proper GENIVS can performe alone, without adiection of any other MINERVA.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I comprehend you, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I doe stand you, sir: fall backe to your first place. Good, passing well: Very properly pursude.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Beautifull, ambiguous, and sufficient ladie, what! are you all alone?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        We would be, sir, if you would leaue vs.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I am at your beauties appointment, bright angell; but—
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        What but?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        No harme, more then most faire feature.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        That touch relished well.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        But, I protest—
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        And why should you protest?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        For good will (deare esteem'd Madam) and I hope, your ladiship will so conceiue of it:

                              And will, in time, returne from your disdaine,
                              And rue the suffrance of our friendly paine.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        O, that peece was excellent! if you could picke out more of these play-particles, and (as occasion shall salute you) embroider, or damaske your discourse with them, perswade your soule, it would most iudiciously commend you. Come, this was a well discharg'd, and auspicious bout. Proue the second.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Ladie, I cannot ruffle it in red and yellow.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Why, if you can reuell it in white, sir, 'tis sufficient.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Say you so, sweet ladie? Lan, tede, de, de, de, dant, dant, dant, dante, &c. No (in good faith) Madame, whosoeuer told your ladiship so, abusde you; but I would be glad to meet your ladiship in a measure.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Me, sir? belike you measure me by your selfe, then?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Would I might, faire feature.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        And what were you the better, if you might?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        The better it please you to aske, faire ladie.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Why, this was rauishing, and most acutely continu'd. Well, spend not your humour too much, you haue now competently exercised your conceit: This (once or twice a day) will render you an accomplisht, elaborate, and well leuelled gallant. Conuey in your courting-stock, wee will (in the heat of this) goe visit the Nymphs chamber.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act IIII.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     PHANTASTE, PHILAVTIA, ARGVRION, MORIA, CVPID.
                     
                        I Would this water would ariue once, our trauailing friend so commended to vs.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        So would I, for hee has left all vs in trauaile with expectation of it.
                     
                     
                        
                        PHA.
                        Pray IOVE, I neuer rise from this couch, if euer I thirsted more for a thing, in my whole time of being a courtier.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Nor I, I'le be sworne: The very mention of it sets my lips in a worse heate, then if he had sprinkled them with MERCVRY. Reach me the glasse, sirrah.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Here, ladie.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        They doe not peele, sweet Charge, doe they?
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Yes, a little, Guardian.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, 'tis an eminent good signe. Euer when my lips doe so, I am sure to haue some delicious good drinke, or other approching.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Mary, and this may be good for vs ladies: for (it seemes) tis far-fet by their stay.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        My palate for yours (deare Honor) it shall proue most elegant, I warrant you: O, I doe fancy this geare that's long a comming, with an unmeasurable straine.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Pray thee sit downe, PHILAVTIA, that rebat
                              •
                            becomes thee singularly.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Is't not queint?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Yes faith. Me thinkes, thy seruant HEDON is nothing so obsequious to thee, as he was wont to be; I know not how, hee's growne out of his garbe a late, hee's warpt.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        In trunesse, and so me thinkes too; hee's much conuerted.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Tut, let him bee what hee will, 'tis an animall I dreame not of. This tire (me thinkes) makes me looke very ingeniously, quick, and spirited, I should be some LAVRA, or some DELIA, me thinkes.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        As I am wise (faire Honors) that title shee gaue him, to bee her Ambition, spoild him: Before, hee was the most propitious and obseruant young nouice—
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        No, no, you are the whole heauen awry, Guardian: 'tis the swaggering coach-horse ANAIDES, drawes with him there, has beene the diuerter of him.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        For CVPIDS sake, speake no more of him; would I might neuer dare to looke in a mirror againe, if I respect ere a marmaset of them al, otherwise, then I would a feather, or my shittle-cock, to make sport with, now and then.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Come, sit downe; troth (and you be good Beauties) let's runne ouer 'hem all now: Which is the properst man amongst them? I say, the trauailer, AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        O, fie on him, he lookes like a venetian trumpetter, i' the battaile of Lepanto, in the gallerie yonder; and speakes to the tune of a countrey ladie, that comes euer i' the rereward, or traine of a fashion.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I should haue iudgement in a feature, sweet Beauties.
                        
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        A bodie would thinke so, at these yeeres.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        And I preferre another now, far before him, a million at least.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Who might that be, Guardian?
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        MOR.
                        Mary (faire Charge) ANAIDES.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        ANAIDES! you talk't of a tune PHILAVTIA, there's one speakes in a key: like the opening of some Iustices gate, or a poste-boies horne, as if his voice fear'd an arrest for some ill wordes it should giue, and were loth to come forth.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        I, and he has a very imperfect face.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Like a sea-monster, that were to rauish ANDROMEDA from the rocke.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        His hand's too great too, by at least a strawes breadth
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Nay, he has a worse fault then that, too.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        A long heele?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        That were a fault in a ladie, rather then him: No, they say, hee puts off the calues of his legs, with his stockings, euery night.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Out vpon him: turne to another of the pictures, for loues sake. What saies ARGVRION? whom doo's shee commend, afore the rest?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        I hope, I haue instructed her sufficiently for an answere.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Troth, I made the motion to her ladiship for one to day, i' the presence, but it appear'd shee was other-waies furnisht before: Shee would none.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Who was that, ARGVRION?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Mary, the poore plaine gentleman, i' the blacke, there.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Who, CRITES?
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        I, I, he. A fellow, that no body so much as lookt vpon, or regarded, and shee would haue had me done him particular grace.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        That was a true tricke of your selfe, MORIA, to perswade ARGVRION, to affect the scholer.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Tut, but shee shall be no chuser for me. In good faith, I like the citizens sonne there, ASOTVS, mee thinkes, none of them all come neere him.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Not, HEDON?
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        HEDON, in troth no. HEDON'S a pretty slight courtier, and he weares his clothes well, and sometimes in fashion; Mary, his face is but indifferent, and he has no such excellent body. No, th'other is a most delicate youth, a sweet face, a streight body, a well proportion'd legge and foot, a white hand, a tender voice.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        How now, ARGVRION?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        O, you should haue let her alone, shee was bestowing a copy of him vpon vs. Such a nose were inough to make me loue a man, now.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        And then his seuerall colours he weares; wherein he flourisheth changeably, euery day.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        O, but his short haire, and his narrow eyes!
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Why, shee dotes more palpably vpon him, then ere his father did vpon her.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Beleeue mee, the young gentleman deserues it. If shee could dote more, 'twere not amisse. Hee is an exceeding proper youth, and

would haue made a most neate barber-surgeon, if hee had beene put to it in time.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Say you so? me thinkes, he lookes like a taylour alreadie.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        I, that had sayed on one of his customers sutes. His face is like a squeezed orange, or—
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Well, ladies, jest on: the best of you both would be glad of such a seruant.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I, I'le be sworne would they, though hee be a little shame-fac'd.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Shame-fac'd, MORIA! out vpon him. Your shame-fac'd seruant is your onely gull.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Goe to, Beauties, make much of time, and place, and occasion, and opportunitie, and fauourites, and things that belong to 'hem, for I'le ensure you, they will all relinquish; they cannot indure aboue another yeere; I know it out of future experience: and therefore take exhibition, and warning. I was once a reueller my selfe, and though I speak it (as mine owne trumpet) I was then esteem'd—
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        The very march-pane of the court, I warrant you?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        And all the gallants came about you like slyes, did they not?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Goe to, they did somewhat, that's no matter now.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Nay, good MORIA, be not angrie. Put case, that wee foure now had the grant from IVNO, to wish our selues into what happie estate wee could? what would you wish to be, MORIA?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Who I? Let me see now. I would wish to be a wise woman, and know all the secrets of court, citie, and countrie. I would know what were done behind the arras, what vpon the staires, what i' the garden, what i' the Nymphs chamber, what by barge, & what by coach. I would tel you which courtier were scabbed, and which not; which ladie had her owne face to lie with her a-nights, & which not; who put off their teeth with their clothes in court, who their haire, who their complexion; and in which boxe they put it. There should not a Nymph, or a widdow be got with childe i' the verge, but I would guesse (within one or two,) who was the right father: and in what moneth it was gotten; with what words; and which way. I would tell you, which Madame lou'd a Monsieur, which a player, which a page; who slept with her husband, who with her friend, who with her gentleman-vsher, who with her horse-keeper, who with her monkie, and who with all. Yes, and who jigg'd the cocke too.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Fye, you'ld tell all,
                     
                     
                        MORIA.
                        If I should wish now, it should bee to haue your tongue out. But what sayes PHILAVTIA? who would she be?
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Troth, the verie same I am. Onely I would wish my selfe a little more command, and soueraignetie; that all the court were subiect to my absolute becke, and all things in it depending on my looke; as if there were no other heauen, but in my smile, nor other hell, but in my frowne; that I might send for any man I list, and haue his head cut off, when I haue done with him; or made an eunuch, if he denyed mee: and if I saw a better

face then mine owne, I might haue my doctor to poyson it. What would you wish, PHANTASTE?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Faith, I cannot (readily) tell you what▪ But (mee thinkes) I should wish my selfe all manner of creatures. Now, I would bee an empresse; and by and by a dutchesse; then a great ladie of state; then one of your miscelany madams; then a waiting-woman; then your cittizens wife; then a course countrey gentlewoman; then a deyrie maide; then a shepheards lasse; then an empresse againe, or the queene of fayries: And thus I would prooue the vicissitudes, and whirle of pleasures, about, and againe. As I were a shepheardesse, I would bee pip'd and sung too; as a deyrie wench, I would dance at may-poles, and make sillabubbes; As a countrey gentlewoman, keep a good house, and come vp to terme, to see motions; As a cittizens wife, bee troubled with a iealous husband, and put to my shifts; (others miseries should bee my pleasures) As a waiting-woman, I would taste my ladies delights to her; As a miscellany madame inuent new tyres, and goe visite courtiers; As a great ladie, lye a bed, and haue courtiers visite mee; As a dutchesse, I would keepe my state: and as an empresse, I'ld doe any thing. And, in all these shapes, I would euer bee follow'd with th' affections of all that see mee. Mary, I my selfe would affect none; or if I did, it should not bee heartily, but so as I might saue my selfe in 'hem still, and take pride in tormenting the poore wretches. Or, (now I thinke on't) I would, for one yeere, wish my selfe one woman, but the richest, fairest, and delicatest in a kingdome, the very center of wealth, and beautie, wherein all lines of loue should meet; and in that person I would prooue all manner of suters, of all humours, and of all complexions, and neuer haue any two of a sort: I would see how Loue (by the power of his object) could worke inwardly alike, in a cholericke man, and a sanguine; in a melancholique, and a phlegmatique; in a foole, and a wise man; in a clowne, and a courtier; in a valiant man, and a coward: and how he could varie outward, by letting this gallant expresse himselfe in dumbe gaze; another with sighing, and rubbing his fingers; a third, with play-ends, and pittifull verses; a fourth, with stabbing himselfe, and drinking healths, or writing languishing letters in his bloud; a fifth, in colour'd ribbands, and good clothes; with this lord to smile, and that lord to court, and the t'other lord to do
                              •
                           e, and one lord to hang himselfe. And then, I to haue a booke made of all this, which I would call the booke of humours, and euery night reade a little piece, ere I slept, and laugh at it. Here comes HEDON.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene II.
                     HEDON, ANAIDES, MERCVRIE, PHANTASTE, PHILAVTIA, MORIA, ARGVRION, CVPID.
                     
                        SAue you, sweet and cleere beauties: By the spirit that moues in me, you are all most pleasingly bestow'd, ladies. Onely, I can take it for no good omen, to find mine Honor so deiected.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        You need not feare, sir, I did of purpose humble my selfe against your comming, to decline the pride of my ambition.
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Faire Honor, Ambition dares not stoope; but if it be your sweet pleasure, I shall lose that title, I will (as I am HEDON) apply my selfe to your bounties.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        That were the next way to distitle my selfe of honor. O, no, rather be still ambitious, I pray you.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        I will be any thing that you please, whilst it pleaseth you to bee your selfe, ladie. Sweet PHANTASTE, deare MORIA, most beautifull ARGVRION—
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Farewell, HEDON.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        ANAIDES, stay, whither goe you?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'light, what should I doe here? and you engrosse 'hem all for your owne vse, 'tis time for me to seeke out.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        I, engrosse 'hem? Away, mischiefe, this is one of your extrauagantiests now, because I began to 
                              •
                           alute 'hem by their names—
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Faith, you might haue sp
                              •
                           rde vs Madame Prudence, the Guardian there, though you had more couetously aym'd at the rest.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        S'heart, take 'hem all, man: what speake you to me of ayming, or couetous?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I, say you so? nay, then, haue at 'hem: ladies, here's one hath distinguish'd you by your names alreadie. It shall onely become me, to aske, How you doe?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Gods so, was this the designe you trauaill'd with?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Who answeres the brazen head? it spoke to some bodie.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Lady Wisedome, doe you interpret for these puppets?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        In truth, and sadnesse (Honors) you are in great offence for this, goe too: the gentleman (I'le vnder-take with him) is a man of faire liuing, and able to maintaine a ladie in her two carroches a day, besides pages, munkeys, and parachitos, with such attendants as shee shall thinke meet for her turne, and therefore there is more respect requirable, howsoere you seeme to conniue. Harke you, sir, let mee discourse a sillable with you. I am to say to you, these ladies are not of that close, and open behauiour, as happily you may suspend; their carriage is well knowne, to be such as it should be, both gentle and extraordinarie.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, here comes the other paire.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene III.
                     AMORPHVS, ASOTVS, HEDON, ANAIDES, MERCVRIE, CVPID, PHANTASTE, PHILAVTIA, ARGVRION, MORIA.
                     
                        THat was your fathers loue, the Nymph ARGVRION. I would haue you direct all your courtship thither, if you could but endeare your selfe to her affection, you were eternally en-gallanted.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        In truth, sir? pray PHOEBVS I proue fauour-some in her faire eyes.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        All diuine mixture, and increase of beautie to this bright beuy of ladies; and to the male-courtiers, complement, and courtesie.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        In the behalfe of the males, I gratifie you, AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        And I, of the females.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Succinctly return'd. I doe vale to both your thankes, and kisse them: but primarily to yours, most ingenious, acute, and polite ladie.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Gods my life, how hee doe's all to bee qualifie her! ingenious, acute, and polite? as if there were not others in place as ingenious, acute, and polite, as shee.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Yes, but you must know, ladie, hee cannot speake out of a dictionarie method.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Sit downe, sweet AMORPHVS: When will this water come, thinke you?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        It cannot now belong, faire ladie.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Now obserue, MERCVRY.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        How? most ambiguous beautie? loue you? that I will by this hand-kercher.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        S'lid, he drawes his othes out of his pocket.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        But, will you be constant?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Constant, Madam? I will not say for constantnesse, but by this purse (which I would be loth to sweare by, vnlesse 'twere embroider'd) I protest (more then most faire ladie) you are the onely, absolute, and vnparalelld creature, I doe adore, and admire, and respect, and reuerence in this court, corner of the world, or kingdome: Mee thinkes you are melancholy.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Do's your heart speake all this?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Say you?—
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, he is groping for another oth.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Now, by this watch (I made how forward the day is) I doe vnfeignedly vow my selfe (s'light 'tis deeper then I tooke it, past fiue) yours entirely addicted, Madame.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        I require no more, dearest ASOTVS, hence-forth let mee call you mine, and in remembrance of me, vouchsafe to weare this chaine, and this diamond.
                     
                     
                        
                        ASO.
                        O god, sweet ladie!
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        There are new othes for him: what? doth HERMES taste no alteration, in all this?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Yes, thou hast strooke ARGVRION inamour'd on ASOTVS, the thinkes.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Alas, no; I am no-body, I: I can doe nothing in this disguise.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        But thou hast not wounded any of the rest, CVPID?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Not yet: it is enough that I haue begun so prosperously.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Nay, these are nothing to the gems I will hourely bestow vpon thee: be but faithfull, and kind to me, and I will lade thee with my richest bounties: behold, here my bracelets, from mine armes.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Not so, good ladie, By this diamond.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Take 'hem, weare 'hem: my iewels, chaine of pearle, pendants, all I haue.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Nay then, by this pearle, you make me a wanton.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Shall not shee answere for this, to maintayne him thus in swearing?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, no, there is a way to weane him from this, the gentleman may be reclaim'd.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        I, if you had the ayring of his apparell, couss', I thinke.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Louing? 'twere pitty I should be liuing else, beleeue me. Saue you, sir. Saue you, sweet ladie. Saue you, Monsieur ANAIDES. Saue you, deare Madame.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Do'st thou know him that saluted thee, HEDON?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        No, some idle FVNGOSO, that hath got aboue the cup-board, since yesterday.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'lud, I neuer saw him till this morning, and he salutes me as familiarly, as if we had knowne together, since the deluge, or the first yeere of Troy-action.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        A most right-handed, and auspicious encounter. Confine your selfe to your fortunes.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        For sports sake, let's haue some riddles, or purposes; hough.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        No faith, your prophecies are best, the t'other are stale.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        
                           Prophecies? we cannot all sit in at them; wee shall make a confusion. No; what calld you that we had in the fore-noone?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        
                           Substantiues, and Adiectiues. Ist not HEDON?
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        I, that, who begins?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        I haue thought; speake your Adiectiues, sirs.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        But doe not you change, then?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Not I, who saies?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Odoriferous.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Popular.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Humble.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        White-liuer'd.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Barbarous.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        
                           Pythagoricall.
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Yours, Signior.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        What must I doe, sir?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Giue forth your Adiectiue, with the rest; as, prosperous, good, faire, sweet, well—
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Any thing, that hath not beene spoken.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Yes, sir: well-spoken, shall be mine.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        What? ha' you all done?
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        I..
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Then the Substantiue is Breeches. Why odoriferous Breeches, Guardian?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Odoriferous, because odoriferous; that which containes most varietie of sauour, and smell, we say is most odoriferous: now, Breeches I presume are incident to that varietie, and therefore odoriferous Breeches.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Well, we must take it howsoeuer, who's next? PHILAVTIA.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Popular.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Why popular Breeches?
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Mary, that is, when they are not content to be generally noted in court, but will presse forth on common stages, and brokers stalls, to the publique view of the world.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Good: why humble Breeches? ARGVRION.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Humble, because they vse to be sate vpon; besides, if you tie 'hem not vp, their propertie is to fall downe about your heeles.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Shee has worne the breeches, it seemes, which haue done so.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        But why white-liuer'd?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Why? 'shart, are not their linings white? besides, when they
come in swaggering companie, and will pocket vp any thing, may they
not properly be said to be white-liuer'd?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        O, yes, wee must not denie it. And why barbarous, HEDON?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Barbarous, because commonly, when you haue worne your
breeches sufficiently, you giue them to your Barber.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        That's good: but now Pythagoricall?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        I, AMORPHVS. Why Pythagoricall Breeches?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        O, most kindly of all, 'tis a conceit of that fortune, I am bold to
hug my braine for.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        How ist, exquisite AMORPHVS?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        O, I am rapt with it, 'tis so fit, so proper, so happy—
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Nay, doe not racke vs thus?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I neuer truly relisht my selfe, before. Giue me your eares. Breeches
Pythagoricall, by reason of their transmigration, into seuerall shapes.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Most rare, in sweet troth. Mary, this young gentleman, for his
well-spoken—
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        I, why well-spoken Breeches?
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Well-spoken? mary well-spoken, because—whatsoeuer they
speake, is well taken; and whatsoeuer is well taken, is well-spoken.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Excellent! beleeue me.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Not so, ladies, neither.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        But why Breeches, now?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Breeches, quasi beare-riches; when a gallant beares all his riches
in his breeches:
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Most fortunately etymologiz'd.
                        
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Nay, we haue another sport afore this, of A thing done, and Who did it, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        I, good PHANTASTE, let's haue that: Distribute the places.
                        
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Why, I imagine, A thing done; HEDON thinkes, Who did it ;
MORIA, With what it was done; ANAIDES, Where it was done; ARGVRION,
When it was done; AMORPHVS, For what cause it was done; you PHILAVTIA,
What followed vpon the doing of it; and this gentleman, Who would haue done
it better. What? is't conceiu'd about?
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        Yes, yes.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        The speake you, sir. Who would haue done it better?
                        
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        How! do's it beginne at me?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Yes, sir: This play is cal'd the Crab, it goes backward.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        May I not name my selfe?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        If you please, sir, and dare abide the venture of it.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Then, I would haue done it better, what euer it is.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        No doubt on't, sir: a good confidence. What followed vpon the
act, PHILAVTIA?
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        A few heate drops, and a moneths mirth.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        
                           For what cause, AMORPHVS?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        For the delight of ladies.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        
                           When, ARGVURION?
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Last progresse.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        
                           Where, ANAIDES?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Why, in a paire of pain'd slops.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        
                           With what, MORIA?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        With a glyster.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        
                           Who, HEDON?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        A trauailer.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Then, The thing done was, An oration was made. Rehearse. An
oration was made.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        By a trauailer.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        With a glyster.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        In a paire of pain'd slops,
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Last progresse.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        For the delight of ladies.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        A few heat drops, and a moneths mirth followed.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        And, this silent gentleman would haue done it better.
                     
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        This was not so good, now.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        In good faith, these vnhappie pages would be whipt, for staying thus.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Beshrew my hand, and my heart, else.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I doe wonder at their protraction!
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Pray VENVS, my whore haue not discouer'd her selfe to the rascally hoyes, and that be the cause of their stay.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I must sute my selfe with another page: this idle PROSAITES will neuer be brought to wait well.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Sir, I haue a kinsman I could willingly wish to your seruice, if you would deigne to accept of him.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        And I shall bee glad (most sweet ladie) to imbrace him: where is hee?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I can fetch him, sir, but I would bee loth to make you turne away your other page.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        You shall not, most sufficient ladie, I will keepe both: pray you lets goe see him.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Whither goes my loue?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Ile returne presently, I goe but to see a page, with this ladie.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        As sure as fate, 't is so; shee has opened all: A poxe of all cockatrices. Dam'me, if she haue plai'd loose with me, I'le cut her throat, within a haires breadth, so it may be heal'd againe.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        What, is he jealous of his Hermaphrodite?
                        
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        O, I, this will be excellent sport.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        PHANTASTE! ARGVRION! what? you are sodainely strooke, me thinkes! for loues sake let's haue some musike, till they come. Ambition, reach the lyra, I pray you.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Any thing to which my Honour shall direct mee.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Come, AMORPHVS, cheare vp PHANTASTE.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        It shall bee my pride, faire ladie, to attempt all that is in my power. But here is an instrument that (alone) is able to infuse soule in the most melancholique, and dull disposde creature vpon earth. O! let mee kisse thy faire knees. Beauteous eares attend it.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Will you haue the Kisse, Honour?
                        
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        I, good Ambition.
                        
                        SONG.
                        
                           O, That ioy so soone should waste!
                        or so sweet a blisse
                        as a kisse,
                        Might not for euer last!
                        So sugred, so melting, so soft, so delicious,
                        The dew that lyes on roses,
                        When the morne her selfe descloses,
                        is not so precious.
                        
                        O, rather then I would it smother,
                        Were I to taste such another;
                        It should bee my wishing
                        That I might dye kissing.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        I made this dittie, and the note to it, vpon a kisse that my Honour gaue me; how like you it, sir?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        A prettie ayre, in generall, I like it well: but in particular, your long die-note did arride me most, but it was somwhat too long. I can shew one, almost of the same nature, but much before it and not so long, in a composition of mine owne. I thinke I haue both the note, and dittie about me.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Pray you, sir, see.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Yes, there is the note; and all the parts if I mis-thinke not. I will read the dittie to your beauties here, but first I am to make you familiar with the occasion, which presents it selfe thus. Vpon a time, going to take my leaue of the Emperour, and kisse his great hands; there being then present, the kings of France, and Arragon, the dukes of Sauoy, Florence▪ Orbeance, Bourbon, Brunswicke, the Lantgraue, Count Palatine, all which had seuerally feasted me; besides, infinite more of inferiour persons, as Counts and others it was my chance the Emperour detain'd by some exorbitant affaire) to wait him the fift part of an houre, or much neere it. In which time (retyring my selfe into a bay-window) the beauteous ladie ANNABELL, neece to the Empresse, and sister to the King of Arragon, who hauing neuer before eyde mee, (but only heard the common report of my vertue, learning, and trauaile) fell into that extremitie of passion, for my loue, that shee there immediately swouned: physicians were sent for, she had to her chamber, so to her bed; where (languishing some few daies) after many times calling vpon me, with my name in her lips, she expirde. As that (I must mourningly say) is the onely fault of my fortune, that, as it hath euer beene my hap to be sew'd to, by all ladies, and beauties, where I haue come, so, I neuer yet sojourn'd, or rested in that place, or part of the world, where some high-borne admirable faire feature died not for my loue.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, the sweet power of trauaile! are you guiltie of this, CVPID?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        No, MERCVRIE, and that his page (COS) knowes, if he were here present to be sworne.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        But, how doth this draw on the dittie, sir?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, she is too quicke with him; he hath not deuis'd that yet.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Mary, some houre before she departed, she bequeath'd to mee this gloue; which golden legacie, the Emperour himselfe tooke care to send after me, in sixe coaches, couer'd all with blacke vellet, attended by the state of his empire; all which he freely presented mee with, and I reciprocally (out of the same bountie) gaue to the lords that brought it: only reseruing the gift of the deceas'd ladie, vpon which I composde this ode, and set it to my most affected instrument, the lyra.
                        
                        
                        SONG.
                        THou more then most sweet gloue,
                        Vnto my more sweet loue,
                        Suffer me to store with kisses
                        This emptie lodging, that now misses
                        The pure rosie hand, that ware thee,
                        Whiter then the kid, that bare thee.
                        Thou art soft, but that was softer;
                        
                           CVPIDS selfe hath kist it ofter,
                        Then e're he did his mothers doues,
                        Supposing her the Queene of loues,
                        That was thy Mistresse,
                        Best of gloues.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Blasphemie, blasphemie, CVPID.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        I, I'le reuenge it time inough; HERMES.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Good AMORPHVS, let's heare it sing.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I care not to admit that, since it pleaseth PHILAVTIA to request it.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Heere, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        After he hath sung.
                         Nay, play it, I pray you, you doe well, you doe well—How like you it, sir?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Verie well in troth.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        But very well? O, you are a meere mammothrept in judgement then. Why, doe you not obserue how excellently the dittie is affected in euerie place? that I doe not marrie a word of short quantitie to a long note? nor an ascending sillable to a descending tone? Besides, vpon the word (best) there, you see how I doe enter with an odde minnum, and driue it thorow the briefe, which no intelligent Musician (I know) but wil affirme to be verie rare, extraordinarie, and pleasing.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        And yet not fit to lament the death of a ladie, for all this.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Tut, heere be they will swallow any thing.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Pray you let me haue a coppie of it, AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        And me too, in troth, I like it exceedingly.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I haue denied it to princes, neuerthelesse to you (the true female twinnes of perfection) I am wonne, to depart withall.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        I hope I shall haue my Honours coppie.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Who is return'd from seeking his page.
                         You are ambitious in that, HEDON.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        How now, ANAIDES! what is it hath conjur'd vp this distemperature in the circle of your face?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'lood, what haue you to doe? A pox vpon your filthie trauailing face, hold your tongue.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Nay, doo'st heare, mischiefe?
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Away, muske-cat.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I say to thee, thou art rude, debauch't, impudent, coorse, impolisht, a frapler, and base.
                     
                     
                        
                        HED.
                        Heart of my father, what a strange alteration has halfe a yeeres haunting of ordinaries wrought in this fellow! that came with a tuss-taffa
                                 •
                              a ierkin to towne but the other day, and a paire of penilesse hose, and now he is turn'd HERCVLES, he wants but a club.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Sir, you with the pencill on your chinne; I will garter my hose with your guts, and that shall be all.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        S'lid, what rare fireworkes be heere? flash, flash.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        What's the matter HEDON? can you tell?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Nothing, but that hee lackes crownes, and thinkes weele lend him some, to be friends.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Asotus returnes with Moria, and Morus.
                        Come, sweet ladie, in good truth I'le haue it, you shall not denie me. MORVS, perswade your aunt I may haue her picture, by any meanes.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Yes, sir: good aunt now, let him haue it, hee will vse mee the better, if you loue me, doe, good aunt.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Well, tell him, he shall haue it.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Master, you shall haue it, she saies.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Shall I? thanke her, good page.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        What, has he entertain'd the foole?
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I, heele wait close, you shall see, though the begger hang off, awhile.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Aunt, my master thankes you.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Call him hither.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Yes, master
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Yes, in veritie, and gaue me this pursse, and he has promis'd me a most fine dogge; which he will haue drawne, with my picture, he saies: and desires most vehemently to bee knowne to your ladiships.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Call him hither, 'tis good groping such a gull.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Master ASOTVS, master ASOTVS.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        For loues sake, let me goe: you see, I am call'd to the ladies.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Wilt thou forsake me then?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        God so, what would you haue me doe?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Come hither, master ASOTVS. I doe ensure your ladiships, he is a gentleman of a verie worthie desert: and of a most bountifull nature. You must shew and insinuate your selfe responsible, and equiualent now to my commendment. Good Honors, grace him.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I protest (more then most faire ladies) I doe wish all varietie of diuine pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique, rich fare, braue attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts attend these faire beauties. Will it please your ladiship to weare this chaine of pearle, and this diamond, for my sake?
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        O.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        And you, Madame, this iewell, and pendants.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        O.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Wee know not how to deserue these bounties, out of so slight merit, ASOTVS.
                     
                     
                        
                        PHI.
                        No, in faith, but there's my gloue for a fauour.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        And soone, after the reuells, I will bestow a garter on you.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O Lord, ladies! it is more grace then euer I could haue hop'd, but that it pleaseth your ladiships to extend. I protest, it is enough, that you but take knowledge of my—if your ladiships want embroidered gownes, tires of any fashion, rebatu's, iewells, or carkanets, any thing whatsoeuer, if you vouchsafe to accept.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        And for it, they will helpe you to shooe-ties, and deuices.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I cannot vtter my selfe (deare beauties) but, you can conceiue—
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        O.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Sir, we will acknowledge your seruice, doubt not: henceforth, you shall bee no more ASOTVS to vs, but our gold-finch, and wee your cages.
                        
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O VENVS, Madams! how shall I deserue this? if I were but made acquainted with HEDON, now, I'le trie: pray you away.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        How he praies Money to goe away from him!
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        AMORPHVS, a word with you: here's a watch I would bestow vpon you, pray you make me knowne to that gallant.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        That I will, sir. Monsieur HEDON, I must intreat you to exchange knowledge with this gentleman.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        'Tis a thing (next to the water we expect) I thirst after, sir▪ Good Monsieur ASOTVS.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Good Monsieur HEDON, I would be glad to be lou'd of men of your ranke, and spirit, I protest. Please you to accept this paire of bracelets, sir: they are not worth the bestowing—
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, HERCVLES, how the gentleman purchases! this must needes bring ARGVRION to a consumption.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Sir, I shall neuer stand in the merit of such bountie, I feare.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O, VENVS, sir; your acquaintance shall bee sufficient. And if at any time you neede my bill, or my bond.
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Argurion swoune
                              •
                           .
                         O, Ô.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Helpe the ladie there.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Gods deare, ARGVRION! Madame, how doe you?
                     
                     
                        ARG.
                        Sicke.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Haue her forth, and giue her aire.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I come againe strait, ladies.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Well, I doubt, all the physique hee has will scarce recouer her: shee's too farre spent.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene IIII.
                     PHILAVTIA, GELAIA, ANAIDES, COS, PROSAITES, PHANTASTE, MORIA, AMORPHVS, HEDON.
                     
                        O Here's the water come: fetch glasses, page.
                     
                     
                        GEL.
                        Heart of my body, here's a coile indeed, with your iealous humours. Nothing but whore, and bitch, and all the villanous swaggering names you can thinke on? S'lid, take your bottle, and put it in your guts for me, I'le see you poxt ere I follow you any longer.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Nay, good punke, sweete rascall; dam' mee, if I am iealous now.
                     
                     
                        GEL.
                        That's true indeede: pray let's goe.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What's the matter, there?
                     
                     
                        GEL.
                        S'light, he has mee vpon intergatories, (nay, my mother shall know how you vse me) where I haue beene? and, why I should stay so long? and, how ist possible? and withall, calls me at his pleasure, I know not how many cockatrices, and things.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        In truth and sadnesse, these are no good epitaphs, ANAIDES, to bestow vpon any gentlewoman; and (Ile ensure you) if I had knowne you would haue dealt thus with my daughter, she should neuer haue fancied you so deeply, as shee has done. Goe too.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Why, doe you heare, mother MORIA. Heart!
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Nay, I pray you, sir, doe not sweare.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Sweare? why? S'lood, I haue sworne afore now, I hope. Both you and your daughter mistake me. I haue not honor'd ARETE, that is held the worthiest ladie in court (next to CYNTHIA) with halfe that obseruance, and respect, as I haue done her in priuate, howsoeuer outwardly I haue carried my selfe carelesse, and negligent. Come, you are a foolish, punke, and know not when you are well imploi'd. Kisse me, come on. Doe it, I say.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Nay, indeed I must confesse, shee is apt to misprision. But I must haue you leaue it, minion.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        How now, ASOTVS? how do's the ladie?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Faith, ill. I haue left my page with her, at her lodging.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        O, here's the rarest water that euer was tasted: fill him some.
                     
                     
                        PRO.
                        What! has my master a new page?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Yes, a kinsman of the ladie MORIAS: you must waite better now, or you are casheer'd, PROSAITES.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Come, gallants, you must pardon my foolish humour: when I am angrie, that any thing crosses mee, I grow impatient straight. Here, I drinke to you.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        O, that we had fiue, or sixe bottles more of this liquor.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Now I commend your iudgement, AMORPHVS, who's that
knockes? Looke, page.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, most delicious, a little of this would make ARGVRION well.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        O, no, giue her no cold drinke, by any meanes.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'lood, this water is the spirit of wine, I'le be hang'd else.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Here's the ladie ARETE, Madame.
                     
                  
                  
                     Act IIII. Scene V.
                     ARETE, MORIA, PHANTASTE, PHILAVTIA, ANAIDES, GELAIA, COS, PROSAITES, AMORPHVS, ASOTVS, HEDON, MERCVRIE, CVPID.
                     
                        WHat! at your beuer, gallants?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Wilt please your ladiship drinke? tis of the new fountayne water.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        Not I, MORIA, I thanke you. Gallants, you are for this night
free, to your peculiar delights; CYNTHIA will haue no sports: when
shee is pleas'd to come forth, you shall haue knowledge. In the meane
time, I could wish you did prouide for solemne reuels, and some vnlook't-for
deuice of wit, to entertaine her, against she should vouchsafe to grace
your pastimes with her presence.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        What say you to a Masque?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Nothing better, if the proiect were new, and rare.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        Why, Ile send for CRITES, and haue his aduice; be you ready
in your indeauours: He shall discharge you of the inuentiue part.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        But, will not your ladiship stay?
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        Not now, PHANTASTE.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Let her goe, I pray you, good ladie Sobrietie, I am glad wee are
rid of her.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        What a set face the gentlewoman has, as shee were still going to
a sacrifice?
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        O, shee is the extraction of a dozen of Puritans, for a looke.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Of all Nymphs i' the court, I cannot away with her; 'tis the
coursest thing—
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        I wonder, how CYNTHIA can affect her so aboue the rest!
Here be they are euery way as faire as shee, and a thought fairer, I trow.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        I, and as ingenious, and conceited as shee.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I, and as politique as shee, for all shee sets such a fore-head on't.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Would I were dead, if I would change to be CYNTHIA.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Or I.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Or I.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        And there's her minion CRITES! why his aduice more then
AMORPHVS? haue not I inuention, afore him? Learning, to better that

                           
inuention, aboue him? and infanted, with pleasant trauaile—
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Death, what talke you of his learning? he vnderstands no more
then a schoole-boy; I haue put him downe my selfe a thousand times (by
this aire) and yet I neuer talkt with him but twice, in my life: you neuer
saw his like. I could neuer get him to argue with me, but once, and then,
because I could not construe an Author I quoted at first sight, hee went
away, and laught at me. By HERCVLES, I scorne him, as I doe the sodden
Nymph, that was here e'en now, his mistris ARETE: And I loue my
selfe for nothing else.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        I wonder the fellow do's not hang himselfe, being thus scorn'd,
and contemn'd of vs that are held the most accomplisht societie of
gallants!
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        By your selues, none else.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        I protest, if I had no musique in me, no courtship, that I were
not a reueller and could dance, or had not those excellent qualities that
giue a man life, and perfection, but a meere poore scholer as he is, I thinke
I should make ſome desperate way with my selfe, whereas now (would I
might neuer breathe more) if I doe know that creature in the kingdome,
with whom I would change.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        This is excellent: well, I must alter all this soone.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Looke you doe, CVPID. The bottles haue wrought, it seemes.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O, I am sorry the reuels are crost. I should ha' tickled it soone.
I did neuer appeare till then. S'lid, I am the neatlyest-made gallant i' the
companie, and haue the best presence; and my dancing—well, I know
what our vsher said to me, lasst time I was at the schoole: would I might
haue lead PHILAVTIA in the measures, and it had beene the gods will. I
am most worthy, I am sure.
                     
                     
                        MORVS.
                        Master, I can tell you newes, the ladie kist mee yonder, and
plaid with me, and sayes shee lou'd you once, as well as shee do's me, but
that you cast her off.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Peace, my most esteemed page.
                     
                     
                        MORVS.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        What lucke is this, that our reuels are dasht? Now was I beginning
to glister, i' the very high way of preferment. And CYNTHIA
had but seene me dance a straine, or doe but one trick, I had beene kept in
court, I should neuer haue needed to looke towards my friends againe.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Containe your selfe. You were a fortunate yong man, if you
knew your owne good: which I haue now proiected, and will presently
multiply vpon you. Beauties, and Valors, your vouchsaf'd applause to a motion.
the humorous CYNTHIA hath, for this night, with-drawne the light of your de-light—
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Tis true AMORPHVS, what may we doe to redeeme it?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Redeeme that we cannot, but, to create a new flame, is in our
power. Here is a gentleman my scholer, whom (for some priuate reasons
me specially mouing) I am couetous to gratifie with title of Master, in

the noble, and subtile science of Courtship: For which grace, he shall this night in court, and in the long gallery, hold his publique Act, by open challenge, to all Masters of the mysterie whatsoeuer, to play at the foure choice, and principall weapons thereof, viz. the bare Accost, the better Regard, the solemne Addresse, and the perfect Close. What say you?
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        Excellent, excellent, AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Well, let vs then take our time by the fore-head: I will instantly haue bills drawne, and aduanc'd in euery angle of the court. Sir, betray not your too much ioy. ANAIDES, wee must mixe this gentleman with you in acquaintance, Monsieur ASOTVS.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I am easily intreated to grace any of your friends, AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Sir, and his friends shall likewise grace you, sir. Nay, I begin to know my selfe, now.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        O, you must continue your bounties.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Must I? why, I'le giue him this ruby on my finger. Doe you heare, sir? I doe heartily with your acquaintance, and I partly know my selfe worthy of it; please you, sir, to accept this poore ruby, in a ring, sir. The poesie is of my owne deuice. Let this blush for me, sir.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        So it must for me, too. For I am not asham'd to take it.
                     
                     
                        MORVS.
                        Sweet man! by my troth, master, I loue you, will you loue me, too? for my aunts sake? Ile waite well, you shall see. Ile still bee here. Would I might neuer stirre, but you are a fine man in these clothes, Master, shall I haue 'hem, when you haue done with them?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        As for that, MORVS, thou shalt see more hereafter: in the meane time, by this aire, or by this feather, Ile doe as much for thee, as any gallant shall doe for his page, whatsoeuer, in this court, corner of the world, or kingdome.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I wonder, this gentleman should affect to keepe a foole! mee thinkes, he makes sport enough with himselfe.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Well, PROSAITES, 'twere good you did waite closer.
                     
                     
                        PRO.
                        I, Ile looke to it; 'tis time.
                     
                     
                        COS.
                        The reuels would haue beene most sumptuous to night, if they had gone forward.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        They must needs, when al the choisest singularities of the court were vp in pantofles; ne're a one of them, but was able to make a whole shew of it selfe.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Within.
                         Sirrah, a torch, a torch.
                     
                     
                        PRO.
                        O, what a call is there! I will haue a canzonet made, with nothing in it, but sirrah; and the burthen shall be, I come.
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        How now, CVPID, how doe you like this change?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Faith, the thred of my deuice is crackt, I may goe sleepe till the reuelling musique awake me.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        And ther too, CVPID, without you had preuented the Fountayne. Alas, poore god, that remembers not selfe-Loue, to bee proofe

against the violence of his quiuer! Well, I haue a plot vpon these prizers, for which, I must presently find out CRITES, and with his assistance, pursue it to a high straine of laughter, or MERCVRIE hath lost of his mettall.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act V.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     MERCVRIE, CRITES.
                     
                        IT is resolu'd on, CRITES, you must doe it.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        The grace diuinest MERCVRIE hath done me,
                        In this vouchsafde discouerie of himselfe,
                        Binds my obseruance in the vtmost terme
                        Of satisfaction, to his godly will:
                        Though I professe (without the affectation)
                        Of an enforc'd, and form'd austeritie)
                        I could be willing to enioy no place
                        With so vnequall natures.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        We beleeue it.
                        But for our sake, and to inflict iust paines
                        On their prodigious follies, aide vs now:
                        No man is, presently, made bad, with ill.
                        And good men, like the sea, should still maintaine
                        Their noble taste, in midst of all fresh humours,
                        That flow about them, to corrupt their streames,
                        Bearing no season, much lesse salt of goodnesse.
                        It is our purpose, CRITES, to correct,
                        And punish, with our laughter, this nights sport
                        Which our court-Dors so heartily intend:
                        And by that worthy scorne, to make them know
                        How farre beneath the dignitie of man
                        Their serious, and most practis'd actions are.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        I, but though MERCVRIE can warrant out
                        His vnder-takings, and make all things good,
                        Out of the powers of his diuinitie,
                        Th'offence will be return'd with weight on me,
                        That am a creature so despisde, and poore;
                        When the whole Court shall take it selfe abusde
                        By our ironicall confederacie.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        You are deceiu'd. The better race in court
                        That haue the true nobilitie, call'd vertue,
                        Will apprehend it, as a gratefull right
                        Done to their separate merit: and approue
                        The fit rebuke of so ridiculous heads,
                        Who with their apish customes, and forc'd garbes,
                        Would bring the name of courtier in contempt,
                        Did it not liue vnblemisht in some few,
                        
                        Whom equall IOVE hath lou'd, and PHOEBVS form'd
                        Of better mettall, and in better mould.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Well, since my leader on is MERCVRIE,
                        I shall not feare to follow. If I fall,
                        My proper vertue shall be my reliefe,
                        That follow'd such a cause, and such a chiefe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene II.
                     ASOTVS, AMORPHVS.
                     
                        NO more, if you loue mee, good master, you are incompatible to liue withall: Send mee for the ladies.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Nay, but intend me.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Feare me not, I warrant you, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Render not your selfe a refractarie, on the sodaine. I can allow well, you should repute highly, heartily (and to the most) of your own endowments; it giues you forth to the world the more assur'd: but with reseruation of an eye, to be alwaies turn'd dutifully back vpon your teacher.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Nay, good, sir, leaue it to mee. Trust mee with trussing all the points of this action, I pray. S'lid, I hope we shall find wit to performe the science, as well as another.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I confesse you to be of an aped, and docible humour. Yet, there are certaine puntilioes, or (as I may more nakedly insinuate them) certaine intrinsecate strokes, and wardes, to which your actiuitie is not yet amounted. As your gentile dor, in colours. For supposition, your mistris appeares heere in prize, ribbanded with greene, and yellow; now it is the part of euery obsequious seruant, to be sure to haue daily about him copie, and varietie of colours, to be presently answerable to any hourely, or half-hourely change in his mistris reuolution.—
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        (I know it, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Giue leaue, I pray you) which if your Antagonist, or player-against-you shall ignorantly be without, and your selfe can produce; you giue him the dor.
                        
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I, I, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Or, if you can possesse your opposite, that the greene your mistris weares, is her reioycing or exultation in his seruice; the yellow, suspicion of his truth, (from her height of affection:) and that he (greenly credulous) shall withdraw thus, in priuate, and from the aboundance of his pocket (to displace her jelous conceit) steale into his hat the colour, whose bluenesse doth expresse truenesse, (shee being nor so, nor so affected) you giue him the dor.
                        
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Doe not I know it, sir?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Nay, good—swell not aboue your vnderstanding. There is yet a third dor, in colours.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I know it too, I know it.
                     
                     
                        
                        AMO.
                        Doe you know it too? what is it? Make good your knowledge.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Why it is—no matter for that.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Doe it, on poene of the dor.
                        
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Why? what is't, say you?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Loe, you haue giuen your selfe the dor. But I will remonstrate to you the third dor; which is not, as the two former dors, indicatiue, but deliberatiue: As how? As thus. Your Riualis, with a dutifull, and serious care, lying in his bed, meditating how to obserue his mistris, dispatcheth his lacquay to the chamber, early, to know what her colours are for the day; with purpose to apply his weare that day, accordingly: You lay wait before, preoccupie the chamber-maide, corrupt her, to returne false colours; He followes the fallacie; comes out accoutred to his beleeu'd instructions; your mistresse smiles; and you giue him the dor.
                        
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Why, so I told you, sir, I knew it.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Tolde mee? It is a strange outrecuidance! your humour too much redoundeth.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Why, sir, what, doe you thinke you know more?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I know that a cooke may as soone, and properly be said to smel wel, as you to be wise. I know these are most cleere, and cleane strokes. But then, you haue your passages, and imbroccata's in courtship; as the bitter Rob in wit; the Reuerse in face, or wry-mouth; and these more subtle, and secure offenders. I will example vnto you. Your opponent makes entrie, as you are ingag'd with your mistresse. You seeing him, close in her eare, with this whisper (here comes your Babion, disgrace him) and withall, stepping off, fall on his bosome, and turning to her, politiquely, aloud say, ladie, reguard this noble gentleman, a man rarely parted, second to none in this court; and then, stooping ouer his shoulder, your hand on his brest, your mouth on his back-side, you giue him the Reuerse stroke, with this Sanna, or Storkes-bill, which makes vp your wits Bob, most bitter.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Nay, for heauens sake, teach me no more. I know all as well— S'lid, if I did not, why was I nominated? why did you chuse mee? why did the ladies pricke out mee? I am sure there were other gallants. But me of all the rest? By that light, and as I am a courtier, would I might neuer stirre, but 'tis strange. Would to the lord, the ladies would come once.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene III.
                     MORPHIDES, AMORPHVS, ASOTVS, HEDON, ANAIDES, THE THRONG. LADIES, CITIZEN, WIFE, PAGES, TAYLOR, MERCER, PERFVMER, IEWELLER, &c.
                     
                        SIgnior, the gallants and ladies are at hand. Are you readie, sir?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Instantly. Goe, accomplish your attire: Cousin MORPHIDES, assist me, to make good the doore with your officious tyrannie.
                     
                     
                        
                        CIT.
                        By your leaue my masters there, pray you let's come by.
                     
                     
                        PAG.
                        You by? why should you come by, more then we?
                     
                     
                        WIT.
                        Why, sir? Because he is my brother, that playes the prizes.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Your brother?
                     
                     
                        CIT.
                        I, her brother, sir, and we must come in.
                     
                     
                        TAY.
                        Why, what are you?
                     
                     
                        CIT.
                        I am her husband, sir.
                     
                     
                        TAY.
                        Then thrust forward your head.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        What tumult is there?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Who's there? beare backe there. Stand from the doore.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Enter none but the ladies, and their hang-bies; welcome Beauties, and your kind Shadowes.
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        This countrie ladie, my friend, good signior AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        And my cockatrice, heere.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        She is welcome.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Knocke those same pages there; and goodman Cockescombe the cittizen, who would you speake withall?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        With whom? your brother?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Who is your brother?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Master ASOTVS? Is hee your brother? Hee is taken vp with great persons. Hee is not to know you to night.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O IOVE, master! and there come ere a cittizen gentlewoman in my name, let her haue entrance, I pray you. It is my sister.
                     
                     
                        WIT.
                        Brother.
                     
                     
                        CIT.
                        Brother, master ASOTVS.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Who's there?
                     
                     
                        WIT.
                        'Tis I, brother.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Gods me! There she is, good master, intrude he.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Make place. Beare backe there.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Knocke that simple fellow, there.
                     
                     
                        WIT.
                        Nay, good sir; It is my husband.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        The simpler fellow hee. Away, backe with your head, sir.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Brother, you must pardon your non-entry: Husbands are not allow'd here in truth. Ile come home soone with my sister; pray you meet vs with a lanthorn, brother. Be merrie, sister: I shall make you laugh anon.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Your prizer is not readie AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Apprehend your places, hee shall be soone; and at all points.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Is there any body come to answer him? Shal we haue any sport.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Sport of importance; howsoeuer, giue me the gloues.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Gloues! why gloues, Signior?
                        
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        He distributes gloues.
                         What's the ceremonie?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Besides their receiu'd fitnesse, at all prizes, they are here properly accommodate to the nuptials of my schollers hauiour to the ladie courtship. Please you apparell your hands. Madam PHANTASTE, madam PHILAVTIA, Guardian, Signior HEDON, Signior ANAIDES, Gentlemen all, Ladies.
                     
                     
                        
                        ALL.
                        Thankes, good AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I will now call forth my prouost, and present him.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Heart! why should not we be masters, aswell as he?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        That's true, and play our masters prizes, as well as the t'other?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        In sadnesse, for vsing your court-weapons, me thinks, you may.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Nay, but why should not wee ladies play our prizes, I pray? I see no reason, but we should take 'hem downe, at their owne weapons.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Troth, and so we may, if we handle 'hem well.
                     
                     
                        WIF.
                        I indeed, forsooth, Madame, if'twere i' the citie, wee would thinke foule scorne, but we would, forsooth.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Pray you, what shoul'd we call your name?
                     
                     
                        WIF.
                        My name is, Downefall.
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Good mistris Downefall! I am sorry, your husband could not get in.
                     
                     
                        WIF.
                        'Tis no matter for him, sir.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        No, no, shee has the more liberty for her selfe.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        A flourish.
                        Peace, peace: They come.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        So. Keepe vp your ruffe: the tincture of your necke is not all so pure, but it will aske it. Maintayne your sprig vpright; your cloke on your halfe-shoulder falling; So: I will reade your bill, aduance it, and present you.
                        Silence.
                        
                           
                              The challen
                              
                                 Be it knowne to all that professe courtship, 
                                 by these presents (from the white sattin reueller, to the cloth of tissue, and bodkin) that we, VLYSSES-POLYTROPVS-AMORPHVS, Master of the noble, and subtile science of courtship, doe giue leaue and licence to our Prouost, ACOLASTVS-POLYPRAGMON-ASOTVS, to play his Masters prize, against all Masters whatsoeuer in this subtile mysterie, at these foure, the choice, and most cunning weapons of court-complement, viz. the bare Accost; the better Reguard; the solemne Addresse; and the perfect Close. These are therefore to giue notice, to all commers, that hee, 
                                       •
                                    he said ACOLASTVS-POLYPRAG
                                    •
                                 ON-ASOTVS, is here present (by the helpe of his Mer
                                       •
                                    er, Taylor, Milla
                                       •
                                    er, Sempster, and so forth) at his designed houre, in this faire gallery, the present day of this present moneth, to performe, and doe his vttermost for the atchieuement, and bearing away of the prizes, which are these: viz. for the bare Accost, two Wall-eyes, in a face forced: For the better R
                                    •
                                 guard, a Face fauourably simpring, with a Farme wauing: For the solemne Addresse, two Lips wagging, and neuer a wise word: For the perfect Close, a Wring by the hand, with a Banquet in a corner. And PHOEBVS sa
                                       •
                                    e CYNTHIA.
                           
                        
                        Musique sounds.
                        Appeareth no man yet, to answere the prizer? No voice? Musique, giue them their summons. 
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        The solemnity of this is excellent.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Silence. Well, I perceiue your name is their terror; and keepeth them backe.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I faith, Master, Let's goe: no body comes. Victus, victa,

victum; Victi, victae, victi—Let's bee retrograde.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Stay. That were dispunct to the ladies. Rather, our selfe shall be your Encounter. Take your state, vp, to the wall: And, ladie, may we implore you to stand forth, as first terme, or bound to our courtship.
                     
                     
                        H
                              •
                           D.
                        A charge.
                         'Fore heauen, 'twill shew rarely.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Sound a charge.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        A poxe on't. Your vulgar will count this fabulous, and impudent, now: by that candle, they'le ne're conceit it.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Excellent well! Admirable!
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Peace.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        They act their ac
                              •
                           ost seuerally to the lady 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              ••
                           a
                              •
                           ds forth.
                         Most fashionably, beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        O, he is a well-spoken gentleman.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Now the other.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Very good.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        For a Scholer, Honor.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        O, 'tis too d
                                 •
                              tch. He reeles too much.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        A flourish.
                         This weapon is done.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        No, we haue our two bouts, at euery weapon, expect.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene IIII.
                     CRITES, MERCVRIE.
                     To them.
                     
                        WHere be these gallants, and their braue prizer here?
                     
                     
                        MORP.
                        Who's there? beare backe: Keepe the dore.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        What are you, sir?
                     
                     
                        C
                              •
                           IT.
                        By your licence, grand-master. Come forward, sir.
                     
                     
                        ANAI.
                        Heart! who l
                              •
                           t in that rag there, amongst vs? put him out, an impecunious creature.
                     
                     
                        HEDO.
                        Out with him.
                     
                     
                        MOR
                              •
                           .
                        Come, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        You must be retrograde.
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        Soft, sir, I am Truchman, and doe flourish before this Monsieur, or french-behau'd gentleman, here; who is drawne hither by report of your chartells, aduanced in court, to proue his fortune with your prizer, so he may haue faire play shewne him, and the libertie to choose his stickler.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        Is he a Master?
                     
                     
                        CRIT.
                        That, sir, he has to shew here; and, confirmed vnder the hands of the most skilfull, and cunning complementaries aliue: please you reade, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        What shall we doe?
                     
                     
                        ANAI.
                        Death, disgrace this fellow i' the blacke-stuffe, what euer you doe.
                     
                     
                        AMOR.
                        Why, but he comes with the stranger.
                     
                     
                        HEDO.
                        That's no matter. He is our owne countryman.
                     
                     
                        
                        ANA.
                        I, and he is a scholer besides. You may disgrace him here, with authoritie.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Well, see these first.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Now shall I be obseru'd by yon'd scholer, till I sweat againe; I would to IOVE, it were ouer.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Sir, this is the wight of worth, that dares you to the encounter. A gentleman of so pleasing, and ridiculous a carriage; as, euen standing, carries meat in the mouth, you see; and I assure you, although no bred courtling, yet a most particular man, of goodly hauings, well fashion'd hauiour, and of as hard'ned, and excellent a barke, as the most naturally-qualified amongst them, inform'd, reform'd, and transform'd, from his originall citticisme, by this elixi'r, or meere magazine of man. And, for your spectators, you behold them, what they are: The most choice particulars in court: This tels tales well; This prouides coaches; This repeates iests; This presents gifts▪ This holds vp the arras; This takes downe from horse; This protests by this light; This sweares by that candle; This delighteth; This adoreth. Yet, all but three men. Then for your ladies, the most proud wittie creatures, all things apprehending, nothing vnderstanding, perpetually laughing, curious maintayners of fooles, mercers, and minstrels, costly to be kept, miserably keeping, all disdayning, but their painter, and pothecary, twixt whom and them there is this reciprock commerce, their beauties maintaine their painters, and their painters their beauties.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Sir, you haue plaid the painter your selfe, and limb'd them to the life. I desire to deserue before 'hem.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Hauing read the certificate.
                        This is anthentique. Wee must resolue to entertaine the Monsieur, howsoeuer we neglect him.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Come, let's all goe together, and salute him.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Content, and not looke o' the other.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Well deuis'd: and a most punishing disgrace.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        On.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        
                           Monsieur. We must not so much betray our selues to discourtship, as to suffer you to be longer vnsaluted: Please you to vse the state, ordain'd for the opponent; in which nature, without enuy we receiue you.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        And embrace you.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        And commend vs to you, sir.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Beleeue it, he is a man of excellent silence.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        He keepes all his wit for action.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        This hath discountenanc'd our scholaris, most richly.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Out of all emphasis. The Monsieur sees, we regard him not.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Hold on: make it knowne how bitter a thing it is, not to bee look't on in court.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        S'lud, will he call him to him yet? doe's not Monsieur perceiue our disgrace?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Hart! he is a foole, I see. Wee haue done our selues wrong to grace him.
                     
                     
                        
                        HED.
                        S'light, what an asse was I, to embrace him?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Illustrous, and fearefull iudges—
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Turne away, turne away.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        It is the sute of the strange opponent (to whom you ought not to turne your tailes, and whose noses I must follow) that he may haue the iustice, before hee encounter his respected aduersarie, to see some light stroke of his play, commenc'd with some other.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Answere not him, but the stranger, we will not beleeue him.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I will demand him my selfe.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        O dreadfull disgrace, if a man were so foolish to feele it!
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Is it your sute, Monsieur, to see some praelude of my scholer? Now, sure the Monsieur wants language.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        And take vpon him to be one of the accomplisht? S'light, that's a goodiest: would we could take him with that nullitie. Non sapette voi parlar' Itagliano?
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'foot, the carpe ha's no tongue.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        
                           Signior, in courtship, you are to bid your abettors forbeare, and satisfie the Monsieurs request.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        A cha
                              •
                           ge.
                        Well, I will strike him more silent, with admiration, and terrifie his daring hither. Hee shall behold my owne play, with my scholer. Ladie, with the touch of your white hand, let me re-enstate you. Pro
                                 •
                              ost, begin to me, at the bare Accost. Now, for the honor of my discipline.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        
                           Signior AMORPHVS, reflect, reflect: what meanes hee by that mouthed waue?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        He is in some distaste of your fellow disciple.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        
                           Signior, your scholer might haue plaid well still, if hee could haue kept his feare longer: I haue enough of him, now. He is a mere peece of glasse, I see through him, by this time.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You come not to giue vs the scorne, Monsieur?
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Nor to be frighted with a face. Signior! I haue seene the lyons. You must pardon me. I shall bee loth to hazzard a reputation with one, that ha's not a reputation to lose.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Meaning your pupil, sir.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        This is that blacke deuill there.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You doe offer a strange affront, Monsieur.
                        
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Sir, he shall yeeld you all the honor of a competent aduersarie, if you please to vnder-take him—
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I am prest for the encounter.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Me? challenge me?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        What! my Master, sir? S'light, Monsieur, meddle with me, doe you heare? but doe not meddle with my Master.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Peace, good squib, goe out.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        And stinke, he bids you.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Master?
                     
                     
                        
                        AMO.
                        Silence, I doe accept him. Sit you downe, and obserue. Me? He neuer profest a thing at more charges. Prepare your selfe, sir. Challenge me? I will prosecute what disgrace my hatred can dictate to me.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        How tender a trauailers spleene is? comparison, to men, that deserue least, is euer most offensiue.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You are instructed in our chartell, and know our weapons?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I appeare not without their notice, sir.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        But must I lose the prizes, Master?
                        
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I will win them for you, bee patient. Lady, vouchsafe the tenure of this ensigne. Who shall be your stickler?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Behold him.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I would not wish you a weaker. Sound musiques. I prouoke you, at the bare Accost.
                        
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        A charge.
                        Excellent comely! 
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        And worthily studied. This is th' exalted Fore-top.
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        O, his legge was too much produc'd.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        And his hat was carried skiruily.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Peace; Let's see the Monsieur's Accost: Rare!
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Sprightly, and short.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        True, it is the french curteau: He lacks but to haue his nose slit.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        A flourish.
                        He do's hop. He do's bound too much.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        A charge.
                        The second bout, to conclude this weapon.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Good, beleeue it!
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        An excellent offer!
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        This is call'd the solemne band-string.
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Foe, that cringe was not put home.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'foot, he makes a face like a stab'd LVCRECE.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Well, he would needes take it vpon him, but would I had done it for all this. He makes me sit still here, like a babioun as I am.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Making villanous faces.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        See, the French prepares it richly.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        I, this is y'cleped the serious trifle.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'lud, 'tis the horse-start out o' the browne studie.
                        
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        A flourish.
                        Rather the bird-ey'd stroke, sir. Your obseruance is too blunt, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Iudges, award the prize. Take breath, sir. This bout hath beene laborious.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        And yet your Criticke, or your Besso'gno, will thinke these things sopperie, and easie, now.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Or rather meere lunacy. For, would any reasonable creature make these his serious studies, and perfections? Much lesse, onely liue to these ends? to be the false pleasure of a few, the true loue of none, and the iust laughter of all?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        We must preferre the Monsieur, we courtiers must be partiall.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Speake, Guardian. Name the prize, at the bare Accost.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        A paire of wall-eyes, in a face forced.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        ANA.
                        Giue the Monsieur. AMORPHVS hath lost his eies.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I! is the palate of your judgement downe? Gentles, I doe appeale.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Yes master, to me. The judges be fooles.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        How now, sir? Tie vp your tongue, Mungrill. He cannot appeale.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Say you, sir?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Sir you still, sir.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Why, so I doe. Doe not I, I pray you?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        
                           Remercie, Madame, and these honourable Censors.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Well, to the second weapon, The better Reguard: I will encounter you better. Attempt.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Sweet Honour.
                        
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        What sayes my good Ambition?
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Which take you at this next weapon? I lay a discretion, with you, on AMORPHVS head.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Why, I take the french-behau'd gentleman.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        'Tis done, a discretion.
                        
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        A discretion? A prettie court-wager! would any discreet person hazard his wit, so?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        I'le lay a discretion, with you, ANAIDES.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Hang 'hem. I'le not venter a doibt of discretion, on eyther of their heads.—
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        No, he should venter all then.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I like none of their playes.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        A charge.
                         See, see, this is strange play!
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        'Tis too full of vncertaine motion. He hobbles too much.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        'Tis call'd your court-staggers, sir.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        That same fellow talkes so, now he has a place.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Hang him, neglect him.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        
                           Your good ladiships affectioned.
                        
                     
                     
                        WI
                              •
                           .
                        Gods so! they speake at this weapon, brother!
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        They must doe so, sister, how should it bee the better Reguard, else?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Me thinkes, hee did not this respectiuely inough.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Why, the Monsieur but dallies with him.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Dallies? Slight see, hee'l put him too't, in earnest. Well done, AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        That puffe was good indeed.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Gods mee! This is desperate play. Hee hits himselfe o'the shinnes.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        And he make this good through, he carries it, I warrant him.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Indeed he displayes his feet, rarely.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        See, see; Hee do's the respectiue Leere damnably well.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        
                           The true idolater of your beauties, shall neuer passe their de
                                 •
                              ties vnadored: I rest your poore knight.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        HED.
                        See, now the oblique leere, or the Ianus: He satisfies all, with that aspect, most nobly.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        A flourish.
                        And most terribly he comes off: like your Rodomantada.
                        
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        How like you this play, ANAIDES?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Good play; but 't is too rough, and boisterous.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I will second it with a stroke easier, wherein I will prooue his language.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        A charge.
                        This is silthie, and graue, now.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        O, 't is coole, and warie play. Wee must not disgrace our owne camerade, too much.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        
                           Signora, ho tanto obligo per pefauore rescinto da lei; che veramente des
                                 •••
                              ero con totto il core, 
                                 •
                               remunerarla in parte: & sicurati
                                 •
                              e signor a mea cara, chè infera sempre pronto à seruirla, & honorarla. Bascio le mane de v
                                 •
                               signoria.
                        
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        The veneti
                                 ••
                               Dop this.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Most vnexspectedly excellent! The French goes downe certaine.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        As buckets are put downe into a well;
                        Or as a schoole-boy.—
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Trusse vp your simile, Iacke-daw, and obserue.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Now the Monsieur is moou'd.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Boe-peepe.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        O, most antique.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        The french Quirke, this sir.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Heart, he will ouer-runne her!
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        A flourish.
                        
                           Madamoyselle, Ie voudroy que pou
                                 •
                              oy monstrer mon affection, mais ie suis tant mal he
                                 •
                              reuse, ci froid, ci layd, ci—Ie ne scay qui di dire—excuse moy, Ie suis tout vostre. 
                        
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        O braue, and spirited! Hee's a right Iouialist.
                        
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        No, no: AMORPHVS grauitie outwaies it.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        And yet your ladie, or your feather would outweigh both.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        What's the prize, ladie, at this better Reguard?
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        
                           A Face fauourably simpring, and a fanne wauing.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        They haue done doubtfully. Diuide. Giue the fauourable Face to the Signior, and the light waue to the Monsi
                                 •
                              ur.
                        
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You become the simper, well, ladie.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        And the wag, better.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Now, to our solemne Addresse. Please the well-grac'd PHILAVTIA to relieue the ladie sentinell; shee hath stood long.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        With all my heart, come, Guardian
                           ▪ Resigne your place.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        
                           Monsieur, furnish your selfe with what solemnitie of ornament you thinke fit for this third weapon; at which you are to shew all the cunning of stroke, your deuotion can possibly deuise.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Let me alone, sir. Ile sufficiently decipher your amorous solemnities. CRITES, haue patience. See, if I hit not all their practicke obseruance, with which they lime twigs, to catch their phantasticke ladiebirds.
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                        
                        CRI.
                        I, but you should doe more charitably, to doe it more openly; that they might discouer themselues mockt in these monstrous affections.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        A charge.
                         
                           Lacquay, where's the taylor?
                     
                     
                        TAY.
                        Heere, sir.
                     
                     
                        HED▪
                        
                        See, they haue their Taylor, Barber, Perfumer, Millaner, Ieweller, Feather-maker, all in common!
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I, this is prettie.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        They make them selues readie on the stage.
                         Here is a haire too much, take it off. Where are thy mullets?
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Is this pinke of equall proportion to this cut, standing of this distance from it?
                     
                     
                        TAY.
                        That it is, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Is it so, sir, you impudent Poultroun? you slaue, you list, you shreds, you.—
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Excellent. This was the best, yet.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        S'foot, we must vse our taylors thus. This is your true magnanimitie.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Come, goe to: put on. Wee must beare with you, for the times sake.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Is the perfume rich, in this jerkin?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Taste, smell; I assure you sir, pure beniamin, the onely spirited sent, that euer awak'd a neapolitane nostrill. You would wish your selfe all nose, for the loue o
                              •
                           t. I frotted a jerkin, for a new-reuenu'd gentleman, yeelded me threescore crownes, but this morning, and the same titillation.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I sauour no sampsuchine, in it.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I am a nulli-fidian, if there be not three thirds of a scruple more of samp
                                 •
                              uchinum, in this confection, then euer I put in any. Ile tell you all the ingredients, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You shall be simple, to discouer your simples.
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Simple? why sir? what recke I to whom I discouer? I haue in it, muske, ciuet, amber, pheenicobalanus, the decoction of turmericke, sesama, nard, spikenard, calamus odoratus, stacte, opobalsamum, amomum, storax, lad
                                 •
                              
                              num, aspalathum, opponax, oenanthe. And what of all these now? what are you the better? Tut, it is the sorting, and the diuiding, and the mixing, and the tempring, and the 
                              •
                           earcing, and the decocting, that makes the fumigation, and the 
                              •
                           uffumigation.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Well, indue me with it.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I will, sir.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        An excellent confection.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        And most worthie a true voluptarie. IOVE! what a coyle these mukse-wormes take, to purchase anothers delight? for, themselues, who beare the odours, haue euer the least sence of them. Yet, I doe like better the prodigalitie of jewels, and clothes, whereof one passeth to a mans heires; the other, at least weares out time: This presently expires, and without continuall riot in reparation is lost: which who so striues to keep, it is one speciall argument to me, that (affecting to smell better then other men) he doth indeed smell farre worse.
                     
                     
                        
                        MER.
                        I know, you will say it sits well, sir.
                     
                     
                        TAY.
                        Good faith, if it doe not, sir, let your Mistris be judge.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        By heauen, if my Mistris doe not like it, I'le make no more conscience to vndoe thee, then to vndoe an oyster.
                     
                     
                        TAY.
                        Beleeue it, sir, there's ne're a Mistris i' the world can mislike it.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        No, not goodwife Taylor, your Mistris; that has onely the iudgment to heat your pressing toole. But for a court-Mistris, that studies these decorums, and knowes the proportion of euerie cut, to a haire, knowes why such a colour, is cut vpon such a colour, and, when a satten is cut vpon six taffa
                              •
                           aes, wil looke that we should diue into the depth of the cut.— Giue me my scarffe. Shew some ribbands, sirra. Ha you the feather?
                     
                     
                        FET.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Ha' you the jewell?
                     
                     
                        IEW.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        What must I giue for the hire on't?
                     
                     
                        IEW.
                        You'le giue me six crownes, sir?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Sixe crownes? By heauen 'twere a good deed to borrow it of thee, to shew: and neuer let thee haue it againe.
                     
                     
                        IEW.
                        I hope your worship will not doe so, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        By IOVE, sir, there bee such trickes stirring, I can tell you, and worthily too. Extorting knaues! that liue by these Court-decorums, and yet, —What's your jewell worth, I pray?
                     
                     
                        IEW.
                        A hundred crownes, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        A hundred crownes? And sixe for the loane on't an houre? What's that? the hundred for the yeere? These impostors would not bee hang'd? your thiefe is not comparable to 'hem, by HERCVLES, well▪ put it in, and the feather. You will ha't, and you shall; and the poxe giue you good on't.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Giue mee my confects, my moscardini, and place those colours in my hat.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        These are 
                              
                                 •
                              olognian ribbands, I warrant you?
                     
                     
                        MIL.
                        In truth, sir: if they be not right granado silke—
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        A poxe on you, you'le all say so.
                     
                     
                        MIL.
                        You giue me not a pennie, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Come sir, perfume my deuant; May it ascend, like solemne sacrifice, into the nostrils of the Queene of Loue.
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Your french ceremonies are the best:
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        
                           Monsieur, Signior, your solemne Addresse is too long. The ladies long to haue you come on.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Soft, sir, our comming on is not so easily prepar'd. Signior Fig.
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Can you helpe my complexion, heere?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        O yes, sir, I haue an excellent mineral Fuc
                                 ••
                              
                           , for the purpose. The gloues are right, sir, you shall burie 'hem in a mucke-hill, a draught, seuen yeeres, and take 'hem out, and wash 'hem, they shall still retaine

their first sent, true spanish. There's ambre i'the vmbre.
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Your price, sweet Fig.
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Giue me what you will, sir: The Signior payes me two crownes a paire, you shall giue me your loue, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        My loue? with a pox to you, goodman sasafras.
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I come, sir. There's an excellent diapasme in a chaine too, if you like it.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Stay, what are the ingredients to your fucus?
                        
                     
                     
                        P
                              •
                           R.
                        Nought, but sublimate, and crude mercurie, sir, well prepar'd, and dulcified, with the jaw-bones of a sow, burnt, beaten, and searced.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I approue it. Lay it on.
                     
                     
                        M
                              •
                           R.
                        Ile haue your chaine of pomander, sirrah; what's your price?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Wee'le agree, Monsieur; Ile assure you, it was both decocted, and dried, where no sun came, and kept in an onyx euer since it was ball'd.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Come, inuert my mustachio, and we haue done.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        'Tis good.
                     
                     
                        BAR.
                        Hold still I pray you, sir.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Nay, the 
                              
                                 •
                              ucus is exorbitant, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Death! doost thou burne me, Harlot?
                     
                     
                        BAR.
                        I beseech you, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        A flourish.
                         Begger, Varlet, Poultroun?
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Excellent, excellent!
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Your french Beate is the most naturall beate of the world.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        O, that I had plaid at this weapon!
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        A charge.
                         Peace, now they come on; the second part.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Madame, your beauties, being so attractiue, I muse you are left thus, alone.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Better be alone, sir; then ill-accompanied.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Nought can be ill, ladie, that can come neere your goodnesse.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Sweet Madame, on what part of you soeuer a man casts his eye, he meets with perfection; you are the liuely image of VENVS, throughout; all the GRACES smile in your cheeks; your beautie nourishes, as well as delights; you haue a tongue steep't in honie; and a breath like a panther: your brests and forehead are whiter then gotes milke, or May-blossomes; a cloud is not so soft as your skinne.—
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Well strooke, Monsieur: Hee charges like a Frenchman indeed, thicke, and hotly.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Your cheekes are CVPIDS baths, wherein hee vses to steepe himselfe in milke, and nectar: Hee do's light all his torches at your eyes, and instructs you how to shoot, and wound, with their beames. Yet I loue nothing, in you, more then your innocence; you retaine so natiue a simplicitie, so vnblam'd a behauiour. Mee thinkes, with such a loue, I should find no head, nor foot of my pleasure: You are the verie spirit of a ladie.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Faire play, Monsieur? you are too hot on the quarrie. Giue your competitor audience.
                     
                     
                        
                        AMO.
                        Lady, how stirring soeuer the Monsieurs tongue is, hee will lie by your side, more dull then your eunuch.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        A good stroke; That mouth was excellently put ouer.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You are faire, lady—
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        You offer foule, Signior, to close. Keepe your distance; for all your Brauo rampant, here.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I say you are faire, lady, let your choice be fit, as you are faire.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I say, ladies doe neuer beleeue they are faire, till some foole begins to dote vpon 'hem.
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        You play too rough, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Your frenchified foole is your onely foole, lady: I doe yeeld to this honorable Monsieur, in all ciuill, and humane courtesie.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        A flourish.
                        Buzze. 
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Admirable. Giue him the prize. Giue him the prize; That mouth, againe, was most courtly hit, and rare.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I knew, I should passe vpon him with the bitter Bob.
                        
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        O, but the Reuerse was singular.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        It was most subtile, AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        If I had don't, it should haue beene better.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        How heartily they applaud this, CRITES!
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        You suffer 'hem too long
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I'le take off their edge instantly.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Name the prize, at the solemne Addresse.
                        
                     
                     
                        PHI.
                        Two lips wagging.
                        
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        And neuer a wise word; I take it.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Giue to AMORPHVS. And, vpon him, againe; let him not draw free breath.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Thankes, faire deliuerer, and my honorable iudges, Madame PHANTASTE, you are our worthy obiect at this next weapon.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        Most couetingly ready, AMORPHVS.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        Your Monsieur is crest-falne.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        So are most of 'hem once a yeere.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        A charge.
                        You will see, I shall now giue him the gentle dor, presently, hee forgetting to shift the colours, which are now chang'd, with alteration of the Mistris. At your last weapon, sir. The perfect Close. Set forward, intend your approch. Monsieur.
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        'Tis yours, Signior.
                        
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        With your example, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Not I, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        It is your right.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        By no possible meanes.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You haue the way.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        As I am noble—
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        As I am vertuous—
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Pardon me, sir.
                     
                     
                        
                        AMO.
                        I will die first.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        You are a tyranne in courtesie.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        He is remou'd—Iudges beare witnesse.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Amorphus staies the other, in his mouing.
                         What of that, sir?
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        You are remou'd, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Well.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        I challenge you; you haue receiued the dor. Giue me the prize.
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Soft, sir. How, the dor?
                        
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        The common Mistris, you see, is changed.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Right, sir.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        And you haue still in your hat the former colours.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        You lie, sir, I haue none: I haue pull'd 'hem out. I meant to play discolour'd.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        The dor, the dor, the dor, the dor, the dor! the palpable dor.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        A flourish.
                         Heart of my bloud. AMORPHVS, what ha' you done? Stuck a disgrace vpon vs all, and at your last weapon?
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        I could haue done no more.
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        By heauen, it was most vnfortunate lucke.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Lucke! by that candle, it was meere rashnesse, and ouer-sight, would any man haue venterd to play so open, and forsake his ward? Dam' me if he ha' not eternally vndone himselfe, in court; and discountenanc'd vs, that were his maine countenance, by it.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Forgiue it, now. It was the soloecisme of my starres.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        The Wring by the hand, and the Banquet is ours.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        O, here's a lady, feeles like a wench of the first yeare; you would thinke her hand did melt in your touch; and the bones of her fingers ran out at length, when you prest 'hem, they are so gently delicate! Hee that had the grace to print a kisse on these lips, should taste wine, & rose-leaues. O, shee kisses as close as a cockle. Let's take 'hem downe, as deepe as our hearts, wench, till our very soules mixe. Adieu, Signior. Good faith, I shall drinke to you at supper, sir.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Stay, Monsieur. Who awards you the prize?
                        
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Why, his proper merit, sir: you see hee has plaid downe your grand garbe-Master, here.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        That's not in your logicke to determine, sir: you are no courtier. This is none of your seuen, or nine beggerly sciences, but a certaine mysterie aboue 'hem, wherein wee that haue skill must pronounce, and not such fresh-men as you are.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Indeed, I must declare my selfe to you no profest courtling; nor to haue any excellent stroke, at your subtile weapons: yet if you please, I dare venter a hit with you, or your fellow, sir DAGONET, here.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        With me?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Heart, I shall neuer haue such a fortune to saue my selfe in a fellow againe, and your two reputations, gentlemen, as in this. I'le vndertake him.
                     
                     
                        
                        HED.
                        Doe, and swinge him soundly, good ANAIDES.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Let mee alone, I'le play other manner of play, then has beene seene, yet. I would the prize lay on't.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        It shall if you will, I forgiue my right.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Are you so confident? what's your weapon?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        At any, I, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        The perfect Close, That's now the best.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Content, I'le pay your scholaritie. Who offers?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Mary, that will I. I dare giue you that aduantage, too.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        You dare? Well, looke to your liberall skonce.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        Make your play still, vpon the answere, sir.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Hold your peace, you are a hobby-horse.
                     
                     
                        ASO.
                        Sit by me, Master.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Now CRITES, strike home.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        You shall see me vndoe the assur'd swaggerer with a tricke, instantly: I will play all his owne play before him; court the wench, in his garbe, in his phrase, with his face; leaue him not so much as a looke, an eye, a stalke, or an imperfect oth, to expresse himselfe by, after me.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Excellent, CRITES.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        A charge.
                        When begin you, sir? Haue you consulted?
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        To your cost, sir; which is the Peece, stands forth to bee courted? O, are you shee? Well, Madame, or sweet lady, it is so, I doe loue you in some sort, doe you conceiue? and though I am no Monsieur, nor no Signior, and do want (as they say) logicke and sophistrie, and good words, to tell you why it is so; yet by this hand, and by that candle, it is so; And though I bee no booke-worme, nor one that deales by arte, to giue you rhetorike, and causes, why it should be so, or make it good it is so, yet dam me, but I know it is so, and am assur'd it is so, and I and my sword shall make it appeare it is so; and giue you reason sufficient, how it can be no otherwise, but so—
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        S'light, ANAIDES, you are mockt; and so we are all.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        How now, Signior! What, suffer your selfe to bee cossen'd of your courtship, before your face?
                     
                     
                        HED.
                        This is plaine confederacy, to disgrace vs: Let's bee gone, and plot some reuenge.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        When men disgraces share,
                        The lesser is the care.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        A flourish.
                        Nay stay, my deare Ambition, I can doe you ouer too. You that tell your Mistris, Her beautie is all composde of theft; Her haire stole from APOLLO's goldy-locks; Her white and red, lillies, and roses stolne out of paradise; Her eyes, two starres, pluckt from the skie; Her nose, the gnomon of Loues diall, that tells you how the clocke of your heart goes: And for her other parts, as you cannot reckon 'hem, they are so many; so you cannot recount them, they are so manifest. Yours, if his owne, vnfortunate HOYDEN, in stead of HEDON.
                     
                     
                        
                        ASO.
                        Sister, come away, I cannot endure 'hem longer.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Goe, Dors, and you, my Madame Courting-stocks,
                        Follow your scorned, and derided mates;
                        Tell to your guiltie brests, what meere guilt blocks
                        You are, and how vnworthy humane states.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Now, sacred god of wit, if you can make
                        Those, whom our sports taxe in these apish graces,
                        Kisse (like the fighting snakes) your peacefull rod;
                        These times shall canonize you for a god.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Why, CRITES, thinke you any noble spirit,
                        Or any, worth the title of a man,
                        Will be incenst, to see th'inchaunted vailes
                        Of selfe-conceit, and seruile flatterie
                        (Wrapt in so many solds, by time, and custome)
                        Drawne from his wronged, and bewitched eyes?
                        Who sees not now their shape, and nakednesse,
                        Is blinder then the sonne of earth, the mole:
                        Crown'd with no more humanitie, nor soule.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Though they may see it, yet the huge estate
                        Phansie, and forme, and sensuall pride haue gotten,
                        Will make them blush for anger, not for shame;
                        And turne shewne nakednesse, to impudence.
                        Humour is now the test, we trie things in;
                        All power is iust: Nought that delights is sinne.
                        And, yet the zeale of euery knowing man,
                        (Opprest with hills of tyrannie, cast on vertue
                        By the light phant'sies of fooles, thus transported)
                        Cannot but vent the Aetna of his fires,
                        T'enflame best bosomes, with much worthier loue
                        Then of these outward, and effeminate shades:
                        That, these vaine ioyes, in which their wills consume
                        Such powers of wit, and soule, as are of force
                        To raise their beings to aeternitie,
                        May be conuerted on workes, fitting men.
                        And, for the practice of a forced looke,
                        An antique gesture, or a fustian phrase,
                        Studie the natiue frame of a true heart,
                        An inward comelinesse of bountie, knowledge,
                        And spirit, that may conforme them, actually,
                        To Gods high figures, which they haue in power:
                        Which to neglect for a selfe-louing neatnesse,
                        Is sacrilege, of an vnpardon'd greatnesse.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Then let the truth of these things strengthen thee,
                        In thy exempt, and only man-like course:
                        Like it the more, the lesse it is respected;
                        
                        Though men faile, vertue is by gods protected.
                        See, here comes ARETE, I'le with-draw my selfe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene V.
                     ARETE, CRITES.
                     
                        CRITES, you must prouide strait for a masque,
                        'Tis CYNTHIAS pleasure.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        How, bright ARETE!
                        Why, 'twere a labour more for HERCVLES.
                        Better, and sooner durst I vnder-take
                        To make the different seasons of the yeere,
                        The windes, or elements to sympathize,
                        Then their vnmeasurable vanitie
                        Dance truely in a measure. They agree?
                        What though all concord's borne of contraries?
                        So many follies will confusion proue,
                        And like a sort of jarring instruments,
                        All out of time: because (indeede) we see
                        There is not that analogie, twixt discords,
                        As betweene things but meerely opposite.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        There is your error. For as HERMES wand
                        Charmes the disorders of tumultuous ghosts,
                        And as the strife of Chaos then did cease,
                        When better light then Natures did arriue:
                        So, what could neuer in it selfe agree,
                        Forgetteth the eccentrike propertie,
                        And at her sight, turnes forth-with regular,
                        Whose scepter guides the flowing Ocean.
                        
                        And though it did not, yet the most of them
                        (Being either courtiers, or not wholy rude)
                        Respect of maiestie, the place, and presence,
                        Will keepe them within ring; especially
                        When they are not presented as themselues,
                        But masqu'd like others. For (in troth) not so
                        T'incorporate them, could be nothing else,
                        Then like a state vngouern'd without lawes;
                        Or body made of nothing but diseases:
                        The one, through impotency poore, and wretched,
                        The other, for the anarchie absurd.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        But, ladie, for the reuellers themselues,
                        It would be better (in my poore conceit)
                        That others were imploid: for such as are
                        Vnfit to be in CYNTHIAES court, can seeme
                        No lesse vnfit to be in CYNTHIAES sports.
                     
                     
                        
                        ARE.
                        That, CRITES, is not purposed without
                        Particular knowledge of the Goddesse mind,
                        (Who holding true intelligence, what follies
                        Had crept into her palace) shee resolu'd,
                        Of sports, and triumphs, vnder that pretext,
                        To haue them muster in their pompe, and fulnesse:
                        That so shee might more strictly, and to roote,
                        Effect the reformation shee intends.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        I now conceiue her heauenly drift in all,
                        And will apply my spirits, to serue her will.
                        O thou, the very power, by which I am,
                        And but for which, it were in vaine to be,
                        Chiefe next DIANA, virgin, heauenly faire,
                        Admired ARETE (of them admir'd,
                        Whose soules are not enkindled by the sense)
                        Disdaine not my chaste fire, but feede the flame
                        Deuoted truely to thy gracious name.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        Leaue to suspect vs: CRITES well shall find,
                        As we are now most deare, wee'le proue most kind.
                        Harke, I am call'd.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        I follow instantly.
                        PHOEBVS APOLLO: if with ancient rites,
                        And due deuotions, I haue euer hung
                        Elaborate p
                                 •
                              ans, on thy golden shrine,
                        Or sung thy triumphs in a loftie straine,
                        Fit for a theater of gods to heare;
                        And thou, the other sonne of mighty IOVE,
                        
                           Cyllenian MERCVRY (sweet MAIAS ioy)
                        If in the busie tumults of the mind,
                        My path thou euer hast illumined,
                        For which, thine altars I haue oft perfum'd,
                        And deckt thy statues with discoloured flowres:
                        Now thrine inuention in this glorious court,
                        That not of bountie only, but of right,
                        CYNTHIA may grace, and giue it life by sight.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene VI. The Hymne.
                     HESPERVS, CYNTHIA, ARETE, TYME, PHRONESIS, THAVMA.
                     
                        
                           QVeene, and Huntresse, chaste, and faire,
                        Now the Sunne is laid to sleepe,
                        
                        Seated, in thy siluer chaire,
                        State in wonted manner keepe:
                        
                           HESPERVS intreats thy light,
                        Goddesse, excellently bright.
                        Earth, let not thy enuious shade
                        Dare it selfe to interpose;
                        
                           CYNTHIAS shining orbe was made
                        Heauen to cleere, when day did close:
                        Blesse vs then with wished sight,
                        Goddesse, excellently bright.
                        Lay thy bow of pearle apart,
                        And thy cristall-shining quiuer;
                        Giue vnto the flying hart
                        Space to breathe, how short soeuer:
                        Thou that mak'st a day of night,
                        Goddesse, excellently bright.
                     
                     
                        CYN.
                        When hath DIANA, like an enuious wretch,
                        That glitters onely to his soothed selfe,
                        Denying to the world, the precious vse
                        Of hoorded wealth, with-held her friendly aide?
                        Monthly, we spend our still-repaired shine,
                        And not forbid our virgin-waxen torch
                        To burne, and blaze, while nutriment doth last:
                        That once consum'd, out of IOVES treasurie
                        A new we take, and sticke it in our spheare,
                        To giue the mutinous kind of wanting men,
                        Their look't—for light. Yet, what is their desert?
                        "Bountie is wrong'd, interpreted as due;
                        "Mortalls can challenge not a ray, by right,
                        "Yet doe expect the whole of CYNTHIAS light.
                        But if that Deities with-drew their gifts,
                        For humane follies, what could men deserue
                        But death, and darknesse? It behooues the high,
                        For their owne sakes, to doe things worthily.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        Most true, most sacred Goddesse; for the heauens
                        Receiue no good of all the good they doe.
                        Nor IOVE, nor you, nor other heauenly power,
                        Are fed with fumes, which doe from incense rise,
                        Or sacrifices reeking in their gore,
                        Yet, for the care which you of mortalls haue,
                        (Whose proper good it is, that they be so)
                        You well are pleas'd with odours redolent:
                        But ignorant is all the race of men,
                        Which still complaines, not knowing why, or when.
                     
                     
                        
                        CYN.
                        Else, noble ARETE, they would not blame,
                        And taxe, for or vnjust, or for as proud,
                        Thy CYNTHIA, in the things which are indeed
                        The greatest glories in our starrie crowne;
                        Such is our chastitie: which safely scornes
                        (Not Loue; for who more feruently doth loue
                        Immortall honour, and diuine renowne?
                        But) giddie CVPID, VENVS franticke sonne.
                        Yet ARETE, if by this vailed light,
                        Wee but discouer'd (what we not discerne)
                        Any the least of imputations stand
                        Readie to sprinkle our vnspotted fame,
                        With note of lightnesse, from these reuels neere:
                        Not, for the empire of the vniuerse,
                        Should night, or court, this whatsoeuer shine,
                        Or grace of ours vnhappily enjoy.
                        "Place, and occasion are two priuie theeues;
                        "And from poore innocent ladies often steale
                        "(The best of things) an honourable name:
                        "To stay with follies, or where faults may be,
                        "Infers a crime, although the partie free.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        How Cynthian-ly (that is, how worthily
                        And like herselfe) the matchlesse CYNTHIA speakes!
                        Infinite iealousies, infinite regards,
                        Doe watch about the true virginitie:
                        But PHoeBE liues from all, not onely fault,
                        But as from thought, so from suspicion free.
                        "Thy presence broad-seales our delights for pure,
                        "What's done in CYNTHIAS sight, is done secure.
                     
                     
                        CYN.
                        That then so answer'd (dearest ARETE)
                        What th' argument or of what sort our sports
                        Are like to be this night, I not demaund.
                        Nothing which dutie, and desire to please
                        Beares written in the forehead, comes amisse.
                        But vnto whose inuention, must we owe,
                        The complement of this nights furniture?
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        Excellent Goddesse, to a mans, whose worth,
                        (Without hyperbole,) I thus may praise;
                        One (at least) studious of deseruing well,
                        And (to speake truth) indeed deseruing well:
                        "Potentiall merit stands for actuall,
                        "Where onely oportunitie doth want,
                        "Not will, nor power: both which in him abound.
                        One, whom the MVSES, and MINERVA loue.
                        For whom should they, then CRITES, more esteeme,
                        
                        Whom PHOEBVS (though not Fortune) holdeth deare?
                        And (which conuinceth excellence in him▪)
                        A principall admirer of your selfe.
                        Euen, through th' vngentle injuries of fate,
                        And difficulties, which doe vertue choake,
                        Thus much of him appeares. What other things
                        Of farther note, doe lye vnborne in him,
                        Them I doe leaue for cherishment to shew,
                        And for a Goddesse graciously to judge.
                     
                     
                        CYN.
                        We haue alreadie judg'd him, ARETE:
                        Nor are we ignorant, how noble minds
                        Suffer too much through those indignities,
                        Which times, and vicious persons cast on them:
                        Our selfe haue euer vowed to esteeme▪
                        
                        (As vertue, for it selfe, so) fortune base;
                        Who's first in worth, the same be first in place.
                        Nor farther notice (ARETE) we craue
                        Then thine approuals soueraigne warrantie:
                        Let 'be thy care, to make vs knowne to him,
                        " CYNTHIA shall brighten, what the world made dimme.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene VII. The first Masque.
                     CVPID,  like ANTEROS.
                     To them.
                     
                        CLeare pearle of heauen, and, not to bee farther ambitious in titles, CYNTHIA. The same of this illustrous night, among others, hath also drawne these foure faire virgins from the palace of their Queene Perfection (a word▪ which makes no sufficient difference, twixt hers, and thine) to visit thy imperiall court: for she, their soueraigne, not finding where to dwell among men, before her returne to heauen, aduised them wholy to consecrate themselues to thy celestiall seruice, as in whose cleere spirit (the proper element, and sphere of vertues) they should behold not her alone, (their euer honour'd mistris) but themselues (more truly themselues) to liue inthroniz'd. Her selfe would haue commended them vnto thy fauour more particularly, but that shee knowes no commendation is more auaileable with them, then that of proper vertue. Neuerthelesse, she will'd them to present this christall mound, a note of monarchie, and symbole of perfection, to thy more worthie deitie; which, as heere by me they most humbly doe, so amongst the rarities thereof, that is the chiefe, to shew whatsoeuer the world hath excellent, howsoeuer remote and various. But your irradiate iudgement will soone discouer the secrets of this little cristall world. Themselues (to appeare more plainely) because they know nothing more odious, then false pretexts, haue chosen to expresse

their seuerall qualities, thus, in seuerall colours.
                        The first, in citron colour, is naturall Affection, which giuen vs to procure our good, is somtime called STORGE, & as euery one is neerest to himselfe, so this hand-maid of reason, allowable selfe-loue, as it is without harme, so are none without it: Her place in the court of Perfection was to quicken mindes in the pursuit of honour. Her deuice is a perpendicular Leuell, vpon a Cube, or Square. The word, SE SVO MODVLO. Alluding to that true measure of ones selfe, which as euerie one ought to make, so is it most conspicuous in thy diuine example.
                        The second, in greene, is AGLAIA, delectable and pleasant Conuersation, whose propertie is to moue a kindly delight, and sometime not without laughter: Her office, to entertaine assemblies, and keepe societies together with faire familiaritie. Her deuice within a Ring of clouds, a Heart with shine about it. The word, CVRARVM NVEILA PELLO. An allegorie of CYNTHIAES light, which no lesse cleares the skie, then her faire mirth the heart.
                        The third, in the discolour'd mantle spangled all ouer, is EVPHANTASTE, a well conceited Wittinesse, and imployd in honouring the court with the riches of her pure inuention. Her deuice, vpon a Petasus, or Mercuriall hat, a Crescent. The word, SIC LAVS INGENII. Inferring, that the praise and glorie of wit, doth euer increase, as doth thy growing moone.
                        The fourth in white, is APHELEIA, a Nymph as pure and simple as the soule, or as an abrase table, and is therefore called Simplicitie, without folds, without pleights, without colour, without counterfeit: and (to speake plainly) Plainenesse it selfe. Her deuice is no deuice. The word vnder her siluer Shield, OMNIS ABEST FVCVS. Alluding to thy spotlesse selfe, who art as farre from impuritie, as from mortalitie.
                        My selfe (celestiall Goddesse) more fit for the court of CYNTHIA, then the arbors of CYTHEREE, am call'd ANTEROS, or Loues enemie; the more welcome therefore to thy court, and the fitter to conduct this quaternion, who as they are thy professed votaries, and for that cause aduersaries to Loue, yet thee (perpetuall Virgin) they both loue, and vow to loue eternally.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene VIII.
                     CYNTHIA, ARETE, CRITES.
                     
                        NOt without wonder, nor without delight,
                        Mine eyes haue view'd (in contemplations depth)
                        This worke of wit, diuine, and excellent:
                        What shape? what substance? or what vnknowne power
                        In virgins habite, crown'd with lawrell leaues,
                        And oliue branches wouen in betweene,
                        On sea-girt rockes, like to a Goddesse shines?
                        O front! Ô face! Ô all caelestiall sure,
                        
                        And more then mortall! ARETE, behold
                        Another CYNTHIA, and another Queene,
                        Whose glorie (like a lasting plenilune)
                        Seemes ignorant of what it is to wane!
                        Not vnder heauen an obiect could be found
                        More sit to please. Let CRITES make approch.
                        Bountie forbids to paule our thanks with stay,
                        Or to deferre our fauour, after view:
                        "The time of grace is, when the cause is new.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        Loe, here the man (celestiall DELIA)
                        Who (like a circle bounded in it selfe)
                        Contaynes as much, as man in fulnesse may.
                        Loe, here the man, who not of vsuall earth,
                        But of that nobler, and more precious mould,
                        Which PHOEBVS selfe doth temper, is compos'd;
                        And, who (though all were wanting to reward)
                        Yet, to himselfe he would not wanting be:
                        Thy fauours gaine is his ambitions most,
                        And labours best; who (humble in his height)
                        Stands fixed silent in thy glorious sight.
                     
                     
                        CYN.
                        With no lesse pleasure, then we haue beheld
                        This precious christall, worke of rarest wit,
                        Our eye doth reade thee (now enstil'd) our CRITES;
                        Whom learning, vertue, and our fauour last,
                        Exempteth from the gloomy multitude.
                        "With common eye the supreme should not see.
                        Henceforth be ours, the more thy selfe to be.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Heau'ns purest light, whose orbe may be eclips'd,
                        But not thy praise (diuinest CYNTHIA)
                        How much too narrow for so high a grace,
                        Thine (saue therein) the most vnworthy CRITES
                        Doth find himselfe! for euer shine thy fame;
                        Thine honours euer, as thy beauties doe;
                        In me they must, my darke worlds chiefest lights,
                        By whose propitious beames my powers are rais'd
                        To hope some part of those most loftie points,
                        Which blessed ARETE hath pleas'd to name,
                        As markes, to which m'indeuours steps should bend:
                        Mine, as begun at thee, in thee must end.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act V. Scene IX. The second Masque.
                     MERCVRIE, as a PAGE.
                     
                        SIster of PHOEBVS, to whose bright orbe we owe, that we not complaine of his absence; These foure brethren (for they are brethren, and sonnes of EVTAXIA, a lady knowne, and highly belou'd of your resplendent deitie) not able to be absent, when CYNTHIA held a solemnitie, officiously insinuate themselues into thy presence: For, as there are foure cardinall vertues, vpon which the whole frame of the court doth moue, so are these the foure cardinall properties, without which, the body of complement moueth not. With these foure siluer iauelins (which they beare in their hands) they support in Princes courts the state of the presence, as by office they are obliged; which, though here they may seeme superfluous, yet, for honors sake, they thus presume to visite thee, hauing also beene emploid in the palace of Queene Perfection. And though to them, that would make themselues gracious to a Goddesse, sacrifices were fitter then presents, or Impreses, yet they both hope thy fauour; and (in place of either) vse seuerall Symboles, contayning the titles of thy imperiall dignitie.
                        First, the hethermost, in the changeable blew, and greene robe, is the commendably-fashioned gallant, EVCOSMOS; whose courtly habite is the grace of the presence, and delight of the surueying eye: whom ladies vnderstand by the names of neate, and elegant. His symbole is, DIVAE VIRGINI, in which he would expresse thy deities principall glory, which hath euer beene virginitie.
                        
                        The second, in the rich acoutrement, and robe of purple, empaled with gold, is EVPATHES; who entertaynes his mind with an harmelesse, but not incurious varietie: All the obiects of his senses are sumptuous, himselfe a gallant, that, without excesse, can make vse of superfluitie: goe richly in imbroideries, iewells (and what not?) without vanitie, and fare delicately without gluttonie: and therefore not (not without cause) is vniuersally thought to be of fiue humour. His Symbole is, DIVAE OPTIMAE. An attribute to expresse thy goodnesse, in which thou so resemblest IOVE thy father.
                        The third, in the blush-colour'd sute, is, EVTOLMOS, as duely respecting others, as neuer neglecting himselfe; commonly knowne by the title of good as dacitie: to courts, and courtly assemblies, a guest most acceptable. His Symbole is, DIVAE VIRAGINI. To expresse thy hardy courage, in chase of sauage beasts, which harbour in woods, and wildernesse.
                        The fourth, in watchet tinsell, is the kind, and truly benefique EVCOLOS. Who imparteth not without respect, but yet without difficultie; and hath the happinesse to make euery kindnesse seeme double, by the

timely, and freely bestowing thereof. He is the chiefe of them, who (by the vulgar) are said to be of good nature. His Symbole is, DIVAE MAXIMAE. An adiunct to signifie thy greatnesse, which in heauen, earth, and hell is formidable.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene X.
                     CVPID,  MERCVRIE.
                     The Ma
                           •
                        kes ioyne, and dance.
                     
                        IS not that AMORPHVS, the trauailer?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        As though it were not! doe you not see how his legs are in trauaile with a measure?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        HEDON, thy master is next.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        What, will CVPID turne nomendator, and cry them?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        No faith, but I haue a comedie toward, that would not be lost for a kingdome.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        In good time, for CVPID will proue the comedie.
                        
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        MERCVRY, I am studying how to match them.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        How to mis-match them were harder.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        They are the Nymphs must doe it, I shall sport my selfe with their passions aboue measure.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Those Nymphs would be tam'd a little indeed, but I feare thou hast not arrowes for the purpose.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        O, yes, here be of all sorts, flights, rouers, and butt-shafts. But I can wound with a brandish, and neuer draw bow for the matter.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I cannot but beleeue it, my inuisible archer, and yet me thinks you are tedious.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        It behoues me to be somewhat circumspect, MERCVRY; for if CYNTHIA heare the twang of my bow, shee'le goe neere to whip mee with the string: therefore, to preuent that, I thus discharge a brandish vpon— it makes no matter which of the couples. PHANTASTE, and AMORPHVS, at you.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Will the shaking of a shaft strike 'hem into such a feuer of affection?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        As well as the wincke of an eye: but I pray thee, hinder me not with thy prattle.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        IOVE forbid I hinder thee. Mary, all that I feare, is CYNTHIAS presence; which, with the cold of her chastitie, casteth such an antiperistasis about the place, that no heate of thine will tarry with the patient.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        It will tarry the rather, for the antiperistasis will keepe it in.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I long to see the experiment.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Why, their marrow boiles already, or they are all turn'd eunuchs.
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        They haue danced the first straine.
                        Nay, and 't bee so, I'le giue ouer speaking, and bee a spectator onely. 
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        CYNTHIA (by my bright soule) is a right exquisite, and splendidious

lady; yet AMORPHVS, I thinke, hath seene more fashions, I am sure more countries: but whether I haue, or not, what neede wee gaze on CYNTHIA, that haue our selfe to admire?
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        O, excellent CYNTHIA! yet if PHANTASTE sate where shee doo's, and had such a tire on her head (for attire can doe much) I say no more—but goddesses are goddesses, and PHANTASTE is as shee is! I would the reuells were done once, I might goe to my schoole of glas
                              •
                           e, againe, and learne to doe my selfe right after all this ruffling.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        How now, CVPID? here's a wonderfull change with your brandish! doe you not heare, how they dote?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        What prodigie is this? no word of loue? no mention? no motion?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Not a word, my little Ignis falne, not a word.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Are my darts inchaunted? Is their vigour gone? is their vertue—
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        What? CVPID turn'd iealous of himselfe? ha, ha, ha.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Laughs MERCVRY?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Is CVPID angrie?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Hath he not cause, when his purpose is so deluded?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        A rare comoedie, it shall be intitled, CVPIDS.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Doe not scorne vs, HERMES.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Choller, and CVPID, are two fiery things; I scorne 'hem not. But I see that come to passe, which I presag'd in the beginning.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        You cannot tell: perhaps the physicke will not worke so soone vpon some, as vpon others. It may be, the rest are not so resty.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        
                           Ex vngue, you know the old adage, as these, so are the remainder.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        I'le trie: this is the same shaft, with which I wounded ARGVRION.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I, but let mee saue you a labour, CVPID: there were certayne bottles of water fetcht, and drunke off (since that time) by these gallants.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        IOVE, strike me into earth: The Fountayne of selfe-Loue!
                        
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Nay, faint not, CVPID.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        I remembred it not.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Faith, it was ominous to take the name of ANTEROS vpon you, you know not what charme or inchantment lies in the word: you saw, I durst not venter vpon any deuice, in our presentment, but was content to be no other then a simple page. Your arrowes properties (to keepe decorum) CVPID, are suted (it should seeme) to the nature of him you personate.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        Indignitie not to be borne.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Nay rather, an attempt to haue beene forborne.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        The second straine.
                        How might I reuenge my selfe on this insulting MERCVRY! there's CRITES, his minion, he has not tasted of this water. It shall be so. Is CRITES turn'd dotard on himselfe too?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        That followes not, because the venome of your shafts cannot pierce him, CVPID.
                     
                     
                        
                        CVP.
                        As though there were one antidote for these, and another for him?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        As though there were not! or as if one effect might not arise of diuers causes? What say you to CYNTHIA, ARETE, PHRONESIS, TIME, and others there?
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        They are diuine.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        And CRITES aspires to be so.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        But that shall not serue him.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        'Tis like to doe it, at this time. But CVPID is growne too couetous, that will not spare one of a multitude.
                     
                     
                        CVP.
                        One is more then a multitude.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        The third straine.
                        ARETES fauour makes any one shot-proofe against thee, CVPID. I pray thee, light hony-bee, remember thou art not now in ADORIS garden, but in CYNTHIAS presence, where thornes lie in garrison about the roses. Soft, CYNTHIA speakes.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene XI.
                     CYNTHIA, ARETE, CRITES, MASQVERS.
                     
                        LAdies, and gallants of our court, to end,
                        And giue a timely period to our sports,
                        Let vs conclude them with declining night;
                        Our empire is but of the darker halfe.
                        And if you iudge it any recompence
                        For your faire paines, t' haue earn'd DIANAS thankes,
                        DIANA grants them: and bestowes their crowne
                        To gratifie your acceptable zeale.
                        For you are they, that not (as some haue done)
                        Doe censure vs, as too seuere, and sowre,
                        But as (more rightly) gracious to the good;
                        Although we not denie, vnto the proud,
                        Or the prophane, perhaps indeede austere:
                        For so ACTAEON, by presuming farre,
                        Did (to our griefe) incurre a fatall doome;
                        And so, swolne NIOBE (comparing more
                        Then he presum'd) was trophaeed into stone.
                        But are we therefore judged too extreme?
                        Seemes it no crime, to enter sacred bowers,
                        And hallowed places, with impure aspect,
                        Most lewdly to pollute? Seemes it no crime,
                        To braue a deitie? Let mortals learne
                        To make religion of offending heauen;
                        
                        And not at all to censure powers diuine.
                        To men, this argument should stand for firme,
                        "A Goddesse did it, therefore it was good:
                        "We are not cruell, nor delight in bloud.
                        But what haue serious repetitions
                        To doe with reuels, and the sports of court
                        We not intend to sowre your late delights
                        With harsh expostulation. Let 't suffice,
                        That we take notice, and can take reuenge
                        Of these calumnious, and lewd blasphemies.
                        For we are no lesse CYNTHIA, then we were,
                        Nor is our power (but as our selfe) the same:
                        Though we haue now put on no tyre of shine,
                        But mortall eyes vndaz'led may indure.
                        "Yeeres are beneath the spheres: and time makes weake
                        "Things vnder heauen, not powers which gouerne heauen.
                        And though our selfe be, in our selfe, secure,
                        Yet let not mortals challenge to themselues
                        Immunitie from thence. Loe, this is all:
                        "Honour hath store of spleene, but wanteth gall.
                        Once more, we cast the slumber of our thankes
                        On your ta'ne toile, which here let take an end.
                        And that we not mis-take your seuerall worths,
                        Nor you our fauour, from your selues remooue
                        What makes you not your selues, those cloudes of masque:
                        They vnmasque.
                        "Particular paines, particular thankes doe aske.
                        How! let me view you! ha? Are we contemn'd?
                        Is there so little awe of our disdaine,
                        That any (vnder trust of their disguise)
                        Should mixe themselues with others of the court?
                        And (without forehead) boldly presse so far,
                        As farther none? How apt is lenitie
                        To be abusde? seueritie to be loth'd?
                        And yet, how much more doth the seeming face
                        Of neighbour-vertues, and their borrowed names,
                        Adde of lewd boldnesse, to loose vanities?
                        Who would haue thought that PHILAVTIA durst
                        Or haue vsurped noble STORGES name?
                        Or with that theft haue ventred, on our eyes?
                        Who would haue thought, that all of them should hope
                        So much of our conniuence, as to come
                        To grace themselues, with titles not their owne?
                        In stead of med'cines, haue we maladies?
                        And such impostumes, as PHANTASTE is,
                        Grow in our palace? we must lance these sores,
                        
                        Or all will putrifie. Nor are these all,
                        For we suspect a farder fraud then this:
                        Take off our vaile, that shadowes may depart,
                        And shapes appeare, beloued ARETE—So.
                        Another face of things presents it selfe,
                        Then did of late: What! featherd CVPID mask'd?
                        And mask'd like ANTEROS? And, stay! more strange!
                        Deare MERCVRIE, our brother like a page,
                        To countenance the ambush of the boy?
                        Nor endeth our discouerie as yet:
                        GELAIA, like a Nymph, that but ere-while
                        (In male attire) did serue ANAIDES?
                        CVPID came hither to find sport and game,
                        Who, heretofore hath beene too conuersant
                        Among our traine; but neuer felt reuenge:
                        And MERCVRIE bare CVPID companie.
                        CVPID, we must confesse this time of mirth
                        (Proclaim'd by vs) gaue opportunitie,
                        To thy attempts, although no priuiledge;
                        Tempt vs no farther, we cannot indure
                        Thy presence longer: vanish hence, away.
                        You, MERCVRIE, we must intreate to stay,
                        And heare what we determine of the rest;
                        For in this plot, we well perceiue your hand.
                        But (for we meane not a censorian taske,
                        And yet to lance these vlcers growne so ripe)
                        Deare ARETE, and CRITES, to you two
                        We giue the charge; impose what paines you please:
                        Th' incurable cut off, the rest reforme,
                        Remembring euer what we first decreed,
                        Since reuells were proclaim'd let now none bleed.
                     
                     
                        ARE.
                        How well DIANA can distinguish times?
                        And forther censures? keeping to her selfe
                        The doome of gods, leauing the rest to vs?
                        Come, cite them, CRITES, first, and then proceed.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        First, PHILAVTIA (for she was the first,)
                        Then light GELAIA, in AGLAIAS name,
                        Thirdly PHANTASTE, and MORIA next,
                        Maine follies all, and of the female crew:
                        AMORPHVS, or EVCOSMOS conterfeit,
                        Voluptuous HEDON tane for EVPATHES,
                        Brazen ANAIDES, and ASOTVS last,
                        With his two pages, MORVS and PROSAITES;
                        And thou, the trauellers euill, COS, approch,
                        Impostors all, and male deformities—
                     
                     
                        
                        ARE.
                        Nay, forward, for I delegate my power.
                        And will that at thy mercie they doe stand,
                        Whom they so oft so plainely scorn'd before.
                        "'Tis vertue which they want, and wanting it,
                        "Honour no garment to their backes can fit.
                        Then, CRITES, practise thy discretion.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Adored CYNTHIA, and bright ARETE,
                        Another might seeme fitter for this taske,
                        Then CRITES farre, but that you iudge not so:
                        For I (not to appeare vindicatiue,
                        Or mindfull of contempts, which I contemn'd
                        As done of impotence) must be remisse,
                        Who, as I was the authour, in some sort,
                        To worke their knowledge into CYNTHIAS sight,
                        So should be much seuerer to reuenge
                        Th'indignitie, hence issuing to her name.
                        But there's not one of these, who are vnpain'd,
                        Or by themselues vnpunished: for vice
                        Is like a furie to the vicious minde,
                        And turnes delight it selfe to punishment.
                        But we must forward to designe their doome,
                        You are offenders, that must be confest,
                        Doe you confesse it?
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        We doe.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        And, that you merit sharpe correction?
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        CRI.
                        Then we (reseruing vnto DELIAES grace,
                        Her further pleasure, and to ARETE
                        What DELIA granteth) thus doe sentence you.
                        That from this place (for poenance knowne of all,
                        Since you haue drunke so deeply of selfe-Loue)
                        You (two and two) singing a palinode,
                        March to your seuerall homes by NIOBES stone,
                        And offer vp two teares apiece thereon;
                        That it may change the name, as you must change,
                        And of a stone be called weeping Crosse:
                        Because it standeth crosse of CYNTHIAS way,
                        One of whose names is sacred TRIVIA.
                        And, after poenance thus perform'd, you passe
                        In like set order, not as MIDAS did,
                        To wash his gold off into Tagus streame,
                        But to the well of knowledge, Helicon;
                        Where purged of your present maladies,
                        (Which are not few, nor slender) you become
                        Such as you faine would seeme: and then returne,
                        Offring your seruice to great CYNTHIA.
                        This is your sentence, if the goddesse please.
                        
                        To ratifie it with her high consent:
                        "The scope of wise mirth vnto fruict is bent.
                     
                     
                        CYN.
                        We doe approue thy censure, belou'd CRITES.
                        Which MERCVRY, thy true propitious friend,
                        (A deitie, next IOVE, belou'd of vs)
                        Will vnder-take to see exactly done:
                        And for this seruice of discouerie
                        Perform'd by thee, in honor of our name,
                        We vow to guerdon it with such due grace,
                        As shall become our bountie, and thy place.
                        "Princes, that would their people should doe well,
                        "Must at themselues begin, as at the head;
                        "For men, by their example, patterne out
                        "Their imitations, and reguard of lawes:
                        "A vertuous Court a world to vertue drawes.
                     
                     PALINODE.
                     
                        AMO.
                        From spanish shrugs, french faces, smirks, irps, and all affected humours.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        From secret friends, sweet seruants, loues, doues, and such phantastique humours.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        From stabbing of armes, flap-dragons, healths, whiffes, and all such swaggering humours.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        From wauing of fannes, coy glaunces, glickes, cringes, and all such simpring humours.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        From making loue by atturny, courting of puppets, and paying for new acquaintance.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        From perfum'd dogs, munkeyes, sparrowes, dildo's, and parachito's.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        
                        AMO.
                        From wearing bracelets of haire, shooe-ties, gloues, garters, and rings with poesies.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        From pargetting, painting, slicking, glazing, and renewing old riueld faces.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        From squiring to tilt-yards, play-houses, pageants, and all such publique places.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        PHA.
                        From entertayning one gallant to gull an other, and making fooles of either.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     
                        AMO.
                        From belying ladies fauours, noble-mens countenance, coyning counterseit imployments, vaine-glorious taking to them other mens seruices, and all selfe-louing humours.
                     
                     
                        CHORVS.
                        Good MERCVRY defend vs.
                     
                     SONG.
                     NOw each one drie his weeping eyes,
                     And to the well of knowledge haste;
                     Where purged of your maladies,
                     You may of sweeter waters taste:
                     And, with refined voice, report
                     The grace of CYNTHIA, and her court.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE EPILOGVE.
                  GEntles, be't knowne to you, since I went in
                  I am turn'd rimer; and doe thus begin.
                  The Author (iealous, how your sense doth take
                  His trauailes) hath enioyned me to make
                  Some short, and ceremonious epilogue;
                  But if I yet know what, I am a rogue.
                  He ties me to such lawes, as quite distract
                  My thoughts; and would a yeere of time exact.
                  I neither must be faint, remisse, nor sorry,
                  Sowre, serious, confident, nor peremptory:
                  
                  But betwixt these. Let's see; to lay the blame
                  Vpon the Childrens action, that were lame.
                  To craue your fauour, with a begging knee,
                  Were to distrust the writers facultie.
                  To promise better at the next we bring,
                  Prorogues disgrace, commends not any thing.
                  Stifly to stand on this, and proudly approue
                  The play, might taxe the maker of selfe-Loue.
                  
                  I'le onely speake, what I haue heard him say;
                  by (—) 'tis good, and if you lik't, you may.
                  THE END.
                  
                     
                        Ec
                              •
                           e rubet quidam, pallet, slupet, oscitat, odit.
                        Hoc volo: nunc nobis carmina nostra placent.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  This Comicall Satyre vvas first acted, in the yeere 1600.
                  By the then Children of Queene ELIZABETHS Chappell.
                  The principall Comoedians were,

                        NAT. FIRED.
                        SAL. PAVY.
                        THO. DAY.
                        IOH. VNDERWOOD.
                        ROB. BAXTER.
                        IOH. FROST.
                     
                  
                  With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  POËTASTER, OR His Arraignement. A Comicall Satyre. Acted, in the yeere 1601. By the then Children of Queene ELIZABETHS CHAPPEL.
                  The Author B. I.
                  
                     MART.
                     Et mihi de nullo fama rubore placet.
                  
                  LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY, for Matthew Lownes.
                  
                  M. DC. XVI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE VERTVOVS, AND MY WORTHY FRIEND, Mr. Richard Martin.
                  
                     
                        SIr, A thankefull man owes a courtesie euer: the vnthankefull, but when he needes it. To make mine owne marke appeare, and shew by which of these seales I am known, I send you this peece of what may liue of mine; for whose innocence, as for the Authors, you were once a noble and timely vndertaker, to the greatest Iustice of this kingdome. Enioy now the delight of your goodnesse; which is to see that prosper, you preseru'd: and posteritie to owe the reading of that, without offence, to your name; which so much ignorance, and malice of the times, then conspir'd to haue supprest.
                  
                     
                        Your true louer, BEN. IONSON.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Persons of the Play.
                  
                     AVGVSTVS CAESAR.
                     MECOENAS.
                     MARC. OVID.
                     COR. GALLVS.
                     PROPERTIVS.
                     FVS. ARISTVS.
                     PVB. OVID.
                     VIRGIL.
                     HORACE.
                     TREBATIVS.
                     LVPVS.
                     TVCCA.
                     CRISPINVS.
                     HERMOGENES.
                     DE. FANNIVS.
                     ALBIVS.
                     MINOS.
                     HISTRIO.
                     PYRGVS.
                     LICTORS.
                     IVLIA.
                     CYTHERIS.
                     PLAVTIA.
                     CHLOE.
                     MAYDES.
                  
                  
                     THE SCENE. ROME.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  POETASTER.
                  
                     After the second sounding.
                     
                        ENVIE.
                        Arising in the midst of the stage.
                        
                           LIght, I salute thee, but with wounded nerues:
                        Wishing thy golden splendor, pitchy darknesse.
                        What's here? TH'ARRAIGNMENT? I: This, this is it,
                        That our sunke eyes haue wak't for, all this while:
                        Here will be subiect for my snakes, and me.
                        Cling to my necke, and wrists, my louing wormes,
                        And cast you round, in soft, and amorous foulds,
                        Till I doe bid, vncurle: Then, breake your knots,
                        Shoot out your selues at length, as your forc't stings
                        Would hide themselues within his malic't sides,
                        To whom I shall apply you. Stay! the shine
                        Of this assembly here offends my sight,
                        I'le darken that first, and out-face their grace.
                        Wonder not, if I stare: these fifteene weekes
                        (So long as since the plot was but an embrion)
                        Haue I, with burning lights, mixt vigilant thoughts,
                        In expectation of this hated play:
                        To which (at last) I am arriu'd as Prologue.
                        
                        Nor would I, you should looke for other lookes,
                        Gesture, or complement from me, then what
                        Th'infected bulke of ENVIE can afford:
                        For I am risse here with a couetous hope,
                        To blast your pleasures, and destroy your sports,
                        With wrestings, comments, applications,
                        
                        Spie-like suggestions, priuie whisperings,
                        And thousand such promooting sleights as these.
                        Marke, how I will begin: The Scene is, ha!
                        ROME? ROME? and ROME? Cracke ey-strings, and your balles
                        Drop into earth; let me be euer blind.
                        I am preuented; all my hopes are crost,
                        Checkt, and abated; fie, a freezing sweate
                        Flowes forth at all my pores, my entrailes burne:
                        What should I doe? ROME? ROME? O my vext soule,
                        How might I force this to the present state?
                        Are there no players here? no poet-apes,
                        That come with basiliskes eyes, whose forked tongues
                        Are steept in venome, as their hearts in gall?
                        Eyther of these would helpe me; they could wrest,
                        Peruer
                              •
                           , and poyson all they heare, or see,
                        With senselesse glosses, and allusions.
                        Now if you be good deuils, flye me not.
                        You know what deare, and ample faculties
                        I haue indow'd you with: Ile lend you more.
                        Here, take my snakes among you, come, and eate,
                        And while the squeez'd juice flowes in your blacke jawes,
                        Helpe me to damne the Authour. Spit it foorth
                        Vpon his lines, and shew your rustie teeth
                        At euerie word, or accent: or else choose
                        Out of my longest vipers, to sticke downe
                        In your deep throats; and let the heads come forth
                        At your ranke mouthes; that he may see you arm'd
                        With triple malice, to hisse, sting, and teare
                        His worke, and him; to forge, and then declame,
                        Traduce, corrupt, apply, enforme, suggest:
                        O, these are gifts wherein your soules are blest.
                        What? doe you hide your selues? will none appeare?
                        None answere? what, doth this calme troupe affright you?
                        Nay, then I doe despaire: downe, sinke againe.
                        This trauaile is all lost with my dead hopes.
                        If in such bosomes, spight haue left to dwell,
                        Enuie is not on earth, nor scarse in hell.
                     
                  
                  
                     The third sounding. PROLOGVE.
                     STay, Monster, ere thou sinke, thus on thy head
                     Set we our bolder foot; with which we tread
                     Thy malice into earth: So spight should die,
                     
                     Despis'd and scorn'd by noble industrie.
                     If any muse why I salute the stage,
                     An armed Prologue; know, 't is a dangerous age:
                     Wherein, who writes, had need present his Scenes
                     
                     Fortie sold proofe against the coniuring meanes
                     Of base detractors, and illiterate apes,
                     That fill vp roomes in faire and formall shapes.
                     'Gainst these, haue we put on this forc't defence:
                     Whereof the allegorie and hid sence
                     Is, that a well erected confidence
                     Can fright their pride, and laugh their folly hence.
                     Here now, put case our Authour should, once more,
                     Sweare that his play were good; he doth implore,
                     You would not argue him of arrogance:
                     How ere that common spawne of ignorance,
                     Our frie of writers, may beslime his fame,
                     And giue his action that adulterate name.
                     Such ful-blowne vanitie he more doth lothe,
                     Then base deiection: There's a meane 'twixt both.
                     Which with a constant firmenesse he pursues,
                     As one, that knowes the strength of his owne muse.
                     
                     And this he hopes all free soules will allow,
                     Others, that take it with a rugged brow,
                     Their moods he rather pitties, then enuies:
                     His mind it is aboue their iniuries.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act I.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     OVID, LVSCVS.
                     
                        THen, when this bodie falls in funerall fire,
                        My name shall liue, and my best part aspire.
                        It shall goe so.
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        Young master, master OVID, doe you heare? gods a mee! away with your songs, and sonnets; and on with your gowne and cappe, quickly: here, here, your father will be a man of this roome presently. Come, nay, nay, nay, nay, be briefe. These verses too, a poyson on 'hem, I cannot abide 'hem, they make mee readie to cast, by the bankes of helicon. Nay looke, what a rascally vntoward thing this poetrie is; I could teare 'hem now.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Giue me, how neere's my father?
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        Hart a'man: get a law-booke in your hand, I will not answere you else. Why so: now there's some formalitie in you. By IOVE, and three or foure of the gods more, I am right of mine olde masters humour for that; this villanous poetrie will vndoe you, by the welkin.
                     
                     
                        
                        OVID.
                        What, hast thou buskins on, LVSCVS, that thou swear'st so tragically, and high?
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        No, but I haue bootes on, sir, and so ha's your father too by this time: for he call'd for 'hem, ere I came from the lodging.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Why? was he no readier?
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        O no; and there was the madde skeldring captaine, with the veluet armes, readie to lay hold on him as hee comes downe: he that presses euerie man he meets, with an oath, to lend him money, and cries; (Thou must doo'r, old boy, as thou art a man, a man of worship.)
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Who? PANTILIVS TVCCA?
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        I, hee: and I met little master LVPVS, the Tribune, going thither too.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Nay, and he be vnder their arrest, I may (with safetie inough) reade ouer my elegie, before he come.
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        Gods a mee! What'll you doe? why, young master, you are not castalian mad, lunatike, frantike, desperate? ha?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        What ailest thou, LVSCVS?
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        God be with you, sir, I'le leaue you to your poeticall fancies, and furies. I'le not be guiltie, I.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Be not, good ignorance: I'm glad th'art gone:
                        For thus alone, our eare shall better judge
                        The hastie errours of our morning muse.
                        
                        
                           
                              Ouid L
                                    •
                                 b. 1. Amo. Ele. 15.
                            ENuie, why twitst thou me, my time's spent ill?
                        And call'st my verse, fruits of an idle quill?
                        Or that (vnlike the line from whence I sprung)
                        Wars dustie honours I pursue not young?
                        Or that I studie not the tedious lawes;
                        And prostitute my voyce to euerie cause?
                        Thy scope is mortall; mine eternall 
                              •
                           ame:
                        Which through the world shall euer chaunt my name.
                        
                           HOMER will liue, whil'st TENEDOS stands, and IDE,
                        Or, to the sea, sleet SIMO
                                 •
                              S doth slide:
                        And so shall HESIOD too, while vines doe beare,
                        Or crooked sickles crop the ripened care.
                        
                           CALLIMACHVS, though in inuention lowe,
                        Shall still be sung: since he in art doth flowe.
                        No losse shall come to SOPHOCLES proud vaine.
                        With sunne, and moone, ARATVS shall remaine.
                        Whil'st slaues be false, fathers hard, and bawdes be whorish,
                        Whil'st harlots flatter, shall MENANDER flourish.
                        
                           ENNIVS, though rude, and ACCIVS high-reard straine,
                        A fresh applause in euerie age shall gaine.
                        Of VARRO'S name, what eare shall not be told?
                        Of IASONS ARGO? and the fleece of gold?
                        
                        Then shall LVCRETIVS loftie numbers die,
                        When earth, and seas in fire and flames shall frie.
                        
                           TYTIRVS, Tillage, AENEE shall be read,
                        Whil'st ROME of all the conquer'd world is head.
                        Till CVPIDS fires be out, and his bowe broken,
                        Thy verses (neate TIBVLLVS) shall be spoken.
                        Our GALLVS shall be knowne from east to west:
                        So shall LYCORIS, whom he now loues best.
                        The suffering plough-share, or the flint may weare:
                        But heauenly poesie no death can feare.
                        Kings shall giue place to it, and kingly showes,
                        The bankes ore which gold-bearing Tagus flowes.
                        Kneele hindes to trash: me let bright PHOEBVS swell,
                        With cups full flowing from the MVSES well.
                        Frost-fearing myrtle shall impale my head,
                        And of sad louers Ile be often read.
                        "Enuie, the liuing, not the dead, doth bite:
                        "For after death all men receiue their right.
                        Then, when this bodie fals in funerall fire,
                        My name shall liue, and my best part aspire.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene II.
                     OVID Senior, OVID Iunior, LVSCVS, TVCCA, LVPVS, PYRGVS.
                     
                        YOur name shall liue indeed, sir; you say true: but how infamously, how scorn'd and contemn'd in the eyes and eares of the best and grauest Romanes, that you thinke not on: you neuer so much as dreame of that. Are these the fruits of all my trauaile and expenses? is this the scope and aime of thy studies? are these the hopefull courses, wherewith I haue so long flattered my expectation from thee? verses? poetrie? OVID, whom I thought to see the pleader, become OVID the play-maker?
                     
                     
                        OVID iu.
                        
                        No, sir.
                     
                     
                        OVID se.
                        
                        Yes, sir. I heare of a tragoedie of yours comming foorth for the common players there, call'd MEDEA. By my houshold-gods, if I come to the acting of it, Ile adde one tragick part, more then is yet expected, to it: beleeue me when I promise it. What? shall I haue my sonne a stager now? an enghle for players? a gull? a rooke? a shot-clogge? to make suppers, and bee laught at? PVBLIVS, I will set thee on the funerall pile, first.
                     
                     
                        OVID iu.
                        
                        Sir, I beseech you to haue patience.
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        Nay, this tis to haue your eares damm'd vp to good counsell. I did angure all this to him afore-hand, without poring into an oxes panch for the matter, and yet he would not be scrupulous.
                     
                     
                        
                        TVCC.
                        How now, good man slaue? what, rowle powle? all riualls, rascall? why my Master, of worship, do'st heare? Are these thy best proiects? is this thy desseignes and thy discipline, to suffer knaues to bee competitors with commanders and gentlemen? are wee paralells, rascall? are wee paralells?
                        
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        Sirrah, goe get my horses ready. You'll still be prating.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Doe, you perpetuall stinkard, doe, goe, talke to tapsters and ostlers, you slaue, they are i' your element, goe: here bee the Emperours captaines, you raggamuffin rascall; and not your cam'rades.
                        
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Indeed, MARCVS OVID, these players are an idle generation, and doe much harme in a state, corrupt yong gentrie very much, I know it: I haue not beene a Tribune thus long, and obseru'd nothing: besides, they will rob vs, vs, that are magistrates, of our respect, bring vs vpon their stages, and make vs ridiculous to the plebeians; they will play you, or me, the wisest men they can come by still; me: only to bring vs in contempt with the vulgar, and make vs cheape.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Th'art in the right, my venerable cropshin, they will indeede: the tongue of the oracle neuer twang'd truer. Your courtier cannot kisse his mistris slippers, in quiet, for 'hem: nor your white innocent gallant pawne his reuelling sute, to make his punke a supper. An honest decayed commander, cannot skelder, cheat, nor be seene in a bawdie house, but he shall be straight in one of their worme wood comoedies. They are growne licentious, the rogues; libertines, flat libertines. They forget they are i' the statute, the rascals, they are blazond there, there they are trickt, they and their pedigrees; they neede no other heralds, I wisse.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        Mee thinkes, if nothing else, yet this alone▪ the very reading of the publike edicts should fright thee from commerce with them; and giue thee distaste enough of their actions. But this betrayes what a student you are: this argues your proficiencie in the law.
                        
                     
                     
                        OVID. iu.
                        
                        They wrong mee, sir, and doe abuse you more,
                        That blow your eares with these vntrue reports.
                        I am not knowne vnto the open stage,
                        Nor doe I traffique in their theaters.
                        
                        Indeed, I doe acknowledge, at request
                        Of some neere friends, and honorable Romanes,
                        I haue begunne a poeme of that nature.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        You haue, sir, a poeme? and where is't? that's tho law you studie.
                     
                     
                        OVID. iu.
                        
                        CORNELIVS GALLVS borrowed it to reade.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        CORNELIVS GALLVS? There's another gallant, too, hath drunke of the same poison: and TIBVLLVS, and PROPERTIVS. But these are gentlemen of meanes, and reuenew now. Thou art a yonger brother, and hast nothing, but thy bare exhibition: which I protest shall bee bare indeed, if thou forsake not these vnprofitable by-courses, and that timely too. Name me a profest poet, that his poetrie did euer afford

him so much as a competencie. I, your god of poets there (whom all of you admire and reuerence so much) HOMER, he whose worme-eaten statue must not bee spewd against, but with hallowed lips, and groueling adoration, what was he? what was he?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Mary, I'le tell thee, old swagger; He was a poore, blind, riming rascall, that liu'd obscurely vp and downe in boothes, and tap-houses, and scarce euer made a good meale in his sleepe, the whoorson hungrie begger.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        He saies well: Nay, I know this nettles you now, but answere me; Is't not true? you'le tell me his name shall liue; and that (now being dead) his workes haue eternis'd him, and made him diuine But could this diuinitie feed him, while he liu'd? could his name feast him?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Or purchase him a Senators reuenue? could it?
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        I, or giue him place in the common-wealth? worship, or attendants? make him be carried in his litter?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Thou speakest sentences, old BIAS.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        All this the law will doe, yong sir, if youle follow it.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        If he be mine, hee shall follow and obserue, what I will apt him too, or, I professe here openly, and vtterly to disclaime in him.
                     
                     
                        OVID. iu.
                        
                        Sir, let me craue you will, forgoe these moodes;
                        I will be any thing, or studie any thing:
                        I'le proue the vnfashion'd body of the law
                        
                        Pure elegance, and make her ruggedst straines
                        Ruine smoothly, as PROPERTIVS elegies.
                        
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        PROPERTIVS elegies? good!
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Nay, you take him too quickly, MARCVS.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        Why, he cannot speake, he cannot thinke out of poetrie, he is bewitcht with it.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Come, doe not mis-prize him.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        
                           Mis-prize? I, mary, I would haue him vse some such wordes now: They haue some touch, some taste of the law. Hee should make himselfe a stile out of these, and let his PROPERTIVS elegies goe by.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Indeed, yong PVBLIVS, he that will now hit the marke, must shoot thorough the law we haue no other planet raignes, & in that spheare, you may sit, and sing with angels. Why, the law makes a man happy, without respecting any other merit: a simple scholer, or none at all may be a lawyer.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        He tells thee true, my noble Neophyte; my little Grammaticaster, he do's: It shall neuer put thee to thy Mathematiques, Metaphysiques, Philosophie, and I know not what suppos'd sufficiencies; If thou canst but haue the patience to plod inough, talke, and make noise inough, be impudent inough, and 'tis inough.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Three bookes will furnish you.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        And the lesse arte, the better: Besides, when it shall be in the power of thy chen rill conscience, to doe right, or wrong, at thy pleasure, my pretty ALCIBIADES.
                     
                     
                        
                        LVPV.
                        I, and to haue better men then himselfe, by many thousand degrees, to obserue him, and stand bare.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        True, and he to carry himselfe proud, and stately, and haue the law on his side for't, old boy.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        Well, the day growes old, gentlemen, and I must leaue you. PVBLIVS, if thou wilt hold my fauour, abandon these idle fruitlesse studies that so bewitch thee. Send IANVS home his back-face againe, and looke only forward to the law: Intend that. I will allow thee, what shall sute thee in the ranke of gentlemen, and maintaine thy societie with the best: and vnder these conditions, I leaue thee. My blessings light vpon thee, if thou respect them: if not, mine eyes may drop for thee, but thine owne heart wil ake for it selfe; and so farewel. What, are my horses come?
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        Yes, sir, they are at the gate without.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        That's well. ASINIVS LVPVS, a word. Captaine, I shall take my leaue of you?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        No, my little old boy, dispatch with COTHVRNVS there: I'le attend thee, I—
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        To borrow some ten drachmes, I know his proiect.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        Sir, you shall make me beholding to you. Now Captaine TVCCA, what say you?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Why, what should I say? or what can I say, my flowre o' the order? Should I say, thou art rich? or that thou art honorable? or wise? or valiant? or learned? or liberall? Why, thou art all these, and thou knowest it (my noble LVCVLLVS) thou knowest it: come, bee not ashamed of thy vertues, old stumpe. Honour's a good brooch to weare in a mans hat, at all times. Thou art the man of warres MECOENAS, old boy. Why shouldst not thou bee grac't then by them, as well as hee is by his poets? How now, my carrier, what newes?
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        The boy has staied within for his cue, this halfe houre.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Come, doe not whisper to me, but speake it out: what? it is no treason against the state, I hope, is't?
                     
                     
                        LVSC.
                        Yes, against the state of my masters purse.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        Sir, AGRIPPA desires you to forbeare him till the next weeke: his moyles are not yet come vp.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        His moyles? now the bots, the spauin, and the glanders, and some dozen diseases more, light on him, and his moyles. What ha' they the yellowes, his moyles, that they come no faster? or are they foundred? ha? his moyles ha' the staggers belike: ha' they?
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        O no, sir: then your tongue might be suspected for one of his moyles.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Hee owes mee almost a talent, and hee thinks to beare it away with his moyles, does hee? Sirrah, you, nut-cracker, goe your waies to him againe, and tell him I must ha' money, I: I cannot eate stones and turses, say. What, will he clem me, and my followers? Aske him, an' he will clem me: doe, goe. He would haue mee frie my ierkin, would hee?

Away, setter, away. Yet, stay, my little tumbler: this old boy shall supply now. I will not trouble him, I cannot bee importunate, I: I cannot bee impudent.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        Alas, sir, no: you are the most maidenly blushing creature vpon the earth.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Do'st thou heare, my little sixe and fiftie, or thereabouts? Thou art not to learne the humours and tricks of that old bald cheater, Time: thou hadst not this chaine for nothing. Men of worth haue their chymaera's, as well as other creatures: and they doe see monsters, sometimes: they doe, they doe, braue boy.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        Better cheape then he shall see you, I warrant him.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Thou must let me haue sixe, sixe, drachmes, I meane, old boy; thou shalt doe it: I tell thee, old boy, thou shalt, and in priuate too, do'st thou see? Goe, walke off: there, there. Sixe is the summe. Thy sonn's a gallant sparke, and must not be put out of a sudden: come hither, CALLINACHVS, thy father tells me thou art too poeticall, boy, thou must not be so, thou must leaue them, yong nouice, thou must, they are a sort of poore staru'd rascalls; that are euer wrapt vp in foule linnen; and can boast of nothing but a leane visage, peering out of a seame-rent sute; the very emblemes of beggerie. No, dost heare? turne lawyer, Thou shalt be my solicitor: Tis right, old boy, ist?
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        You were best tell it, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        No: fare thou well mine honest horse-man, and thou old beuer. Pray thee Romane, when thou commest to towne, see me at my lodging, visit me sometimes: thou shalt be welcome, old boy. Doe not balke me, good swaggerer. IOVE keepe thy chaine from pawning, goe thy waies, if thou lack money, I'le lend thee some: I'le leaue thee to thy horse, now. Adieu.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        Farewell, good Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Boy, you can haue but halfe a share now, boy.
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        'Tis a strange boldnesse, that accompanies this fellow: Come.
                     
                     
                        OVID. iu.
                        
                        I'le giue attendance on you, to your horse, sir, please you—
                     
                     
                        OVID. se.
                        
                        No: keepe your chamber, and fall to your studies; doe so: the gods of Rome blesse thee.
                     
                     
                        OVID. iu.
                        
                        And giue me stomacke to digest this law,
                        That should haue followed sure, had I beene he.
                        O sacred poesie, thou spirit of artes,
                        The soule of science, and the queene of soules,
                        What prophane violence, almost sacriledge,
                        Hath here beene offered thy diuinities!
                        That thine owne guiltlesse pouertie should arme
                        Prodigious ignorance to wound thee thus!
                        For thence, is all their force of argument
                        Drawne forth against thee; or from the abuse
                        
                        Of thy great powers in a dultrate braines:
                        When, would men learne but to distinguish spirits,
                        And set true difference twixt those jaded wits
                        That runne a broken pase for common hire,
                        And the high raptures of a happy Muse
                        
                        Borne on the wings of her immortall thought,
                        That kickes at earth with a disdainefull heele,
                        And bears at heauen gates with her bright hooues;
                        They would not then with such distorted faces,
                        And desp'rate censures stab at poesie.
                        
                        They would admire bright knowledge, and their minds
                        Should ne're descend on so vnworthy obiects,
                        As gold, or titles: they would dread farre more,
                        To be thought ignorant, then be knowne poore.
                        "The time was once, when wit drown'd wealth: but now,
                        "Your onely barbarisme is t'haue wit, and want.
                        "No matter now in vertue who excells,
                        "He, that hath coine, hath all perfection else.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene III.
                     TIBVLLVS, OVID.
                     
                        OVID?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Who's there? Come in.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Good morrow, Lawyer.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Good morrow (deare TIBVLLVS) welcome: sit downe.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Not I. What: so hard at it? Let's see, what's here?
                        Nay, I will see it—
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Pray thee away—
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        If thrice in field, a man vanquish his foe,
                        'Tis after in his choice to serue, or no.
                        How now OVID! Law—cases in verse?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        In troth, I know not: they runne from my pen
                        Vnwittingly, if they be verse. What's the newes abroad?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Off with this gowne, I come to haue thee walke.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        No, good TIBVLLVS, I'm not now in case,
                        Pray' let me alone.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        How? not in case!
                        S'light thou'rt in too much case, by all this law.
                        
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Troth, if I liue, I will new dresse the law,
                        In sprightly poesies habillaments.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        The hell thou wilt. What, turne law into verse?
                        Thy father has school'd thee, I see. Here, reade that same.
                        There's subiect for you: and if I mistake not,
                        A Supersedeas to your melancholy.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        How! subscrib'd IVLIA! Ô, my life, my heauen!
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Is the mood chang'd?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Musique of wit! Note for th' harmonious spheares!
                        
                        Celestiall accents, how you rauish me!
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        What is it, OVID?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        That I must meete my IVLIA, the Princesse IVLIA.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Where?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Why, at—hart, I haue forgot: my passion so transports mee.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Ile saue your paines: it is at ALBIVS house,
                        The iewellers, where the faire LYCORIS lies.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Who? CYTHERIS, CORNELIVS GALLVS loue?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        I, heele be there too, and my PLAVTIA.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        And why not your DELIA?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Yes, and your CORINNA.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        True, but my sweet TIBVLLVS, keepe that secret:
                        I would not, for all ROME, it should be thought,
                        I vaile bright IVLIA vnderneath that name:
                        IVLIA the gemme, and iewell of my soule,
                        That takes her honours from the golden skie,
                        As beautie doth all lustre, from her eye.
                        The ayre respires the pure elyzian sweets,
                        In which she breathes: and from her lookes descend
                        The glories of the summer. Heauen she is,
                        Prays'd in her selfe aboue all praise: and he,
                        Which heares her speake, would sweare the tune-full orbes
                        Turn'd in his zenith onely.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        PVBLIVS, thou'lt lose thy selfe.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        O, in no labyrinth, can I safelier erre,
                        Then when I lose my selfe in praysing her.
                        Hence Law, and welcome, Muses; though not rich,
                        Yet are you pleasing: let's be reconcilde,
                        And now made one. Hencefoorth, I promise faith,
                        And all my serious houres to spend with you:
                        With you, whose musicke striketh on my heart,
                        And with bewitching tones steales forth my spirit,
                        In IVLIAS name; faire IVLIA: IVLIAS loue
                        Shall be a law, and that sweet law I'le studie,
                        The law, and art of sacred IVLIAS loue:
                        All other obiects will but abiects prooue.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Come, wee shall haue thee as passionate, as PROPERTIVS, anon.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        O, how does my SEXTVS?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Faith, full of sorrow, for his CYNTHIAS death.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        What, still?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Still, and still more, his grieues doe grow vpon him,
                        As doe his houres. Neuer did I know
                        An vnderstanding spirit so take to heart
                        The common worke of fate.
                        
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        O my TIBVLLVS,
                        
                        Let vs not blame him: for, against such chances,
                        The heartiest strife of vertue is not proofe.
                        We may read constancie, and fortitude,
                        To other soules: but had our selues beene strooke
                        With the like planet, had our loues (like his)
                        Beene rauisht from vs, by injurious death,
                        And in the height, and heat of our best dayes,
                        It would haue crackt our sinnewes, shrunke our veines,
                        And made our verie heart-strings iarre, like his.
                        Come, let's goe take him foorth, and prooue, if mirth
                        Or companie will but abate his passion.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Content, and I implore the gods, it may.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act II.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     ALEIVS, CRISPINVS, CHLOE, MAYDES, CYTHERIS.
                     
                        MAster CRISPINVS, you are welcome: Pray', vse a stoole, sir. Your cousin CYTHERIS will come downe presently. Wee are so busie for the receiuing of these courtiers here, that I can scarce be a minute with my selfe, for thinking of them: Pray you sit, sir, Pray you sit, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I am verie well, sir. Ne're trust me, but you are most delicately seated here, full of sweet delight and blandishment! an excellent ayre, an excellent ayre!
                     
                     
                        ALEI.
                        I, sir, 'tis prettie ayre. These courtiers runne in my minde still; I must looke out: for IVPITERS sake, sit, sir. Or please you walke into the garden? There's a garden on the back-side.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I am most strenuously well, I thanke you, sir.
                     
                     
                        ALEI.
                        Much good doe you, sir.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Come, bring those perfumes forward a little, and strew some roses, and violets here; Fye, here bee roomes sauour the most pittifully ranke that euer I felt: I crie the gods mercie, my husband's in the winde of vs.
                     
                     
                        ALEI.
                        Why, this is good, excellent, excellent: well said, my sweet CHLOE. Trimme vp your house most obsequiously.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        For VVLCANVS sake, breathe somewhere else: in troth you ouercome our perfumes exceedingly, you are too predominant.
                     
                     
                        ALEI.
                        Heare but my opinion, sweet wife.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        A pinne for your pinnion. In sinceritie, if you be▪ thus fulsome to me in euerie thing, I'le bee diuore't; Gods my bodie? you know what you were, before I married you; I was a gentlewoman borne, I; I lost all my friends to be a citizens wife; because I heard indeed, they kept their wiues as fine as ladies; and that wee might rule our husbands, like ladies; and doe what wee listed: doe you thinke I would haue married you, else?
                     
                     
                        
                        ALBI.
                        I acknowledge, sweet wife, she speakes the best of any woman in Italy, and mooues as mightily: which makes me, I had rather she should make bumpes on my head, as big as my two singers, then I would offend her. But sweet wife—
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Yet againe? I'st not grace inough for you, that I call you husband, and you call me wife: but you must still bee poking mee, against my will, to things?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        But you know, wife; here are the greatest ladies, and gallantest gentlemen of ROME, to bee entertain'd in our house now: and I would faine aduise thee, to entertaine them in the best sort, yfaith wife.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        In sinceritie, did you euer heare a man talke so idlely? You would seeme to be master? You would haue your spoke in my cart? you would aduise me to entertaine ladies, and gentlemen? because you can marshall your pack-needles, horse-combes, hobby-horses, and wall-candlestickes in your ware-house better then I; therefore you can tell how to entertaine ladies, and gentle-folkes better then I?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        O my sweet wife, vpbraid me not with that: "Gaine sauours sweetly from any thing; He that respects to get, must relish all commodities alike; and admit no difference betwixt oade, and frankincense; or the most precious balsamum, and a tar-barrell.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Mary fough: You sell snuffers too, if you be remembred, but I pray you let mee buy them out of your hand; for I tell you true, I take it highly in snuffe, to learne how to entertaine gentlefolkes, of you, at these yeeres, I faith. Alas man; there was not a gentleman came to your house i' your tother wiues time, I hope? nor a ladie? nor musique? nor masques? Nor you, nor your house were so much as spoken of, before I disbast my selfe, from my hood and my fartingall, to these bumrowles, and your whale-bone-bodies.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Looke here, my sweet wife; I am mum, my deare mummia, my balsamum, my spermacete, and my verie citie of—shee has the most best, true, feminine wit in ROME!
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I haue heard so, sir; and doe most vehemently desire to participate the knowledge of her faire features.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Ah, peace; you shall heare more anon: bee not seene yet, I pray you; not yet: Obserue.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        'Sbodie, giue husbands the head a little more, and they'll bee nothing but head shortly; whats he there?
                     
                     
                        MAYD. 1.
                        I know not forsooth.
                     
                     
                        MAYD. 2.
                        Who would you speake with, sir?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I would speake with my cousin CYTHERIS.
                     
                     
                        MAYD.
                        Hee is one forsooth would speake with his cousin CYTHERIS.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Is she your cousin, sir?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yes in truth, forsooth, for fault of a better.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Shee is a gentlewoman?
                     
                     
                        
                        CRIS.
                        Or else she should not be my cousin, I assure you.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Are you a gentleman borne?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        That I am, ladie; you shall see mine armes, if 't please you.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        No, your legges doe sufficiently shew you are a gentleman borne, sir: for a man borne vpon little legges, is alwayes a gentleman borne.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yet, I pray you, vouchsafe the sight of my armes, Mistresse; for I beare them about me, to haue 'hem seene: my name is CRISPINVS, or CRI-SPINAS indeed; which is well exprest in my armes, (a Face crying in chiefe; and beneath it a blouddie Toe, betweene three Thornes pungent.)
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Then you are welcome, sir; now you are a gentleman borne, I can find in my heart to welcome you: for I am a gentlewoman borne too; and will beare my head high inough, though 'twere my fortune to marrie a trades-man.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        No doubt of that, sweet feature, your carriage shewes it in any mans eye, that is carried vpon you with iudgement.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Hee is still going in and out.
                         Deare wife, be not angry.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        God's my passion!
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Heare me but one thing; let not your maydes set cushions in the parlor windowes; nor in the dyning-chamber windowes; nor vpon stooles, in eyther of them, in any case; for 'tis tauerne-like; but lay them one vpon another, in some out-roome, or corner of the dyning-chamber.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Goe, goe, meddle with your bed-chamber onely, or rather with your bed in your chamber, onely; or rather with your wife in your bed onely; or on my faith, I'le not be pleas'd with you onely.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Looke here, my deare wife, entertaine that gentleman kindly, I pre' thee,—mum.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Goe, I need your instructions indeede; anger mee no more, I aduise you. Citi-sin, quoth'a! she's a wise gentlewoman yfaith, will marrie her selfe to the sinne of the citie.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        But this time, and no more (by heauen) wife: hang no pictures in the hall, nor in the dyning-chamber, in any case, but in the gallerie onely, for 'tis not courtly else, o' my word, wife.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        'Sprecious, neuer haue done!
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Wife.—
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Doe I not beare a reasonable corrigible hand ouer him, CRISPINVS?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        By this hand, ladie, you hold a most sweet hand ouer him.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        And then for the great gilt andyrons?—
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Againe! would the andyrons were in your great guttes, for mee.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        I doe vanish, wife.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        How shall I doe, Master CRISPINVS? here will bee all the brauest ladies in court presently, to see your cousin CYTHERIS: Ô the

gods! how might I behaue my selfe now, as to entertayne them most courtly?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Mary, ladie, if you will entertaine them most courtly, you must doe thus: as soone as euer your maide, or your man brings you word they are come; you must say (A poxe on 'hem, what doe they here.) And yet when they come, speake them as faire, and giue them the kindest welcome in wordes, that can be.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Is that the fashion of courtiers, CRISPINVS?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I assure you, it is, ladie, I haue obseru'd it.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        For your poxe, sir, it is easily hit on; but, 'tis not so easily to speake faire after, me thinkes?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        O wife, the coaches are come, on my word, a number of coaches, and courtiers.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        A poxe on them: what doe they here?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        How now wife! wouldst thou not haue 'hem come?
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Come? come, you are a foole, you: He knowes not the trick on't. Call CYTHERIS, I pray you: and good master CRISPINVS, you can obserue, you say; let me intreat you for all the ladies behauiours, iewels, iests, and attires, that you marking as well as I, we may put both our markes together, when they are gone, and conferre of them.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I warrant you, sweet ladie; let mee alone to obserue, till I turne my selfe to nothing but obseruation. Good morrow cousin CYTHERIS.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Welcome kind cousin. What? are they come?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        I, your friend CORNELIVS GALLVS, OVID, TIBVLLVS, PROPERTIVS, with IVLIA the Emperors daughter, and the ladie PLAVTIA, are lighted at the dore; and with them HERMOGENES TIGELLIVS, the excellent musician.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Come, let vs goe meet them, CHLOE.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Obserue, CRISPINVS.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        At a haires breadth, ladie, I warrant you.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene II.
                     GALLVS, OVID, TIBVLLVS, PROPERTIVS, HERMOGENES, IVLIA, PLAVTIA, CYTHERIS, CHLOE, ALBIVS, CRISPINVS.
                     
                        HEalth to the louely CHLOE: you must pardon me, Mistris, that I preferre this faire gentlewoman.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        I pardon, and praise you for it, sir; and I beseech your Excellence, receiue her beauties into your knowledge and fauour.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        CYTHERIS, shee hath fauour, and behauiour, that commands as much of me: and sweet CHLOE, know I doe exceedingly loue you, and

that I will approue in any grace my father the Emperour may shew you. Is this your husband?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        For fault of a better, if it please your highnesse.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Gods my life! how hee shames mee!
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Not a whit, CHLOE, they all thinke you politike, and wittie; wise women choose not husbands for the eye, merit, or birth, but wealth, and soueraigntie.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Sir, we all come to gratulate, for the good report of you.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        And would be glad to deserue your loue, sir.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        My wife will answere you all, gentlemen; I'le come to you againe presently.
                     
                     
                        PLAV.
                        You haue chosen you a most faire companion here, CYTHERIS, and a very faire house.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        To both which, you and all my friends, are very welcome, PLAVTIA.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        With all my heart, I assure your ladiship.
                     
                     
                        PLAV.
                        Thankes, sweet Mistris CHLOE.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        You must needes come to court, ladie, yfaith, and there bee sure your welcome shall be as great to vs.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Shee will well deserue it, Madame. I see, euen in her lookes, gentrie, and generall worthinesse.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        I haue not seene a more certaine character of an excellent disposition.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Wife.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        O, they doe so commend me here, the courtiers! what's the matter now?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        For the banquet, sweet wife.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Yes; and I must needs come to court, and bee welcome, the Princesse sayes.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        OVID, and TIBVLLVS, you may bee bold to welcome your Mistresses here.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        We find it so, sir.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        And thanke CORNELIVS GALLVS.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Nay, my sweet SEXTVS, in faith thou art not sociable.
                     
                     
                        PROP.
                        In faith, I am not, PVBLIVS; nor I cannot.
                        Sicke mindes, are like sicke men that burne with feuers,
                        Who when they drinke, please but a present tast,
                        And after beare a more impatient fit.
                        Pray, let me leaue you; I offend you all,
                        And my selfe most.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Stay, sweet PROPERTIVS.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        You yeeld too much vnto your grieues, and sate,
                        Which neuer hurts, but when we say it hurts vs.
                     
                     
                        PROP.
                        O peace, TIBVLLVS; your philosophie
                        Lends you too rough a hand to search my wounds.
                        Speake they of griefes, that know to sigh, and grieue;
                        
                        The free and vnconstrained spirit feeles
                        No weight of my oppression.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Worthy Roman!
                        
                        Me thinkes I taste his miserie; and could
                        Sit downe, and chide at his malignant starres.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Me thinkes I loue him, that he loues so truely.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        This is the perfect'st loue, liues after death.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Such is the constant ground of vertue still.
                     
                     
                        PLAV.
                        It puts on an inseparable face.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Haue you markt euery thing, CRISPINVS?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Euery thing, I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        What gentlemen are these? doe you know them?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I, they are poets, lady.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        
                           Poets? they did not talke of me since I went, did they?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O yes, and extold your perfections to the heauens.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Now in sinceritie, they be the finest kind of men, that euer I knew: Poets? Could not one get the Emperour to make my husband a Poet, thinke you?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        No, ladie, 'tis loue, and beautie make Poets: and since you like Poets so well, your loue, and beauties shall make me a Poet.
                        
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        What shall they? and such a one as these?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I, and a better then these: I would be sorry else.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        And shall your lookes change? and your haire change? and all, like these?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Why, a man may be a Poet, and yet not change his haire, lady.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Well, wee shall see your cunning: yet if you can change your haire, I pray, doe.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Ladies, and lordings, there's a slight banquet staies within for you, please you draw neere, and accost it.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        We thanke you, good ALBIVS: but when shall wee see those excellent iewels you are commended to haue?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        At your ladiships seruice. I got that speech by seeing a play last-day, and it did me some grace now: I see, 'tis good to collect sometimes; I'le frequent these plaies more then I haue done, now I come to be familiar with courtiers.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Why, how now, HERMOGENES? what ailest thou trow?
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        A little melancholy, let me alone, pray thee.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Melancholy! how so?
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        With riding: a plague on all coaches for me.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Is that hard-fauour'd gentleman a poet too; CYTHERIS?
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        No; this is HERMOGENES, as humorous as a poet though: he is at Musician.
                        
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        A Musician? then he can sing.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        That he can excellently; did you neuer heare him?
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        O no: will he be intreated, thinke you?
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        I know not. Friend, Mistresse CHLOE would faine heare


                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           


                           
HERMOGENES sing: are you interested in him?
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        No doubt, his owne humanitie will command him so farre, to the satisfaction of so faire a beautie; but rather then faile, weele all bee suiters to him.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        'Cannot sing.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Pray thee, HERMOGENES.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        'Cannot sing.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        For honour of this gentlewoman, to whose house, I know thou maist be euer welcome.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        That he shall in truth, sir, if he can sing.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        What's that?
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        This gentlewoman is wooing HERMOGENES for a song.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        A song▪ come, he shall not denie her. HERMOGENES?
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        'Cannot sing.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        No, the ladies must doe it, hee staies but to haue their thankes acknowledg'd as a debt to his cunning.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        That shall not want: our selfe will be the first shall promise to pay him more then thankes, vpon a fauour so worthily vouchsaft.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        Thanke you, Madame, but 'will not sing.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Tut, the onely way to winne him, is to abstaine from intreating him.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Doe you loue singing, ladie?
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        O, passingly.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Intreat the ladies, to intreat me to sing then, I beseech you.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        I beseech your grace, intreat this gentleman to sing.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        That we will CHLOE; can he sing excellently?
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        I thinke so, Madame: for he intreated me, to intreat you, to intreat him to sing.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Heauen, and earth! would you tell that?
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Good sir, let's intreat you to vse your voice.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Alas, Madame, I cannot in truth.
                     
                     
                        PLAV.
                        The gentleman is modest: I warrant you, he sings excellently.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        HERMOGENES, cleere your throat: I see by him, here's a gentleman will worthily challenge you.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Not I, sir, I'le challenge no man.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        That's your modestie, sir: but wee, out of an assurance of your excellencie, challenge him in your behalfe.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I thanke you, gentlemen, I'le doe my best.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        Let that best be good, sir, you were best.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        O, this contention is excellent. What is't you sing, sir?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        
                           If I freely may discouer, &c. Sir, I'le sing that.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        One of your owne compositions, HERMOGENES.
                        He offers you vantage enough.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Nay truely, gentlemen, I'le challenge no man—: I can sing but one staffe of the dittie neither.
                     
                     
                        
                        GALL.
                        The better: HERMOGENES himselfe will bee intreated to sing the other.
                        SONG.
                        IF I freely may discouer,
                        What would please me in my louer:
                        I would haue her faire, and wittie,
                        Sauouring more of court, then cittie;
                        A little proud, but full of pittie:
                        Light, and humorous in her toying.
                        Oft building hopes, and soone destroying,
                        Long, but sweet in the enioying,
                        Neither too easie, nor too hard:
                        All extremes I would haue bard.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Beleeue me, sir, you sing most excellently.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        If there were a praise aboue excellence, the gentleman highly deserues it.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        Sir, all this doth not yet make mee enuie you: for I know I sing better then you.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Attend HERMOGENES, now.
                        2.
                        Shee should be allowed her passions,
                        So they were but vs'd as fashions;
                        Sometimes froward, and then frowning,
                        Sometimes sickish, and then swowning,
                        Euery 
                              •
                           it, with change, still crowning.
                        Purely iealous, I would haue her,
                        Then onely constant when I craue her.
                        'Tis a vertue should not saue her.
                        Thus, nor her delicates would cloy me,
                        Neither her peenishnesse annoy me.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Nay, HERMOGENES, your merit hath long since beene both knowne, and admir'd of vs.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        You shall heare me sing another: now will I begin.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        We shall doe this gentlemans banquet too much wrong, that staies for vs, ladies.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        'Tis true: and well thought on, CORNELIVS GALLVS.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        Why 'tis but a short aire, 'twill be done presently, pray' stay; strike musique.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        No, good HERMOGENES: wee'll end this difference within.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        'Tis the common disease of all your musicians, hat they know no meane, to be intreated, either to begin, or end.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Please you lead the way, gentles?
                     
                     
                        AL
                              •
                           .
                        Thankes, good ALBIVS.
                     
                     
                        
                        ALBI.
                        O, what a charme of thankes was here put vpon me! O IOVE, what a setting forth it is to a man, to haue many courtiers come to his house! Sweetly was it said of a good olde house-keeper; I had rather want meate, then want ghests: specially, if they be courtly ghests. For, neuer trust me, if one of their good legges made in a house, be not worth all the good cheere, a man can make them. Hee that would haue fine ghests, let him haue a 
                              ••
                           ne wife; he that would haue a fine wife, let him come to me.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        By your kind leaue, Master ALBIVS.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        What, you are not gone, Master CRISPINVS?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yes faith, I haue a desseigne drawes me hence: pray' sir, fashion mean excuse to the ladies.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Will you not stay? and see the iewels, sir? I pay you stay.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Not for a million, sir, now; Let it suffice, I must relinquish; and so in a word, please you to expiate this complement.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Mum.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        He presently goe and enghle some broker, for a Poets gowne, and bespeake a garland: and then ieweller, looke to your best iewell ysaith.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act III.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     HORACE, CRISPINVS.
                     
                        
                           Hor. li. 1. Sat. 9 HMh? yes; I will begin an ode so: and it shall be to MECOENAS.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        'Slid, yonder's HORACE! they say hee's an excellen
                              •
                            
                           Poet: MECOENAS loues him. Ile fall into his acquaintance, if I can; I thinke he be composing, as he goes i' the street! ha? 't is a good humour, and he be: Ile compose too.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Swell me a bowle with lusti
                              •
                            wine,
                        Till I may see the plump LYaeVS swim
                        Aboue the brim:
                        I drinke, as I would wright,
                        In slowing measure, fill'd with flame, and spright.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Sweet HORACE, MINERVA, and the Muses stand auspicious to thy desseignes. How far'st thou, sweete man? frolicke? rich? gallant? ha?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Not greatly gallant, sir, like my fortunes; well.
                        I'm bold to take my leaue, sir, you'ld naught else, sir, would you?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Troth, no, but I could wish thou did'st know vs, HORACE, we are a scholer, I assure thee.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        A scholer, sir? I shall bee couetous of your faire knowledge.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Gramercie, good HORACE. Nay, we are new turn'd Poet too, which is more; and a Satyrist too, which is more then that: I write iust in thy veine, I. I am for your odes or your sermons, or any thing indeed; wee are a gentleman besides: our name is RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, weare a prettie stoick too.
                     
                     
                        
                        HORA.
                        To the proportion of your beard, I thinke it, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        By PHOEBVS, here's a most neate fine street, is't not? I protest to thee, I am enamour'd of this street now, more then of halfe the streets of 
                              
                                 •
                              ome, againe; 'tis so polite, and terse! There's the front of a building now. I studie architecture too: if euer I should build, I'de haue a house iust of that prospectiue.
                        
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Doubtlesse, this gallants tongue has a good turne, when hee sleepes.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I doe make verses, when I come in such a street as this: O your city-ladies, you shall ha'hem 
                              •
                           it in euery shop like the Muses—offring you the c
                                 •
                              s
                                 ••
                              lian dewes, and the thespian liquors, to as many as haue but the sweet grace and audacitie to— sip of their lips. Did you neuer heare any of my verses?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        No, sir (but I am in some 
                              ••
                           are, I must, now.)
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I'le tell thee some (if I can but recouer 'hem) I compos'd e'en now of a dressing, I saw a iewellers wife weare, who indeede was a iewell herselfe: I preferre that kind of tire now, what's thy opinion, HORACE?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        With your siluer bodkin, it does well, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I cannot tell, but it stirres me more then all your court-curles, or your spangles, or your tricks: I affect not these high gable-ends, these tuscane-tops, nor your coronets, nor your arches, nor your pyramids; giue me a fine sweet— little delicate dressing, with a bodkin, as you say: and a mushrome, for all your other ornatures.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Is't not possible to make an escape from him?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I haue remitted my verses, all this while, I thinke I ha' forget 'hem.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Here's he, could wish you had else.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Pray IOVE, I can intreat 'hem of my memorie.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        You put your memorie to too much trouble, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        No, sweet HORACE, we must not ha' thee thinke so.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I crie you mercy; then, they are my eares
                        That must be tortur'd: well, you must haue patience, eares.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Pray thee, HORACE, obserue.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Yes, sir: your sattin sleeue begins to fret at the rug that is vnderneath it, I doe obserue: And your ample veluet bases are not without euident staines of a hot disposition, naturally.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O— I'le die them into another colour, at pleasure: how many yards of veluet dost thou thinke they containe?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Hart! I haue put him now in a fresh way
                        To vexe me more: Faith, sir, your mercers booke
                        Will tell you with more patience, then I can;
                        (For I am crost, and so's not that, I thinke.)
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        S'light, these verses haue lost me againe: I shall not inuite 'hem to mind, now.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Racke not your thoughts, good sir; rather, deferre it
                        
                        To a new time; I'le meete you at your lodging,
                        Or where you please: Till then, IOVE keepe you, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Nay, gentle HORACE, stay: I haue it, now.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Yes, sir. APOLLO, HERMES, IVPITER, looke down vpon me.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Rich was thy hap, sweet, deintie cap,
                        There to be placed:
                        Where thy smooth blacke, sleeke white may smacke,
                        And both be graced.
                        
                           white, is there vsurpt for her brow; her forehead: and then sleeke, as the paralell to smooth, that went before. A kind of Paranomasie, or Agnomination: doe you conceiue, sir?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Excellent. Troth, sir, I must be abrupt, and leaue you.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Why, what haste hast thou? pray thee, stay a little: thou shalt not goe yet, by PHOEBVS.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I shall not? what remedie? Fie, how I sweat with suffering!
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        And then—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Pray, sir, giue me leaue to wipe my face a little.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yes, doe, good HORACE.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Thanke you, sir.
                        Death! I must craue his leaue to pisse anon;
                        Or that I may goe hence with halfe my teeth:
                        I am in some such feare. This tyrannie
                        Is strange, to take mine eares vp by commission,
                        (Whether I will or no) and make them stalls
                        To his lewd soloecismes, and worded trash.
                        Happy thou, bold BOLANVS, now, I say;
                        Whose freedome, and impatience of this fellow,
                        Would, long ere this, haue call'd him foole, and foole,
                        And ranke, and tedious foole, and haue flung iests
                        As hard as stones, till thou hadst pelted him
                        Out of the place: whil'st my tame modestie
                        Suffers my wit be made a solemne asse
                        To beare his fopperies—
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        HORACE, thou art miserably affected to be gone, I see. But— pray thee, let's proue, to enioy thee awhile: Thou hast no businesse, I assure me. Whether is thy iourney directed? ha?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Sir, I am going to visit a friend, that's sicke.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        A friend? What's he? doe not I know him?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        No, sir, you doe not know him; and 'tis not the worse for him.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        What's his name? where's he lodg'd?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Where, I shall be fearefull to draw you out of your way, sir; a great way hence: Pray', sir, let's part.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Nay, but where is't? I pray thee, say.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        On the farre side of all Tyber yonder, by CAESARS gardens.
                     
                     
                        
                        CRIS.
                        O, that's my course directly; I am for you. Come, goe: why stand'st thou?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Yes, sir: marry, the plague is in that part of the citie; I had almost forgot to tell you, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Fow: It's no matter, I feare no pestilence, I ha' not offended PHOEBVS.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I haue, it seemes; or else this heauie scourge
                        Could ne're haue lighted on me—
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Come, along.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I am to goe downe some halfe mile, this way, sir, first, to speake with his physician: And from thence to his apothecary, where I shall stay the mixing of diuers drugs—
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Why, it's all one. I haue nothing to doe, and I loue not to be idle, I'le beare thee companie. How call'st thou the pothecary?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        O, that I knew a name would fright him now. Sir RHADAMANTHVS, RHADAMANTHVS, sir.
                        There's one so cald, is a iust iudge, in hell,
                        And doth inflict strange vengeance on all those,
                        That (here on earth) torment poore patient spirits.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        He dwells at the three Faries, by IANVS Temple?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Your pothecary does, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Hart, Iowe him money for sweet meates, and hee has laid to arrest me, I heare: but—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Sir, I haue made a most solemne vow: I will neuer baile any man.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Well then, I'le sweare, and speake him faire, if the worst come. But his name is MINOS, not RHADAMANTHVS, HORACE.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        That may bee, sir: I but guest at his name by his signe. But your MINOS is a iudge too, sir?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I protest to thee, HORACE (doe but taste mee once) if I doe know my selfe, and mine owne vertues truely, thou wilt not make that esteeme of VARIVS, or VIRGIL, or TIBVLLVS, or any of 'hem indeed, as now in thy ignorance thou dost; which I am content to forgiue: I would faine see, which of these could pen more verses in a day, or with more facilitie then I; or that could court his mistris, kisse her hand, make better sport with her fanne, or her dogge—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I cannot baile you yet, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Or that could moue his body more gracefully, or dance better you shoo'd see mee, were it not i' the street—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Nor yet.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Why, I haue beene a reueller, and at my cloth of siluer sute, and my long stocking, in my time, and will be againe—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        If you may be trusted, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        And then for my singing, HERMOGENES himselfe enuies me; that is your onely Master of musique you haue in Rome.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        HORA.
                        Is your mother liuing, sir?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Au: Conuert thy thoughts to somewhat else, I pray thee.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        You haue much of the mother in you, sir: your father is dead?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I, I thanke IOVE, and my grand-father too and all my kinsfolkes, and well compos'd in their vrnes.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        The more their happinesse; that rest in peace,
                        Free from th'abundant torture of thy tongue;
                        Would I were with them too.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        What's that, HORACE?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I now remember me, sir, of a sad fate
                        A cunning woman, one SABELLA sung,
                        When in her 
                              •
                           rne, she cast my destinie,
                        I being but a child
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        What was't I pray thee?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Shee told me, I should surely neuer perish
                        By famine, poyson, or the enemies sword;
                        The hecticke feuer, cough, or pleurisie,
                        Should neuer hurt me; nor the tardie gowt:
                        But in my time, I should be once surpriz'd,
                        By a strong tedious talker, that should vexe
                        And almost bring me to consumption.
                        Therefore (if I were wise) she warn'd me shunne
                        All such long-winded monsters, as my bane:
                        For if I could but scape that one discourser,
                        I might (no doubt) proue an olde aged man.
                        By your leaue, sir?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Tut, tut: abandon this idle humour, 'tis nothing but melancholy. Fore IOVE, now I thinke o
                              •
                           t, I am to appeare in court here, to answere to one that has me in suit; sweet HORACE, goe with mee, this is my houre: if I neglect it, the law proceedes against me. Thou art familiar with these things, pray thee, if thou lou'st me, goe.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Now, let me dye, sir, if I know your lawes;
                        Or haue the power to stand still halfe so long
                        In their loud courts, as while a case is Argued.
                        Besides, you know, sir, where I am to goe,
                        And the necessitie—
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        'Tis true:—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I hope the houre of my release be come: Hee will (vpon this consideration) discharge me, sure.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Troth, I am doubtfull, what I may best doe; whether to leaue thee, or my affaires, HORACE?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        O IVPITER, mee, sir; mee, by any meanes: I beseech you, mee, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        No saith, I'le venture those now: Thou shalt see I loue thee, come HORACE.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Nay then, I am desperate: I follow you, sir. 'Tis hard

contending with a man that ouer-comes thus.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        And how deales MECOENAS with thee? liberally? ha?
                        Is he open-handed? bountifull?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Hee's still himselfe, sir.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Troth, HORACE, thou art exceeding happy in thy friends and acquaintance; they are all most choice spirits, and of the first ranke of Romanes: I doe not know that poet, I protest, ha's vs'd his fortune more prosperously, then thou hast. If thou would'st bring me knowne to MECoeNAS, I should second thy desert well; thou should'st find a good sure assistant of mee: one, that would speake all good of thee in thy absence, and be content with the next place, not enuying thy reputation with thy patron. Let me not liue, but I thinke thou and I (in a small time) should list them all out of fauour, both VIRGIL, VARIVS, and the best of them; and enioy him wholy to our selues.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Gods, you doe know it, I can hold no longer;
                        This brize hath prickt my patience: Sir, your silkenesse
                        Cleerely mistakes MECOENAS, and his house;
                        To thinke, there breathes a spirit beneath his roofe,
                        Subiect vnto those poore affections
                        Of vnder-mining enuie, and detraction,
                        Moodes, onely proper to base groueling minds:
                        That place is not in Rome, I dare affirme,
                        More pure, or free, from such low common euils.
                        There's no man greeu'd, that this is thought more rich,
                        Or this more learned; each man hath his place,
                        And to his merit, his reward of grace:
                        Which with a mutuall loue they all embrace.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        You report a wonder! 'tis scarce credible, this.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I am no torture, to enforce you to beleeue it, but 'tis so.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Why, this enflames mee with a more ardent desire to bee his, then before: but, I doubt I shall find the entrance, to his familiaritie, somwhat more then difficult, HORACE.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Tut, you'le conquer him, as you haue done me; There's no standing out against you, sir, I see that. Either your importunitie, or the intimation of your good parts; or—
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Nay, I'le bribe his porter, and the groomes of his chamber; make his doores open to mee that way, first: and then, I'le obserue my times. Say, he should extrude mee his house to day; shall I therefore desist, or let fall my suite, to morrow? No: I'le attend him, follow him, meet him? i' the street, the high waies, run by his coach, neuer leaue him. What? Man hath nothing giuen him, in this life, without much labour.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        And impudence.
                        Archer of heauen, PHOEBVS, take thy bow,
                        And with a full drawne shaft, naile to the earth
                        This PYTHON; that I may yet run hence, and liue:
                        
                        Or brawnie HERCVLES, doe thou come downe,
                        And (though thou mak'st it vp thy thirteenth labour)
                        Rescue me from this HYDRA of discourse, here.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene II.
                     ARISTIVS, HORACE, CRISPINVS.
                     
                        HORACE, well met.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        O welcome, my releeuer,
                        ARISTIVS, As thou lou'st me, ransome me.
                     
                     
                        ARIS.
                        What ayl'st thou, man?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        'Death, I am seaz'd on here
                        By a Land-R
                                 •
                              mora, I cannot stirre;
                        Not moue, but as he please.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Wilt thou goe, HORACE?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        'Hart! he cleaues to me like ALCIDES shirt,
                        Tearing my flesh, and sinnewes; Ô, I ha' beene vext
                        And tortur'd with him, beyond fortie feuers.
                        For IOVES sake, find some meanes, to take me from him.
                     
                     
                        ARIS.
                        Yes, I will: but I'le goe first, and tell MECOENAS.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Come, shall we goe?
                     
                     
                        ARIS.
                        The iest will make his eyes runne, yfaith.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Nay, ARISTIVS?
                     
                     
                        ARIS.
                        Farewell, HORACE.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        'Death! will a' leaue me? FVSCVS ARISTIVS, doe you heare? Gods of Rome! you said, you had somewhat to say to me, in priuate.
                     
                     
                        ARIS.
                        I, but I see, you are now imploi'd with that gentleman: 'twere offence to trouble you. I'le take some fitter oportunitie, farewell.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Mischiefe, and torment! Ô, my soule, and heart,
                        How are you crampt with anguish! Death it selfe
                        Brings not the like convulsions. Ô, this day,
                        That euer I should view thy tedious face—
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        HORACE, what passion? what humour is this?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Away, good prodigie, afflict me not.
                        (A friend, and mocke me thus!) neuer was man
                        So left vnder the axe—how now.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene III.
                     MINOS, LICTORS, CRISPINVS, HORACE.
                     
                        THat's he, in the imbrodered hat, there, with the ash-colour'd feather: his name is LABERIVS CRISPINVS.
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        LABERIVS CRISPINVS; I arrest you in the Emperours name.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Me, sir? doe you arrest me?
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        I, sir, at the sute of Master MINOS the pothecarie.
                     
                     
                        
                        HORA.
                        Thankes, great APOLLO: I will not slip thy fauour offered me in my escape, for my fortunes.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Master MINOS? I know no master MINOS. Where's HORACE? HORACE? HORACE?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        Sir, doe not you know me?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O yes; I know you, master MINOS: 'crie you mercy. But HORACE? Gods me, is he gone?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        I, and so would you too, if you knew how. Officer, looke to him.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Doe you heare, master MINOS? pray
                              •
                            let's be vs'd like a man of our owne fashion. By IANVS, and IVPITER, I meant to haue paied you next weeke, euery drachme. Seeke not to eclipse my reputation, thus vulgarly.
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        Sir, your oathes cannot serue you, you know I haue forborne you long.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I am conscious of it, sir. Nay, I beseech you, gentlemen, doe not exhale me thus; remember 'tis but for sweet meates—
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        Sweet meat must haue sowre sawce, sir. Come along.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Sweet, master MINOS: I am forfeited to eternall disgrace, if you doe not commiserate. Good officer, be not so officious.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene IIII.
                     TVCCA, PYRGVS, MINOS, LICTORS, CRISPINVS, HISTRIO, DEMETRIVS.
                     
                        WHy, how now, my good brace of bloud-hounds? whither doe you dragge the gent'man? you mungrels, you curres, you bandogs, wee are Captaine TVCCA, that talke to you, you inhumane pilchers.
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        Sir, he is their prisoner.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Their pestilence. What are you, sir?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        A citizen of Rome, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Then you are not farre distant from a foole, sir.
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        A pothecarie, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I knew thou wast not a physician; fough: out of my nostrils, thou stink'st of lo
                                 •••
                              m, and the syringe: away, quack-saluer. Follower, my sword.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        Here, noble leader, youle doe no harme with it: I'le trust you.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Doe you heare, you, good-man slaue? hooke, ramme, rogue, catch-pole, lose the gent'man, or by my veluet armes—
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        The Officer strikes vp his heeles.
                        What will you doe, sir? 
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Kisse thy hand, my honourable actiue varlet: and imbrace thee, thus.
                     
                     
                        
                        PYRG.
                        O patient metamorphosis!
                        
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        My sword, my tall rascall.
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        Nay, soft, sir: Some wiser then some.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        What? and a wit to! By PLVTO, thou must bee cherish'd, slaue; here's three drachmes for thee: hold.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        There's halfe his lendings gone.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Giue mee.
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        No, sir, your first word shall stand: I'le hold all.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Nay, but, rogue—
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        You would make a rescue of our prisoner, sir, you?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I, a rescue? away inhumane varlet. Come, come, I neuer rellish aboue one iest at most; doe not disgust me: Sirra, doe not. Rogue, I tell thee, rogue, doe not.
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        How, sir? rogue?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I, why! thou art not angrie, rascall? art thou?
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        I cannot tell, sir, I am little better, vpon these termes.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Ha! gods, and fiends! why, do'st heare? rogue, thou, giue me thy hand; I say vnto thee, thy hand: rogue. What? do'st not thou know me? not me, rogue? not Captaine TVCCA, rogue?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        Come: pra' surrender the gentleman his sword, officer; we'll haue no fighting here.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        What's thy name?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        MINOS, an't please you.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        MINOS? come, hither, MINOS; Thou art a wise fellow, it seemes: Let me talke with thee.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Was euer wretch so wretched, as vnfortunate I?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Thou art one of the centum-viri, old boy, art' not?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        No, indeed, master Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Goe to, thou shalt be, then: I'le ha' thee one, MINOS. Take my sword from those rascals, do'st thou see? goe, doe it: I cannot attempt with patience. What does this gentleman owe thee, little MINOS?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        Fourescore sesterties, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        What? no more? Come, thou shalt release him, MINOS: what, I'le bee his baile, thou shalt take my word, old boy, and casheere these furies: thou shalt do't, I say, thou shalt, little MINOS, thou shalt.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yes, and as I am a gentleman, and a reueller, I'le make a peece of poetrie, and absolue all, within these fiue daies.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Come, MINOS is not to learne how to vse a gent'man of qualitie, I know; My sword: If hee pay thee not, I will, and I must, old boy. Thou shalt bee my pothecary too: ha'st good eringo's, MINOS?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        The best in Rome, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Goe too then— Vermine, know the house.
                     
                     
                        
                        PYRG.
                        I warrant you, Collonell.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        For this gentleman, MINOS?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        I'le take your word, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Thou hast it, my sword—
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        Yes, sir: but you must discharge the arrest, Master CRISPINVS.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        How, MINOS? looke in the gentlemans face, and but reade his silence. Pay, pay; 'tis honour, MINOS.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        By IOVE, sweet Captaine, you doe most infinitely endeare, and oblige me to you.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Tut, I cannot complement, by MARS: but IVPITER loue me, as I loue good wordes, and good clothes, and there's an end. Thou shalt giue my boy that girdle, and hangers, when thou hast worne them a little more—
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O IVPITER! Captaine, he 'shall haue them now, presently: please you to be acceptiue, young gentleman.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        Yes, sir, feare not; I shall accept: I haue a prettie foolish humour of taking, if you knew all.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Not now, you shall not take, boy.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        By my truth, and earnest, but hee shall, Captaine, by your leaue.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Nay, and a 'sweare by his truth, and earnest, take it boy: doe not make a gent'man forsworne.
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        Well, sir, there is your sword; but thanke master MINOS: you had not carried it as you doe, else.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        MINOS is iust, and you are knaues, and—
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        What say you, sir?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Passe on, my good scoundrell, passe on, I honour thee: But, that I hate to haue action with such base rogues as these; you should ha' seene me vnrip their noses now, and haue sent 'hem to the next barbers, to stitching: for, doe you see— I am a man of humour, and I doe loue the varlets, the honest varlets; they haue wit, and valour: and are indeed good profitable— errant rogues, as any liue in an empire. Doest thou heare, POETASTER? second me. Stand vp (MINOS) close, gather, yet, so. Sir (thou shalt haue a quarter share, bee resolute) you shall, at my request, take MINOS by the hand, here, little MINOS, I will haue it so; all friends, and a health: Be not inexorable. And thou shalt impart the wine, old boy, thou shalt do't, little MINOS, thou shalt: make vs pay it in our physicke. What? we must liue, and honour the gods, sometimes; now BACCHVS, now COMVS, now PRIAPVS: euery god, a little. What's he, that stalkes by, there? boy, PYRGVS, you were best let him passe, sirrah; doe, ferret, let him passe, doe.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        'Tis a player, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        A player? Call him, call the lowsie slaue hither: what, will he saile by, and not once strike, or vaile to a Man of warre? ha? doe you

heare? you, player, rogue, stalker, come backe here: no respect to men of worship, you slaue? What, you are proud, you rascall, are you proud? ha? you grow rich, doe you? and purchase, you two-penny teare-mouth? you haue fortune, and the good yeere on your side, you stinkard? you haue? you haue?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Nay, sweet Captaine, be confin'd to some reason; I protest I saw you not, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        You did not? where was your sight, OEDIPVS? you walke with hares eies, doe you? I'le ha' 'hem glas'd, rogue; and you say the word, they shall be glaz'd for you: come, we must haue you turne fiddler againe, slaue, 'get a base violin at your backe, and march in a tawnie coate, with one sleeue, to Goose-faire, and then you'll know vs; you'll see vs then; you will, gulch, you will? Then, wil't please your worship to haue any musicke, Captaine?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Nay, good Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        What? doe you laugh, Owleglas? death, you perstemptuous varlet, I am none of your fellowes: I haue commanded a hundred and fiftie such rogues, I.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        I, and most of that hundred and fiftie, haue beene leaders of a legion.
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        If I haue exhibited wrong, I'le tender satisfaction, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Sai'st thou so, honest vermine? Giue me thy hand, thou shalt make vs a supper one of these nights.
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        When you please, by IOVE, Captaine, most willingly.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Doest thou 'sweare? to morrow then; say, and hold slaue. There are some of you plaiers honest gent'man-like scoundrels, and suspected to ha' some wit, as well as your poets; both at drinking, and breaking of iests: and are companions for gallants. A man may skelder yee, now and then, of halfe a dozen shillings, or so. Doest thou not know that PANTALABVS there?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        No, I assure you, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Goe, and bee acquainted with him, then; hee is a gent'man, parcell-poet, you slaue: his father was a man of worship, I tell thee. Goe, he pens high, loftie, in a new stalking straine; bigger then halfe the rimers i' the towne, againe: he was borne to fill thy mouth, MINOTAVRVS, he was: hee will teach thee to teare, and rand, Rascall, to him, cherish his muse, goe: thou hast fortie, fortie, shillings, I meane, stinkard, giue him in earnest, doe, he shall write for thee, slaue. If hee pen for thee once, thou shalt not need to trauell, with thy pumps full of grauell, any more, after a blinde iade and a hamper: and stalke vpon boords, and barrell heads, to an old crackt trumpet—
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Troth, I thinke I ha' not so much about me, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        It's no matter: giue him what thou hast: Stiffe 
                                 •
                              oe, I'le giue my word for the rest: though it lacke a shilling, or two, it skils not: Goe, thou art an honest shifter, I'le ha' the statute repeal'd for thee. MINOS,

must tell thee, MINOS, thou hast deiected you gent'mans spirit exceedingly: do'st obserue? do'st note, little MINOS?
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Goe to then, raise; recouer, doe. Suffer him not to droop, in prospect of a player, a rogue, a stager: put twentie into his hand, twentie, 
                              •
                           esterces, I meane, and let no bodie see: goe, doe it, the worke shall commend it selfe, be MINOS, I'le pay.
                     
                     
                        MINO.
                        Yes forsooth, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        Doe not we serue a notable sharke?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        And what new matters haue you now afoot, sirrah? ha? I would faine come with my cockatrice one day, and see a play; if I knew when there were a good bawdie one: but they say, you ha' nothing but humours, reuells, and satyres, that girde, and fart at the time, you slaue.
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        No, I assure you, Captaine, not wee. They are on the other side of Tyber: we haue as much ribaldrie in our plaies, as can bee, as you would wish, Captaine: All the sinners, i' the suburbs, come, and applaud our action, daily.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I heare, you'll bring me o' the stage there; you'll play me, they say: I shall be presented by a sort of copper-lac't scoundrels of you: life of PLVTO, and you stage me, stinkard; your mansions shall sweat for't, your tabernacles, varlets, your Globes, and your Triumphs.
                        
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Not we, by PHOEBVS, Captaine▪ doe not doe vs imputation without desert.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I wu' not, my good two-penny rascall: reach mee thy neufe. Do'st heare? What wilt thou giue mee a weeke, for my brace of beagles, here, my little point-trussers? you shall ha' them act among yee. Sirrah, you, pronounce. Thou shalt heare him speake, in king DARIVS dolefull straine.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        O dolefull dayes! O direfull deadly dump!
                        O wicked world! and worldly wickednesse!
                        How can I hold my fist from crying, thump,
                        In rue of this right rascall wretchednesse!
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        In an amorous vaine now, sirrah, peace.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        O, shee is wilder, and more hard, withall,
                        Then beast, or bird, or tree, or stonie wall.
                        Yet might shee loue me, to vpreare her state:
                        I, but perhaps, shee hopes some nobler mate.
                        Yet might shee loue me, to content her sire:
                        I, but her reason masters her desire.
                        Yet might shee loue me as her beauties thrall:
                        I, but I feare, shee cannot loue at all.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Now, the horrible fierce Souldier, you, sirrah.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        What? will I braue thee? I, and beard thee too.
                        A roman spirit scornes to beare a braine,
                        So full of base pusillanimitie.
                     
                     
                        
                        DEMET. HIST.
                        Excellent.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Nay, thou shalt see that, shall rauish thee anon: prick vp thine eares, stinkard: the Ghost, boies.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        Vindicta.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        Timoria.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        Vindicta.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        Timoria.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        Veni.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        Veni.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Now, thunder, sirrah, you, the rumbling plaier.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        I, but some bodie must crie (murder) then, in a small voice.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Your fellow-sharer, there, shall do't; Crie, sirrah, crie.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        Murder, murder.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        Who calls out murder? lady, was it you?
                     
                     
                        DEMET. HIST.
                        O, admirable good, I protest.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Sirrah, boy, brace your drumme a little straighter, and doe the t'other fellow there, hee in the— what sha' call him— and yet, stay too.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        Nay, and thou dalliest, then I am thy foe,
                        And feare shall force, what friendship cannot win;
                        Thy death shall burie what thy life conceales,
                        Villaine! thou diest, for more respecting her—
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        O, stay my Lord.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        Then me: yet speake the truth, and I will guerdon thee:
                        But if thou dally once againe, thou diest.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Enough of this, boy.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        Why then lament therefore: damn'd be thy guts vnto king PLVTOES hell, and princely EREBVS; for sparrowes must haue foode.
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        'Pray, sweet Captaine, let one of them doe a little of a ladie.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        O! he will make thee eternally enamour'd of him, there: doe, sirrah, doe: 'twill allay your fellowes furie a little.
                     
                     
                        1. PYR.
                        Master, mocke on: the scorne thou giuest me,
                        Pray IOVE, some lady may returne on thee.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        No: you shall see mee doe the Moore: Master, lend mee your scarfe a little.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Here, 'tis at thy seruice, boy.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        They with-draw to make themselues ready.
                        You, master MINOS, harke hither a little.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        How do'st like him? art not rapt? art not tickled now? do'st not applaud, rascall? do'st not applaud?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Yes: what will you aske for 'hem a weeke, Captaine?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        No, you mangonizing slaue, I will not part from 'hem: you'll sell 'hem for enghles you: let's ha' good cheere to morrow-night at supper, stalker, and then wee'll talke, good capon, and plouer, doe you heare, sirrah? and doe not bring your eating plaier with you there; I cannot away with him: He will eate a legge of mutton, while I am in my porridge,

the leane POLVPHAGVS, his belly is like Barathrum, he lookes like a midwife in mans apparell, the slaue. Nor the villanous-out-of-tune fiddler AENO
                              •
                           ARBVS, bring not him. What hast thou there? sixe and thirtie? ha?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        No, here's all I haue (Captaine) some fiue and twentie. Pray, sir, will you present, and accommodate it vnto the gentleman: for mine owne part, I am a meere stranger to his humour: besides, I haue some businesse inuites me hence, with Master ASINIVS LVPVS, the tribune.
                        
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Well: goe thy waies: pursue thy proiects, let mee alone with this desseigne; my POETASTER shall make thee a play, and thou shalt be a man of good parts, in it. But stay, let mee see: Doe not bring your AESOPE, your polititian; vnlesse you can ram vp his mouth with cloues: the slaue smells ranker then some sixteene dung-hills, and is seuenteene times more rotten: Mary, you may bring FRISKER, my zany: Hee's a good skipping swaggerer; and your fat foole there, my MANGO, bring him too: but let him not begge rapiers, nor scarfes, in his ouer-familiar playing face, nor rore out his barren bold iests, with a tormenting laughter, betweene drunke, and drie. Doe you heare, stiffe-toe? Giue him warning, admonition, to forsake his saw
                              •
                           y glauering grace, and his goggle eie: it does not become him, sirrah: tell him so. I haue stood vp and defended you I, to gent'men, when you haue beene said to prey vpon pu'nees, and honest citizens, for socks, or buskins: or when they ha' call'd you vsurers, or brokers, or said, you were able to helpe to a peece of flesh— I haue sworne, I did not thinke so. Nor that you were the common retreats for punkes decai'd i' their practice. I cannot beleeue it of you—
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Thanke you, Captaine: IVPITER, and the rest of the gods confine your moderne delights, without disgust.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Stay, thou shalt see the Moore, ere thou goest: what's he, with the halfe-armes there, that salutes vs out of his cloke, like a motion? ha?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        O, sir, his dubblet's a little decaied; hee is otherwise a very simple honest fellow, sir, one DEMETRIVS, a dresser of plaies about the towne, here; we haue hir'd him to abuse HORACE, and bring him in, in a play, with all his gallants: as, TIBVLLVS, MECOENAS, CORNELIVS GALLVS, and the rest.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        And: why so, stinkard?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        O, it will get vs a huge deale of money (Captaine) and wee haue need on't; for this winter ha's made vs all poorer, then so many staru'd snakes: No bodie comes at vs; not a gentleman, nor a—
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        But, you know nothing by him, doe you, to make a play of?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Faith, not much, Captaine: but our Author will deuise, that, that shall serue in some sort.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Why, my PARNASSVS, here, shall helpe him, if thou wilt: Can thy Author doe it impudently enough?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        O, I warrant you, Captaine, and spitefully inough, too; hee ha's one of the most ouer-flowing ranke wits, in Rome. He will slander any man that breathes, if he disgust him.
                     
                     
                        
                        TVCC.
                        The boy comes in on Minos 
                              〈◊〉
                           , who 
                              〈◊〉
                           , as he alls.
                        I'le know the poore, egregious, nitty rascall, and he haue these commendable qualities, I'le cherish him (stay, here comes the Tartar) I'le make a gathering for him, I: a purse, and put the poore slaue in fresh rags. Tell him so, to comfort him: well said, boy.
                     
                     
                        2. PYR.
                        Where art thou, boy? where is CALIPOLIS?
                        
                        Fight earth-quakes, in the entrailes of the earth,
                        And easterne whirle-windes in the hellish shades:
                        Some foule contagion of th'infected heauens
                        Blast all the trees; and in their cursed tops
                        The dismall night-rauen, and tragicke owle
                        Breed, and become fore-runners of my fall.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Well, now fare thee well, my honest penny-biter: Commend me to seuen-shares and a halfe, and remember to morrow— if you lacke a seruice, you shall play in my name, rascalls, but you shall buy your owne cloth, and I'le ha' two shares for my countenance. Let thy author stay with mee.
                     
                     
                        DEME.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        'Twas well done, little MINOS, thou didst stalke well; forgiue me that I said thou stunkst, MINOS: 'twas the sauour of a poet, I met sweating in the street, hangs yet in my nostrills.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Who? HORACE?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I; he, do'st thou know him?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O, he forsooke me most barbarously, I protest.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Hang him fustie satyre, he smells all goate; hee carries a ram, vnder his arme-holes, the slaue: I am the worse when I see him. Did not MINOS impart?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yes, here are twentie drachmes, he did conuey.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Well said, keepe 'hem, wee'll share anon; come, little MINOS.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Faith, Captaine, I'le be bold to shew you a mistris of mine, a iewellers wife, a gallant, as we goe along.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        There spoke my Genius. MINOS, some of thy eringoes, little MINOS; send: come hither, PARNASSVS, I must ha' thee familiar with my little locust, here, 'tis a good vermine, they say. See, here's HORACE, and old TREBATIVS, the great lawier, in his companie; let's auoid him, now: He is too well seconded.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene V.
                     HORACE, TREBATIVS.
                     
                        
                           Hor. Sat. 1. li. 2. THere are, to whom I seeme excessiue sower;
                        And past a satyres law, t'extend my power:
                        Others, that thinke what euer I haue writ
                        Wants pith, and matter to eternise it;
                        
                        And that they could, in one daies light, disclose
                        A thousand verses, such as I compose.
                        What shall I doe, TREBATIVS? say.
                     
                     
                        TREB.
                        Surcease.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        And shall my Muse admit no more encrease?
                     
                     
                        TREB.
                        So I aduise.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        An ill death let mee die.
                        If 'twere not best; but sleepe auoids mine eye:
                        And I vse these, lest nights should tedious seeme.
                     
                     
                        TREB.
                        Rather, contend to sleepe, and liue like them,
                        That holding golden sleepe in speciall price,
                        Rub'd with sweet oiles, swim siluer Tyber thrice,
                        And euery eu'en, with neat wine steeped be:
                        Or, if such loue of writing rauish thee,
                        Then dare to sing vnconquer'd CAESARS deeds;
                        Who cheeres such actions, with aboundant meeds.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        That, father, I desire; but when I trie,
                        I feele defects in euery facultie:
                        Nor is't a labour fit for euery pen,
                        To paint the horrid troups of armed men;
                        The launces burst, in GALLIA'S slaughtred forces;
                        Or wounded Parthians, tumbled from their horses:
                        Great CAESARS warres cannot be fought with words.
                     
                     
                        TREB.
                        Yet, what his vertue in his peace affords,
                        His fortitude, and iustice thou canst show;
                        As wise LVCILIVS, honor'd SCIPIO.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Of that, my powers shall suffer no neglect,
                        When such sleight labours may aspire respect:
                        But, if watch not a most chosen time,
                        The humble wordes of FLACCVS cannot clime
                        The' attentiue eare of CAESAR; nor must I
                        With lesse obseruance shunne grosse flatterie:
                        For he, reposed safe in his owne merit,
                        Spurnes backe the gloses of a fawning spirit.
                     
                     
                        TREB.
                        But, how much better would such accents sound,
                        Then, with a sad, and serious verse to wound
                        PANTOLABVS, railing in his sawcie iests?
                        Or NOMENTANVS spent in riotous feasts?
                        "In satyres, each man (though vntoucht) complaines
                        "As he were hurt; and hates such biting straines.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        What shall I doe? MILONIVS shakes his heeles
                        In ceaslesse dances, when his braine once feeles
                        The stirring feruour of the wine ascend;
                        And that his eyes false number apprehend.
                        CASTOR his horse; POLLVX loues handie fights:
                        Thousand heads, a thousand choise delights.
                        
                        My pleasure is in feet, my words to close,
                        As, both our better, old LVCILIVS does:
                        He, as his trustie friends, his bookes did trust
                        With all his secrets; nor, in things vniust,
                        Or actions lawfull, ran to other men:
                        So, that the old mans life, describ'd was seene
                        As in a votiue table in his lines;
                        And to his steps my Genius inclines,
                        
                           Lucanian, or Apulian, I not whether;
                        For the Venusian colonie plowes either:
                        Sent thither, when the Sabines were forc'd thence
                        (As old fame sings) to giue the place defence
                        'Gainst such, as seeing it emptie, might make rode
                        Vpon the empire; or there sixe abode:
                        Whether th' Apulian borderer it were,
                        Or the Lucanian violence they feare.
                        But this my stile no liuing man shall touch,
                        If first I be not forc'd by base reproch;
                        But, like a sheathed sword, it shall defend
                        My innocent life; for, why should I contend
                        To draw it out, when no malicious thiefe
                        Robs my good name, the treasure of my life?
                        O IVPITER, let it with rust be eaten,
                        Before it touch, or insolently threaten
                        The life of any with the least disease;
                        So much I loue, and woe a generall peace.
                        But, he that wrongs me (better, I proclame,
                        He neuer had assai'd to touch my fame.)
                        For he shall weepe, and walke with euery tongue
                        Throughout the citie, infamously song.
                        SERVIVS, the Praetor, threats the lawes, and vrne,
                        If any at his deedes repine or spurne;
                        The witch, CANIDIA, that ALBVCIVS got,
                        Denounceth witch-craft, where shee loueth not:
                        THVRIVS, the iudge, doth thunder worlds of ill,
                        To such, as striue with his iudiciall will;
                        "All men affright their foes in what they may,
                        "Nature commands it, and men must obay.
                        Obserue with me; "The wolfe his tooth doth vse:
                        "The bull his horne. And, who doth this infuse,
                        "But nature? There's luxurious SCAEVA; Trust
                        His long-liu'd mother with him; His so iust
                        And scrupulous right hand no mischiefe will;
                        No more, then with his heele a wolfe will kill,
                        
                        Or Oxe with iaw: Mary, let him alone
                        With temper'd poison to remoue the croane.
                        But, briefly, if to age I destin'd bee,
                        Or that quick deaths black wings inuiron me;
                        If rich, or poore; at Rome; or fate command
                        I shall be banish't to some other land;
                        What hiew soeuer, my whole state shall beare,
                        I will write satyres still, in spight of feare.
                     
                     
                        TREB.
                        HORACE; I feare, thou draw'st no lasting breath:
                        And that some great mans friend will be thy death.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        What? when the man that first did satyrise,
                        Durst pull the skin ouer the eares of vice;
                        And make, who stood in outward fashion cleare,
                        Giue place, as foule within; shall I forbeare?
                        Did LAELIVS, or the man, so great with fame,
                        That from sackt Carthage fetcht his worthy name,
                        Storme, that LVCILIVS did METELLVS pierce?
                        Or bury LVPVS quick, in famous verse?
                        Rulers, and subiects, by whole tribes he checkt;
                        But vertue, and her friends did still protect:
                        And when from sight, or from the iudgement seat,
                        The vertuous SCIPIO, and wise LAELIVS met,
                        Vnbrac't, with him in all light sports, they shar'd;
                        Till, their most frugall suppers were prepar'd.
                        What e're I am, though both for wealth, and wit;
                        Beneath LVCILIVS, I am pleas'd to sit,
                        Yet, enuy (spight of her empoisoned brest)
                        Shall say, I liu'd in grace here, with the best;
                        And, seeking in weake trash to make her wound,
                        Shall find me solid, and her teeth vnsound:
                        'Lesse, learn'd TREBATIVS censure disagree.
                     
                     
                        TREB.
                        No, HORACE, I of force must yeeld to thee,
                        Only, take heed, as being aduis'd by mee,
                        Lest thou incurre some danger: Better pause
                        Then rue thy ignorance of the sacred lawes;
                        There's iustice, and great action may be su'd
                        'Gainst such, as wrong mens fames with verses lewd.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I, with lewd verses; such as libels bee,
                        And aym'd at persons of good qualitie.
                        I reuerence and adore that iust decree:
                        But if they shall be sharp, yet modest rimes
                        That spare mens persons, and but taxe their crimes,
                        Such, shall in open court, find currant passe▪
                        
                        Were CAESAR iudge, and with the makers grace.
                     
                     
                        
                        TREB.
                        Nay, I'le adde more; if thou thy selfe being cleare,
                        Shalt taxe in person a man, fit to boare
                        Shame, and reproch; his sute shall quickly bee
                        Dissolu'd in laughter, and thou thence sit free.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act IIII.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     CHLOE, CYTHERIS.
                     
                        BVt, sweet ladie, say: am I well inough attir'd for the court, in sadnesse?
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Well inough? excellent well, sweet Mistris CHLOE, this straight-bodied city attire (I can tell you) will stir a courtiers bloud, more, then the finest loose sacks the ladies vse to be put in; and then you are as well iewell'd as any of them, your ruffe, and linnen about you, is much more pure then theirs: And for your beautie, I can tell you, there's many of them would defie the painter, if they could change with you. Mary, the worst is, you must looke to be enuied, and endure a few courtfrumps for it.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        O IOVE, Madam, I shall buy them too cheape! Giue me my muffe, and my dogge there. And will the ladies be any thing familiar with me, thinke you?
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        O IVNO! why, you shall see 'hem flock about you with their puffe wings, and aske you, where you bought your lawne? and what you paid for it? who starches you? and entreat you to helpe 'hem to some pure landresses, out of the citie.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        O CVPID! giue me my fanne, and my masque too: And will the lords, and the poets there, vse one well too, ladie?
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Doubt not of that: you shall haue kisses from them, goe pit-pat, pit-pat, pit-pat, vpon your lips, as thick as stones out of slings, at the assault of a citie. And then your eares will be so furd with the breath of their complements, that you cannot catch cold of your head (if you would) in three winters after.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Thanke you, sweet ladie. O heauen! And how must one behaue her selfe amongst 'hem? you know all.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Faith, impudently inough, mistris CHLOE, and well inough. Carrie not too much vnder-thought betwixt your selfe and them; nor your citie mannerly word (forsooth) vse it not too often in any case; but plaine, I, Madam; and, No, Madam: Nor neuer say, your Lordship, nor your Honor; but, you, and you my Lord, and my Ladie: the other, they count too simple, and minsitiue. And though they desire to kisse heauen with their titles, yet they will count them fooles that giue them too humbly.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        O intolerable, IVPITER! By my troth, ladie, I would not for a world, but you had lyen in my house: and i' faith you shall not pay a

farthing, for your boord, nor your chambers.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        O, sweet Mistresse CHLOE!
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        I faith, you shall not ladie, nay, good ladie, doe not offer it.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene II.
                     COR. GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, CYTHERIS, CHLOE.
                     
                        COme, where be these ladies? By your leaue, bright starres, this gentleman and I are come to man you to court: where your late kind entertainement is now to bee requited with a heauenly banquet.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        A heauenly banquet, Gallus?
                        
                     
                     
                        COR. GALL.
                        No lesse, my deare, CYTHERIS.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        That were not strange, ladie, if the epithete were onely giuen for the companie inuited thither; your selfe, and this faire gentlewoman.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Are we inuited to court, sir?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        You are, ladie, by the great Princesse, IVLIA: who longs to greet you with any fauours, that may worthily make you an often courtier.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        In sinceritie, I thanke her, sir. You haue a coach? ha' you not?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        The Princesse hath sent her owne, ladie.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        O VENVS! that's well: I doe long to ride in a coach most vehemently.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        But, sweet GALLVS, pray you, resolue mee, why you giue that heauenly prayse, to this earthly banquet?
                     
                     
                        COR. GALL.
                        Because (CYTHERIS) it must bee celebrated by the heauenly powers: All the Gods, and Goddesses will bee there; to two of which, you two must be exalted.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        A prettie fiction in truth.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        A fiction indeed, CHLOE, and fit, for the fit of a poet.
                        
                     
                     
                        COR. GALL.
                        Why, CYTHERIS, may not poets (from whose diuine spirits, all the honours of the gods haue beene deduc't) intreate so much honor of the gods, to haue their diuine presence at a poeticall banquet?
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Suppose that no fiction: yet, where are your habilities to make vs two goddesses, at your feast?
                     
                     
                        COR. GALL.
                        Who knowes not (CYTHERIS) that the sacred breath of a true poet, can blow any vertuous humanitie, vp to deitie?
                        
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        To tell you the femall truth (which is the simple truth) ladies; and to shew that poets (in spight of the world) are able to deifie themselues: At this banquet, to which you are inuited, wee intend to assume the figures of the Gods; and to giue our seuerall Loues the formes of Goddesses. OVID will be IVPITER; the Princesse IVLIA, IVNO; GALLVS here APOLLO; you CYTHERIS, PALLAS; I will bee BACCHVS; and my Loue PLAVTIA, CERES: And to install you, and your husband,

faire CHLOE, in honours, equall with ours; you shall be a Goddesse, and your husband a God.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        A God? O my god!
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        A God, but a lame God, ladie: for he shall be VULCAN, and you VENVS. And this will make our banquet no lesse then heauenly.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        In sinceritie, it will bee sugred. Good IOVE, what a prettie foolish thing it is to be a poet! But harke you, sweet CYTHERIS; could they not possibly leaue out my husband? mee thinkes, a bodies husband do's not so well at Court: A bodies friend, or so—but husband, 'tis like your clog to your marmaset, for all the world, and the heauens.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Tut, neuer feare, CHLOE: your husband will be left without in the lobby, or the great chamber, when you shall be put in, i'the closet, by this lord, and by that lady.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Nay, then I am certified: he shall goe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene III.
                     GALLVS, HORACE, TIBVLLVS, ALBIVS, CRISPINVS, TVCCA, DEMETRIVS, CYTHERIS, CHLOE.
                     
                        HORACE! Welcome.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Gentlemen, heare you the newes?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        What newes, my QVINTVS?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Our melancholike friend, PROPERTIVS,
                        Hath clos'd himselfe, vp, in his CYNTHIAS tombe;
                        And will by no intreaties be drawne thence.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Nay, good master CRISPINVS, pray you, bring neere the gentleman.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        CRISPINVS? Hide mee, good GALLVS: TIBVLLVS, shelter mee.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Make your approch, sweet Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        What meanes this, HORACE?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I am surpriz'd againe, farewell.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Stay, HORACE.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        What, and be tir'd on, by yond' vulture? No:
                        PHoe
                              •
                           VS defend me.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        'Slight! I hold my life,
                        This same is he met him in holy street.
                        
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Troth, 'tis like enough. This act of PROPERTIVS relisheth very strange, with me.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        By thy leaue, my neat scoundrell: what, is this the mad boy you talk't on?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I: this is master ALBIVS, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Giue me thy hand, AGAMEMNON; we heare abroad, thou art the HECTOR of citizens: what sayest thou? are we welcome to thee, noble NEOPTOLEMVS?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Welcome, Captaine? by IOVE, and all the Gods i'the capitoll—
                     
                     
                        
                        TVCC.
                        No more, we conceiue thee. Which of these is thy wedlocke, MENELAVS? thy HELLEN? thy LVCRECE? that wee may doe her honor; mad boy?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Shee i'the little fine dressing, sir, is my Mistris.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        For fault of a better, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        A better, prophane rascall? I crie thee mercy (my good scroile) was't thou?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        No harme, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Shee is a VENVS, a VESTA, a MELPOMENE: Come hither, PENELOPE; what's thy name, IRIS?
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        My name is CHLOE, sir; I am a gentlewoman.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Thou art in merit to be an empresse (CHLOE) for an eye, and a lip; thou hast an emperors nose: kisse me againe: 'tis a vertuous punke, So. Before IOVE, the gods were a sort of goslings, when they suffred so sweet a breath, to perfume the bed of a stinkard: thou hadst ill fortune, THISBE; the fates were infatuate; they were, punke; they were.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        That's sure, sir: let me craue your name, I pray you, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I am know'n by the name of Captaine TVCCA, punke; the noble Roman, punke: a gent'man, and a commander, punke.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        In good time: a gentleman, and a commander? that's as good as a poet, me thinkes.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        A prettie instrument! It's my cousin CYTHERIS violl, this: is't not?
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Nay, play cousin, it wants but such a voice, and hand, to grace it, as yours is.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Alas, cousin, you are merrily inspir'd.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        'Pray you play, if you loue me.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yes, cousin: you know, I doe not hate you.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        A most subtill wench! How she hath baited him with a violl yonder, for a song!
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Cousin, 'pray you call mistris CHLOE; shee shall heare an essay of my poetrie.
                        
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I'le call her. Come hither, cockatrice: here's one, will set thee vp, my sweet punke; set thee vp.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Are you a puet, so soone, sir?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Wife: mum.
                        SONG.
                        LOue is blinde, and a wanton;
                        In the whole world, there is scant▪
                        
                        one such another:
                        No, not his Mother.
                        
                        He hath pluckt her doues, and sparrowes,
                        To feather his sharpe arrowes,
                        And alone preuaileth,
                        Whilst sicke VENVS waileth.
                        
                        But if CYPRIS once recouer
                        The wag; it shall behoue her
                        To looke better to him:
                        Or shee will vndoe him.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        O, most odoriferous musicke!
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        A, ha! stinkard. Another ORPHEVS, you slaue, another ORPHEVS! an ARION, riding on the backe of a dolphin, rascall!
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Haue you a copy of this dittie, sir?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Master ALBIVS ha's.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        I, but in truth, they are my wiues verses; I must not shew 'hem.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Shew 'hem, bankerupt, shew 'hem; they haue salt in 'hem, and will brooke the aire, stinkard.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        How? to his bright mistris, CANIDIA?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I, sir, that's but a borrowed name; as OVIDS CORINNA, or PROPERTIVS his CYNTHIA, or your NEMESIS, or DELIA, TIBVLLVS.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        It's the name of HORACE his witch, as I remember.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Why? the ditt'is all borrowed; 'tis HORACES: hang him plagiary.
                        
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        How? he borrow of HORACE? hee shall pawne himselfe to ten brokers, first. Doe you heare, POETASTERS? I know you to be men of worship— He shall write with HORACE, for a talent: and let MECoeNAS, and his whole colledge of criticks take his part: thou shalt do't, young PHOEBVS: thou shalt, PHAETON; thou shalt.
                     
                     
                        DEME.
                        Alas, sir, HORACE! hee is a meere spunge; nothing but humours, and obseruation, he goes vp and downe sucking from euery societie, and when hee comes home, squeazes himselfe drie againe. I know him, I.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Thou saiest true, my poore poeticall Furie, hee will pen all hee knowes. A sharpe thornie-tooth'd satyricall rascall, flie him; hee carries hey in his horne: he wil sooner lose his best friend, then his least iest. What he once drops vpon paper, against a man, liues eternally to vpbraid him in the mouth of euery slaue tankerd-bearer, or water-man; not a bawd, or a boy that comes from the bake-house, but shall point at him: 'tis all dogge, and scorpion; he carries poison in his teeth, and a sting in his taile. Fough, body of IOVE! I'le haue the slaue whipt one of these daies for his satyres, and his humours, by one casheer'd clarke, or another.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Wee'll vnder-take him, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        DEME.
                        I, and tickle him i' faith, for his arrogancie, and his impudence, in commending his owne things; and for his translating: I can trace him i' faith. O, he is the most open fellow, liuing; I had as lieue as a new sute, I were at it.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Say no more then, but doe it; 'tis the only way to get thee a new sute; sting him▪ my little neufts; I'le giue you instructions: I'le bee

your intelligencer, we'll all ioyne, and hang vpon him like so many horse-leaches, the plaiers and all. We shall sup together, soone; and then wee'll conspire, i' faith.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        O, that HORACE had staied still, here.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        So would not I: for both these would haue turn'd Pythagoreans, then.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        What, mute?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        I, as fishes i'faith: come, ladies, shall we goe?
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        We await you, sir. But mistris CHLOE askes, if you haue not a god to spare, for this gentleman.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Who, Captaine TVCCA?
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        I; hee.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Yes, if we can inuite him along, he shall be MARS.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Ha's MARS any thing to doe with VENVS?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        O, most of all, ladie.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Nay, then, I pray let him bee inuited: and what shall CRISPINVS be?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        MERCVRY, mistris CHLOE.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        MERCVRY? that's a Poet? is't?
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        No, ladie; but somewhat inclining that way: hee is a Herald at armes.
                        
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        A Herald at armes? good: and MERCVRY? pretty: hee ha's to doe with VENVS, too?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        A little, with her face, ladie; or so.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        'Tis very well; pray' let's goe, I long to be at it.
                     
                     
                        CYTH.
                        Gentlemen, shall we'pray your companies along?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        You shall not only pray, but preuaile, ladie. Come, sweet Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Yes, I follow: but thou must not talke of this now, my little bankerupt.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Captaine, looke here: mum.
                     
                     
                        DEME.
                        I'le goe write, sir.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Doe, doe, stay: there's a drachme, to purchase ginger-bread, for thy muse.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene IIII.
                     LVPVS, HISTRIO, LICTOR, MINOS, MECoeNAS, HORACE.
                     
                        COme, let vs talke, here; here we may bee priuate: shut the dore,
                     
                     
                        LICTOR.
                        You are a plaier, you say.
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        I, and't please your worship.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Good: and how are you able to giue this intelligence?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Mary, sir, they directed a letter to me, and my fellow-sharers.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Speake lower, you are not now i'your theater, Stager: my

sword, knaue. They directed a letter to you, and your fellow-sharers: forward.
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Yes, sir; to hire some of our properties; as a scepter, and a crowne, for IOVE; and a caduceus for MERCVRY: and a petasus—
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        
                           Caduceus? and petasus? Let me see your letter. This is a coniuration; a conspiracy, this. Quickly, on with my buskins: I'le act a tragoedie, i' faith. Will nothing but our gods serue these poets to prophane? dispatch. Plaier, I thanke thee. The Emperour shall take knowledge of thy good seruice. Who's there now? Looke, knaue. A crowne, and a scepter? this is good: rebellion, now?
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        'Tis your pothecary, sir, master MINOS.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        What tell'st thou me of pothecaries, knaue? Tell him; I haue affaires of state, in hand; I can talke to no pothecaries, now. Heart of me! Stay the pothecary there.
                        You shall see, I haue fish't out a cunning peece of plot now: They haue had some intelligence, that their proiect is discouer'd, and now haue they dealt with my pothecary, to poison me; 'tis so; knowing, that I meant to take physick to day: As sure as death, 'tis there. IVPITER, I thanke thee, that thou hast yet made me so much of a politician. You are welcome, sir; take the potion from him there; I haue an antidote more then you wote off, sir; throw it on the ground there: So. Now fetch in the dogge; And yet we cannot tarrie to trie experiments, now: arrest him, you shall goe with me, sir; I'le tickle you, pothecarie; I'le giue you a glister, i' faith. Haue I the letter? I▪ 'tis here. Come, your fasces, LICTORS: The halfe pikes, and the halberds, take them downe from the lares, there. Plaier, assist me.
                     
                     
                        MECae.
                        Whither now, ASINIVS LVPVS, with this armorie?
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        I cannot talke now; I charge you, assist me: Treason, treason.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        How? treason?
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        I: if you loue the Emperour, and the state, follow me.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene V.
                     OVID, IVLIA, GALLVS, CYTHERIS, TIBVLLVS, PLAVTIA, ALBIVS, CHLOE, TVCCA, CRISPINVS, HERMOGENES, PYRGVS.
                     
                        GOds, and Goddesses, take your seuerall seates. Now, M
                              •
                           RCVRY, moue your caduceus, and in IVPITERS name command silence.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        In the name of IVPITER; silence.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        The cryer of the court hath too clarified a voice.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Peace, Momus.
                        
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Oh, he is the God of reprehension; let him alone. 'Tis his office. MERCVRY, goe forward, and proclaime after PHOEBVS, our high

pleasure, to all the Deities that shall partake this high banquet.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        The great God, IVPITER,
                        Of his licentious goodnesse,
                        Willing to make this feast, no fast
                        From any manner of pleasure;
                        Nor to bind any God or Goddesse,
                        To be any thing the more god or goddess, for their names:
                        He giues them all free licence,
                        To speake no wiser, then persons of baser titles;
                        And to be nothing better▪ then common men, or women.
                        And therefore no God
                        Shall need to keep himselfe more strictly to his Goddesse,
                        Then any man do's to his wife.
                        Nor any Goddesse
                        Shall need to keepe her selfe more strictly to her God,
                        Then any woman do's to her husband.
                        But, since it is no part of wisdome,
                        In these daies, to come into bonds;
                        It shall be lawfull for euery louer,
                        To breake louing oathes,
                        To change their louers, and make loue to others,
                        As the heate of euery ones bloud,
                        And the spirit of our nectar shall inspire.
                        And IVPITER, saue IVPITER.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        The great, &c.
                        Of his, &c.
                        Willing, &c.
                        From any, &c.
                        Nor to, &c.
                        To be, &c.
                        He giues, &c.
                        To speake, &c.
                        And to, &c.
                        And there, &c.
                        Shall need, &c.
                        Then any▪ &c.
                        Nor any, &c.
                        Shall need, &c.
                        Then any, &c.
                        But, since, &c.
                        In these, &c.
                        It shall, &c.
                        To breake, &c.
                        To change, &c.
                        As the, &c.
                        And the, &c.
                        And IVPI. &c.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        So: now we may play the fooles, by authoritie.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        To play the foole by authoritie, is wisdome.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Away with your matterie sentences, Momus; they are too graue, and wise, for this meeting.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        MERCVRY, giue our iester a stoole, let him sit by; and reach him of our cates.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Do'st heare, mad IVPITER? Wee'll haue it enacted; He, that speakes the first wise word, shall be made cuckold. What sai'st thou? Is't not a good motion?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        
                           Deities, are you all agreed?
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        Agreed, great IVPITER.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        I haue read in a booke, that to play the foole wisely, is high wisdome.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        How now, VULCAN! will you be the first wizard?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Take his wife, MARS, and make him cuckold, quickly.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Come, cockatrice.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        No, let me alone with him, IVPITER: I'le make you take heed, sir, while you liue againe; if there be twelue in a companie, that you bee not the wisest of 'hem.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        No more, I will not indeed, wife, hereafter; I'le be here: mum.
                     
                     
                        
                        OVID.
                        Fill vs a bowle of nectar, GANYMEDE: we will drinke to our daughter VENVS.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Looke to your wife, VULCAN: IVPITER begins to court her.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Nay, let MARS looke to it: VULCAN must doe, as VENVS doe's, beare.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Sirrah, boy: catamite. Looke, you play GANYMEDE well now, you slaue. Doe not spill your nectar; Carrie your cup euen: so. You should haue rub'd your face, with whites of egges, you rascall; till your browes had shone like our sooty brothers here, as sleeke as a horn-booke: or ha' steept your lips in wine, till you made 'hem so plump, that IVNO might haue beene iealous of'hem. Punke, kisse me, punke.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Here, daughter VENVS, I drinke to thee.
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        'Thanke you, good father IVPITER.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Why, mother IVNO! gods and fiends! what, wilt thou suffer this ocular temptation?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        MARS is enrag'd, hee lookes bigge, and begins to stut, for anger.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        Well plaid, Captaine MARS.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Well said, minstrell MOMVS: I must put you in? must I? When will you be in good fooling of your selfe, fiddler? neuer?
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        O, 'tis our fashion, to be silent, when there is a better foole in place, euer.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        'Thanke you, rascall.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Fill to our daughter VENVS, GANYMEDE, who fills her father with affection.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Wilt thou be ranging, IVPITER, before my face?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Why not, IVNO? why should IVPITER stand in awe of thy face, IVNO?
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Because it is thy wiues face, IVPITER.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        What, shall a husband be afraid of his wiues face? will shee paint it so horribly? Wee are a King, cot-queane; and we will raigne in our pleasures; and wee will cudgell thee to death, if thou finde fault with vs.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        I will find fault with thee, King cuckold-maker: what, shall the King of gods turne the King of good fellowes, and haue no fellow in wickednesse? This makes our poets, that know our prophanenesse, liue as prophane, as we: By my god-head, IVPITER; I will ioyne with all the other gods, here; bind thee hand and foot; throw thee downe into earth; and make a poore poet of thee, if thou abuse me thus.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        A good smart-tongu'd Goddesse; a right IVNO.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        IVNO, we will cudgell thee, IVNO: we told thee so yesterday, when thou wert iealous of vs, for THETIS.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        Nay, to day shee had me in inquisition too.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Well said, my sine Phrygian frie, informe, informe. Giue mee some wine (King of Heralds) I may drinke to my cockatrice.
                     
                     
                        
                        OVID.
                        No more, GANYMEDE, wee will cudgell thee, IVNO: by S
                              •
                           YX, we will.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        I, 'tis well, Gods may grow impudent in iniquitie, and they must not be told of it—
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Yea, we will knocke our chinne against our brest; and shake thee out of Olympus, into an oyster-bote, for thy scolding.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Your nose is not long enough to doe it, IVPITER, if all thy strumpets, thou hast among the starres, tooke thy part. And there is neuer a starre in thy fore-head, but shall be a horne, if thou persist to abuse me.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        A good iest, i' faith.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        We tell thee, thou anger'st vs, cot-queane; and we will thunder thee in peeces, for thy cot-queanitie.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Another good iest.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        O, my hammers, and my Cyclops! this boy fills not wine enough, to make vs kind enough, to one another.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Nor thou hast not collied thy face enough, stinkard.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        I'le ply the table with nectar, and make them friends.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        Heauen is like to haue but a lame skinker, then.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        "Wine, and good liuers, make true louers: I'le sentence them together. Here father, here mother, for shame, drinke your selues drunke, and forget this dissention: you two should cling together, before our faces, and giue vs example of vnitie.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        O, excellently spoken, VULCAN, on the sodaine!
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        IVPITER, may doe well to preferre his tongue to some office, for his eloquence.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        His tongue shall bee gent'man vsher to his wit, and still goe before it.
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        An excellent fit office!
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I, and an excellent good iest, besides.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        What, haue you hired MERCVRY, to cry your iests you make?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        MOMVS, you are enuious.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Why, you whoreson block-head, 'tis your only blocke of wit in fashion (now adaies) to applaud other folkes iests.
                     
                     
                        HERM.
                        True: with those that are not artificers themselues. VULCAN, you nod; and the mirth of the iest droops.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        He ha's fild nectar so long, till his braine swims in it.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        What, doe we nod, fellow Gods? sound musicke, and let vs startle our spirits with a song.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Doe, APOLLO: thou art a good musician.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        What saies IVPITER?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Ha? ha?
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        A song.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Why, doe, doe, sing.
                     
                     
                        PLAV.
                        BACCHVS, what say you?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        CERES?
                     
                     
                        PLAV.
                        But, to this song?
                     
                     
                        
                        TIBV.
                        Sing, for my part.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Your belly weighes downe your head, BACCHVS: here's a song toward.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Begin, VULCAN—
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        What else? what else?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Say, IVPITER—
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        MERCVRY—
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        I, say, say—
                        SONG.
                        WAke, our mirth begins to die:
                        Quicken it with tunes, and wine:
                        Raise your notes, you're out: fie, fie,
                        This drouzinesse is an ill signe.
                        We banish him the queere of Gods,
                        That droops agen:
                        Then all are men,
                        For here's not one, but nods.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        I like not this sodaine and generall heauinesse, amongst our Godheads: 'Tis somewhat ominous. APOLLO, command vs lowder musicke, and let MERCVRY, and MOMVS contend to please, and reuiue our senses.
                     
                     SONG.
                     
                        
                           HERM.
                        
                        THen, in a free and lofty straine,
                        Our broken tunes we thus repaire;
                     
                     
                        
                           CRIS.
                        
                        And we answere them againe,
                        Running diuision on the panting aire:
                     
                     
                        
                           AMBO.
                        
                        To celebrate this feast of sense,
                        As free from scandall, as offence.
                     
                     
                        
                           HERM.
                        
                        Here is beautie, for the eye;
                     
                     
                        
                           CRIS.
                        
                        For the eare, sweet melodie;
                     
                     
                        
                           HERM.
                        
                        
                           Ambrosiack odours, for the smell;
                     
                     
                        
                           CRIS.
                        
                        Delicious nectar, for the taste;
                     
                     
                        
                           AMBO.
                        
                        For the touch, a ladies waste;
                        Which doth all the rest excell!
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        I: This hath wak't vs. MERCVRY, our Herald; Goe from our selfe, the great God IVPITER, to the great Emperour, AVGVSTVS CAESAR: And command him, from vs (of whose bountie he hath receiued his sir-name, AVGVSTVS) that for a thanke-offring to our beneficence, he presently sacrifice as a dish to this banquet, his beautifull and wanton daughter IVLIA. Shee's a curst queane, tell him; and plaies the scold behind his backe: Therefore, let her be sacrific'd. Command him this, MERCVRY, in our high name of IVPITER ALTITONANS.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Stay, feather-footed MERCVRY, and tell AVGVSTVS, from vs, the great IVNO SATVRNIA; if he thinke it hard to doe, as IVPITER

hath commanded him, and sacrifice his daughter, that hee had better to doe so ten times, then suffer her to loue the well-nos'd poet, OVID: whom he shall doe well to whip, or cause to bee whipt, about the capitoll, for soothing her, in her follies.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VI.
                     CAESAR, MECOENAS, HORACE, LVPVS, HISTRIO, MINOS, LICTORS, OVID, GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, TVCCA, CRISPINVS, ALBIVS, HERMOGENES, PYRGVS, IVLIA, CYTHERIS, PLAVTIA, CHLOE.
                     
                        WHat sight is this? MECOENAS! HORACE! say!
                        Haue we our senses? Doe we heare? and see?
                        Or, are these but imaginarie obiects
                        Drawne by our phantasie? Why speake you not?
                        
                           Let vs doe sacrifice? Are they the Gods?
                        Reuerence, amaze, and furie fight in me.
                        What? doe they kneele? Nay, then I see 'tis true
                        I thought impossible: Ô, impious sight!
                        Let me diuert mine eyes; the very thought
                        Euerts my soule, with passion: looke not, man.
                        There is a panther, whose vnnaturall eyes
                        He offers to kill his daughter.
                        Will strike thee dead: turne then, and die on her
                        With her owne death.
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        HORACE. What meanes imperiall CAESAR?
                     
                     
                        CAESA.
                        What, would you haue me let the strumpet liue,
                        That, for this pageant, earnes so many deathes?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Boy, slinke boy.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        'Pray IVPITER, we be not follow'd by the sent, Master.
                     
                     
                        CAESA.
                        Say, sir, what are you?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        I play VULCAN, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAESA.
                        But, what are you▪ sir?
                     
                     
                        ALBI.
                        Your citizen, and ieweller, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAESA.
                        And what are you, dame?
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        I play VENVS, forsooth.
                     
                     
                        CAESA.
                        I aske not, what you play? but, what you are?
                     
                     
                        CHLO.
                        Your citizen, and iewellers wife, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAESA.
                        And you, good sir?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Your gentleman, parcell-poet, sir.
                     
                     
                        CAESA.
                        O, that prophaned name!
                        And are these seemely companie for thee,
                        Degenerate monster? all the rest I know,
                        
                        And hate all knowledge, for their hatefull sakes.
                        Are you, that first the deities inspir'd
                        With skill of their high natures, and their powers,
                        The first abusers of their vse-full light;
                        Prophaning thus their dignities, in their formes:
                        And making them like you, but counterfeits?
                        O, who shall follow vertue, and embrace her,
                        When her false bosome is found nought but aire?
                        And yet, of those embraces, centaures spring,
                        That warre with humane peace, and poyson men.
                        Who shall, with greater comforts, comprehend
                        Her vnseene being, and her excellence;
                        When you, that teach, and should eternize her,
                        Liue, as shee were no law vnto your liues:
                        Nor liu'd her selfe, but with your idle breaths?
                        If you thinke gods but fain'd, and vertue painted,
                        Know, we sustaine an actuall residence;
                        And, with the title of an Emperour,
                        Retaine his spirit, and imperiall power:
                        By which (in imposition too remisse,
                        Licentious NASO, for thy violent wrong,
                        In soothing the declin'd affections
                        Of our base daughter) we exile thy feete
                        From all approch, to our imperiall court,
                        On paine of death: and thy mis-gotten loue
                        Commit to patronage of iron doores;
                        Since her soft-hearted 
                              •
                           ire cannot containe her.
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        O, good my lord; forgiue: be like the Gods.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Let royall bountie (CAESAR) mediate.
                     
                     
                        CAESA.
                        There is no bountie to be shewed to such,
                        As haue no reall goodnesse: Bountie is
                        A spice of vertue: and what vertuous act
                        Can take effect on them, that haue no power
                        Of equall habitude to apprehend it,
                        But liue in worship of that idoll vice,
                        As if there were no vertue, but in shade
                        Of strong imagination, meerely enforc't?
                        This shewes, their knowledge is meere ignorance;
                        Their farre-fetcht dignitie of soule, a phansy;
                        And all their square pretext of grauitie
                        A meere vaine glorie: hence, away with 'hem.
                        I will preferre for knowledge, none, but such
                        As rule their liues by it, and can becalme
                        All sea of humour, with the marble trident
                        
                        Of their strong spirits: Others fight below
                        With gnats, and shaddowes, others nothing know.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VII.
                     TVCCA, CRISPINVS, PYRGVS, HORACE, MECoeNAS, LVPVS, HISTRIO.
                     
                        WHat's become of my little punke, VENVS! and the poult-foot stinkard, her husband? ha?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O, they are rid home i' the coach, as fast as the wheeles can runne.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        God IVPITER is banisht, I heare: and his cockatrice, IVNO, lockt vp: 'Hart; and and all the poetrie in Parnassus get me to bee a player againe, I'le sell 'hem my share for a sesterce. But this is humours, HORACE, that goat-footed enuious slaue; hee's turn'd fawne now, an informer, the rogue: 'tis hee has betraid vs all. Did you not see him, with the Emperour, crouching?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Well, follow me. Thou shalt libell, and I'le cudgell the rascall. Boy, prouide me a truncheon; Reuenge shall gratulate him, tam MARTI, quàm MERCVRIO.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        I, but Master; take heed how you giue this out, HORACE is a man of the sword.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        'Tis true, in troth: they say, he's valiant.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Valiant? so is mine arse, gods, and fiends! I'le blow him into aire, when I meet him next: He dares not fight with a puck-fist.
                     
                     
                        PYRG.
                        Horace passes by.
                        Master, here he comes.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Where? IVPITER saue thee, my good poet; my noble prophet; my little fat HORACE. I scorne to beate the rogue i' the court; and I saluted him, thus faire, because hee should suspect nothing, the rascall: Come, wee'll goe see how forward our iourney-man is toward the vntrussing of him.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Doe you heare, Captaine? I'le write nothing in it but innocence: because I may sweare I am innocent.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Nay, why pursue you not the Emperor for your reward, now, LVPVS?
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        Stay, ASINIVS; you, and your stager, and your band of LICTORS:
                        I hope your seruice merits more respect,
                        Then thus, without a thankes, to be sent hence?
                     
                     
                        HIST.
                        Well, well, iest on, iest on.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Thou base vnworthy groome.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        I, I, 'tis good.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Was this the treason? this, the dangerous plot,
                        Thy clamorous tongue so bellowed through the court?
                        Hadst thou no other proiect to encrease
                        Thy grace with CAESAR, but this woluish traine;
                        
                        To prey vpon the life of innocent mirth,
                        And harmelesse pleasures, bred, of noble wit?
                        Away, I lothe thy presence: such as thou,
                        They are the moths, and scarabes of a state;
                        The bane of empires; and the dregs of courts;
                        Who (to endeare themselues to any 'employment)
                        Care not, whose fame they blast; whose life they endanger:
                        And vnder a disguis'd, and cob-web masque
                        Of loue, vnto their soueraigne, vomit forth
                        Their owne prodigious malice; and pretending
                        To be the props, and columnes of his safety,
                        The guards vnto his person, and his peace,
                        Disturbe it most, with their false lapwing-cries.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Good. CAESAR shall know of this; beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        CAESAR doth know it (wolfe) and to his knowledge,
                        Hee will (I hope) reward your base endeuours.
                        "Princes that will but heare, or giue accesse
                        "To such officious spies, can ne're be safe:
                        "They take in poyson, with an open care,
                        "And, free from danger, become slaues to feare.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VIII.
                     OVID.
                     
                        BAnisht the court? Let me be banisht life;
                        Since the chiefe end of life is there concluded:
                        Within the court, is all the kingdome bounded,
                        And as her sacred spheare doth comprehend
                        Ten thousand times so much, as so much place
                        In any part of all the empire else;
                        So euery body, moouing in her spheare,
                        Containes ten thousand times as much in him,
                        As any other, her choice orbe excludes.
                        As in a circle, a magician, then
                        Is safe, against the spirit, he excites;
                        But out of it, is subiect to his rage,
                        And loseth all the vertue of his arte:
                        So I, exil'd the circle of the court,
                        Lose all the good gifts, that in it I ioy'd.
                        "No vertue currant is, but with her stamp:
                        "And no vice vicious, blaunch't with her white hand.
                        The court's the abstract of all Romes desert;
                        And my deare IVLIA, th'abstract of the court.
                        
                        Meethinkes, now I come neere her, I respire
                        Some aire of that late comfort, I receiu'd:
                        And while the euening, with her modest vaile,
                        Giues leaue to such poore shaddowes as my selfe,
                        To steale abroad, I, like a heart-lesse ghost,
                        Without the liuing body of my loue,
                        Will here walke, and attend her. For I know,
                        Not farre from hence, shee is imprisoned,
                        And hopes, of her strict guardian, to bribe
                        So much admittance, as to speake to me,
                        And cheere my fainting spirits, with her breath.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene IX.
                     IVLIA,  OVID.
                     Shee appeareth aboue, as at her chamber window.
                     
                        OVID? my loue?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Here, heauenly IVLIA.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Here? and not here? O, how that word doth play
                        With both our fortunes, differing, like our selues,
                        Both one; and yet diuided, as oppos'd?
                        I high, thou low? Ô, this our plight of place
                        Doubly presents the two lets of our loue,
                        Locall, and ceremoniall height, and lownesse:
                        Both waies, I am too high, and thou too low.
                        Our mindes are euen, yet: Ô, why should our bodies,
                        That are their slaues, be so without their rule?
                        I'le cast my selfe downe to thee; If I die,
                        I'le euer liue with thee: no height of birth,
                        Of place, of dutie, or of cruell power,
                        Shall keepe mee from thee; should my father locke
                        This body vp within a tombe of brasse,
                        Yet I'le be with thee. If the formes, I hold
                        Now in my soule, be made one substance with it;
                        That soule immortall; and the same 'tis now;
                        Death cannot raze th'affects, shee now retayneth:
                        And then, may shee be any where shee will.
                        The soules of parents rule not childrens soules,
                        When death sets both in their dissolu'd estates;
                        Then is no child, nor father: then eternitie
                        Frees all, from any temporall respect.
                        I come, my OVID, take me in thine armes:
                        And let me breathe my soule into thy brest.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        O, stay, my loue: the hopes thou do'st conceiue
                        Of thy quicke death, and of thy future life,
                        Are not autenticall. Thou choosest death,
                        
                        So thou might'st ioy thy loue, in th'other life.
                        But know (my princely loue) when thou art dead,
                        Thou onely must suruiue in perfect soule;
                        And in the soule, are no affections:
                        We powre out our affections with our bloud;
                        And with our blouds affections, fade our loues.
                        "No life hath loue in such sweet state, as this;
                        "No essence is so deare to moodie sense,
                        "As flesh, and bloud; whose quintessence is sense.
                        "Beautie, compos'd of bloud, and flesh, moues more,
                        "And is more plausible to bloud, and flesh,
                        "Then spirituall beautie can be to the spirit.
                        Such apprehension, as we haue in dreames
                        (When sleepe, the bond of senses, locks them vp)
                        Such shall we haue, when death destroies them quite.
                        If loue be then thy obiect, change not life;
                        Liue high, and happy still: I still below,
                        Close with my fortunes, in thy height, shall ioy.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Ay me, that vertue, whose braue eagles wings
                        With euery stroke, blow starres, in burning heauen;
                        Should like a swallow (preying toward stormes)
                        Fly close to earth: and with an eager plume,
                        Pursue those obiects, which none else can see,
                        But seeme to all the world, the emptie aire.
                        Thus thou (poore OVID) and all vertuous men
                        Must prey like swallowes, on inuisible foode;
                        Pursuing flies, or nothing: and thus loue,
                        And euery worldly phansie, is transpos'd,
                        By worldly tyrannie, to what plight it list.
                        O, father, since thou gau'st me not my mind,
                        Striue not to rule it: Take, but what thou gau'st
                        To thy disposure. Thy affections
                        Rule not in me; I must beare all my griefes,
                        Let me vse all my pleasures: vertuous loue
                        Was neuer scandall to a Goddesse state.
                        But, hee's inflexible! and, my deare loue,
                        Thy life may chance be shortned, by the length
                        Of my vnwilling speeches to depart.
                        Farewell, sweet life: though thou be yet exil'd
                        Th'officious court, enioy me amply, still:
                        My soule, in this my breath, enters thine eares,
                        And on this turrets floore, will I lie dead,
                        Till we may meet againe. In this proud height,
                        I kneele beneath thee, in my prostrate loue,
                        And kisse the happy sands, that kisse thy feet.
                        
                        "Great IOVE submits a scepter, to a cell;
                        "And louers, ere they part, will meet in hell.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Farewell, all companie; and if I could
                        All light with thee: hells shade should hide my browes,
                        Till thy deare beauties beames redeem'd my vowes.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Shee calls him backe.
                        OVID, my loue: alas, may we not stay
                        A little longer (think'st thou) vndiscern'd?
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        For thine owne good, faire Goddesse, doe not stay:
                        Who would ingage a firmament of fires,
                        Shining in thee, for me, a falling starre?
                        Be gone, sweet life-bloud: if I should discerne
                        Thy selfe but toucht, for my sake, I should die.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        I will be gone, then; and not heauen it selfe
                        He calls her backe.
                        Shall draw me backe. 
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Yet IVLIA, if thou wilt,
                        A little longer, stay.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        I am content.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        O, mightie OVID! what the sway of heauen
                        Could not retire, my breath hath turned back.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Who shall goe first, my loue? my passionate eyes
                        Will not endure to see thee turne from mee.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        If thou goe first, my soule will follow thee.
                     
                     
                        IVLI.
                        Then we must stay.
                     
                     
                        OVID.
                        Ay me, there is no stay
                        In amorous pleasures: if both stay, both die.
                        I heare thy father, hence, my deitie.
                        
                        Feare forgeth sounds in my deluded eares;
                        I did not heare him: I am mad with loue.
                        There is no spirit, vnder heauen, that workes
                        With such illusion: yet such witchcraft kill mee,
                        Ere a sound mind, without it, saue my life.
                        Here, on my knees, I worship the blest place
                        That held my goddesse; and the louing aire,
                        That clos'd her body in his silken armes:
                        Vaine OVID! kneele not to the place, nor aire;
                        Shee's in thy heart: rise then, and worship there▪
                        
                        "The truest wisdome silly men can haue,
                        "Is dotage, on the follies of their flesh.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act V.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     CAESAR, MECOENAS, GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, HORACE, EQVITES RO.
                     
                        WE, that haue conquer'd still, to saue the conquer'd,
                        And lou'd to make inflictions feard, not felt;
                        Grieu'd to reproue, and ioyfull to reward,
                        More proud of reconcilement, then reuenge,
                        
                        Resume into the late state of our loue,
                        Worthy CORNELIVS GALLVS, and TIBVLLVS:
                        You both are gentlemen, you, CORNELIVS,
                        A souldier of renowne; and the first prouost,
                        That euer let our Roman eagles flie
                        On swarthy Aegypt, quarried with her spoiles.
                        Yet (not to beare cold formes, nor mens out-termes,
                        Without the inward fires, and liues of men)
                        You both haue vertues, shining through your shapes;
                        To shew, your titles are not writ on posts,
                        Or hollow statues, which the best men are,
                        Without Promethean stuffings reacht from heauen!
                        Sweet poesies sacred garlands crowne your gentrie:
                        Which is, of all the faculties on earth,
                        The most abstract, and perfect; if shee bee
                        True borne, and nurst with all the sciences.
                        Shee can so mould Rome, and her monuments,
                        Within the liquid marble of her lines,
                        That they shall stand fresh, and miraculous,
                        Euen, when they mixe with innouating dust;
                        In her sweet streames shall our braue Roman spirits
                        Chace, and swim after death, with their choise deeds
                        Shining on their white shoulders; and therein
                        Shall Tyber, and our famous riuers fall
                        With such attraction, that th'ambitious line
                        Of the round world shall to her center shrinke,
                        To heare their musicke: And, for these high parts,
                        CAESAR shall reuerence the Pierian artes.
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        Your Maiesties high grace to poesie,
                        Shall stand 'gainst all the dull detractions
                        Of leaden soules; who (for the vaine assumings
                        Of some, quite worthlesse of her soueraigne wreaths)
                        Containe her worthiest prophets in contempt.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Happy is Rome of all earths other states,
                        To haue so true, and great a president,
                        For her inferiour spirits to imitate,
                        As CAESAR is; who addeth to the sunne,
                        Influence, and lustre: in encreasing thus
                        His inspirations, kindling fire in vs.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        PHOEBVS himselfe shall kneele at CAESARS shrine,
                        And deck it with bay-garlands dew'd with wine,
                        To quite the worship CAESAR does to him:
                        Where other Princes, hoisted to their thrones
                        By fortunes passionate and disordered power,
                        Sit in their height, like clouds, before the sunne,
                        
                        Hindring his comforts; and (by their excesse
                        Of cold in vertue, and crosse heate in vice)
                        Thunder, and tempest, on those learned heads,
                        Whom CAESAR with such honour doth aduance.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        All humane businesse fortune doth command
                        Without all order; and with her blinde hand,
                        Shee, blinde, bestowes blinde gifts: that still haue nurst
                        They see not who, nor how, but still, the worst.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        CAESAR, for his rule, and for so much stuffe
                        As fortune puts in his hand, shall dispose it
                        (As if his hand had eyes, and soule, in it)
                        With worth and iudgement. "Hands, that part with gifts,
                        "Or will restraine their vse, without desert;
                        "Or with a miserie, numm'd to vertues right,
                        "Worke, as they had no soule to gouerne them,
                        "And quite reiect her: seu'ring their estates
                        "From humane order. Whosoeuer can,
                        "And will not cherish vertue, is no man.
                     
                     
                        EQVES.
                        VIRGIL is now at hand, imperiall CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        
                           Romes honour is at hand then. Fetch a chaire,
                        And set it on our right hand; where 'tis fit.
                        
                           Romes honour, and our owne, should euer sit.
                        Now he is come out of Campania,
                        I doubt not, he hath finisht all his Aeneids,
                        Which, like another soule, I long t'enioy.
                        What thinke Viz. Mecoenas, Gallus, Tibullus
                            you three, of VIRGIL, gentlemen,
                        (That are of his profession, though rankt higher)
                        Or HORACE, what saist thou, that art the poorest,
                        And like liest to enuy, or to detract?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        CAESAR speakes after common men, in this,
                        To make a difference of me, for my poorenesse:
                        As if the filth of pouertie sunke as deepe
                        Into a knowing spirit, as the bane
                        Of riches doth, into an ignorant soule.
                        No, CAESAR, they be path-lesse, moorish minds,
                        That being once made rotten with the dung
                        Of damned riches, euer after sinke
                        Beneath the steps of any villanie.
                        But knowledge is the nectar, that keepes sweet
                        A perfect soule, euen in this graue of sinne;
                        And for my soule, it is as free, as CAESARS:
                        For, what I know is due, I'le giue to all.
                        "He that detracts, or enuies vertuous merit,
                        "Is still the couetous, and the ignorant spirit.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Thankes, HORACE, for thy free, and holsome sharpnesse:
                        
                        Which pleaseth CAESAR more, then seruile fawnes.
                        "A flatterd prince soone turnes the prince of fooles.
                        And for thy sake, wee'll put no difference more
                        Betweene the great, and good, for being poore.
                        Say then, lou'd HORACE, thy true thought of VIRGIL.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I iudge him of a rectified spirit,
                        By many reuolutions of discourse
                        (In his bright reasons influence) refin'd
                        From all the tartarous moodes of common men;
                        Bearing the nature, and similitude
                        Of a right heauenly bodie: most seuere
                        In fashion, and collection of himselfe,
                        And then as cleare, and confident, as IOVE.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        And yet so chaste, and tender is his eare▪
                        
                        In suffering any syllable to passe,
                        That, he thinkes, may become the honour'd name
                        Of issue to his so examin'd selfe;
                        That all the lasting fruits of his full merit
                        In his owne poemes, he doth still distaste:
                        As if his mindes peece, which he stroue to paint,
                        Could not with fleshly pencils haue her right.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        But, to approue his workes of soueraigne worth,
                        This obseruation (me thinkes) more then serues:
                        And is not vulgar. That, which he hath writ,
                        Is with such iudgement, labour'd, and distill'd
                        Through all the needfull vses of our liues,
                        That could a man remember but his lines,
                        He should not touch at any serious point,
                        But he might breathe his spirit out of him.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        You meane, he might repeat part of his workes,
                        As fit for any conference, he can vse?
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        True, royall CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Worthily obseru'd:
                        And a most worthie vertue in his workes.
                        What thinks materiall HORACE, of his learning?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        His learning labours not the schoole-like glosse,
                        That most consists in ecchoing wordes, and termes,
                        And soonest wins a man an empty name;
                        Nor any long, or far-fetcht circumstance,
                        Wrapt in the curious generalties of artes:
                        But a direct, and analyticke summe
                        Of all the worth and first effects of artes.
                        And for his poesie, 'tis so ramm'd with life,
                        That it shall gather strength of life, with being,
                        And liue hereafter, more admir'd, then now.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        This one consent, in all your doomes of him,
                        
                        And mutuall loues of all your seuerall merits,
                        Argues a trueth of merit in you all.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene II.
                     CAESAR, VIRGIL, MECOENAS, GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, HORACE, EQVITES RO.
                     
                        SEe, here comes VIRGIL; we will rise and greet him:
                        Welcome to CAESAR, VIRGIL. CAESAR, and VIRGIL
                        Shall differ but in sound; to CAESAR, VIRGIL
                        (Of his expressed greatnesse) shall be made
                        A second sur-name, and to VIRGIL, CAESAR.
                        Where are thy famous Aeneids? doe vs grace
                        To let vs see, and surfet on their sight.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Worthlesse they are of CAESARS gracious eyes,
                        If they were perfect; much more with their wants:
                        Which yet are more, then my time could supply.
                        And, could great CAESARS expectation
                        Be satisfied with any other seruice,
                        I would not shew them.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        VIRGIL is too modest;
                        Or seekes, in vaine, to make our longings more.
                        Shew them, sweet VIRGIL.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Then, in such due feare,
                        As fits presenters of great workes, to CAESAR,
                        I humbly shew them.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Let vs now behold
                        A humane soule made visible in life;
                        And more refulgent in a senselesse paper,
                        Then in the sensuall complement of Kings.
                        Read, read, thy selfe, deare VIRGIL, let not me
                        Prophane one accent, with an vntun'd tongue:
                        "Best matter, badly showne, shewes worse, then bad.
                        See then, this chaire, or purpose set for thee
                        To reade thy poeme in: refuse it not.
                        "Vertue, without presumption, place may take
                        "Aboue best Kings, whom onely she should make.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        It will be thought a thing ridiculous
                        To present eyes, and to all future times
                        A grosse vntruth; that any poet (void
                        Of birth, or wealth, or temporall dignity)
                        Should, with decorum, transcend CAESARS chaire.
                        "Poore vertue rais'd, high birth and wealth set vnder,
                        "Crosseth heau'ns courses, and makes worldlings wonder.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        The course of heauen, and fate it selfe, in this
                        Will CAESAR crosse; much more all worldly custome.
                     
                     
                        
                        HORA.
                        "Custome, in course of honour, euer erres:
                        "And they are best, whom fortune least preferres.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        HORACE hath (but more strictly) spoke our thoughts.
                        The vast rude swinge of generall confluence
                        Is, in particular ends, exempt from sense:
                        And therefore reason (which in right should be
                        The speciall rector of all harmonie)
                        Shall shew we are a man, distinct by it,
                        From those, whom custome rapteth in her preasse.
                        Ascend then, VIRGIL: and where first by chance
                        We here haue turn'd thy booke, doe thou first reade.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Great CAESAR hath his will: I will ascend.
                        'Twere simple iniurie to his free hand,
                        That sweepes the cobwebs, from vn-vsed vertue,
                        And makes her shine proportion'd, to her worth.
                        To be more nice to entertaine his grace;
                        Then he is choise and liberall to afford it.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Gentlemen of our chamber, guard the doores,
                        And let none enter, peace. Begin, good VIRGIL.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        
                           
                              Virg. lib. 4. Aeneid.
                            Meane while, the skies 'gan thunder; and in taile
                        Of that, fell powring stormes of sleet, and haile:
                        The Tyrian lords, and Troian youth, each where
                        With VENVS Dardane 
                           
                              Iulus.
                            nephew, now, in feare
                        Seeke out for seuerall shelter through the plaine;
                        Whil'st flouds come rowling from the hills amaine.
                        
                           DIDO a caue, The Troian 
                           
                              Aeneas.
                            Prince the same
                        Lighted vpon. There, earth, and heauens great 
                              Iuno.
                            
                           dame,
                        That hath the charge of marriage, first gaue signe
                        Vnto this contract; fire, and aire did shine,
                        As guiltie of the match; and from the hill
                        The nymphs, with shreekings, doe the region fill.
                        Here first began their bane; This day was ground
                        Of all their ills: For now, nor rumours sound,
                        Nor nice respect of state mooues DIDO ought;
                        Her loue, no longer now, by stealth is sought:
                        Shee calls this wedlocke, and with that faire name
                        Couers her fault. Forth-with the bruit, and fame,
                        Through all the greatest Lybian townes, is gone;
                        Fame, a fleet euill, then which is swifter none:
                        That mouing growes, and flying gathers strength;
                        Little at first, and fearefull; but at length
                        Shee dares attempt the skies, and stalking proud
                        With feet on ground, her head doth pierce a cloud!
                        This child, our parent earth, stird vp with spight
                        Of all the gods, brought forth; and, as some wright,
                        
                        Shee was last sister of that Giant Coeus, Enceladus, &c. race,
                        That thought to scale IOVES court; right swift of pase,
                        And swifter, far, of wing: a monster vast,
                        And dreadfull. Looke, how many plumes are plac't
                        On her huge corps, so many waking eyes
                        Sticke vnderneath: and (which may stranger rise
                        In the report) as many tongues shee beares,
                        As many mouthes, as many listning eares.
                        Nightly, in midst of all the heauen, shee flies,
                        And through the earths darke shaddow, shreeking, cries;
                        Nor doe her eyes once bend, to taste sweet sleepe:
                        By day, on tops of houses, shee doth keepe,
                        Or on high towers; and doth thence affright
                        Cities, and townes of most conspicuous site.
                        As couetous shee is of tales, and lies,
                        As prodigall of truth: This monster, &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene III.
                     LVPVS, TVCCA, CRISPINVS, DEMETRIVS, HISTRIO, LICTORS, CAESAR, VIRGIL, MECOENAS, GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, HORACE, EQVITES RO.
                     
                        COme, follow me, assist me, second me: where's the Emperour?
                     
                     
                        EQVES 1.
                        Sir, you must pardon vs.
                     
                     
                        EQVES 2.
                        CAESAR is priuate now, you may not enter.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Not enter? Charge 'hem, vpon their allegeance, crop-shin.
                     
                     
                        EQVES 1.
                        We haue a charge to the contrary, sir.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        I pronounce you all traytors, horrible traytors:
                        What? doe you know my affaires?
                        I haue matter of danger, and state, to impart to CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        What noise is there? who's that names CAESAR?
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        A friend to CAESAR. One that for CAESARS good, would speake with CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Who is't? looke, CORNELIVS.
                     
                     
                        EQVES 1.
                        ASINIVS LVPVS.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        O, bid the turbulent informer hence;
                        We haue no vacant eare, now, to receiue
                        The vnseason'd fruits of his officious tongue.
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        You must auoid him there.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        I coniure thee, as thou art CAESAR, or respect'st thine owne safetie; or the safetie of the state, CAESAR: Heare mee, speake with mee,

CAESAR; 'tis no common businesse, I come about; but such as, being neglected, may concerne the life of CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        The life of CAESAR? Let him enter. VIRGIL, keepe thy seat.
                     
                     
                        EQVITES.
                        Beare backe there: whither will you? keepe backe.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        By thy leaue good man vsher: mend thy perruke, so.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Lay hold on HORACE there; and on MECOENAS, LICTORS. Romans, offer no reseue, vpon your allegeance: Reade, royall CAESAR; I'le tickle you, Satyre.
                        
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        He will, humours, he will: He will squeeze you, Poet puckfist.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        I'le lop you off, for an vnprofitable branch, you satyricall varlet.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I, and EPAMINONDAS your patron, here, with his flaggon chaine; Come, resigne: Though 'twere your great grand-fathers, the law ha's made it mine now, sir. Looke to him, my party-colour'd rascalls; looke to him.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        What is this, ASINIVS LVPVS? I vnderstand it not.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Not vnderstand it? A libell, CAESAR. A dangerous, seditious libell. A libell in picture.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        A libell?
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        I, I found it in this HORACE his studie, in MECOENAS his house, here; I challenge the penaltie of the lawes against 'hem.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I, and remember to begge their land betimes; before some of these hungrie court-hounds sent it out.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Shew it to HORACE: Aske him, if he know it.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Know it? His hand is at it, CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Then 'tis no libell.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        It is the imperfect body of an embleme, CAESAR, I began for MECOENAS.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        An embleme? right: That's greeke for a libell.
                        Doe but marke, how confident he is.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        A iust man cannot feare, thou foolish Tribune;
                        Not, though the malice of traducing tongues,
                        The open vastnesse of a tyrannes eare,
                        The senselesse rigour of the wrested lawes,
                        Or the red eyes of strain'd authoritie
                        Should, in a point, meet all to take his life.
                        His innocence is armour 'gainst all these.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Innocence? Ô, impudence! Let mee see, let mee see. Is not here an Eagle? And is not that Eagle meant by CAESAR? ha? Do's not CAESAR giue the eagle? Answere me; what saist thou?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Hast thou any euasion, stinkard?
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Now hee's turn'd dumbe. I'le tickle you, Satyre.
                        
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Pish. Ha, ha.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        Dost thou pish me? Giue me my long-sword.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        With reuerence to great CAESAR, worthy Romans,
                        
                        Obserue but this ridiculous commenter:
                        The soule to my deuice, was in this distich.
                        
                        Thus, oft, the base and rauenous multitude
                        Suruiue, to share the spoiles of fortitude.
                        Which in this body, I haue figur'd here,
                        A VULTVRE —
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        A Vulture? I; now, 'tis a Vulture. O, abominable! monstrous monstrous! ha's not your Vulture a beake? ha's it not legges? and tallons? and wings? and feathers?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Touch him, old Buskins.
                        
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        And therefore must it be an Eagle?
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        Respect him not, good HORACE: Say your deuice.
                        
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        A VULTVRE, and a WOLFE —
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        A Wolfe? good. That's I; I am the wolfe. My name's LVPVS, I am meant by the wolfe. On, on, a Vulture, and a Wolfe —
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Preying vpon the carcasse of an ASSE —
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        An Asse? Good still: That's I, too. I am the asse.
                        You meane me by the asse—
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        'Pray thee, leaue braying then.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        If you will needes take it, I cannot with modestie giue it from you.
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        But, by that beast, the old Aegyptians
                        
                        Were wont to figure in their hieroglyphicks,
                        Patience, frugalitie, and fortitude;
                        For none of which, we can suspect you, Tribune.
                        
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Who was it, LVPVS, that inform'd you first,
                        This should be meant by vs? or was't your comment?
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        No, CAESAR: A player gaue mee the first light of it, indeede.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I, an honest sycophant-like slaue, and a politician, besides.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Where is that player?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        He is without, here.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Call him in.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Call in the player, there: Master AESOPE, call him.
                     
                     
                        EQVITES.
                        Player? where is the player? Beare backe: None, but the player, enter.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Yes: this gent'man, and his Achates must.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        'Pray you, master vsher; wee'll stand close, here.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        'Tis a gent'man of qualitie, this; though he be somewhat out of clothes, I tell yee. Come AESOPE: hast a bay-leafe i' thy mouth? Well said, be not out, stinkard. Thou shalt haue a monopoly of playing, confirm'd to thee and thy couey, vnder the Emperours broad seale, for this seruice.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Is this hee?
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        I, CAESAR: this is hee.
                     
                     
                        
                        CAES.
                        Let him be whipt. LICTORS, goe take him hence.
                        And LVPVS, for your fierce credulitie,
                        One fit him with a paire of larger eares:
                        'Tis CAESARS doome, and must not be reuok't.
                        We hate, to haue our court, and peace disturb'd
                        With these quotidian clamours. See it done.
                     
                     
                        LVPV.
                        CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Gag him, we may haue his silence.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        CAESAR hath done like CAESAR. Faire, and iust
                        Is his award, against these brainelesse creatures.
                        'Tis not the wholesome sharpe moralitie,
                        Or modest anger of a satyricke spirit,
                        That hurts, or wounds the bodie of a state;
                        But the sinister application
                        Of the malicious, ignorant, and base
                        Interpreter: who will distort, and straine
                        The generall scope and purpose of an authour,
                        To his particular, and priuate spleene.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        We know it, our deare VIRGIL, and esteeme it
                        A most dishonest practice, in that man,
                        Will seeme too wittie in anothers worke.
                        This while the rest whisper Casar.
                        What would CORNELIVS GALLVS, and TIBVLLVS?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Nay, but as thou art a man, do'st heare? a man of worship; and honourable: Holde, here, take thy chaine againe. Resume, mad MECoeNAS. What? do'st thou thinke, I meant t' haue kept it, bold boy? No; I did it but to fright thee, I, to try how thou would'st take it. What? will I turne sharke, vpon my friends? or my friends friends? I scorne it with my three soules. Come, I loue bully HORACE, as well as thou do'st, I: 'tis an honest hieroglyphick. Giue mee thy wrist, Helicon. Do'st thou thinke, I'le second e're a rhinoceros of them all, against thee? ha? or thy noble Hippocrene, here? I'le turne stager first, and be whipt too: do'st thou see, bully?
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        You haue your will of CAESAR: vse it Romanes.
                        
                        VIRGIL shall be your Praetor; and our selfe
                        Will here sit by, spectator of your sports;
                        And thinke it no impeach of royaltie.
                        Our eare is now too much prophan'd (graue MARO)
                        With these distastes, to take thy sacred lines:
                        Put vp thy booke, till both the time and wee
                        Be sitted with more hallowed circumstance
                        For the receiuing so diuine a worke.
                        Proceede with your desseigne.
                     
                     
                        MECoe. GALL. TIBV.
                        Thankes, to great CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        TIBVLLVS, draw you the inditement then, whil'st HORACE arrests them, on the statute of Calumny: MECOENAS, and I, will take our places here. Lictors, assist him.
                     
                     
                        
                        HORA.
                        I am the worst accuser, vnder heauen.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Tut, you must do't: 'Twill be noble mirth.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I take no knowledge, that they doe maligne me.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        I, but the world takes knowledge.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        'Would the world knew,
                        How heartily I wish, a foole should hate me.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Body of IVPITER! What? Will they arraigne my briske POETASTER, and his poore iourney-man, ha? Would I were abroad skeldring for a drachme, so I were out of this labyrinth againe: I doe feele my selfe turne stinkard, already. But I must set the best face I haue, vpon't now: well said, my diuine, deft HORACE, bring the whorson detracting slaues to the barre, doe. Make 'hem hold vp their spread golls: I'le giue in euidence for thee, if thou wilt. Take courage, CRISPINVS, would thy man had a cleane band.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        What must we doe, Captaine?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Thou shalt see anon: Doe not make diuision with thy legs, so.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        What's he, HORACE?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I only know him for a motion, CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I am one of thy Commanders, CAESAR; A man of seruice, and action; My name is PANTILIVS TVCCA: I haue seru'd i' thy warres against MARK ANTONY, I.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Doe you know him, CORNELIVS?
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Hee's one, that hath had the mustring, or conuoy of a companie, now, and then: I neuer noted him by any other imployment.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        We will obserue him better.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        LICTOR, proclaime silence, in the court.
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        In the name of CAESAR, silence.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Let the parties, the accuser, and the accused, present themselues.
                     
                     
                        LICT.
                        The accuser, and the accused; present your selues in court.
                     
                     
                        CRIS. DEMETRIVS.
                        Here.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Reade the inditement.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIVS FANIVS, hold vp your hands. You are, before this time, ioyntly and seuerally indited, and here presently to be arraigned, vpon the Statute of Calumny, or Lex Remmia (The one by the name of RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, aliàs CRISPINAS, Poetaster, and plagiary: the other, by the name of DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, play-dresser, and plagiary) That you (not hauing the feare of PHOEBVS, or his shafts, before your eyes) contrary to the peace of our liege lord, AVGVSTVS CAESAR, his crowne and dignitie, and against the forme of a Statute, in that case made, and prouided; haue most ignorantly, foolishly, and (more like your selues) maliciously, gone about to depraue, and calumniate the person and writings of QVINTVS HORACIVS FLACCVS, here present, poet, and priest to the Muses: and to that end haue mutually conspir'd, and plotted, at sundry times, as by seuerall meanes, and in sundry places, for the

better accomplishing your base and enuious purpose; taxing him, falsly, of selfe-loue, arrogancy, impudence, rayling, filching by translation, &c. Of all which calumnies, and euery of them, in manner and forme aforesaid, what answere you? Are you guiltie, or not guiltie?
                        
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Not guiltie, say.
                     
                     
                        CRIS. DEMET.
                        Not guiltie.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        How will you be tryed?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        By the Romane Gods, and the noblest Romanes.
                        
                     
                     
                        CRIS. DEMET.
                        By the Romane Gods, and the noblest Romanes.
                        
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Here sits MECOENAS, and CORNELIVS GALLVS:
                        Are you contented to be tryed by these?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I, so the noble Captaine may bee ioyn'd with them in commission, say.
                     
                     
                        CRIS. DEMET.
                        I, so the noble Captaine may bee ioyn'd with them in commission.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        What sayes the plaintife?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I am content.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Captaine, then take your place.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Alas, my worshipfull Praetor! 'tis more of thy gent'nesse, then of my deseruing, I wusse. But, since it hath pleas'd the court to make choice of my wisdome, and grauitie, come, my calumnious varlets: Let's heare you talke for your selues, now, an houre or two. What can you say? Make a noise. Act, act.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Stay, turne, and take an oath first. You shall sweare,
                        By thunder-darting IOVE, the King of gods,
                        And by the Genius of AVGVSTVS CAESAR;
                        
                        By your owne white, and vncorrupted soules;
                        And the deepe reuerence of our Romane iustice;
                        To iudge this case, with truth and equitie:
                        As bound by your religion, and your lawes.
                        Now reade the euidence: But first demand
                        Of either prisoner, if that writ be theirs.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Shew this vnto CRISPINVS. Is it yours?
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Say I: what? dost thou stand vpon it, pimpe? Doe not denie thine owne MINERVA, thy PALLAS, the issue of thy braine.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Yes, it is mine.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Shew that vnto DEMETRIVS. Is it yours?
                     
                     
                        DEME.
                        It is.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        There's a father, will not denie his owne bastard, now, I warrant thee.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Reade them aloud.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Rampe vp, my genius; be not retrograde:
                        But boldly nominate a spade, a spade.
                        What, shall thy lubricall and glibberie Muse
                        
                        Liue, as shee were defunct, like punke in stewes?
                        (Tvcc. Excellent!)
                        
                        Alas! That were no moderne consequence,
                        To haue cotburnall buskins frighted hence.
                        No, teach thy incubus to poetize;
                        And throw abroad thy spurious snotteries,
                        Vpon that puft-vp lumpe of barmy froth,
                        (TVCCA. Ah, ha!)
                        Or clumsie chil-blain'd indgement: that, with oath,
                        Magnificates his merit; and bespawles
                        The conscious time, with humorous fome, and brawles,
                        As if his organons of sense would crack
                        The sinewes of my patience. Breake his back,
                        O Poets all, and some: For now we list
                        Of strenuous venge-ance to clutch the fist.
                     
                     Subscri. CRIS.
                     
                        TVCC.
                        I mary, this was written like a HERCVLES in poetrie, now.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Excellently well threatned!
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        I, and as strangely worded, CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        We obserue it.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        The other, now.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        This's a fellow of a good prodigall tongue too, this'll doe wel.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Our Muse is in mind for th'vntrussing a poet,
                        I slip by his name; for most men doe know it:
                        A critick, that all the world be scumbers
                        With satyricall humours, and lyricall numbers.
                        (TVCC. Art thou there, boy?)
                        And for the most part, himselfe doth aduance
                        With much selfe-loue, and more arrogance.
                        (TVCC. Good againe.)
                        And (but that I would not be thought a prater)
                        I could tell you, he were a translater.
                        I know the authors from whence he ha's stole,
                        And could trace him too, but that I vnderstand 'hem not full and whole.
                        (TVCC. That line is broke loose from all his fellowes: chaine him vp shorter, doe.)
                        The best note I can giue you to know him by,
                        Is, that he keepes gallants company;
                        Whom I would wish, in time should him feare,
                        Lest after they buy repentance too deare.
                     
                     Subscri. DEME. FAN.
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Well said. This carries palme with it.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        And why, thou motly gull? why should they feare?
                        When hast thou knowne vs wrong, or taxe a friend?
                        I dare malice, to betray it. Speake.
                        Now thou curl'st vp, thou poore, and nasty snake,
                        
                        And shrink'st thy poys'nous head into thy bosome:
                        Out viper, thou that eat'st thy parents, hence.
                        Rather, such speckled creatures, as thy selfe,
                        Should be eschew'd, and shund: such, as will bite
                        And gnaw their absent friends, not cure their fame,
                        Catch at the loosest laughters, and affect
                        To be thought iesters, such, as can deuise
                        Things neuer seene, or heard, t'impaire mens names,
                        And gratifie their credulous aduersaries,
                        Will carrie tales, doe basest offices,
                        Cherish diuided fires, and still increase
                        New flames, out of old embers, will reueale
                        Each secret that's committed to their trust,
                        These be black slaues: Romans, take heed of these.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Thou twang'st right, little HORACE, they be indeed:
                        A couple of chap-falne curres. Come, We of the bench,
                        Let's rise to the vrne, and condemne 'hem, quickly.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Before you goe together (worthy Romans)
                        We are to tender our opinion;
                        And giue you those instructions, that may adde
                        Vnto your euen iudgement in the cause:
                        Which thus we doe commence. First you must know
                        That where there is a true and perfect merit,
                        There can bee no deiection; and the scorne
                        Of humble basenesse, oftentimes, so workes
                        In a high soule vpon the grosser spirit,
                        That to his bleared, and offended sense,
                        There seemes a hideous fault blaz'd in the obiect;
                        When only the disease in his eyes.
                        Here-hence it comes, our HORACE now stands taxt
                        Of impudence, selfe-loue, and arrogance,
                        By these, who share no merit in themselues;
                        And therefore, thinke his portion is as small.
                        For they, from their owne guilt, assure their soules,
                        If they should confidently praise their workes,
                        In them it would appeare inflation:
                        Which, in a full, and wel-digested man,
                        Cannot receiue that foule abusiue name,
                        But the faire title of erection.
                        And, for his true vse of translating men,
                        It still hath bin a worke of as much palme
                        In cleerest iudgements, as t'inuent, or make.
                        His sharpenesse, that is most excusable;
                        As being forc't out of a suffering vertue,
                        Oppressed with the licence of the time:
                        
                        And howsoeuer fooles, or ierking pedants,
                        Players, or such like buffon, barking wits,
                        May with their beggerly, and barren trash,
                        Tickle base vulgar eares, in their despight;
                        This (like IOVES thunder) shall their pride controule,
                        "The honest Satyre hath the happiest soule.
                        Now, Romans, you haue heard our thoughts, With-draw, when you please.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Remoue the accused from the barre.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Who holds the vrne to vs? ha? Feare nothing: I'le quit you, mine honest pittifull stinkards. I'le do't.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Captaine, you shall eternally girt me to you, as I am generous.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Goe to.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        TIBVLLVS, let there be a case of vizards priuately prouided: we haue found a subiect to bestow them on.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        It shall be done, CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Here be wordes, HORACE, able to bastinado a mans eares.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I. Please it great CAESAR, I haue pills about me
                        (Mixt with the whitest kind of ellebore)
                        Would giue him a light vomit; that should purge
                        His braine, and stomack of those tumorous heates:
                        Might I haue leaue to minister vnto him.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        O! be his AESCVLAPIVS, gentle HORACE;
                        You shall haue leaue, and he shall be your patient.
                        VIRGIL, vse your authoritie, command him forth.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        CAESAR is carefull of your health, CRISPINVS;
                        And hath himselfe chose a physitian
                        To minister vnto you: take his pills.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        They are somewhat bitter, sir, but very wholsome;
                        Take yet another, so: Stand by, they'll worke anon.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        
                           Romans, returne to your seuerall seates: Lictors, bring forward the vrne; and set the accused at the barre.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Quickly, you whorson egregious varlets; Come forward. What? shall we sit all day vpon you? you make no more haste, now, then a begger vpon pattins: or a physitian to a patient that has no money, you pilchers.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, hold vp your hands. You haue (according to the Roman custome) put your selues vpon triall to the vrne, for diuers and sundrie calumnies, whereof, you haue before this time beene indited, and are now presently arraigned: Prepare your selues to 
                                 •
                              arken to the verdict of your Tryers. CAIVS CILNIVS MECOENAS pronounceth you, by this hand-writing, Guiltie. CORNELIVS GALLVS, Guiltie. PANTILIVS TVCCA—
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Parcell-guiltie, I.
                     
                     
                        DEME.
                        He meanes himselfe for it was he indeed,
                        Suborn'd vs to the calumnie.
                     
                     
                        
                        TVCC.
                        I, you whorson cantharides? was't I?
                     
                     
                        DEME.
                        I appeale to your conscience, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Then, you confesse it, now.
                     
                     
                        DEME.
                        I doe, and craue the mercy of the court.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        What saith CRISPINVS?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O, the Captaine, the Captaine—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        My physicke begins to worke with my patient, I see.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Captaine, stand forth and answere.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Hold thy peace, Poet Praetor: I appeale from thee, to CAESAR,
                        I. Doe me right, royall CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Mary, and I will, sir. Lictors, gag him: doe.
                        And put a case of vizards o're his head,
                        That he may looke bi-fronted, as he speakes.
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        Gods, and fiends! CAESAR! thou wilt not, CAESAR? wilt thou? Away, you whorson vultures; away. You thinke I am a dead corps now, because CAESAR is dispos'd to iest with a man of marke, or so. Hold your hook't talons out of my flesh, you inhumane Harpies. Goe to, do't. What? will the royall AVGVSTVS cast away a gent'man of worship, a Captaine, and a Commander, for a couple of condemn'd caitiue calumnious Cargo's?
                        
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Dispatch, Lictors.
                        
                     
                     
                        TVCC.
                        CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Forward, TIBVLLVS.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Demand, what cause they had to maligne HORACE.
                     
                     
                        DEME.
                        In troth, no great cause, not I; I must confesse: but that hee kept better company (for the most part) then I: and that better men lou'd him, then lou'd me: and that his writings thriu'd better then mine, and were better lik't, and grac't: nothing else.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Thus, enuious soules repine at others good.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        If this be all; faith, I forgiue thee freely.
                        Enuy me still, so long as VIRGIL loues me,
                        GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, and the best-best CAESAR,
                        My deare MECOENAS: while these, with many more
                        (Whose names I wisely slip) shall thinke me worthy
                        Their honour'd, and ador'd societie,
                        And reade, and loue, proue, and applaud my poemes;
                        I would not wish but such as you should spight them.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        How now, CRISPINVS?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O, I am sicke—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        A bason, a bason, quickly; our physick works. Faint not, man.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—retrograde—reciprocal—Incubus.
                        
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        What's that, HORACE?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        
                           Retrograde, and reciprocall Incubus are come vp.
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Thankes be to IVPITER.
                     
                     
                        
                        CRIS.
                        O—glibbery—lubricall—defunct—Ô—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Well said: here's some store.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        What are they?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        
                           Glibbery, lubricall, and defunct.
                        
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        O, they came vp easie.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—Ô—
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        What's that?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Nothing, yet.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Magnificate.
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        
                           Magnificate? that came vp somewhat hard.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        I. What cheere, CRISPINVS?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O, I shall cast vp my—spurious—snotteries—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Good. Againe.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Chilblaind—Ô—Ô—clumsie
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        That clumsie stucke terribly.
                     
                     
                        MECoe.
                        What's all that, HORACE?
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Spurious snotteries, chilblain'd, clumsie.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        O IVPITER!
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        Who would haue thought, there should ha' beene such a deale of filth in a poet?
                        
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—barmy froth—
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        What's that?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        —Puffy—inflate—turgidous—ventositous.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        
                           Barmy froth, puffy, inflate, turgidous, and ventositous are come vp.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        O, terrible, windie wordes!
                     
                     
                        GALL.
                        A signe of a windie braine.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—oblatrant—furibund—fatuate—strenuous—
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Here's a deale: oblatrant, furibund, fatuate, strenuous.
                        
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        Now, all's come vp, I trow. What a tumult hee had in his belly!
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        No: there's the often conscious dampe behind, still.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—conscious—dampe.
                        
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        It's come vp, thankes to APOLLO, and AESCVLAPIVS:
                        Yet, there's another; you were best take a pill more?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O, no: Ô—Ô—Ô—Ô.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Force your selfe then, a little with your finger.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—Ô—prorumped.
                        
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        
                           Prorumped? What a noise it made! as if his spirit would haue prorumpt with it.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—Ô—Ô.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Helpe him: it stickes strangely, what euer it is.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—clutcht.
                        
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Now it's come: clutcht.
                        
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        
                           Clutcht? It's well, that's come vp! It had but a narrow passage.
                     
                     
                        
                        CRIS.
                        O—
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        Againe, hold him: hold his head there.
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Snarling gusts—quaking custard.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        How now, CRISPINVS?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        O—obstupefact.
                        
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Nay: that are all we, I assure you.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        How doe you feele your selfe?
                     
                     
                        CRIS.
                        Pretty, and well, I thanke you.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        These pills can but restore him for a time;
                        Not cure him quite of such a maladie,
                        Caught by so many surfets; which haue fill'd
                        His bloud, and braine, thus full of crudities:
                        'Tis necessary, therefore, he obserue
                        A strict and holsome dyet. Looke, you take
                        Each morning, of old CATOES principles
                        A good draught, next your heart; that walke vpon,
                        Till it be well digested: Then come home,
                        And taste a piece of TERENCE, sucke his phrase
                        In stead of lycorice; and, at any hand,
                        Shun PLAVTVS, and old ENNIVS, they are meates
                        Too harsh for a weake stomacke. Vse to reade
                        (But not without a tutor) the best Greekes:
                        
                        As ORPHEVS, MVSAEVS, PINDARVS,
                        HESIOD, CALLIMACHVS, and THEOCRITE,
                        High HOMER, but beware of LYCOPHRON:
                        He is too darke, and dangerous a dish.
                        You must not hunt for wild, out-landish termes,
                        To stuffe out a peculiar dialect;
                        But let your matter runne before your words:
                        
                        And if, at any time, you chaunce to meet
                        Some Gallo-belgick phrase, you shall not straight
                        Racke your poore verse to giue it entertainement;
                        But let it passe: and doe not thinke your selfe
                        Much damnified, if you doe leaue it out;
                        When, nor your vnderstanding, nor the sense
                        Could well receiue it. This faire abstinence,
                        In time, will render you more sound, and cleere;
                        And this haue I prescrib'd to you, in place
                        Of a strict sentence: which till he performe,
                        Attire him in that robe. And hence-forth, learne
                        To beare your selfe more humbly; not to swell,
                        Or breathe your insolent, and idle spight,
                        On him, whose laughter, can your worst affright.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        Take him away. CRIS. IVPITER guard CAE
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        And, for a weeke, or two, see him lockt vp
                        
                        In some darke place, remoou'd from companie:
                        He will talke idly else after his physicke.
                        Now, to you, sir. Th'extremitie of law
                        Awards you to be branded in the front,
                        For this your calumny; But, since it pleaseth
                        HORACE (the partie wrong'd) t'intreat, of CAESAR,
                        A mitigation of that iuster doome;
                        With CAESARS tongue, thus we pronounce your sentence.
                        DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, thou shalt here put on
                        That coate, and cap; and henceforth, thinke thy selfe
                        No other, then they make thee: vow to weare them
                        In euery faire, and generous assembly,
                        Till the best sort of minds shall take to knowledge
                        As well thy satisfaction, as thy wrongs.
                     
                     
                        HORA.
                        Only (graue Praetor) here, in open court,
                        I craue the oath, for good behauiour,
                        May be administred vnto them both.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        HORACE, it shall: TIBVLLVS, giue it them.
                     
                     
                        TIBV.
                        RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, Lay your hands on your hearts. You shall here solemnely attest, and sweare; That neuer (after this instant) either, at Booke-sellers stalls, in tauernes, two-penny roomes, 'tyring-houses, noble-mens buttries, puisne's chambers (the best, and farthest places, where you are admitted to come) you shall once offer, or dare (thereby to endeare your selfe the more to any player, enghle, or guiltie gull, in your companie) to maligne, traduce, or detract the person, or writings of QVINTVS HORACIVS FLACCVS; or any other eminent man, transcending you in merit, whom your enuy shall find cause to worke vpon, either, for that, or for keeping himselfe in better acquaintance, or enioying better friends: Or if (transported by any sodaine and desperate resolution) you doe; That then, you shall not vnder the bastoun, or in the next presence, being an honorable assembly of his fauourers, bee brought as voluntary gent. to vndertake the for-swearing of it. Neither shall you at any time (ambitiously, affecting the title of the vntrussers, or whippers of the age) suffer the itch of writing to ouer-run your performance in libell; vpon paine of being taken vp for lepers in wit, and (losing both your time, and your papers) bee irrecouerably forfeited to the hospitall of Fooles. So helpe you our Roman gods, and the Genius of great CAESAR.
                     
                     
                        VIRG.
                        So: now dissolue the court.
                     
                     
                        HORA. TIBV. GALL. MECOE. VIRG.
                        And thankes to CAESAR,
                        That thus hath exercis'd his patience.
                     
                     
                        CAES.
                        We haue, indeed, you worthiest friends of CAESAR.
                        It is the bane, and torment of our eares,
                        To heare the discords of those iangling rimers,
                        That, with their bad and scandalous practices,
                        Bring all true arts, and learning in contempt.
                        
                        But let not your high thoughts descend so low,
                        As these despised obiects; Let them fall,
                        With their flat groueling soules: Be you your selues.
                        And as with our best fauours you stand crown'd:
                        So let your mutuall loues be still renown'd.
                        Enuy will dwell, where there is want of merit,
                        Though the deseruing man should cracke his spirit.
                        SONG.
                        BLush, folly, blush: here's none that feares
                        The wagging of an asses eares,
                        Although a wooluish case he weares.
                        Detraction is but basenesse varlet;
                        And apes are apes, though cloth'd in scarlet.
                     
                  
                  THE END.
                  
                     Rumpatur, quisquis rumpitur inuidia.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  TO THE READER.
                  IF, by looking on what is past, thou hast deseru'd that name, I am willing thou should'st yet know more, by that which followes; an apologeticall Dialogue: which was only once spoken vpon the stage, and all the answere I euer gaue, to sundry impotent libells then cast out (and some yet remayning) against me, and this Play. Wherein I take no pleasure to reuiue the times, but that Posteritie may make a difference, betweene their manners that prouok'd me then, and mine that neglected them euer. For, in these strifes, and on such persons, were as wretched to affect a victorie, as it is vnhappy to be committed with them. Non annorum canicies est laudanda, sed morum.
                  
                  
                     The Persons.
                     NASVTVS, POLYPOSVS, AVTHOR.
                     
                        I Pray you let's goe see him, how he lookes
                        After these libells.
                     
                     
                        POLY.
                        O, vex'd, vex'd, I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        NASV.
                        Doe you thinke so? I should be sorry for him,
                        If I found that.
                     
                     
                        POLY.
                        O, they are such bitter things,
                        
                        He cannot choose.
                     
                     
                        NAS.
                        But, is he guilty of 'hem?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Fuh! that's no matter.
                     
                     
                        NAS.
                        No?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        No. Here's his lodging;
                        Wee'll steale vpon him: or, let's listen, stay.
                        He has a humor oft t' talke t' himselfe.
                     
                     
                        NAS.
                        They are your manners lead me, not mine owne.
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        The Fates haue not spun him the coursest thred
                        That (free from knots of perturbation)
                        Doth yet so liue, although but to himselfe,
                        As he can safely scorne the tongues of slaues;
                        And neglect Fortune, more then she can him.
                        It is the happiest thing, this not to be
                        Within the reach of malice; It prouides
                        A man so well, to laugh of iniuries:
                        And neuer sends him farder for his vengeance
                        Then the vex'd bosome of his enemy.
                        I, now, but thinke, how poore their spight sets off,
                        Who, after all their waste of sulphurous tearmes,
                        And burst-out thunder of their charged mouthes,
                        Haue nothing left, but the vnsau'ry smoake
                        Of their blacke vomit, to vpbrayd themselues:
                        Whilst I, at whom they shot, sit here shot-free,
                        And as vn-hurt of enuy, as vnhit.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I, but the Multitude, they thinke not so, sir,
                        They thinke you hit, and hurt: and dare giue out
                        Your silence argues it, in not reioyning
                        To this, or that late libell?
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        'Lasse, good rout!
                        I can affoord them leaue, to erre so still:
                        And, like the barking students of Beares-Colledge,
                        To swallow vp the garbadge of the time
                        With greedy gullets, whilst my selfe sit by
                        Pleas'd, and yet tortur'd, with their beastly feeding.
                        'Tis a sweet madnesse runnes along with them,
                        To thinke, all that are aym'd at, still are strooke:
                        Then, where the shaft still lights, make that the marke,
                        And so, each feare, or feauer-shaken foole
                        May challenge TEVCERS hand in archery.
                        Good troth, if I knew any man so vile,
                        To act the crimes, these whippers reprehend,
                        Or what their seruile apes gesticulate,
                        I should not then much muse, their shreds were lik'd;
                        Since ill men haue a lust t' heare others sinnes,
                        And good men haue a zeale to heare sinne sham'd.
                        But when it is all excrement, they vent,
                        Base filth, and offall: or thefts, notable
                        As Ocean pyracies, or high-way stands:
                        And not a crime there tax'd, but is their owne,
                        
                        Or what their owne foule thoughts suggested to them,
                        And, that in all their hea
                              •
                            of taxing others,
                        Not one of them, but liues himselfe (if knowne)
                        Improbior satyram scribente cinaedo.
                        What should I say, more? then turne stone with wonder!
                     
                     
                        NAS.
                        I neuer saw this play bred all this tumult.
                        What was there in it could so deeply offend?
                        And stirre so many hornets?
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        Shall I tell you?
                     
                     
                        NAS.
                        Yes, and ingenuously.
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        Then, by the hope,
                        Which I preferre vnto all other obiects,
                        I can professe, I neuer writ that peece
                        More innocent, or empty of offence.
                        Some salt it had, but neyther tooth, nor gall,
                        Nor was there in it any circumstance,
                        Which, in the setting downe, I could suspect
                        Might be peruerted by an enemies tongue.
                        Onely, it had the fault to be call'd mine.
                        That was the crime.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        No? why they, say you tax'd
                        The Law, and Lawyers; Captaines; and the Players
                        By their particular names.
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        It is not so.
                        I vs'd no name. My Bookes haue still beene taught
                        To spare the persons, and to speake the vices.
                        These are meere slanders, and enforc'd by such
                        As haue no safer wayes to mens disgraces,
                        But their owne lyes, and losse of honesty.
                        Fellowes of practis'd, and most laxatiue tongues,
                        Whose empty and eager bellies, i' the yeere,
                        Compell their braynes to many desp'rate shifts,
                        (I spare to name 'hem: for, their wretchednesse,
                        Fury it selfe would pardon.) These, or such
                        Whether of malice, or of ignorance,
                        Or itch, t'haue me their aduersary (I know not)
                        Or all these mixt; but sure I am, three yeeres,
                        They did prouoke me with their petulant stiles
                        On euery stage: And I at last, vnwilling,
                        But weary, I confesse, of so much trouble,
                        Thought, I would try, if shame could winne vpon 'hem.
                        And therefore chose AVGVSTVS CAESARS times,
                        When wit, and artes were at their height in Rome,
                        To shew that VIRGIL, HORACE, and the rest
                        Of those great master-spirits did not want
                        Detractors, then, or practisers against them:
                        And by this line (although no paralel)
                        I hop'd at last they would sit downe, and blush.
                        But nothing could I sinde more contrary.
                        And though the impudence of flyes be great,
                        Yet this hath so prouok'd the angry waspes,
                        
                        Or as you sayd, of the next nest, the hornets;
                        That they fly buzzing, mad, about my nostrills:
                        And like so many screaming grasse-hoppers,
                        Held by the wings, fill euery eare with noyse.
                        And what? those former calumnies you mention'd.
                        First, of the Law. Indeed, I brought in OVID,
                        Chid by his angry father, for neglecting
                        The study of their lawes, for poetry:
                        And I am warranted by his owne words.
                        Sape pater dixit,
Trist. lib. 4. Eleg. 10.
                            studium quid invtile tentas?
                        Maeonides nullas ipse reliquit opes.
                        And in farre harsher termes elsewhere, as these:
                        Non me verbosas leges ediscere,
Amo. lib. 1. Eleg. 15.
                            non me
                        Ingrato voces prostituisse foro.
                        But how this should relate, vnto our lawes,
                        Or their iust ministers, with least abuse,
                        I reuerence both too much, to vnderstand!
                        Then, for the Captaine; I will onely speake
                        An Epigramme I here haue made: It is
                        
                           Vnto true Souldiers. That's the lemma. Marke it.
                        Strength of my Countrey, whilst I bring to view
                        Such as are misse-call'd Captaines, and wrong you,
                        And your high names; I doe desire, that thence,
                        Be nor put on you, nor you take offence:
                        I sweare by your true friend, my Muse, I loue
                        Your great profession, which I once did proue;
                        And did not shame it with my actions, then,
                        No more then I dare, now, doe with my pen.
                        He that not trusts me, hauing vow'd thus much,
                        But's angry for the Captaine, still▪ is such.
                        Now, for the Players, it is true, I tax'd 'hem,
                        And yet, but some; and those so sparingly,
                        As all the rest might haue sate still, vnquestion'd,
                        Had they but had the wit, or conscience,
                        To thinke well of themselues. But, impotent they
                        Thought each mans vice belong'd to their whole tribe:
                        And much good doo't 'hem. What th' haue done 'gainst me,
                        I am not mou'd with. If it gaue 'hem meat,
                        Or got 'hem clothes. 'Tis well. That was their end.
                        Onely amongst them, I am sorry for
                        Some better natures, by the rest so drawne,
                        To run in that vile line.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        And is this all?
                        Will you not answere then the libells?
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        No.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Nor the vntrussers?
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        Neither.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Y'are vndone then.
                     
                     
                        AV.
                        With whom?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        The world.
                     
                     
                        AV.
                        The baud
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Po.
                        It wil be taken
                        To be stupidity, or tamenesse in you.
                     
                     
                        
                        AVT.
                        But, they that haue incens'd me, can in soule
                        Acquit me of that guilt. They know, I dare
                        To spurne, or ba
                              •
                           full 'hem; or squirt their eyes
                        With inke, or vrine: or I could doe worse,
                        Arm'd with ARCHILOCHVS fury, write Iambicks,
                        Should make the desperate lashers hang themselues.
                        Rime 'hem to death, as they doe Irish rats
                        In drumming tunes. Or, liuing, I could stampe
                        Their foreheads with those deepe, and publike brands
                        That the whole company of Barber-Surgeons
                        
                        Should not take off, with all their art, and playsters.
                        And these my prints should last, still to be read
                        In their pale fronts: when, what they write 'gainst me,
                        Shall like a figure, drawne in water, fleete,
                        And the poore wretched papers be employed
                        To cloth tabacco, or some cheaper drug.
                        This I could doe, and make them infamous.
                        But, to what end? when their owne deedes haue mark'd 'hem,
                        And, that I know, within his guilty brest
                        Each slanderer beares a whip, that shall torment him,
                        Worse, then a million of these temporall plagues:
                        Which to pursue, were but a feminine humour,
                        And, farre beneath the dignitie of a man.
                     
                     
                        NAS.
                        'Tis true: for to reuenge their iniuries,
                        Were to confesse you felt 'hem. Let 'hem goe,
                        And vse the treasure of the foole, their tongues,
                        Who makes his gayne, by speaking worst, of best.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        O, but they lay particular imputations—
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        As what?
                     
                     
                        PO.
                        That all your writing, is meere rayling.
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        Ha! If all the salt in the old comoedy
                        
                        Should be so censur'd, or the sharper wit
                        Of the bold satyre, termed scolding rage,
                        What age could then compare with those, for buffo
                              •
                           s?
                        VVhat should be sayd of ARISTOPHANES?
                        PERSIVS? or IUVENAL? whose names we now
                        So glorifie in schooles, at least pretend it.
                        Ha' they no other?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Yes: they say you are slow,
                        And scarse bring forth a play a yeere.
                     
                     
                        AVT.
                        'Tis true.
                        I would, they could not say that I did that,
                        There's all the ioy that I take i' their trade,
                        Vnlesse such Scribes as they might be proscrib'd
                        Th' abused theaters. They would thinke it strange, now,
                        A man should take but colts-foote, for one day,
                        And, betweene whiles, spit out a better poeme
                        
                        Then e're the master of art, or giuer of wit,
                        Their belly made. Yet, this is possible,
                        
                        If a free minde had but the patience,
                        To thinke so much, together, and so vile.
                        But, that these base, and beggerly conceipts
                        Should carry it, by the multitude of voices,
                        Against the most abstracted worke, oppos'd
                        To the stuff'd nostrills of the drunken rout!
                        O, this would make a learn'd, and liberall soule,
                        To riue his stayned quill, vp to the back,
                        And damne his long-watch'd labours to the fire;
                        Things, that were borne, when none but the still night,
                        And his dumbe candle saw his pinching throes:
                        Were not his owne free merit a more crowne
                        Vnto his trauailes, then their reeling claps.
                        This 'tis, that strikes me silent, seales my lips,
                        And apts me, rather to sleepe out my time,
                        Then I would waste it in contemned strifes,
                        With these vile Ibides, these vncleane birds,
                        That make their mouthes their clysters, and still purge
                        From their hot entrailes. But, I leaue the monsters
                        To their owne fate. And, since the Comick MVSE
                        Hath prou'd so ominous to me, I will trie
                        If Tragoedie haue a more kind aspect.
                        Her fauours in my next I will pursue,
                        Where, if I proue the pleasure but of one,
                        So he iudicious be; He shall b' alone
                        A Theatre vnto me: Once, I'le say,
                        To strike the eare of time, in those fresh straines,
                        As shall, beside the cunning of their ground,
                        Giue cause to some of wonder, some despight,
                        And vnto more, despaire, to imitate their sound.
                        I, that spend halfe my nights, and all my dayes,
                        Here in a cell, to get a darke, pale face,
                        To come forth worth the iuy, or the bayes,
                        And in this age can hope no other grace—
                        Leaue me. There's something come into my thought,
                        That must, and shall be sung, high, and aloofe,
                        Safe from the wolues black iaw, and the dull asses hoofe.
                     
                     
                        NASV.
                        I reuerence these raptures, and obey 'hem.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  This Comicall Satyre vvas first acted, in the yeere 1601.
                  By the then Children of Queene ELIZABETHS Chappell.
                  The principall Comoedians were,

                        NAT. FIELD.
                        SAL. PAVY.
                        THO. DAY.
                        IOH. VNDERWOOD.
                        WILL. OSTLER.
                        THO. MARTON.
                     
                  
                  
                     With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  SEIANVS his FALL. A Tragoedie. Acted, in the yeere 1603. By the K. MAIESTIES SERVANTS.
                  The Author B. I.
                  
                     MART.
                     Non hîc Centauros, non Gorgonas, Harpyias
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                     
                     Inuenies: Hominem pagmanostra sapit.
                  
                  LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY,
                  M. DC. XVI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE NO LESSE NOBLE, BY VERTVE, THEN BLOVD: Esme L. AVBIGNY.
                  
                     
                        MY LORD,
                     
                  
                  
                     IF euer any ruine were so great, as to suruiue; I thinke this be one I send you: the Fal of Seianus. It is a poeme, that (if I well remember) in your Lo. sight, suffer'd no lesse violence from our people here, then the subiect of it did from the rage of the people of Rome; but, with a different fate, as (I hope) merit: For this hath out-liu'd their malice, and begot it selfe a greater fauour then he lost, the loue of good men. Amongst whom, if I make your Lo. the first it thankes, it is not without a iust confession of the bond your benefits haue, and euer shall hold vpon me.
                  
                     
                        Your Lo. most faithfull honorer, BEN. IONSON.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Argument.
                  
                     AELius Seianus, sonne to Seius Strabo, a gentleman of Rome, and borne at Vulsinium, after his long seruice in court: first, vnder Augustus, afterward, Tiberius: grew into that fauour with the latter, and won him by those artes, as there wanted nothing, but the name, to make him a copartner of the Empire. Which greatnesse of his, Drusus, the Emperors sonne not brooking, after many smother'd dislikes, it one day breaking out, the Prince strooke him publikely on the face. To reuenge which disgrace, Liuia, the wife of Drusus (being before corrupted by him to her dishonour, and the discouery of her husbands councells) Seianus practiseth with, together with her Physitian, called Eudemus, and on
                        •
                      
                     Lygdus, an Eunuch, to poyson Drusus. This their inhumane act hauing successefull, and vnsuspected passage, it emboldeneth Seianus to farther, & more insolent proiects, euen the ambition of the Empire: where finding the lets, he must encounter, to be many, & hard, in respect of the issue of Germanicus (who were next in hope for the succession) he deuiseth to make Tiberius selfe, his meanes: & instill's into his eares many doubts, and suspicions, both against the Princes, and their mother Agrippina: which Caesar iealously hearkning to, as couetously consenteth to their ruine, and their friends. In this time, the better to mature and strengthen his designe, he labours to marry Liuia, and worketh (with all his ingine) to remoue Tiberius from the knowledge of publike businesse, with allurements of a quiet and retyred life: the latter of which, Tiberius (out of a pronenesse to lust, and a desire to hide those vnnaturall pleasures, which he could not so publikely practise) embraceth: the former inkindleth his feares, and there giues him first cause of doubt, or suspect toward Seianus. Against whom, he raiseth (in priuate) a new instrument, one Sertorius Macro, and by him vnder-worketh, discouers the others counsells, his meanes, his ends, sounds the affections of the Senators, diuides, distracts them: at last, when Seianus least looketh, and is most secure (with pretext of doing him an vn-wonted honour in the Senate) he traines him from his guardes, with one letter, and in one day, hath him suspected, accused, condemned, and torne in pieces, by the rage of the people,
               
               
                  
                  The Persons of the Play.
                  
                     TIBERIVS.
                     DRVSVS se.
                     
                     NERO.
                     DRVSVS iu.
                     
                     CALIGVLA.
                     ARRVNTIVS.
                     SILIVS.
                     SABINVS.
                     LEPIDVS.
                     CORDVS.
                     GALLVS.
                     REGVLVS.
                     TERENTIVS.
                     LACO.
                     EVDEMVS.
                     RVFVS.
                     SEIANVS.
                     LATIARIS.
                     VARRO.
                     MACRO.
                     COTTA.
                     AFER.
                     HATERIVS.
                     SANQVINIVS.
                     POMPONIVS.
                     POSTHVMVS.
                     TRIO.
                     MINVTIVS.
                     SATRIVS.
                     NATTA.
                     OPSIVS.
                  
                  
                     TRIBVNI.
                     AGRIPPINA.

                           LIVIA.
                           SOSIA.
                        
                     
                     PRAECONES.
                     FLAMEN.
                     TVBICINES.
                     NVNTIVS.
                     LICTORES.
                     MINISTRI.
                     TIBI
                           •
                        INES.
                     SERVVS.
                  
                  
                     THE SCENE.
                  
                  ROME.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  SEIANVS. Act. I.
                  SABINVS, SILIVS, NATTA, LATIARIS, CORDVS, SATRIVS, ARRVNTIVS, EVDEMVS, HATERIVS, &c.
                  
                     
                        HAile, CAIVS SILIVS.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     TITIVS SABINVS, Haile.
                     Yo'are rarely met in court!
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Therefore, well met.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     'Tis true: Indeed, this place is not our sphaere.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     No, SILIVS, wee are no good inginers;
                     We want the fine arts, & their thriuing vse,
                     Should make vs grac'd, or fauour'd of the times:
                     We haue no shift of faces, no cleft tongues,
                     No soft, and glutinous bodies, that can sticke,
                     Like snailes, on painted walls; or, on our brests,
                     Creepe vp, to fall, from that proud height, to which
                     We did by slauerie, not by seruice, clime.
                     We are no guilty men, and then no great;
                     We haue nor place in court, office in state,
                     That we can say, we owe vnto our crimes:
                     We burne with no black secrets, which can make
                     Vs deare to the pale authors; or liue fear'd
                     Of their still waking iealosies, to raise
                     Our selues a fortune, by subuerting theirs.
                     We stand not in the lines, that doe aduance
                     To that so courted point.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     But yonder leane
                     A paire that doe.
(SAB. Good cousin LATIARIS.)
                     
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     SATRIVS SECVNDVS, and PINNARIVS NATTA,
                     The great SEIANVS clients: There be two,
                     
                     Know more, then honest councells: whose close brests
                     Were they rip'd vp to light, it would be found
                     A poore, and idle sinne, to which their trunkes
                     Had not beene made fit organs. These can lye,
                     Flatter, and sweare, forsweare, depraue, informe,
                     Smile, and betray; make guilty men; then beg
                     The forfeit liues, to get the liuings; cut
                     Mens throates with whisprings; sell to gaping sutors
                     The emptie smoake, that flyes about the Palace;
                     Laugh, when their patron laughes; sweat, when he sweates;
                     Be hot, and cold with him; change euery moode,
                     Habit, and garbe, as often as he varies;
                     Obserue him, as his watch obserues his clocke;
                     And true, as turkise in the deare lords ring,
                     Looke well, or ill with him: ready to praise
                     His lordship, if he spit, or but pisse faire,
                     Haue an indifferent stoole, or breake winde well,
                     Nothing can scape their catch.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Alas! these things
                     Deserue no note, confer'd with other vile,
                     And filthier flatteries, that corrupt the times:
                     When, not alone our gentries chiefe are faine
                     To make their safety from such sordide acts,
                     But all our Consuls, and no little part
                     Of such as haue beene Praetors, yea, the most
                     Of Senators (that else not vse their voyces)

                           Fedarij.
                         
                     
                     Start vp in publique Senate, and there striue
                     Who shall propound most abiect things, and base,
                     So much, as oft TIBERIVS hath beene heard,
                     Leauing the court, to crie Ô race of men,
                     Prepar'd for seruitude! which shew'd, that, he
                     Who least the publique liberty could like,
                     As loathly brook'd their flat seruilitie.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Well, all is worthy of vs, were it more,
                     Who with our ryots, pride, and ciuill hate,
                     Haue so prouok'd the iustice of the gods.
                     We, that (within these fourescore yeeres) were borne
                     Free, equall lords of the triumphed world,
                     And knew no masters, but affections,
                     To which betraying first our liberties,
                     We since became the slaues to one mans lusts;
                     And now to many: euery ministring spie
                     That will accuse, and sweare, is lord of you,
                     Of me, of all, our fortunes, and our liues.
                     Our lookes are call'd to question, and our wordes,
                     How innocent soeuer, are made crimes;
                     
                     We shall not shortly dare to tell our dreames,
                     Or thinke, but 'twill be reason.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     "Tyrannes artes
                     "Are to giue flatterers, grace; accusers, power;
                     "That those may seeme to kill whom they deuoure.
                     Now good CREMVTIVS CORDVS.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     Haile, to your lordship.
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        .
                     Who's that salutes your cousin?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     'Tis one CORDVS,
                     A gentleman of Rome: one, that has writ
                     Annal's of late, they say, and very well.
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     Annal's? of what times?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     I thinke of POMPEI'S,
                     And CAIVS CAESARS; and so downe to these.
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     How stands h'affected to the present state?
                     Is he or Drusian? or Germanican?
                     
                     Or ours or neutrall?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     I know him not so far.
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     Those times are somewhat queasie to be toucht.
                     Haue you or seene or heard part of his worke?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Not I, he meanes they shall be publike shortly.
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     O. CORDVS do you cal him?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     I.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     But these our times
                     Are not the same, ARRVNTIVS.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Times? the men,
                     The men are not the same: 'tis we are base▪
                     
                     Poore, and degenerate from th'exalted streine
                     Of our great fathers. Where is now the soule
                     Of god-like CATO? he, that durst be good,
                     When CAESAR durst be euill; and had power,
                     As not to liue his slaue, to dye his master.
                     Or where the constant BRVTVS, that (being proofe
                     Against all charme of benefits) did strike
                     So braue a blow into the monsters heart
                     That sought vnkindly to captiue his countrie?
                     O, they are fled the light. Those mightie spirits
                     Lye rak'd vp, with their ashes in their vrnes,
                     And not a sparke of their eternall fire
                     Glowes in a present bosome. All's but blaze,
                     Flashes, and smoke, wherewith we labour so,
                     There's nothing Romane in vs; nothing good,
                     Gallant, or great: 'Tis true, that CORDVS say's,
                     Braue CASSIVS was the last of all that race.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Drusus passeth by.
                     Stand by, lord DRVSVS.
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     Th'Emp'rours son, giue place.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     I like the prince well.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     A riotous youth,
                     There's little hope of him.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     That fault his age
                     Will, as it growes, correct. Me thinkes, he beares
                     Himselfe, each day, more nobly then other:
                     And wins no lesse on mens affections,
                     Then doth his father lose. Beleeue me, I loue him;
                     And chiefly for opposing to SEIANVS.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     And I, for gracing his yong kinsmen so,
                     
                     The sonnes of Prince GERMANICVS: It shewes
                     A gallant cleerenesse in him, a streight minde,
                     That enuies not, in them, their fathers name.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     His name was, while he liu'd, aboue all enuie;
                     And being dead, without it. O, that man!
                     If there were seedes of the old vertue left,
                     They liu'd in him.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     He had the fruits, ARRVNTIVS,
                     More then the seedes: SABINVS, and my selfe
                     Had meanes to know him, within; and can report him.
                     We were his followers, (he would call vs friends.)
                     He was a man most like to vertue'; In all,
                     And euery action, neerer to the gods,
                     Then men, in nature; of a body' as faire
                     As was his mind; and no lesse reuerend
                     In face, then fame: He could so vse his state,
                     Temp'ring his greatnesse, with his grauitie,
                     As it auoyded all selfe-loue in him,
                     And spight in others. What his funeralls lack'd
                     In images, and pompe, they had supply'd
                     With honourable sorrow, souldiers sadnesse,
                     A kind of silent mourning, such, as men
                     (Who know no teares, but from their captiues) vse
                     To shew in so great losses.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     I thought once,
                     Considering their formes, age, manner of deaths,
                     The neerenesse of the places, where they fell,
                     T'haue paralell'd him with great ALEXANDER:
                     For both were of best feature, of high race,
                     Yeer'd but to thirtie, and, in forraine lands,
                     By their owne people, alike made away.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     I know not, for his death, how you might wrest it:
                     But, for his life, it did as much disdaine
                     Comparison, with that voluptuous, rash,
                     Giddy, and drunken Macedon's, as mine
                     Doth with my bond-mans. All the good, in him,
                     (His valour, and his fortune) he made his;
                     But he had other touches of late Romanes,
                     That more did speake him: POMPEI'S dignitie,
                     The innocence of CATO, CAESAR'S spirit,
                     Wise BRVTVS temp'rance, and euery vertue,
                     Which, parted vnto others, gaue them name,
                     Flow'd mixt in him. He was the soule of goodnesse:
                     And all our praises of him are like streames
                     Drawne from a spring, that still rise full, and leaue
                     The part remayning greatest.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I am sure
                     He was too great for vs, and that they knew
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     Who did remoue him hence.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     When men grow fast
                     Honor'd, and lou'd, there is a tricke in state
                     (Which iealous princes neuer faile to vse)
                     How to decline that growth, with faire pretext,
                     And honourable colours of employment,
                     Either by embassie, the war, or such,
                     To shift them forth into another aire,
                     Where they may purge, and lessen; so was he:
                     And had his secon'ds there, sent by TIBERIVS,
                     And his more subtile damme, to discontent him;
                     To breede, and cherish mutinies; detract
                     His greatest actions; giue audacious check
                     To his commands; and worke to put him out
                     In open act of treason. All which snares
                     When his wise cares preuented, a fine poyson
                     Was thought on, to mature their practices.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     Here comes SEIANVS.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Now obserue the stoupes,
                     The bendings, and the falls.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Most creeping base!
                     SEIANVS, SATRIVS, TERENTIVS, &c.
                     They passe ouer the stage.
                     I Note 'hem well: No more. Say you.
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     My lord,
                     There is a gentleman of Rome would buy—
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     How cal you him you talk'd with?
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     'Please your lordship,
                     It is EVDEMVS, the physitian
                     To LIVIA, DRVSV'S wife.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     On with your sute.
                     Would buy, you said—
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     A Tribune
                        ▪ place, my lord.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     What will he giue?
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     Fiftie sestertia.
                     
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     LIVIA'S physitian, say you, is that fellow?
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     It is, my lord; your lordships answere?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     To what?
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     The place, my lord. 'Tis for a gentleman,
                     Your lordship will well like off, when you see him;
                     And one, you may make yours, by the grant.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Well, let him bring his money, and his name.
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     Thanke your lordship. He shall, my lord.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Come hither.
                     Know you this same EVDEMVS? Is he learn'd?
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     Reputed so, my lord: and of deepe practice.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Bring him in, to me, in the gallerie;
                     And take you cause, to leaue vs there, togither:
                     I would confer with him, about a griefe.—On.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     So, yet! another? yet? Ô desperate state
                     Of grou'ling honour! Seest thou this, Ô sunne,
                     And doe wee see thee after? Me thinkes, day
                     Should lose his light, when men doe lose their shames,
                     And, for the emptie circumstance of life,
                     
                     Betray their cause of liuing.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Nothing so.
                     SEIANVS can repaire, if IOVE should ruine.
                     He is the now court-god; And well applyed
                     With sacrifice of knees, of crookes, and cringe,
                     He will doe more then all the house of heau'n
                     Can, for a thousand hecatombes. 'Tis he
                     Makes vs our day, or night; Hell, and Elysium
                     
                     Are in his looke: We talke of RHADAMANTH,
                     Furies, and fire-brands; But 'tis his frowne
                     That is all these, where, on the aduerse part,
                     His smile is more, then ere (yet) Poets fain'd
                     Of blisse, and shades, nectar—
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     A seruing boy?
                     I knew him, at CAIVS trencher, when for hyre,
                     He prostituted his abused body
                     To that great gourmond, fat APICIVS;
                     And was the noted pathick of the time.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     And, now, the second face of the whole world.
                     The partner of the empire, hath his image
                     Rear'd equall with TIBERIVS, borne in ensignes,
                     Command's, disposes euery dignitie,
                     Centurions, Tribunes, Heads of prouinces,
                     
                        Praetors, and Consuls, all that heretofore
                     
                        Romes generall suffrage gaue, is now his sale.
                     The gaine, or rather spoile, of all the earth,
                     One, and his house, receiues.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     He hath of late
                     Made him a strength too, strangely, by reducing
                     All the Praetorian bands into one campe,
                     Which he command's: pretending, that the souldier
                     By liuing loose, and scattered, fell to ryot;
                     And that if any sodaine enterprise
                     Should be attempted, their vnited strength
                     Would be far more, then seuer'd; and their life
                     More strict, if from the citie more remou'd.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Where, now, he builds, what kind of fort's he please,
                     Is hard to court the souldier, by his name,
                     Wooes, feasts the chiefest men of action,
                     Whose wants, not loues, compell them to be his.
                     And, though he ne're were liberall by kind,
                     Yet, to his owne darke ends, hee's most profuse,
                     Lauish, and letting flye, he cares not what
                     To his ambition.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Yet, hath he ambition?
                     Is there that step in state can make him higher?
                     Or more? or any thing he is, but lesse?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Nothing, but Emp'rour.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     The name TIBERIVS
                     I hope, will keepe; how ere he hath fore-gone
                     
                     The dignitie, and power.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Sure, while he liues.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     And dead, it comes to DRVSVS. Should he fayle,
                     To the braue issue of GERMANICVS;
                     And they are three: Too many (ha?) for him
                     To haue a plot vpon?
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     I doe not know
                     The heart of his designes; but, sure, their face
                     Lookes farther then the present.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     By the gods,
                     If I could gesse he had but such a thought,
                     My sword should cleaue him downe from head to heart,
                     But I would finde it out: and with my hand
                     I'ld hurle his panting braine about the ayre,
                     In mites, as small as atomi, to'vndoe
                     The knotted bed —
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     You are obseru'd, ARRVNTIVS.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     He turnes to Seianus clyents.
                     Death! I dare tell him so; and all his spies:
                     You, sir, I would, doe you looke? and you.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Forbeare.
                  
                  SATRIVS, EVDEMVS, SEIANVS.
                  HEere, he will instant be; Let's walke a turne.
                  Yo'are in a muse, EVDEMVS?
                  
                     EVD.
                     Not I, sir.
                     I wonder he should marke me out so! well,
                     IOVE, and APOLLO forme it for the best.
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     Your fortune's made vnto you now, EVDEMVS,
                     If you can but lay hold vpon the meanes;
                     Doe but obserue his humour, and — beleeue it —
                     He's the noblest Romane, where he takes —
                     Here comes his lordship.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Now, good SATRIVS.
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     This is the gentleman, my lord.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Is this?
                     Giue me your hand, we must be more acquainted.
                     Report, sir, hath spoke out your art, and learning:
                     And I am glad I haue so needfull cause,
                     (How euer in it selfe painefull, and hard)
                     To make me knowne to so great vertue. Looke,
                     Who's that? SATRIVS — I haue a griefe, sir,
                     That will desire your helpe. Your name's EVDEMVS?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Sir?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     It is, my lord.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     I heare, you are Physitian to LIVIA, the princesse?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     I minister vnto her, my good lord.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     You minister to a royall lady, then.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     She is, my lord, and fayre.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     That's vnderstood
                     Of all their sexe, who are, or would be so;
                     And those, that would be, physicke soone can make 'hem▪
                     
                     For those that are, their beauties feare no collours.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Your lordship is conceited.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Sir, you know it.
                     And can (if need be) read a learned lecture,
                     
                     On this, and other secrets. Pray you tell me,
                     What more of ladies, besides LIVIA,
                     Haue you your patients?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Many, my good lord.
                     The great AVGVSTA, VRGVLANIA.
                     MVTILIA PRISCA, and PLANCINA, diuers —
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     And, all these tell you the particulars
                     Of euery seuerall griefe? how first it grew,
                     And then encreas'd, what action caused that;
                     What passion that: and answere to each point
                     That you will put 'hem.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Else, my lord, we know not
                     How to prescribe the remedies.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Goe to,
                     Yo'are a subtill nation, you Physitians!
                     And growne the onely cabinets, in court,
                     To ladies priuacies. Faith which of these
                     Is the most pleasant lady, in her physicke?
                     Come, you are modest now.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     'Tis fit, my lord.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Why, sir, I doe not aske you of their vrines,
                     Whose smel's most violet? or whose seige is best?
                     Or who makes hardest faces on her stoole?
                     Which lady sleepes with her owne face, a nights?
                     Which puts her teeth off, with her clothes, in court?
                     Or, which her hayre? which her complexion?
                     And, in which boxe she puts it? These were questions
                     That might, perhaps, haue put your grauity
                     To some defence of blush. But, I enquir'd,
                     Which was the wittiest? meriest? wantonnest?
                     Harmelesse intergatories, but conceipts.
                     Me thinks, AVGVSTA should be most peruerse,
                     And froward in her fit?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     She's so, my lord.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     I knew it. And MVTILIA the most iocund?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     'Tis very true, my lord.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     And why would you
                     Conceale this from me, now? Come, what's LIVIA?
                     I know, she's quick, and quaintly spirited,
                     And will haue strange thoughts, when she's at leasure;
                     She tells 'hem all to you?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     My noblest lord,
                     He breaths not in the empire, or on earth,
                     Whom I would be ambitious to serue
                     (In any act, that may preserue mine honour)
                     Before your lordship.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Sir, you can loose no honor,
                     By trusting ought to me. The coursest act
                     Done to my seruice, I can so requite,
                     As all the world shall stile it honorable:
                     "Your idle, vertuous definitions
                     
                     "Keepe honor poore, and are as scorn'd, as vaine:
                     "Those deeds breathe honor, that do sucke in gaine.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
                     EVD.
                     But, good my lord, if I should thus betray
                     The counsels of my patient, and a ladies
                     Of her high place, and worth; what might your lordship,
                     (Who presently are to trust me with your owne)
                     Iudge of my faith?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Only the best, I sweare.
                     Say now, that I should vtter you my griefe;
                     And with it, the true cause; that it were loue;
                     And loue to LIVIA: you should tell her this?
                     Should she suspect your faith? I would you could
                     Tell me as much, from her; see, if my braine
                     Could be turn'd iealous.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Happily, my lord,
                     I could, in time, tell you as much, and more;
                     So I might safely promise but the first,
                     To her, from you.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     As safely, my EVDEMVS,
                     (I now dare call thee so) as I haue put
                     The secret into thee.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     My lord —
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Protest not.
                     Thy lookes are vowes to me, vse onely speed,
                     And but affect her with SEIANVS loue,
                     Thou art a man, made, to make Consuls. Goe.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     My lord, Ile promise you a priuate meeting
                     This day, together.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Canst thou?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     The place?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     My gardens, whither I shall fetch your lordship.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Let me adore my AESCVLAPIVS.
                     
                     Why, this indeed is physick! and out-speakes
                     The knowledge of cheape drugs, or any vse
                     Can be made out of it! more comforting
                     Then all your opiates, iulebes, apozemes,
                     Magistrall syrrupes, or—Be gone, my friend,
                     Not barely stiled, but created so;
                     Expect things, greater then thy largest hopes,
                     To ouertake thee: Fortune, shall be taught
                     To know how ill she hath deseru'd thus long,
                     To come behinde thy wishes. Goe, and speed.
                     "Ambition makes more trusty slaues, then need,
                     These fellowes, by the fauour of their arte,
                     Haue, still, the meanes to tempt, oft-times, the power.
                     If LIVIA will be now corrupted, then
                     Thou hast the way, SEIANVS, to worke out
                     His secrets, who (thou knowest) endures thee not,
                     Her husband DRVSVS: and to worke against them.
                     Prosper it, PALLAS, thou, that betterst wit;
                     For VENVS hath the smallest share in it.
                  
                  
                  TIBERIVS, SEIANVS, DRVSVS.
                  One kneeles to him.
                  WEe not endure these flatteries, let him stand;
                  Our empire, ensignes, axes, roddes, and state
                  Take not away our humane nature from vs:
                  Looke vp, on vs, and fall before the gods.
                  
                     SEI.
                     How like a god, speakes CAESAR!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     There, obserue!
                     He can indure that second, that's no flattery.
                     O, what is it, proud slime will not beleeue
                     Of his owne worth, to heare it equall prais'd
                     Thus with the gods?
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     He did not heare it, sir.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     He did not? Tut, he must not, we thinke meanely.
                     'Tis your most courtly, knowne confederacy,
                     To haue your priuate parasite redeeme
                     What he, in publique subtilty, will lose
                     To making him a name.
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     Right mighty lord —
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We must make vp our eares, 'gainst these assaults
                     Of charming tongues; we pray you vse, no more
                     These contumelies to vs: stile not vs
                     Or lord, or mighty, who professe our selfe
                     The seruant of the Senate, and are proud
                     T'enioy them our good, iust, and fauouring lords.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     Rarely dissembled.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Prince-like, to the life.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     "When power, that may command, so much descends,
                     "Their bondage, whom it stoupes to, it intends.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Whence are these letters?
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     From the Senate.
                     
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     So.
                     Whence these?
                  
                  
                     LA.
                     From thence too.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Are they sitting, now?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     They stay thy answere, CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     If this man
                     Had but a minde allied vnto his words,
                     How blest a fate were it to vs, and Rome?
                     
                     We could not thinke that state, for which to change,
                     Although the ayme were our old liberty:
                     The ghosts of those that fell for that, would grieue
                     Their bodies liu'd not, now, againe to serue.
                     "Men are deceiu'd, who thinke there can be thrall
                     "Beneath a vertuous prince. Wish'd liberty
                     "Ne're louelier lookes, then vnder such a crowne.
                     But, when his grace is meerely but lip-good,
                     And, that no longer, then he aires himselfe
                     Abroad in publique, there, to seeme to shun
                     The strokes, and stripes of flatterers, which within
                     Are lechery vnto him, and so feed
                     His brutish sense with their afflicting sound,
                     As (dead to vertue) he permits himselfe
                     Be carried like a pitcher, by the eares,
                     
                     To euery act of vice: this is a case
                     Deserues our feare, and doth presage the nigh,
                     And close approach of bloud and tyranny.
                     "Flattery is midwife vnto princes rage:
                     "And nothing sooner, doth helpe foorth a tyranne,
                     "Then that, and whisperers grace, who haue the time,
                     "The place, the power, to make all men offenders.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     He should be told this; and be bid dissemble
                     With fooles, and blinde men: We that know the euill,
                     Should hunt the Palace-rattes, or giue them bane;
                     Fright hence these worse then rauens, that deuoure
                     The quicke, where they but prey vpon the dead:
                     He shall be told it.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Stay, ARRVNTIVS,
                     We must abide our oportunity:
                     And practise what is fit, as what is needfull.
                     "It is not safe t'enforce a soueraigne's eare:
                     "Princes heare well, if they at all will heare.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Ha? Say you so? well. In the meane time, IOVE,
                     (Say not, but I doe call vpon thee now.)
                     Of all wilde beasts, preserue me from a tyranne;
                     And of all tame, a flatterer.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     'Tis well pray'd.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Returne the lords this voyce, we are their creature:
                     And it is fit, a good, and honest prince,
                     Whom they, out of their bounty, haue instructed
                     With so dilate, and absolute a power,
                     Should owe the office of it, to their seruice;
                     And good of all, and euery citizen.
                     Nor shall it e're repent vs, to haue wish'd
                     The Senate iust, and fau'ring lords vnto vs,
                     "Since their free loues doe yeeld no lesse defence
                     "T' a princes state, then his owne innocence.
                     Say then, there can be nothing in their thought
                     Shall want to please vs, that hath pleased them;
                     Our suffrage rather shall preuent, then stay
                     Behind their wills: 'tis empire, to obey
                     Where such, so great, so graue, so good determine.
                     Yet, for the sute of Spaine, t'erect a temple
                     In honour of our mother, and our selfe,
                     We must (with pardon of the Senate) not
                     Assent thereto. Their lordships may obiect
                     Our not denying the same late request
                     Vnto the Asian cities: We desire
                     That our defence, for suffering that, be knowne
                     In these briefe reasons, with our after purpose.
                     Since deified AVGVSTVS hindred not
                     
                     A temple to be built, at Pergamum,
                     In honour of himselfe, and sacred Rome,
                     We, that haue all his deedes, and wordes obseru'd
                     Euer, in place of lawes, the rather follow'd
                     That pleasing precedent, because, with ours,
                     The Senates reuerence also, there, was ioyn'd.
                     But, as, t'haue once receiu'd it, may deserue
                     The gaine of pardon, so, to be ador'd
                     With the continew'd stile, and note of gods,
                     Through all the prouinces, were wild ambition,
                     And no lesse pride: Yea, eu'n AVGVSTVS name
                     Would early vanish, should it be prophan'd
                     With such promiscuous flatteries. For our part,
                     We here protest it, and are couetous
                     Posteritie should know it, we are mortall;
                     And can but deedes of men: 'twere glory' inough,
                     Could we be truely a prince. And, they shall adde
                     Abounding grace, vnto our memorie,
                     That shall report vs worthy our fore-fathers,
                     Carefull of your affaires, constant in dangers,
                     And not afraid of any priuate frowne
                     For publike good. These things shall be to vs
                     Temples, and statues, reared in your mindes,
                     The fairest, and most during imag'rie:
                     For those of stone, or brasle, if they become
                     Odious in iudgement of posteritie,
                     Are more contemn'd, as dying sepulchres,
                     Then tane for liuing monuments. We then
                     Make here our suite, alike to gods and men,
                     The one, vntill the period of our race,
                     T'inspire vs with a free, and quiet mind,
                     Discerning both diuine, and humane lawes;
                     The other, to vouchsafe vs after death,
                     An honourable mention, and faire praise,
                     T'accompanie our actions, and our name:
                     The rest of greatnesse princes may command,
                     And (therefore) may neglect, only, a long,
                     A lasting, high, and happy memorie
                     They should, without being satisfied, pursue.
                     Contempt of fame begets contempt of vertue.
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     Rare!
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     Most diuine!
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     The Oracles are ceas'd,
                     That only CAESAR, with their tongue, might speake.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Let me be gone, most felt, and open this!
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     Stay.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     What? to heare more cunning, and fine wordes,
                     With their sound flatter'd, ere their sense be meant?
                  
                  
                     
                     TIB.
                     Their choise of Antium, thereto place the guift
                     Vow'd to the goddesse, for our mothers health,
                     
                        
                           Fortuna equestris.
                         We will the Senate know, we fairely like;
                     As also, of their grant to LEPIDVS,
                     For his repayring the Aemilian place,
                     And restauration of those monuments:
                     Their grace too in consining of SILANVS,
                     To th'other Is'le Cithera, at the sute
                     Of his religious sister, much commends
                     Their policie, so temp'red with their mercy.
                     But, for the honours, which they haue decreed
                     To our SEIANUS▪ to aduance his statue
                     In POMPEI'S theatre (whose ruining fire
                     His vigilance, and labour kept restrain'd
                     In that one losse) they haue, therein, out-gone
                     Their owne great wisedomes, by their skilfull choise,
                     And placing of their bounties, on a man,
                     Whose merit more adornes the dignitie,
                     Then that can him: and giues a benefit,
                     In taking, greater, then it can receiue.
                     Blush not, SEIANVS, thou great aide of Rome,
                     Associate of our labours our chiefe helper,
                     Let vs not force thy simple modestie
                     With offring at thy praise, for more we cannot,
                     Since there's no voice can take it. No man, here,
                     Receiue our speeches, as hyperbole's;
                     For we are far from flatt'ring our friend,
                     (Let enuy know) as from the need to flatter.
                     Nor let them aske the causes of our praise;
                     Princes haue still their grounds rear'd with themselues,
                     Aboue the poore low flats of common men,
                     And, who will search the reasons of their acts,
                     Must stand on equall bases. Lead, away.
                     Our loues vnto the Senate.
                     
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Caesar.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Peace.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     Great POMPEI'S theatre was neuer ruin'd
                     Till now, that proud SEIANVS hath a statue
                     Rear'd on his ashes.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Place the shame of souldiers,
                     Aboue the best of generalls? cracke the world!
                     And bruise the name of Romanes into dust,
                     Ere we behold it!
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Checke your passion;
                     Lord DRVSVS tarries.
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     Is my father mad?
                     Wearie of life, and rule, lords? thus to heaue
                     An idoll vp with praise! make him his mate!
                     His riuall in the empire!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     O, good prince!
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     Allow him statues? titles? honours? such,
                     
                     As he himselfe refuseth?
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Braue, braue DRVSVS!
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     The first ascents to soueraigntie are hard
                     But, entred once, there neuer wants or meanes,
                     Or ministers, to helpe th'aspirer on.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     True, gallant DRVSVS.
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     We must shortly pray
                     To Modestie, that he will rest contented—
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I, where he is, and not write emp'rour.
                     SEIANVS,  DRVSVS, ARRVNTIVS, &c.
                     He enters, followd with clients.
                     THere is your bill, and yours; Bring you your man:
                     I haue mou'd for you, too, LATIARIS.
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     What?
                     Is your vast greatnesse growne so blindly bold,
                     That you will ouer vs?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Why, then giue way.
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     Giue way, Colossus? Doe you lift? Aduance you?
                     Drusus strikes him.
                     Take that. 
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Good! braue! excellent braue prince!
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     Nay, come, approch. What? stand you off? at gaze?
                     It lookes too full of death, for thy cold spirits.
                     Auoid mine eye, dull camell, or my sword
                     Shall make thy brau'rie fitter for a graue,
                     Then for a triumph. I'le aduance a statue,
                     O'your owne bulke; but 't shall be on the crosse:
                     Where I will naile your pride, at breadth, and length,
                     And cracke those sinnewes, which are yet but stretch'd
                     With your swolne fortunes rage.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     A noble prince!
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     A CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR!
                     SEIANVS.
                     HE that, with such wrong mou'd, can beare it through
                     With patience, and an euen mind, knowes how
                     To turne it backe. Wrath, couer'd, carryes fate:
                     Reuenge is lost, if I professe my hate.
                     What was my practice late, I'le now pursue
                     As my fell iustice. This hath stil'd it new.
                  
                  CHORVS—Of Musicians.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act. II.
                  SEIANVS, LIVIA, EVDEMVS.
                  
                     PHysitian, thou art worthy of a prouince,
                     For the great fauours done vnto our loues;
                     And, but that greatest LIVIA beares a part
                     In the requitall of thy seruices,
                     
                     I should alone, despaire of ought, like meanes,
                     To giue them worthy satisfaction.
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     EVDEMVS, (I will see it) shall receiue
                     A fit, and full reward, for his large merit.
                     But for this potion, we intend to DRVSVS,
                     (No more our husband, now) whom shall we choose
                     As the most apt, and abled instrument,
                     To minister it to him?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     I say, LYGDVS.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     LYGDVS? what's he?
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     An Eunuch DRVSVS loues.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     I, and his cup-bearer.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Name not a second.
                     If DRVSVS loue him, and he haue that place,
                     We cannot thinke a sitter.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     True, my lord,
                     For free accesse, and trust, are two maine aides.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Skilfull physitian!
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     But he must be wrought
                     To th'vndertaking, with some labour'd arte.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Is he ambitious?
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     No.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Or couetous?
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     Neither.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Yet, gold is a good generall charme.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     What is he then?
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     Faith, only wanton, light.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     How! Is he young? and faire?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     A delicate youth.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Send him to me, I'le worke him. Royall ladie,
                     Though I haue lou'd you long, and with that height
                     Of zeale, and dutie, (like the fire, which more
                     It mounts, it trembles) thinking nought could adde
                     Vnto the feruour, which your eye had kindled;
                     Yet, now I see your wisedome, iudgement, strength,
                     Quicknesse, and will, to apprehend the meanes
                     To your owne good, and greatnesse, I protest
                     My selfe through rarefied, and turn'd all flame
                     In your affection: Such a spirit as yours,
                     Was not created for the idle second
                     To a poore flash, as DRVSVS; but to shine
                     Bright, as the Moone, among the lesser lights,
                     And share the sou'raigntie of all the world.
                     Then LIVIA triumphs in her proper spheare,
                     When shee, and her SEIANVS shall diuide
                     The name of CAESAR; and AVGVSTA'S starre
                     Be dimm'd with glorie of a brighter beame:
                     When AGRIPPINA'S fires are quite extinct,
                     And the scarce-seene TIBERIVS borrowes all
                     His little light from vs, whose folded armes
                     Shall make one perfect or be. Who's that? EVDEMVS,
                     Looke, 'tis not DRVSVS? Ladie, doe not feare.
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     Not I, my Lord. My feare, and loue of him
                     Left me at once.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Illustrous ladie! stay—
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     I'le tell his lordship.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Who is't, EVDEMVS?
                  
                  
                     
                     EVD.
                     One of your lordships seruants, brings you word
                     The Emp'rour hath sent for you.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     O! where is he?
                     He goes out.
                     With your faire leaue, deare Princesse. I'le but aske
                     A question, and returne.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Fortunate Princesse!
                     How are you blest in the fruition
                     Of this vnequald man, this soule of Rome,
                     The empires life, and voice of CAESARS world!
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     So blessed, my EVDEMVS, as to know
                     The blisse I haue, with what I ought to owe
                     The meanes that wrought it. How do'I looke to day?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Excellent cleere, beleeue it. This same fucus
                     
                     Was well laid on.
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     Me thinkes, 'tis here not white.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Lend me your scarlet, lady. 'Tis the sunne
                     Hath giu'n some little taint vnto the ceruse,
                     You should haue vs'd of the white oyle I gaue you.
                     SEIANVS, for your loue! his very name
                     Commandeth aboue CVPID, or his shafts—
                  
                  
                     (LIV.
                     Nay, now yo'haue made it worse.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     I'le helpe it straight.)
                     And, but pronounc'd, is a sufficient charme
                     Against all rumour; and of absolute power
                     To satisfie for any ladies honour.
                  
                  
                     (LIV.
                     What doe you now, EVDEMVS?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Make a light fucus,
                     To touch you ore withall.) Honor'd SEIANVS!
                     What act (though ne're so strange, and insolent)
                     But that addition will at least beare out,
                     If 't doe not expiate?
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     Here, good physitian.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     I like this studie to preserue the loue
                     Of such a man, that comes not euery houre
                     To greet the world. ('Tis now well, ladie, you should
                     Vse of the dentisrice, I prescrib'd you, too,
                     To cleere your teeth, and the prepar'd pomatum,
                     To smoothe the skin:) A lady cannot be
                     Too curious of her forme, that still would hold
                     The heart of such a person, made her captiue,
                     As you haue his: who, to endeare him more
                     In your cleere eye, hath put away his wife,
                     The trouble of his bed, and your delights,
                     Faire Apicata, and made spacious roome
                     To your new pleasures.
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     Haue not we return'd
                     That, with our hate of DRVSVS, and discouerie
                     Of all his councels?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Yes, and wisely, lady,
                     The ages that succeed, and stand far off
                     To gaze at your high prudence, shall admire
                     And reckon it an act, without your sexe:
                     It hath that rare apparance. Some will thinke
                     
                     Your fortune could not yeeld a deeper sound,
                     Then mixt with DRVSVS; But, when they shall heare
                     That, and the thunder of SEIANVS meet,
                     SEIANVS, whose high name doth strike the starres,
                     And rings about the concaue, great SEIANVS,
                     Whose glories, stile, and titles are himselfe,
                     The often iterating of SEIANVS:
                     They then will lose their thoughts, and be asham'd
                     To take acquaintance of them.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     I must make
                     A rude departure, lady. CAESAR sends
                     With all his haste both of command, and prayer.
                     Be resolute in our plot; you haue my soule,
                     As certayne yours, as it is my bodies.
                     And, wise physitian, so prepare the poyson
                     As you may lay the subtile operation
                     Vpon some naturall disease of his.
                     Your eunuch send to me. I kisse your hands,
                     Glorie of ladies, and commend my loue
                     To your best faith, and memorie.
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     My lord,
                     I shall but change your wordes. Farewell. Yet, this
                     Remember for your heed, he loues you not;
                     You know, what I haue told you: His designes
                     Are full of grudge, and danger: we must vse
                     More then a common speed.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Excellent lady,
                     How you doe fire my bloud!
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     Well, you must goe?
                     The thoughts be best, are least set forth to shew.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     When will you take some physick, lady?
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     When
                     I shall, EVDEMVS: But let DRVSVS drug
                     Be first prepar'd.
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     Were LYGDVS made, that's done;
                     I haue it readie. And to morrow-morning,
                     I'le send you a perfume, first to resolue,
                     And procure sweat, and then prepare a bath
                     To clense, and cleere the cutis; against when,
                     I'le haue an excellent new fucus made,
                     Resistiue 'gainst the sunne, the raine, or wind,
                     Which you shall lay on with a breath, or oyle,
                     As you best like, and last some fourteene houres.
                     This change came timely, lady, for your health;
                     And the restoring your complexion,
                     Which DRVSVS choller had almost burnt vp:
                     Wherein your fortune hath prescrib'd you better
                     Then arte could doe.
                  
                  
                     LIV.
                     Thankes, good physitian,
                     I'le vse my fortune (you shall see) with reuerence.
                     Is my coach ready?
                  
                  
                     EVD.
                     It attends your highnesse.
                  
                  
                     
                     SEIANVS.
                     IF this be not reuenge, when I haue done
                     And made it perfect, let Aegyptian slaues,
                     
                        Parthians, and bare-foot Hebrewes brand my face,
                     And print my body full of iniuries.
                     Thou lost thy selfe, childe DRVSVS, when thou thought'st
                     Thou could'st out-skip my vengeance: or out-stand
                     The power I had to crush thee into ayre.
                     Thy follyes now shall taste what kinde of man
                     They haue prouok'd, and this thy fathers house
                     Cracke in the flame of my incensed rage,
                     Whose fury shall admit no shame, or meane.
                     Adultery? it is the lightest ill,
                     I will commit. A race of wicked acts
                     Shall flow out of my anger, and o're-spread
                     The worlds wide face, which no posterity
                     Shall e're approoue, nor yet keepe silent: Things,
                     That for their cunning, close, and cruell marke,
                     Thy father would wish his; and shall (perhaps)
                     Carry the empty name, but we the prize.
                     On then, my soule, and start not in thy course;
                     Though heau'n drop sulphure, and hell belch out fire,
                     Laugh at the idle terrors: Tell proud IOVE,
                     Betweene his power, and thine, there is no oddes.
                     'Twas onely feare, first, in the world made gods.
                  
                  TIBERIVS, SEIANVS.
                  IS yet SEIANVS come?
                  
                     SEI.
                     He's here, dread CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Let all depart that chamber, and the next:
                     Sit downe, my comfort. When the master-prince
                     Of all the world, SEIANVS, saith, he feares;
                     Is it not fatall?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Yes, to those are fear'd.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     And not to him?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Not, if he wisely turne
                     That part of fate he holdeth, first on them.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     That nature, bloud, and lawes of kinde forbid.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Doe policie, and state forbid it?
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     No.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     The rest of poore respects, then, let goe by:
                     State is inough to make th'act iust, them guilty.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Long hate pursues such acts.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Whom hatred frights,
                     Let him not dreame on sou'raignty.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Are rites
                     Of faith, loue, piety, to be trod downe?
                     Forgotten? and made vaine?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     All for a crowne.
                     The prince, who shames a tyrannes name to beare,
                     
                     Shall neuer dare doe any thing, but feare;
                     All the command of scepters quite doth perish
                     If it beginne religious thoughts to cherish:
                     Whole Empires fall, swaid by those nice respects.
                     It is the licence of darke deeds protects
                     Eu'n states most hated: when no lawes resist
                     The sword, but that it acteth what it list.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Yet so, we may doe all things cruelly,
                     Not safely:
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Yes, and doe them thoroughly.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Knowes yet, SEIANVS, whom we point at?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     I,
                     Or else my thought, my sense, or both doe erre:
                     'Tis AGRIPPINA?
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     She; and her proud race.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Proud? dangerous,
                  
                  
                     CAESAR.
                     For in them apace
                     The fathers spirit shoots vp. GERMANICVS
                     Liues in their lookes, their gate, their forme, t'vpbraide vs
                     With his close death, if not reuenge the same.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     The act's not knowne.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Not prou'd. But whispring fame
                     Knowledge, and proofe doth to the iealous giue,
                     Who, then to faile, would their owne thought beleeue.
                     It is not safe, the children draw long breath,
                     That are prouoked by a parents death.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     It is a dangerous, to make them hence,
                     If nothing but their birth be their offence.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Stay, till they strike at CAESAR: then their crime
                     Will be enough, but late, and out of time
                     For him to punish.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Doe they purpose it?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     You know, sir, thunder speakes not till it hit.
                     Be not secure: none swiftlier are opprest,
                     Then they, whom confidence betrayes to rest.
                     Let not your daring make your danger such:
                     All power's to be fear'd, where 'tis too much.
                     The youth's are (of themselues) hote, violent,
                     Full of great thought; and that male-spirited dame,
                     Their mother, slackes no meanes to put them on,
                     By large allowance, popular presentings,
                     Increase of traine, and state, suing for titles,
                     Hath them commended with like praiers, like vowes,
                     To the same Gods, with CAESAR: daies and nights
                     Shee spends in banquets, and ambitious feasts
                     For the Nobilitie; where CAIVS SILIVS,
                     TITIVS SABINVS, olde ARRVNTIVS,
                     ASINIVS GALLVS, FVRNIVS, REGVLVS,
                     And others, of that discontented list,
                     Are the prime guests. There, and to these, she tels
                     Whose niece she was, whose daughter, and whose wife,
                     
                     And then must they compare her with AVGVSTA,
                     I, and preferre her too, commend her forme,
                     Extoll her fruitfulnesse; at which a showre
                     Fals for the memorie of GERMANICVS,
                     Which they blow ouer straight, with windie praise,
                     And puffing hopes of her aspiring sonnes:
                     Who, with these hourely ticklings, grow so pleas'd,
                     And wantonly conceited of themselues,
                     As now, they sticke not to beleeue they're such,
                     As these doe giue 'hem out: and would be thought
                     (More then competitors) immediate heires.
                     Whilest to their thirst of rule they winne the rout
                     (That's still the friend of noueltie) with hope
                     Of future freedome, which on euerie change,
                     That greedily, though emptily, expects.
                     CAESAR, 'tis age in all things breeds neglects,
                     And princes that will keepe olde dignitie,
                     Must not admit too youthfull heires stand by;
                     Not their owne issue: but so darkely set
                     As shadowes are in picture, to giue height,
                     And lustre to themselues.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We will command
                     Their ranke thoughts downe, and with a stricter hand
                     Then we haue yet put forth, their traines must bate,
                     Their titles, feasts and factions.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Or your state.
                     But how sir, will you worke?
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Confine 'hem,
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     No.
                     They are too great, and that too faint a blow,
                     To giue them now: it would haue seru'd at first,
                     When, with the weakest touch, their knot had burst.
                     But, now, your care must be, not to detect
                     The smallest cord, or line of your suspect,
                     For such, who know the weight of princes feare,
                     Will, when they find themselues discouer'd, reare
                     Their forces, like seene snakes, that else would lye
                     Rould in their circles, close: Nought is more high,
                     Daring, or desperate, then offenders found;
                     Where guilt is, rage, and courage doth abound.
                     The course must be, to let 'hem still swell vp,
                     Riot, and surfet on blind fortunes cup;
                     Giue 'hem more place, more dignities, more stile,
                     Call 'hem to court, to senate: in the while,
                     Take from their strength some one or twaine, or more
                     Of the maine Fautors; (It will fright the store)
                     And, by some by-occasion. Thus, with slight
                     You shall disarme first, and they (in night
                     Of their ambition) not perceiue the traine,
                     
                     Till, in the ingine, they are caught, and slaine.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We would not kill, if we knew how to saue;
                     Yet, then a throne, 'tis cheaper giue a graue.
                     Is there no way to bind them by deserts?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Sir, wolues do change their haire, but not their harts.
                     While thus your thought vnto a meane is tied,
                     You neither dare inough, nor doe prouide.
                     All modestie is fond; and chiefly where
                     The subiect is no lesse compeld to beare,
                     Then praise his sou'raignes acts.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We can no longer
                     Keepe on our masque to thee, our deare SEIANVS;
                     Thy thoughts are ours, in all, and we but proou'd
                     Their voice, in our designes, which by assenting
                     Hath more confirm'd vs, then if heartning IOVE
                     Had, from his hundred statues, bid vs strike,
                     And at the stroke clickt all his marble thumb's.
                     But, who shall first be strooke?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     First, CAIVS SILIVS;
                     He is the most of marke, and most of danger:
                     In power, and reputation equall strong,
                     Hauing commanded an imperiall armie
                     Seuen yeeres together, vanquish'd SACROVIR
                     In Germanie, and thence obtain'd to weare
                     The ornaments triumphall. His steep fall,
                     By how much it doth giue the weightier crack,
                     Will send more wounding terrour to the rest,
                     Command them stand aloofe, and giue more way
                     To our surprising of the principall.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     But what, SABINVS?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Let him grow awhile,
                     His fate is not yet ripe: we must not plucke
                     At all together, lest wee catch our selues.
                     And ther's ARRVNTIVS too, he only talkes.
                     But SOSIA, SILIVS wife, would be wound in
                     Now, for she hath a furie in her brest
                     More, then hell euer knew; and would be sent
                     Thither in time. Then, is there one CREMVTIVS
                     CORDVS, a writing fellow, they haue got
                     To gather notes of the precedent times,
                     And make them into Annal's; a most tart
                     And bitter spirit (I heare) who, vnder colour
                     Of praysing those, doth taxe the present state,
                     Censures the men, the actions, leaues no tricke,
                     No practice vn-examin'd, paralels
                     The times, the gouernments, a profest champion,
                     For the old libertie—
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     A perishing wretch.
                     As if there were that chaos bred in things,
                     
                     The lawes, and libertie would not rather choose
                     To be quite broken, and tane hence by vs,
                     Then haue the staine to be preseru'd by such.
                     Haue we the meanes, to make these guiltie, first?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Trust that to me: let CAESAR, by his power,
                     But cause a formall meeting of the Senate,
                     I will haue matter, and accusers readie.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     But how? let vs consult.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Wee shall mispend
                     The time of action. Counsels are vnfit
                     In businesse, where all rest is more pernicious
                     Then rashnesse can be. Acts of this close kind
                     Thriue more by execution, then aduice.
                     There is no lingring in that worke begun,
                     Which cannot praised be, vntill through done.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Our edict shall, forthwith, command a court.
                     While I can liue, I will preuent earths furie:
                     
                        .
                  
                  POSTHVMVS, SEIANVS.
                  MY Lord SEIANVS—
                  
                     SEI.
                     IVLIVS POSTHVMVS,
                     Come with my wish! what newes from AGRIPPINA'S?
                  
                  
                     POS.
                     Faith none. They all locke vp themselues a'late;
                     Or talke in character: I haue not seene
                     A companie chang'd. Except they had
                     Intelligence by augurie of our practice.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     When were you there?
                  
                  
                     POS.
                     Last night.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     And what ghests found you?
                  
                  
                     POS.
                     SABINVS, SILIVS, (the olde list,) ARRVNTIVS,
                     FVRNIVS, and GALLVS.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Would not these talke?
                  
                  
                     POS.
                     Little.
                     And yet we offered choice of argument.
                     SATRIVS was with me.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Well: 'tis guilt inough
                     Their often meeting. You forgot t'extoll
                     The hospitable ladie?
                  
                  
                     POS.
                     No, that tricke
                     Was well put home, and had succeded too,
                     But that SABINVS cought a caution out;
                     For she began to swell:
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     And may she burst.
                     IVLIVS,

                           Mutilia Prisca.
                         I would haue you goe instantly,
                     Vnto the palace of the great AVGVSTA,
                     And, (by your kindest friend,) get swift accesse;
                     Acquaint her, with these meetings: Tell the words
                     You brought me, (th'other day) of SILIVS,
                     Adde somewhat to 'hem. Make her vnderstand
                     The danger of SABINVS, and the times,
                     Out of his closenesse. Giue ARRVNTIVS words
                     Of malice against CAESAR; so, to GALLVS:
                     
                     But (aboue all) to AGRIPPINA. Say,
                     (As you may truely) that her infinite pride,
                     Propt with the hopes of her too fruitfull wombe,
                     With popular studies gapes for soueraigntie;
                     And threatens CAESAR. Pray AVGVSTA then,
                     That for her owne, great CAESARS, and the publique
                     safetie, she be pleas'd to vrge these dangers.
                     CAESAR is too secure (he must be told,
                     And best hee'll take it from a mothers tongue.)
                     Alas! what is 't for vs to sound, t' explore,
                     To watch, oppose, plot, practise, or preuent,
                     If he, for whom it is so strongly labour'd,
                     Shall, out of greatnesse, and free spirit, be
                     Supinely negligent? Our citi's now
                     Deuided as in time o'th'ciuill warre,
                     And men forbeare not to declare themselues
                     Of AGRIPPINA'S partie. Euery day,
                     The faction multiplies; and will doe more
                     If not resisted: you can best inlarge it
                     As you find audience. Noble POSTHVMVS,
                     Commend me to your PRISCA: and pray her,
                     Shee will solicite this great businesse
                     To earnest, and most present execution,
                     With all her vtmost credit with AVGVSTA.
                  
                  
                     POS.
                     I shall not faile in my instructions.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     This second (from his mother) will well vrge
                     Our late designe, and spur on CAESARS rage:
                     Which else might grow remisse. The way, to put
                     A prince in bloud, is to present the shapes
                     Of dangers, greater then they are (like late,
                     Or early shadowes) and, sometimes, to faine
                     Where there are none, onely, to make him feare;
                     His feare will make him cruell: And once entred,
                     He doth not easily learne to stop, or spare
                     Where he may doubt. This haue I made my rule,
                     To thrust TIBERIVS into tyrannie,
                     And make him toile, to turne aside those blockes,
                     Which I alone, could not remooue with safetie.
                     DRVSVS once gone, GERMANICVS three sonnes
                     Would clog my way; whose guardes haue too much faith
                     To be corrupted: and their mother knowne
                     Of too-too vnreproou'd a chastitie,
                     To be attempted, as light LIVIA was.
                     Worke then, my art, on CAESAR'S feares, as they
                     On those they feare, till all my betts be clear'd:
                     
                     And he in ruines of his house, and hate
                     Of all his subiects, bury his owne state:
                     When, with my peace, and safty, I will rise,
                     By making him the publike sacrifice.
                  
                  SATRIVS, NATTA.
                  THey'are growne exceeding circumspect, and wary.
                  
                     NAT.
                     They haue vs in the wind: And yet, ARRVNTIVS
                     Cannot contayne himselfe.
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     Tut, hee's not yet
                     Look'd after, there are others more desir'd,
                     That are more silent.
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     Here he comes. Away.
                  
                  SABINVS, ARRVNTIVS, CORDVS.
                  HOw is it, that these beagles haunt the house
                  Of AGRIPPINA?
                  
                     ARR.
                     O, they hunt, they hunt.
                     There is some game here lodg'd, which they must rouse,
                     To make the great-ones sport.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     Did you obserue
                     How they inueigh'd 'gainst CAESAR?
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I, baytes, baytes,
                     For vs to bite at: would I haue my flesh
                     Torne by the publique hooke, these qualified hang-men
                     Should be my company.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     Here comes another.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I, there's a man, AFER the oratour!
                     One, that hath phrases, figures, and fine flowres,
                     To strew his rethorique with, and doth make haste
                     To get him note, or name, by any offer
                     Where bloud, or gaine be obiects; steepes his wordes,
                     When he would kill, in artificiall teares:
                     The Crocodile of Tyber! him I loue,
                     That man is mine. He hath my heart, and voice,
                     When I would curse, he, he.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Contemne the slaues,
                     Their present liues will be their future graues.
                  
                  SILIVS, AGRIPPINA, NERO, SOSIA.
                  MAy't please your highnesse not forget your selfe,
                  I dare not, with my manners, to attempt
                  Your trouble farder.
                  
                     AGR.
                     Farewell, noble SILIVS.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Most royall princesse.
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     SOSIA stayes with vs?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Shee is your seruant, and doth owe your grace
                     An honest, but vnprofitable loue.
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     How can that be, when there's no gaine, but vertuous?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     You take the morall, not the politique sense.
                     
                     I meant, as shee is bold, and free of speech,
                     Earnest to vtter what her zealous thought
                     Trauailes withall, in honour of your house;
                     Which act, as it is simply borne in her,
                     Pertakes of loue, and honesty, but may,
                     By th'ouer-often, and vnseason'd vse,
                     Turne to your losse, and danger: For your state
                     Is wayted on by enuies, as by eyes;
                     And euery second ghest your tables take,
                     Is a fee'd spie, t'obserue who goes, who comes,
                     What conference you haue, with whom, where, when,
                     What the discourse is, what the lookes, the thoughts
                     Of eu'ry person there, they doe extract,
                     And make into a substance.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Heare me, SILIVS,
                     Were all TIBERIVS body stuck with eyes,
                     And eu'ry wall, and hanging in my house
                     Transparent, as this lawne I weare, or ayre;
                     Yea, had SEIANVS both his eares as long
                     As to my in-most closet: I would hate
                     To whisper any thought, or change an act,
                     To be made IVNO'S riuall. Vertues forces
                     Shew euer noblest in conspicuous courses.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     'Tis great, and brauely spoken, like the spirit
                     Of AGRIPPINA: yet, your highnesse knowes,
                     There is nor losse, nor shame in prouidence:
                     Few can, what all should doe, beware inough.
                     You may perceiue with what officious face,
                     SATRIVS, and NATTA, AFER, and the rest
                     Visite your house, of late, t'enquire the secrets;
                     And with what bold, and priuiledg'd arte, they raile
                     Against AVGVSTA: yea, and at TIBERIVS,
                     Tell tricks of LIVIA, and SEIANVS, all
                     T'excite, and call your indignation on,
                     That they might heare it at more libertie.
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     Yo'are too suspitious, SILIVS.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Pray the gods,
                     I be so AGRIPPINA: But I feare
                     Some subtill practice. They, that durst to strike
                     At so examp-lesse, and vn-blam'd a life,
                     As, that of the renown'd GERMANICVS,
                     Will not sit downe, with that exploit alone:
                     "He threatens many, that hath iniur'd one.
                  
                  
                     NER.
                     'Twere best rip forth their tongues, seare out their eies,
                     When next they come.
                  
                  
                     SOS.
                     A fit reward for spies.
                     
                     DRVSVS in: AGRIPPINA, NERO, SILIVS.
                     HEare you the rumour?
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     What?
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     DRVSVS is dying.
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     Dying?
                  
                  
                     NER.
                     That's strange!
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     Yo'were with him, yesternight.
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     One met EVDEMVS, the Physician,
                     Sent for, but now: who thinkes he cannot liue.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Thinkes? if't be arriu'd at that, he knowes,
                     Or none.
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     This's quicke! what should bee his disease?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Poyson. Poyson—
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     How, SILIVS!
                  
                  
                     NER.
                     What's that?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Nay, nothing. There was (late) a certaine blow
                     Giu'n o' the face.
                  
                  
                     NER.
                     I, to SEIANVS?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     True.
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     And, what of that?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     I'am glad I gaue it not.
                  
                  
                     NER.
                     But, there is somewhat else?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Yes, priuate meetings,
                     With a great ladie, at a physicians,
                     And, a wife turn'd away—
                  
                  
                     NER.
                     Ha!
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Toyes, meere toyes:
                     What wisdom's now i'th' streets? i'th' common mouth?
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     Feares, whisp'rings, tumults, noyse, I know not what:
                     They say, the Senate sit.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     I'le thither, straight;
                     And see what's in the forge.
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     Good SILIVS doe.
                     SOSIA, and I will in.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Haste you, my lords,
                     To visit the sicke prince: tender your loues,
                     And sorrowes to the people. This SEIANVS
                     (Trust my diuining soule) hath plots on all:
                     No tree, that stops his prospect, but must fall.
                  
                  CHORVS—Of Musicians.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act III. THE SENATE.
                  SEIANVS, VARRO, LATIARIS. COTTA, AFER. GALLVS, LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS. PRAECONES, LICTORES.
                  
                     TIs only you must vrge against him, VARRO,
                     Nor I, nor CAESAR may appeare therein,
                     Except in your defence, who are the Consul:
                     
                     And, vnder colour of late en'mitie
                     Betweene your father, and his, may better doe it,
                     As free from all suspition of a practice.
                     Here be your notes, what points to touch at; read:
                     Bee cunning in them. AFER ha's them too.
                  
                  
                     
                     VAR.
                     But is he summon'd?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     No. It was debated
                     By CAESAR, and concluded as most fit
                     To him take vnprepar'd.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     And prosecute
                     All vnder name of treason.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     I conceiue.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     DRVSVS being dead, CAESAR will not be here.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     What should the businesse of this Senate bee?
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     That can my subtile whisperers tell you: We,
                     That are the good dull-noble lookers on,
                     Are only call'd to keepe the marble warme.
                     What should we doe with those deepe mysteries,
                     Proper to these fine heads? let them alone.
                     Our ignorance may, perchance, helpe vs be sau'd
                     From whips, and furies.
                     
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     See, see, see, their action!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I, now their heads doe trauaile, now they worke;
                     Their faces runne like shittles▪ they are weauing
                     Some curious cobweb to catch flyes.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Obserue,
                     They take their places.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     What so low?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     O yes,
                     They must be seene to flatter CAESARS griefe
                     Though but in sitting.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     Bid vs silence.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     Silence.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     Fathers Conscript, may this our present meeting
                     Turne faire, and fortunate to the Common-wealth.
                     SILIVS, SENATE.
                     SEe, SILIVS enters.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Haile graue Fathers.
                     
                  
                  
                     LIC.
                     Stand.
                     SILIVS, forbeare thy place.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     How!
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     SILIVS stand forth,
                     The Consul hath to charge thee.
                  
                  
                     LIC.
                     Roome for CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Is he come too? nay then expect a tricke.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     SILIVS accus'd? sure he will answere nobly.
                     TIBERIVS, SENATE.
                     WE stand amazed, Fathers, to behold
                     This generall deiection. Wherefo
                           •
                        e sit
                     
                        Romes Consuls thus dissolu'd, as they had lost
                     All the remembrance both of stile, and place?
                     It not becomes. No woes are of fit waight,
                     To make the honour of the empire stoope:
                     Though I, in my peculiar selfe, may meete
                     Iust reprehension, that so suddenly,
                     And, in so fresh a griefe, would greet the Senate,
                     When priuate tongues, of kinsmen, and allies,
                     (Inspir'd with comforts) lothly are indur'd,
                     The face of men not seene, and scarce the day,
                     To thousands, that communicate our losse.
                     
                     Nor can I argue these of weaknesse; since
                     They take but naturall wayes: yet I must seeke
                     For stronger aides, and those faire helpes draw out
                     From warme imbraces of the common-wealth.
                     Our mother, great AVGVSTA, 'is strooke with time,
                     Our selfe imprest with aged characters,
                     DRVSVS is gone, his children young, and babes,
                     Our aimes must now reflect on those, that may
                     Giue timely succour to these present ills,
                     And are our only glad-suruiuing hopes,
                     The noble issue of GERMANICVS,
                     NERO, and DRVSVS: might it please the Consul
                     
                     Honour them in, (they both attend without.)
                     I would present them to the Senates care,
                     And raise those sunnes of ioy, that should drinke vp
                     These flouds of sorrow, in your drowned eyes.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     By IOVE, I am not OEDIPVS inough,
                     To vnderstand this SPHYNX.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     The princes come.
                     TIBERIVS, NERO, DRVSVS iunior.
                     
                     APproch you noble NERO, noble DRVSVS,
                     These princes, Fathers, when their parent dyed,
                     I gaue vnto their vncle, with this prayer,
                     That, though h' had proper issue of his owne,
                     He would no lesse bring vp, and foster these,
                     Then that selfe-bloud; and by that act confirme
                     Their worths to him, and to posteritie.
                     D
                           •
                        VSVS tane hence, I turne my prayers to you,
                     And, 'fore our countrie, and our gods, beseech
                     You take, and rule AVGVSTVS nephewes sonnes,
                     Sprung of the noblest ancestors; and so
                     Accomplish both my dutie, and your owne.
                     NERO, and DRVSVS, (these shall be to you
                     In place of parents, these your fathers, these,
                     And not vnfitly: For you are so borne,
                     As all your good, or ill's the common-wealths.
                     Receyue them, you strong guardians; and blest go`ds
                     Make all their actions answere to their blouds:
                     Let their great titles find increase by them,
                     Not they by titles. Set them, as in place,
                     So in example, aboue all the Romanes:
                     
                     And may they know no riuals, but themselues.
                     Let fortune giue them nothing; but attend
                     Vpon their vertue: and that still come forth
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     Greater then hope, and better then their fame.
                     Relieue me, Fathers, with your generall voyce.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     May all the gods consent to CAESAR'S wish,
                     
                        A forme of speaking they 
                              ••
                           d. And adde to any honours, that may crowne
                     The hopefull issue of GERMANICVS.
                     
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We thanke you, reuerend Fathers, in their right.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     If this were true now! but the space, the space
                     Betweene the brest, and lips—TIBERIVS heart
                     Lyes a thought farder, then another mans.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     My comforts are so flowing in my ioyes,
                     As, in them, all my streames of griefe are lost,
                     No lesse then are land-waters in the sea,
                     Or showres in riuers; though their cause was such,
                     As might haue sprinkled eu'n the gods with teares:
                     Yet since the greater doth embrace the lesse,
                     We couetously obey.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     Well acted, CAESAR.)
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     And, now I am the happy witnesse made
                     Of your so much desir'd affections,
                     To this great issue, I could wish, the fates
                     Would here set peacefull period to my dayes;
                     How euer, to my labours, I intreat
                     (And beg it of this Senate) some fit ease.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     Laugh, Fathers, laugh: Ha' you no spleenes about you?)
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     The burden is too heauy, I sustayne
                     On my vnwilling shoulders; and I pray
                     It may be taken off, and re-confer'd
                     Vpon the Consuls, or some other Romane,
                     More able, and more worthy.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     Laugh on, still.)
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Why, this doth render all the rest suspected!
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     It poysons all.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     O, do' you taste it then?
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     It takes away my faith to any thing
                     He shall hereafter speake.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I, to pray that,
                     Which would be to his head as hot as thunder,
                     
                        
                           A wreath of laurell.
                         (Gain'st which he weares that charme) should but the court
                     Receiue him at his word
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Heare.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     For my selfe,
                     I know my weakenesse, and so little couet
                     (Like some gone past) the waight that will oppresse me,
                     As my ambition is the counter-point.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     Finely maintain'd; good still.)
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     But Rome, whose bloud,
                     Whose nerues, whose life, whose very frame relyes
                     On CAESAR'S strength, no lesse then heau'n on ATLAS,
                     Cannot admit it but with generall ruine.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     Ah! are you there, to bring him of?)
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Let CAESAR
                     No more then vrge a point so contrary
                     To CAESARS greatnesse, the grieu'd Senates vowes,
                     
                     Or Romes necessitie.
                  
                  
                     (GAL.
                     He comes about.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     More nimbly then VERTVMNVS.)
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     For the publique,
                     I may be drawne, to shew, I can neglect
                     All priuate aymes; though I affect my rest:
                     But, if the Senate still command me serue,
                     I must be glad to practise my obedience.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     You must, and will, sir. We doe know it.)
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     CAESAR,
                     Liue long,
Another forme. and happy, great, and royall CAESAR,
                     The gods preserue thee, and thy modestie,
                     Thy wisedome, and thy innocence.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     Where is't?
                     The prayer's made before the subiect.)
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     Guard
                     His meekenesse, IOVE, his pietie, his care,
                     His bountie—
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     And his subtlety, I'le put in:
                     Yet hee'll keepe that himselfe, without the gods.
                     All prayer's are vaine for him.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We will not hold
                     Your patience, Fathers, with long answere; but
                     Shall still contend to be, what you desire,
                     And worke to satisfie so great a hope:
                     Proceed to your affaires.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Now, SILIVS, guard thee;
                     The curtin's drawing.
                  
                  
                     AFER
                     aduanceth.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     Silence.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     Cite CAIVS, SILIVS.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     CAIVS SILIVS.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Here.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     The triumph that thou hadst in Germanie
                     
                     For thy late victorie on SACROVIR,
                     Thou hast enioy'd so freely, CAIVS SILIVS,
                     As no man it enuy'd thee; nor would CAESAR,
                     Or Rome admit, that thou wert then defrauded
                     Of any honours, thy deserts could clayme,
                     In the faire seruice of the common-wealth:
                     But now, if, after all their loues, and graces,
                     (Thy actions, and their courses being discouer'd)
                     It shall appeare to CAESAR, and this Senate,
                     Thou hast defil'd those glories, with thy crimes—
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Crimes?
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     Patience, SILIVS.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Tell thy moile of patience,
                     I am a Romane. What are my crimes? Proclaime them.
                     Am I too rich? too honest for the times?
                     Haue I or treasure, iewels, land, or houses
                     That some informer gapes for? Is my strength
                     Too much to be admitted? Or my knowledge?
                     These now are crimes.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     Nay, SILIVS, if the name
                     Of crime so touch thee, with what impotence
                     Wilt thou endure the matter to be search'd?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     I tell thee, AFER, with more scorne, then feare:
                     Employ your mercenarie tongue, and arte.
                     Where's my accuser?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     Here.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     VARRO? The Consul?
                     
                     Is he thrust in?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     'Tis I accuse thee, SILIVS.
                     
                     Against the maiestie of Rome, and CAESAR,
                     I doe pronounce thee here a guiltie cause,
                     First, of beginning, and occasioning,
                     Next, drawing out the warre in Gallia,
                     For which thou late triumph'st; dissembling long
                     That SACROVIR to be an enemie,
                     Only to make thy entertainement more,
                     Whil'st thou, and thy wife SOSIA poll'd the prouince;
                     Wherein, with sordide-base desire of gaine,
                     Thou hast discredited thy actions worth
                     And beene a traytor to the state.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Thou lyest.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I thanke thee, SILIVS, speake so still, and often.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     If I not proue it, CAESAR, but iniustly
                     Haue call'd him into tryall, here I bind
                     My selfe to suffer, what I claime 'gainst him;
                     And yeeld, to haue what I haue spoke, confirm'd
                     By iudgement of the court, and all good men.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     CAESAR, I craue to haue my cause defer'd,
                     Till this mans Consulship be out.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We cannot,
                     Nor may we graunt it.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Why? shall he designe
                     My day of tryall? is he my accuser?
                     And must he be my iudge?
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     It hath beene vsuall,
                     And is a right, that custome hath allow'd
                     The magistrate, to call forth priuate men;
                     And to appoint their day: Which priuiledge
                     We may not in the Consul see infring'd,
                     By whose deepe watches, and industrious care
                     It is so labour'd, as the common-wealth
                     Receiue no losse, by any oblique course.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     CAESAR, thy fraud is worse then violence.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     SILIVS, mistake vs not, we dare not vse
                     The credit of the Consul, to thy wrong,
                     But only doe preserue his place, and power,
                     So farre as it concernes the dignitie,
                     And honor of the state.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Beleeue him, SILIVS.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Why, so he may, ARRVNTIVS.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I say so.
                     And he may choose too.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     By the capitoll,
                     And all our gods, but that the deare republick,
                     Our sacred lawes, and iust authoritie
                     Are interess'd therein, I should be silent.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     Please' CAESAR to giue way vnto his tryall.
                     He shall haue iustice.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Nay, I shall haue law;
                     Shall I not AFER? speake.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     Would you haue 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     No, my well-spoken man, I would no more;
                     Nor lesse: might I inioy it naturall,
                     
                     Not taught to speake vnto your present ends,
                     Free from thine, his, and all your vnkind handling,
                     Furious enforcing, most vniust presuming,
                     Malicious, and manifold applying,
                     Foule wresting, and impossible construction.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     He raues, he raues.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Thou durst not tell me so,
                     Had'st thou not CAESARS warrant. I can see
                     Whose power condemnes me.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     This betrayes his spirit.
                     This doth inough declare him what he is.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     What am I? speake.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     An enemie to the state.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Because I am an enemie to thee,
                     And such corrupted ministers o' the state,
                     That here art made a present instrument
                     To gratifie it with thine owne disgrace.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     This, to the Consul, is most insolent!
                     And impious!
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     I, take part. Reueale your selues.
                     Alas, I sent not your confed'racies?
                     Your plots, and combinations? I not know
                     Minion SEIANVS hates me; and that all
                     This boast of law, and law, is but a forme,
                     A net of VULCANES filing, a meere ingine,
                     To take that life by a pretext of iustice,
                     Which you pursue in malice? I want braine,
                     Or nostrill to perswade me, that your ends,
                     And purposes are made to what they are,
                     Before my answere? O, you equall gods,
                     Whose iustice not a world of wolfe-turn'd men
                     Shall make me to accuse (how ere prouoke)
                     Haue I for this so oft engag'd my selfe?
                     Stood in the heate, and feruor of a fight,
                     When PHOEBVS sooner hath forsooke the day
                     Then I the field? Against the blue-ey'd Gaules?
                     
                     And crisped Germanes? when our Romane Eagles
                     Haue fann'd the fire, with their labouring wings,
                     And no blow dealt, that left not death behind it?
                     When I haue charg'd, alone, into the troopes
                     Of curl'd Sicambrians, routed them, and came
                     Not off, with backward ensignes of a slaue,
                     But forward markes, wounds on my brest, and face,
                     Were meant to thee, Ô CAESAR, and thy Rome?
                     
                     And haue I this returne? did I, for this,
                     Performe so noble, and so braue defeate,
                     On SACROVIR? (Ô IOVE, let it become me
                     To boast my deedes, when he, whom they concerne,
                     Shall thus forget them.)
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     SILIVS, SILIVS,
                     
                     These are the common customes of thy bloud,
                     When it is high with wine, as now with rage:
                     This well agrees, with that intemperate vaunt,
                     Thou lately mad'st at AGRIPPINA'S table,
                     That when all other of the troopes were prone
                     To fall into rebellion, only yours
                     Remain'd in their obedience. You were he,
                     That sau'd the empire; which had then beene lost,
                     Had but your legions, there, rebell'd, or mutin'd.
                     Your vertue met, and fronted euery perill.
                     You gaue to CAESAR, and to Rome their surety.
                     Their name, their strength, their spirit, and their state,
                     Their being was a donatiue from you.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Well worded, and most like an Orator.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Is this true, SILIVS?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Saue thy question, CAESAR.
                     Thy spie, of famous credit, hath affirm'd it.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Excellent Romane!
                     
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     He doth answere stoutly.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     If this be so, there needes no farder cause
                     Of crime against him.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     What can more impeach
                     The royall dignitie, and state of CAESAR,
                     Then to be vrged with a benefit
                     He cannot pay?
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     In this, all CAESARS fortune
                     Is made vnequall to the courtesie.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     His meanes are cleane destroy'd, that should requite.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Nothing is great inough for SILIVS merit.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     GALLVS on that side to?
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Come, doe not hunt,
                     And labour so about for circumstance,
                     To make him guiltie, whom you haue fore-doom'd:
                     Take shorter wayes, I'le meet your purposes.
                     The wordes were mine, and more I now will say:
                     Since I haue done thee that great seruice, CAESAR,
                     Thou still hast fear'd me; and, in place of grace,
                     Return'd me hatred: so soone, all best turnes,
                     With doubtfull Princes, turne deepe iniuries
                     In estimation, when they greater rise,
                     Then can be answer'd. Benefits, with you,
                     Are of no longer pleasure, then you can
                     With ease restore them; that transcended once,
                     Your studies are not how to thanke, but kill.
                     It is your nature, to haue all men slaues
                     To you, but you acknowledging to none.
                     The meanes that makes your greatnesse, must not come
                     In mention of it; if it doe, it takes
                     So much away, you thinke: and that, which help'd,
                     Shall soonest perish, if it stand in eye,
                     
                     Where it may front, or but vpbraid the high.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Suffer him speake no more.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     Note but his spirit.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     This shewes him in the rest.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Let him be censur'd.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     He' hath spoke inough to proue him CAESARS foe.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     His thoughts looke through his words.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     A censure.
                  
                  
                     SIL.
                     Stay,
                     Stay, most officious Senate, I shall straight
                     Delude thy furie. SILIVS hath not plac'd
                     His guards within him, against fortunes spight,
                     So weakely, but he can escape your gripe
                     That are but hands of fortune: Shee her selfe
                     When vertue doth oppose, must lose her threats.
                     All that can happen in humanitie,
                     The frowne of CAESAR, proud SEIANVS hatred,
                     Base VARRO'S spleene, and AFERS bloudying tongue,
                     The Senates seruile flatterie, and these
                     Mustred to kill, I'am fortified against;
                     And can looke downe vpon: they are beneath me.
                     It is not life whereof I stand enamour'd:
                     Nor shall my end make me accuse my fate.
                     The coward, and the valiant man must fall,
                     Only the cause, and manner how, discernes them:
                     Which then are gladdest, when they cost vs dearest.
                     
                        Romanes, if any here be in this Senate,
                     Would know to mock TIBERIVS tyrannie,
                     Looke vpon SILIVS, and so learne to die.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     O, desperate act!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     An honorable hand!
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Looke, is he dead?
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     'Twas nobly strooke, and home.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     My thought did prompt him to it. Farewell, SILIVS.
                     Be famous euer for thy great example.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We are not pleas'd, in this sad accident,
                     That thus hath stalled, and abus'd our mercy,
                     Intended to preserue thee, noble Romane:
                     
                     And to preuent thy hopes.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Excellent wolfe!
                     Now he is full, he howles.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     CAESAR doth wrong
                     His dignitie, and safetie, thus to mourne
                     The deseru'd end of so profest a traytor,
                     And doth, by this his lenitie, instruct
                     Others as factious, to the like offence.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     The confiscation meerely of his state
                     Had beene inough.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     O, that was gap'd for then?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     Remoue the body.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Let citation
                     Goe out for SOSIA.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Let her be proscrib'd.
                     And for the goods, I thinke it fit that halfe
                     Goe to the treasure, halfe vnto the children.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     With leaue of CAESAR, I would thinke, that fourth
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     Part, which the law doth cast on the informers,
                     Should be inough; the rest goe to the children:
                     Wherein the Prince shall shew humanitie,
                     And bountie, not to force them by their want
                     (Which in their parents trespasse they deseru'd)
                     To take ill courses.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     It shall please vs.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I,
                     Out of necessitie. This LEPIDVS
                     Is graue and honest, and I haue obseru'd
                     A moderation still in all his censures.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     And bending to the better—Stay, who's this?
                     CREMVTIVS CORDVS? what? is he brought in?
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     More bloud vnto the banquet? Noble CORDVS,
                     I wish thee good: Be as thy writings, free,
                     And honest.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     What is he?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     For th'Annal's, CAESAR.
                  
                  PRAECO, CORDVS, SATRIVS, NATTA.
                  CREMVTIVS CORDꝰ.
                  
                     COR.
                     Here.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     SATRIVS SECVNDꝰ,
                     PINNARIVS NATTA, you are his accusers.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Two of SEIANVS bloud-hounds, whom he breeds
                     With humane flesh, to bay at citizens.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     Stand forth before the Senate, and confront him.
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     I doe accuse thee here, CREMVTIVS CORDVS,
                     To be a man factious, and dangerous,
                     A sower of sedition in the state,
                     A turbulent, and discontented spirit,
                     Which I will proue from thine owne writings, here,
                     The Annal's thou hast publish'd; where thou bit'st
                     The present age, and with a vipers tooth,
                     Being a member of it, dar'st that ill
                     Which neuer yet degenerous bastard did
                     Vpon his parent.
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     To this, I subscribe;
                     And, forth a world of more particulars,
                     Instance in only one: Comparing men,
                     And times, thou praysest BRVTVS, and affirm'st
                     That CASSIVS was the last of all the Romanes.
                     
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     How! what are we then?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     What is CAESAR? nothing?
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     My lords, this strikes at euery Romanes priuate,
                     In whom raignes gentrie, and estate of spirit,
                     To haue a BRVTVS brought in parallel,
                     A parricide, an enemie of his countrie,
                     Rank'd, and preferr'd to any reall worth
                     That Rome now holds. This is most strangely inuectiue.
                     Most full of spight, and insolent vpbraiding.
                     Nor is't the time alone is here dispris'd,
                     
                     But the whole man of time, yea CAESAR'S selfe
                     Brought in disualew; and he aym'd at most
                     By oblique glance of his licentious pen.
                     CAESAR, if CASSIVS were the last of Romanes,
                     Thou hast no name.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Let's heare him answere. Silence.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     So innocent I am of fact, my lords,
                     As but my words are argu'd; yet those words
                     Not reaching eyther prince, or princes parent:
                     The which your law of treason comprehends.
                     BRVTVS, and CASSIVS, I am charg'd, t' haue prays'd:
                     Whose deedes, when many more, besides my selfe,
                     Haue writ, not one hath mention'd without honour.
                     Great TITVS LIVIVS, great for eloquence,
                     And faith, amongst vs, in his historie,
                     With so great prayses POMPEY did extoll,
                     As oft AVGVSTVS call'd him a POMPEIAN:
                     Yet this not hurt their friendship. In his booke
                     He often names SCIPIO, AFRANIVS,
                     Yea, the same CASSIVS, and this BRVTVS too,
                     As worthi'st men; not theeues, and parricides,
                     Which notes, vpon their fames, are now impos'd.
                     ASINIVS POLLIO'S writings quite throughout
                     Giue them a noble memorie; SO MESSALLA
                     Renown'd his generall CASSIVS: yet both these
                     Liu'd with AVGVSTVS, full of wealth, and honours.
                     To CICERO'S booke, where CATO was heau'd vp
                     Equall with heau'n, what else did CAESAR answere,
                     Being then Dictator, but with a penn'd oration,
                     As if before the iudges? Doe but see
                     ANTONIVS letters; read but BRVTVS pleadings:
                     What vile reproch they hold against AVGVSTVS,
                     False I confesse, but with much bitternesse.
                     The Epigram's of BIBACVLVS, and CATVLLVS,
                     Are read, full stuft with spight of both the CAESARS;
                     Yet deified IVLIVS, and no lesse AVGVSTVS!
                     Both bore them, and contemn'd them: (I not know
                     Promptly to speake it, whether done with more
                     Temper, or wisdome) for such obloquies
                     If they despised bee, they dye supprest,
                     But, if with rage acknowledg'd, they are confest.
                     The Greekes I slip, whose licence not alone,
                     But also lust did scape vnpunished:
                     Or where some one (by chance) exception tooke,
                     He words with words reueng'd. But, in my worke,
                     What could be aim'd more free, or farder of
                     
                     From the times scandale, then to write of those,
                     Whom death from grace, or hatred had exempted?
                     Did I, with BRVTVS, and with CASSIVS,
                     Arm'd, and possess'd of the PHILIPPI fields,
                     Incense the people in the ciuill cause,
                     With dangerous speeches? or doe they, being slaine
                     Seuentie yeeres since, as by their images
                     (Which not the conquerour hath defac'd) appeares,
                     Retaine that guiltie memorie with writers?
                     Posterie payes euerie man his honour.
                     Nor shall there want, though I condemned am,
                     That will not only CASSIVS well approue,
                     And of great BRVTVS honour mindfull be,
                     But that will, also, mention make of me.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Freely, and nobly spoken.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     With good temper,
                     I like him, that he is not moou'd with passion.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     He puts 'hem to their whisper.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Take him hence,
                     We shall determine of him at next sitting.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Meane time, giue order, that his bookes be burn't,
                     To the' Aediles.
                     
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     You haue well aduis'd.
                  
                  
                     AFE.
                     It fits not such licentious things should liue
                     T' vpbraid the age.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     If th' age were good, they might.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Let'hem be burnt.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     All sought, and burnt, to day.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     The court is vp, Lictors, resume the fasces.
                     
                  
                  ARRVNTIVS, SABINVS, LEPIDVS.
                  LEt 'hem be burnt! Ô, how ridiculous
                  Appeares the Senate's brainlesse diligence,
                  Who thinke they can, with present power, extinguish
                  The memorie of all succeeding times!
                  
                     SAB.
                     'Tis true when (contrarie) the punishment
                     Of wit, doth make th' authoritie increase.
                     Nor doe they ought, that vse this crueltie
                     Of interdiction, and this rage of burning;
                     But purchase to themselues rebuke, and shame,
                     And to the writers an eternall name.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     It is an argument the times are sore,
                     When vertue cannot safely be aduanc'd;
                     Nor vice reproou'd.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I, noble LEPIDVS,
                     AVGVSTVS well foresaw, what we should suffer,
                     Vnder TIBERIVS, when he did pronouuce
                     The Roman race most wretched, that should liue
                     Betweene so slow iawes, and so long a bruising.
                     
                     TIBERIVS, SEIANVS.
                     THis businesse hath succeeded well, SEIANVS:
                     And quite remoou'd all iealousie of practice
                     'Gainst AGRIPPINA, and our nephewes. Now,
                     We must bethinke vs how to plant our ingines
                     For th' other paire, SABINVS, and ARRVNTIVS,
                     And GALLVS too (how ere he flatter vs,)
                     His heart we know.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Giue it some respite, CAESAR.
                     Time shall mature, and bring to perfect crowne,
                     What we, with so good vultures, haue begunne:
                     SABINVS shall be next.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Rather ARRVNTIVS.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     By any meanes, preserue him. His franke tongue
                     Being lent the reines, will take away all thought
                     Of malice, in your course against the rest.
                     We must keep him to stalke with.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Dearest head,
                     To thy most forunate designe I yeeld it.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Sir— I' haue beene so long train'd vp in grace,
                     First, with your father, great AVGVSTVS, since,
                     With your most happie bounties so familiar,
                     As I not sooner would commit my hopes
                     Or wishes to the gods, then to your eares.
                     Nor haue I euer, yet, beene couetous
                     Of ouer-bright, and dazling honours: rather
                     To watch, and trauaile in great CAESAR'S safetie,
                     With the most common souldier.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     'Tis confest.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     The only gaine, and which I count most faire
                     Of all my fortunes,

                           His daughter was betroth'd to Claudius, his sonne.
                         is that mightie CAESAR
                     Hath thought me worthie his alliance. Hence
                     Beginne my hopes.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     H'mh?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     I haue heard, AVGVSTVS
                     In the bestowing of his daughter, thought
                     But euen of gentlemen of Rome: If so,
                     (I know not how to hope so great a fauour)
                     But if a husband should be sought for LIVIA,
                     And I be had in minde, as CAESARS freind,
                     I would but vse the glorie of the kindred.
                     It should not make me slothfull, or lesse caring
                     For CAESARS state; it were inough to me
                     It did confirme, and strengthen my weake house,
                     Against the-now-vnequall opposition
                     Of AGRIPPINA; 'and for deare reguard
                     Vnto my children, this I wish: my selfe
                     Haue no ambition farder, then to end
                     My dayes in seruice of so deare a master.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We cannot but commend thy pietie
                     
                     Most-lou'd SEIANVS, in acknowledging
                     Those bounties; which we faintly, such, remember.
                     But to thy suit. The rest of mortall men,
                     In all their drifts, and counsels, pursue profit:
                     Princes, alone, are of a different sort,
                     Directing their maine actions still to fame.
                     VVe therefore will take time to thinke, and answere.
                     For LIVIA, she can best, her selfe, resolue
                     If she will marrie after DRVSVS, or
                     Continue in the family; besides
                     She hath a mother, and a grandame yet,
                     VVhose neerer counsels she may guide her by:
                     But I will simply deale. That enmitie,
                     Thou fear'st in AGRIPPINA, would burne more,
                     If LIVIAS marriage should (as 'twere in parts)
                     Deuide th' imperiall house; an emulation
                     Betweene the women might breake forth; and discord
                     Ruine the sonnes, and nephues, on both hands.
                     VVhat if it cause some present difference?
                     Thou art not safe, SEIANVS, if thou prooue it.
                     Canst thou beleeue, that LIVIA who was wife
                     To CAIVS CAESAR, then to DRVSVS, now
                     VVill be contented to grow old with thee,
                     Borne but a priuate gentleman of Rome?
                     
                     And rayse thee with her losse, if not her shame?
                     Or say, that I should wish it, canst thou thinke
                     The Senate, or the people (who haue seene
                     Her brother, father, and our ancestors,
                     In highest place of empire) will indure it?
                     The state thou hold'st alreadie, is in talke;
                     Men murmure at thy greatnesse; and the nobles
                     Sticke not, in publike, to vpbraid thy climbing
                     Aboue our fathers fauours, or thy scale:
                     And dare accuse me, from their hate to thee.
                     Be wise, deare friend. VVe would not hide these things
                     For friendships deare respect. Nor will we stand
                     Aduerse to thine, or LIVIA'S designements.
                     VVhat we had purpos'd to thee, in our thought,
                     And with what neere degrees of loue to bind thee,
                     And make thee equall to vs, for the present,
                     VVe will forbeare to speake. Only thus much
                     Beleeue our lou'd SEIANVS, we not know
                     That height in bloud, or honour, which thy vertue,
                     And minde to vs, may not aspire with merit;
                     And this wee'll publish, on all watch'd occasion
                     
                     The Senate, or the people shall present.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     I am restor'd, and to my sense againe,
                     Which I had lost in this so blinding suit.
                     CAESAR hath taught me better to refuse,
                     Then I knew how to aske. How pleaseth CAESAR
                     T' imbrace my late aduice, for leauing Rome?
                     
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     We are resolu'd.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Here are some motiues more
                     Which I haue thought on since, may more confirme.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Carefull SEIANVS! we will straight peruse them:
                     Goe forward in our maine designe, and prosper.
                     SEIANVS.
                     IF those but take, I shall. Dull, heauie CAESAR!
                     Would'st thou tell me, thy fauours were made crimes?
                     And that my fortunes were esteem'd thy faults?
                     That thou, for me, wert hated? and not thinke
                     I would with winged haste preuent that change,
                     When thou might'st winne all to thy selfe againe,
                     By forfeiture of me? Did those fond words
                     Fly swifter from thy lips, then this my braine,
                     This sparkling forge, created me an armor
                     T' encounter chance, and thee? Well, read my charmes,
                     And may they lay that hold vpon thy senses,
                     As thou had'st snuft vp hemlocke, or tane downe
                     The iuice of poppie, and of mandrakes. Sleepe,
                     Voluptuous CAESAR, and securitie
                     Seize on thy stupide powers, and leaue them dead
                     To publique cares, awake but to thy lusts.
                     The strength of which makes thy libidinous soule
                     Itch to leaue Rome; and I haue thrust it on:
                     With blaming of the citie businesse,
                     The multitude of suites, the confluence
                     Of suitors, then their importunacies,
                     The manifold distractions he must suffer,
                     Besides ill rumours, enuies, and reproches,
                     All which, a quiet and retired life,
                     (Larded with ease, and pleasure) did auoid;
                     And yet, for any weightie, 'and great affaire,
                     The fittest place to giue the soundest counsels.
                     By this, shall I remooue him both from thought,
                     And knowledge of his owne most deare affaires;
                     Draw all dispatches through my priuate hands;
                     Know his designements, and pursue mine owne;
                     Make mine owne strengths, by giuing suites, and places;
                     
                     Conferring dignities, and offices:
                     And these▪ that hate me now, wanting accesse
                     To him, will make their enuie none, or lesse.
                     For when they see me arbiter of all,
                     They must obserue: or else, with CAESAR fall.
                  
                  TIBERIVS, SERVUS.
                  TO marry LIVIA? will no lesse, SEIANVS,
                  Content thy aimes? no lower obiect? well!
                  Thou know'st how thou art wrought into our trust;
                  Wouen in our designe; and think'st, we must
                  Now vse thee, whatsoere thy proiects are:
                  'Tis true. But yet with caution, and fit care.
                  And, now we better thinke— who's there, within?
                  
                     SER.
                     CAESAR?
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     To leaue our iourney off, were sin
                     'Gainst our decree'd delights; and would appeare
                     Doubt: or (what lesse becomes a prince) low feare.
                     Yet, doubt hath law, and feares haue their excuse,
                     Where princes states plead necessarie vse;
                     As ours doth now: more in SEIANVS pride,
                     Then all fell AGRIPPINA'S hates beside.
                     Those are the dreadfull enemies, we raise
                     VVith fauours, and make dangerous, with prayse;
                     The iniur'd by vs may haue will alike,
                     But 'tis the fauourite hath the power, to strike:
                     And furie euer boyles more high, and strong,
                     Heat'with ambition, then reuenge of wrong.
                     'Tis then a part of supreme skill, to grace
                     No man too much; but hold a certaine space
                     Betweene th' ascenders rise, and thine owne flat,
                     Lest, when all rounds be reach'd, his aime be that.
                     'Tis thought— IS MACRO in the palace? See:
                     If not goe, seeke him, to come to vs— Hee
                     Must be the organ, we must worke by now;
                     Though none lesse apt for trust: Need doth allow
                     VVhat choise would not. I' haue heard, that aconite
                     
                     Being timely taken, hath a healing might
                     Against the scorpions stroke; the proofe wee'll giue:
                     That, while two poysons wrastle, we may liue.
                     Hee hath a spirit too working, to be vs'd
                     But to th' encounter of his like; excus'd
                     Are wiser sou'raignes then, that raise one ill
                     Against another, and both safely kill:
                     The prince, that 
                           •
                        eeds great natures, they will sway him;
                     VVho nourisheth a lyon, must obey him.
                     
                     TIBERIVS, MACRO.
                     MAcro, we sent for you.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     I heard so, CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     (Leaue vs awhile.) When you shal know, good MACRO,
                     The causes of our sending, and the ends;
                     You then will harken neerer: and be pleas'd
                     You stand so high, both in our choise, and trust.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     The humblest place in CAESARS choise, or trust,
                     May make glad MACRO proud; without ambition:
                     Saue to doe CAESAR seruice.
                  
                  
                     TIB.
                     Leaue our courtings.
                     We are in purpose, MACRO, to depart
                     The citie for a time, and see Campania;
                     Not for our pleasures, but to dedicate
                     A paire of temples, one, to IVPITER
                     At Capua, th'other at Nola, to AVGVSTVS:
                     In which great worke, perhaps, our stay will be
                     Beyond our will produc't. Now, since we are
                     Not ignorant what danger may be borne
                     Out of our shortest absence, in a state
                     So subiect vnto enuie, and embroild
                     With hate, and faction; we haue thought on thee,
                     (Amongst a field of Romanes,) worthiest MACRO,
                     To be our eye, and eare, to keepe strict watch
                     On AGRIPPINA, NERO, DRVSVS, I,
                     And on SEIANVS: Not, that we distrust
                     His loyaltie, or doe repent one grace,
                     Of all that heape, we haue conferd on him.
                     (For that were to disparage our election,
                     And call that iudgement now in doubt, which then
                     Seem'd as vnquestion'd as an oracle,)
                     But, greatnesse hath his cankers. Wormes, and moaths
                     Breed out of too fit matter, in the things
                     Which after they consume, transferring quite
                     The substance of their makers, int'themselues.
                     MACRO is sharpe, and apprehends. Besides,
                     I know him subtle, close, wise, and wel-read
                     In man, and his large nature. He hath studied
                     Affections, passions, knowes their springs, their ends,
                     Which way, and whether they will worke: 'tis proofe
                     Inough, of his great merit, that we trust him.
                     Then, to a point; (because our conference
                     Cannot be long without suspition)
                     Here, MACRO, we assigne thee, both to spie,
                     Informe, and chastise; thinke, and vse thy meanes,
                     Thy ministers, what, where, on whom thou wilt;
                     
                     Explore, plot, practise: All thou doost in this,
                     Shall be, as if the Senate, or the Lawes
                     Had giu'n it priuiledge, and thou thence stil'd
                     The sauier both of CAESAR, and of Rome.
                     
                     We will not take thy answere, but in act:
                     Whereto, as thou proceed'st, we hope to heare
                     By trusted messengers. If't be enquir'd,
                     Wherefore we call'd you, say, you haue in charge
                     To see our chariots readie, and our horse:
                     Be still our lou'd, and (shortly) honor'd MACRO.
                     MACRO.
                     I Will not aske, why CAESAR bids doe this:
                     But ioy, that he bids me. It is the blisse
                     Of courts, to be imploy'd; no matter, how:
                     A princes power makes all his actions vertue.
                     We, whom he workes by, are dumbe instruments,
                     To doe, but not enquire: His great intents
                     Are to be seru'd, not search'd. Yet, as that bow
                     Is most in hand, whose owner best doth know
                     T'affect his aymes, so let that states-man hope
                     Most vse, most price, can hit his princes scope.
                     Nor must he looke at what, or whom to strike,
                     But lose at all; each marke must be alike.
                     Were it to plot against the fame, the life
                     Of one, with whom I twin'd; remoue a wife
                     From my warme side, as lou'd, as is the ayre;
                     Practise away each parent; draw mine heyre
                     In compasse, though but one; worke all my kin
                     To swift perdition; leaue no vntrain'd engin,
                     For friendship, or for innocence; nay, make
                     The gods all guiltie: I would vndertake
                     This, being impos'd me, both with gaine, and ease.
                     The way to rise, is to obey, and please.
                     He that will thriue in state, he must neglect
                     The trodden paths, that truth and right respect;
                     And proue new, wilder wayes: for vertue, there,
                     Is not that narrow thing, shee is else-where.
                     Mens fortune there is vertue; reason, their will:
                     Their licence, law; and their obseruance, skill.
                     Occasion, is their foile; conscience, their staine;
                     Profit, their lustre: and what else is, vaine.
                     If then it be the lust of CAESARS power,
                     T'haue rais'd SEIANVS vp, and in an hower
                     
                     O're-turne him, tumbling, downe, from height of all;
                     We are his ready engine: and his fall
                     May be our rise. It is no vncouth thing
                     To see fresh buildings from old ruines spring.
                  
                  CHORVS—Of Musicians.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act IIII.
                  GALLVS, AGRIPPINA, NERO, DRVSVS, CALIGVLA.
                  
                     YOu must haue patience, royall AGRIPPINA.
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     I must haue vengeance, first: and that were nectar
                     
                     Vnto my famish'd spirits. O, my fortune,
                     Let it be sodaine thou prepar'st against me;
                     Strike all my powers of vnderstanding blind,
                     And ignorant of destinie to come:
                     Let me not feare, that cannot hope.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Deare Princesse,
                     These tyrannies, on your selfe, are worse then CAESAR'S.
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     Is this the happinesse of being borne great?
                     Still to be aim'd at? still to be suspected?
                     To liue the subiect of all iealousies?
                     At least the colour made, if not the ground
                     To euery painted danger? who would not
                     Choose once to fall, then thus to hang for euer?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     You might be safe, if you would —
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     What, my GALLVS?
                     Be lewd SEIANVS strumpet? Or the baud
                     To CAESARS lusts, he now is gone to practise?
                     Not these are safe, where nothing is. Your selfe,
                     While thus you stand but by me, are not safe.
                     Was SILIVS safe? or the good SOSIA safe?
                     Or was my niece, deare CLAVDIA PVLCHRA safe?
                     Or innocent FVRNIVS? They, that latest haue
                     (By being made guiltie) added reputation
                     To AFERS eloquence? O, foolish friends,
                     Could not so fresh example warne your loues,
                     But you must buy my fauours, with that losse
                     Vnto your selues: and, when you might perceiue
                     That CAESARS cause of raging must forsake him,
                     Before his will? Away, good GALLVS, leaue me.
                     Here to be seene, is danger; to speake, treason:
                     To doe me least obseruance, is call'd faction.
                     You are vnhappy in me, and I in all.
                     Where are my sonnes? NERO? and DRVSVS? We
                     
                     Are they, be shot at; Let vs fall apart:
                     Not, in our ruines, sepulchre our friends.
                     Or shall we doe some action, like offence,
                     To mocke their studies, that would make vs faultie?
                     And frustrate practice, by preuenting it?
                     The danger's like: for, what they can contriue,
                     They will make good. No innocence is safe,
                     When power contests. Nor can they trespasse more,
                     Whose only being was all crime, before.
                  
                  
                     NER.
                     You heare, SEIANVS is come backe from CAESAR?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     No. How? Disgrac'd?
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     More graced now, then euer.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     By what mischance?
                  
                  
                     CAL.
                     A fortune, like inough
                     Once to be bad.
                  
                  
                     DRV.
                     But turn'd too good, to both.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     What was't?
                  
                  
                     NER.
                     TIBERIVS sitting at his meat,
                     In a farme house, they call Spelunca, sited
                     By the sea-side, among the Fundane hills,
                     Within a naturall caue, part of the grot
                     (About the entrie) fell, and ouer-whelm'd
                     Some of the wayters; others ran away:
                     Only SEIANVS, with his knees, hands, face,
                     Ore-hanging CAESAR, did oppose himselfe
                     To the remayning ruines, and was found
                     In that so labouring posture, by the souldiers
                     That came to succour him. With which aduenture,
                     He hath so sixt himselfe in CAESAR'S trust,
                     As thunder cannot mooue him, and is come
                     With all the height of CAESARS praise, to Rome.
                     
                  
                  
                     AGR.
                     And power, to turne those ruines all on vs;
                     And bury whole posterities beneath them.
                     NERO, and DRVSVS, and CALIGVLA,
                     Your places are the next, and therefore most
                     In their offence. Thinke on your birth, and bloud,
                     Awake your spirits, meete their violence,
                     'Tis princely, when a tyran doth oppose;
                     And is a fortune sent to exercise
                     Your vertue, as the wind doth trie strong trees:
                     Who by vexation grow more sound, and firme.
                     After your fathers fall, and vncles fate,
                     What can you hope, but all the change of stroke
                     That force, or slight can giue? then stand vpright;
                     And though you doe not act, yet suffer nobly:
                     Be worthy of my wombe, and take strong cheare;
                     What we doe know will come, we should not feare.
                     
                     MACRO.
                     REturn'd so soone? renew'd in trust, and grace?
                     Is CAESAR then so weake? or hath the place
                     But wrought this alteration, with the aire;
                     And he, on next remoue, will all repaire?
                     MACRO, thou art ingag'd: and what before
                     Was publique; now, must be thy priuate, more.
                     The weale of CAESAR, fitnesse did imply;
                     But thine owne fate confers necessity
                     On thy employment: and the thoughts borne nearest
                     Vnto our selues, moue swiftest still, and dearest.
                     If he recouer, thou art lost: yea, all
                     The weight of preparation to his fall
                     Will turne on thee, and crush thee. Therefore, strike
                     Before he settle, to preuent the like
                     Vpon thy selfe. He doth his vantage know,
                     That makes it home, and giues the foremost blow.
                  
                  LATIARIS, RVFVS, OPSIVS.
                  IT is a seruice, great SEIANVS will
                  See well requited, and accept of nobly.
                  Here place your selues, betweene the roofe, and seeling,
                  And when I bring him to his wordes of danger,
                  Reueale your selues, and take him.
                  
                     RVF.
                     Is he come?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     I'le now goe fetch him.
                  
                  
                     OPS.
                     With good speed. I long
                     To merit from the state, in such an action.
                  
                  
                     RVF.
                     I hope, it will obtayne the Consul-ship
                     For one of vs.
                  
                  
                     OPS.
                     We cannot thinke of lesse,
                     To bring in one, so dangerous as SABINVS.
                  
                  
                     RVF.
                     He was a follower of GERMANICVS,
                     And still is an obseruer of his wife,
                     And children, though they be declin'd in grace;
                     A daily visitant, keepes them companie
                     In priuate, and in publique; and is noted
                     To be the only client, of the house:
                     Pray IOVE, he will be free to LATIARIS.
                  
                  
                     OPS.
                     H'is alli'd to him, and doth trust him well.
                  
                  
                     RVF.
                     And he'll requite his trust?
                  
                  
                     OPS.
                     To doe an office
                     So gratefull to the state, I know no man
                     But would straine neerer bands, then kindred—
                  
                  
                     RVF.
                     List,
                     I heare them come.
                  
                  
                     OPS.
                     Shift to our holes, with silence.
                  
                  
                  LATIARIS, SABINVS.
                  IT is a noble constancie you shew
                  To this afflicted house: that not like others,
                  (The friends of season) you doe follow fortune,
                  And in the winter of their fate, forsake
                  The place, whose glories warm'd you. You are iust,
                  And worthy such a princely patrones loue,
                  As was the worlds-renown'd GERMANICVS:
                  Whose ample merit when I call to thought,
                  And see his wife and issue, obiects made
                  To so much enuie, iealousie, and hate,
                  It makes me ready to accuse the gods
                  Of negligence, as men of tyrannie.
                  
                     SAB.
                     They must be patient, so must we.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     O IOVE.
                     What will become of vs, or of the times,
                     When, to be high, or noble, are made crimes?
                     When land, and treasure are most dangerous faults?
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Nay, when our table, yea our bed assaults
                     Our peace, and safetie? when our writings are,
                     By any enuious instruments (that dare
                     Apply them to the guiltie) made to speake
                     What they will haue, to fit their tyrannous wreake?
                     When ignorance is scarcely innocence:
                     And knowledge made a capitall offence?
                     When not so much, but the bare emptie shade
                     Of libertie, is reft vs? and we made,
                     The prey to greedie Vultures, and vile spies,
                     That first transfixe vs with their murdering eyes?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Me thinkes, the Genius of the Romane race
                     Should not be so extinct, but that bright flame
                     Of libertie might be reuiu'd againe,
                     (Which no good man but with his life, should lose)
                     And we not sit like spent, and patient fooles
                     Still puffing in the darke, at one poore coale,
                     Held on by hope, till the last sparke is out.
                     The cause is publique, and the honour, name,
                     The immortalitie of euery soule
                     That is not bastard, or a slaue in Rome,
                     Therein concern'd: Whereto, if men would change
                     The weari'd arme, and for the waightie shield
                     So long sustain'd, employ the facile sword,
                     We might haue some assurance of our vowes.
                     This asses fortitude doth tyre vs all.
                     It must be actiue valour must redeeme
                     
                     Our losse, or none. The rocke, and our hard steele
                     Should meete, t'enforce those glorious fires againe,
                     Whose splendor cheer'd the world, and heat gaue life
                     No lesse then doth the sunne's.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     'Twere better stay,
                     In lasting darkenesse, and despaire of day.
                     No ill should force the subiect vndertake
                     Against the soueraigne; more then hell should make
                     The gods doe wrong. A good man should, and must
                     Sit rather downe with losse, then rise vniust.
                     Though, when the Romanes first did yeeld themselues
                     To one mans power, they did not meane their liues,
                     Their fortunes, and their liberties, should be
                     His absolute spoile, as purchas'd by the sword.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Why we are worse, if to be slaues, and bond
                     To CAESARS slaue, be such, the proud SEIANVS?
                     He that is all, do's all, giues CAESAR leaue
                     To hide his vlcerous, and anointed face,
                     With his bald crowne at Rhodes, while he here stalkes
                     Vpon the heads of Romanes, and their Princes,
                     Familiarly to Empire.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Now you touch
                     A point indeed, wherein he shewes his arte,
                     As well as power.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     And villany in both.
                     Doe you obserue where LIVIA lodges? How
                     DRVSVS came dead? What men haue beene cut off?
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Yes, those are things remou'd: I neerer look't,
                     Into his later practice, where he stands
                     Declar'd a master in his mysterie.
                     First, ere TIBERIVS went, he wrought his feare,
                     To thinke that AGRIPPINA sought his death.
                     Then put those doubts in her; sent her oft word,
                     Vnder the show of friendship, to beware
                     Of CAESAR, for he laid to poyson her:
                     Draue them to frownes, to mutuall iealousies,
                     Which, now, in visible hatred are burst out.
                     Since, he hath had his hyred instruments
                     To worke on NERO, and to heaue him vp;
                     To tell him CAESAR'S old; That all the people,
                     Yea, all the armie haue their eyes on him;
                     That both doe long to haue him vndertake
                     Something of worth, to giue the world a hope;
                     Bids him to court their grace; the easie youth,
                     Perhaps, giues eare, which straight he writes to CAESAR;
                     And with this comment: See yon'd dangerous boy,
                     Note but the practice of the mother, there,
                     Shee's tying him, for purposes at hand,
                     
                     With men of sword. Here's CAESAR put in fright
                     'Gainst sonne, and mother. Yet, he leaues not thus.
                     The second brother DRVSVS (a fierce nature,
                     And fitter for his snares, because ambitious,
                     And full of enuie) him he clasp's, and hugs,
                     Poysons with praise, tells him what hearts he weares,
                     How bright he stands in popular expectance;
                     That Rome doth suffer with him, in the wrong
                     His mother does him, by preferring NERO:
                     Thus sets he them asunder, each 'gainst other,
                     Proiects the course, that serues him to condemne,
                     Keepes in opinion of a friend to all,
                     And all driues on to ruine.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     CAESAR sleepes,
                     And nods at this?
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Would he might euer sleepe,
                     Bogg'd in his filthy lusts.
                  
                  
                     OPS.
                     Treason to CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     RVF.
                     Lay hands vpon the traytor, LATIARIS,
                     Or take the name thy selfe.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     I am for CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Am I then catch'd?
                  
                  
                     RVF.
                     How thinke you, sir? you are.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     Spies of this head! so white! so full of yeeres!
                     Well, my most reuerend monsters, you may liue
                     To see your selues thus snar'd.
                  
                  
                     OPS.
                     Away with him.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Hale him away.
                  
                  
                     RVF.
                     To be a spie for traytors,
                     Is honorable vigilance.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     You doe well,
                     My most officious instruments of state;
                     Men of all vses: Drag me hence, away.
                     The yeere is well begun, and I fall fit,
                     To be an offring to SEIANVS. Goe.
                  
                  
                     OPS.
                     Couer him with his garments, hide his face.
                  
                  
                     SAB.
                     It shall not need. Forbeare your rude assault,
                     The fault's not shamefull villanie makes a fault.
                  
                  MACRO, CALIGVLA.
                  SIr, but obserue how thicke your dangers meete
                  In his cleare drifts! Your mother, and your brothers,
                  Now cited to the Senate! Their friend, GALLVS,
                  Feasted to day by CAESAR, since committed!
                  SABINVS, here we met, hurryed to fetters!
                  The Senators all strooke with feare, and silence,
                  Saue those, whose hopes depend not on good meanes,
                  But force their priuate prey, from publique spoile!
                  And you must know, if here you stay, your state
                  Is sure to be the subiect of his hate,
                  As now the obiect.
                  
                     CAL.
                     What would you aduise me?
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     To goe for Capreae presently: and there
                     
                     Giue vp your selfe, entirely, to your vncle.
                     Tell CAESAR (since your mother is accus'd
                     To flie for succours to AVGVSTVS statue,
                     And to the armie, with your brethren) you
                     Haue rather chose, to place your aides in him,
                     Then liue suspected; or in hourely feare
                     To be thrust out, by bold SEIANV'S plots:
                     Which, you shall confidently vrge, to be
                     Most full of perill to the state, and CAESAR,
                     As being laid to his peculiar ends,
                     And not to be let run, with common safety.
                     All which (vpon the second) I'le make plaine,
                     So both shall loue, and trust with CAESAR gaine.
                  
                  
                     CAL.
                     Away then, let's prepare vs for our iourney.
                     ARRVNTIVS.
                     STill, do'st thou suffer heau'n? will no flame,
                     No heate of sinne make thy iust wrath to boile
                     In thy distemp'red bosome, and ore-flow
                     The pitchy blazes of impietie,
                     Kindled beneath thy throne? Still canst thou sleepe,
                     Patient, while vice doth make an antique face
                     At thy drad power, and blow dust, and smoke
                     Into thy nostrils? IOVE, will nothing wake thee?
                     Must vile SEIANVS pull thee by the beard,
                     Ere thou wilt open thy black-lidded eye,
                     And looke him dead? Well! Snore on, dreaming gods:
                     And let this last of that proud Giant-race,
                     Heaue mountayne vpon mountayne, 'gainst your state—
                     Be good vnto me, fortune, and you powers,
                     Whom I, expostulating, haue profan'd;
                     I see (what's equall with a prodigie)
                     A great, a noble Romane, and an honest,
                     Liue an old man! O, MARCVS LEPIDVS,
                     When is our turne to bleed? Thy selfe, and I
                     (Without our boast) are a'most all the few
                     Left, to be honest, in these impious times.
                     LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS.
                     WHat we are left to be, we will be, LVCIVS,
                     Though tyrannie did stare, as wide as death,
                     To fright vs from it.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     'T hath so, on SABINVS.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     I saw him now drawne from the Gemonies,
                     
                     And (what increas'd the direnesse of the fact)
                     His faithfull dogge (vpbraiding all vs Romanes)
                     Neuer forsooke the corp's, but, seeing it throwne
                     Into the streame, leap'd in, and drown'd with it.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     O act! to be enui'd him, of vs men!
                     We are the next, the hooke layes hold on, MARCVS▪
                     
                     What are thy artes (good patriot, teach them me)
                     That haue preseru'd thy haires, to this white die,
                     And kept so reuerend, and so deare a head,
                     Safe, on his comely shoulders?
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Arts, ARRVNTIVS?
                     None, but the plaine, and passiue fortitude,
                     To suffer, and be silent; neuer stretch
                     These armes, against the torrent; liue at home,
                     With my owne thoughts, and innocence about me,
                     Not tempting the wolues iawes: these are my artes.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I would begin to studie 'hem, if I thought
                     They would secure me. May I pray to IOVE,
                     In secret, and be safe? I, or aloud?
                     With open wishes? so I doe not mention
                     TIBERIVS, or SEIANVS? yes, I must,
                     If I speake out. 'Tis hard, that. May I thinke,
                     And not be rackt? What danger is't to dreame?
                     Talke in ones sleepe? or cough? who knowes the law?
                     May I shake my head, without a comment? say
                     It raines, or it holds vp, and not be throwne
                     Vpon the Gemonies? These now are things,
                     Whereon mens fortune, yea their fate depends.
                     Nothing hath priuiledge 'gainst the violent eare.
                     No place, no day, no houre (we see) is free.
                     (Not our religious, and most sacred times)
                     From some one kind of crueltie: all matter,
                     Nay all occasion pleaseth. Mad-mens rage,
                     The idlenesse of drunkards, womens nothing,
                     Iesters simplicity, all, all is good
                     That can be catch'd at. Nor is now th'euent
                     Of any person, or for any crime,
                     To be expected; for, 'tis alwayes one:
                     Death, with some little difference of place,
                     Or time— what's this? Prince NERO? guarded?
                     LACO, NERO, LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS.
                     ON, Lictors, keepe your way: My lords, forbeare.
                     On paine of CAESARS wrath, no man attempt
                     Speech with the prisoner.
                  
                  
                     NER.
                     Noble friends, be safe:
                     
                     To loose your selues for wordes, were as vaine hazard,
                     As vnto me small comfort: Fare you well.
                     Would all Rome's suffrings in my fate did dwell.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     
                        Lictors, away.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Where goes he, LACO?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Sir,
                     His banish'd into Pontia, by the Senate.
                     
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Do' I see? and heare? and feele? May I trust sense?
                     Or doth my phant'sie forme it?
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Where's his brother?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     DRVSVS is prisoner in the palace.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Ha?
                     I smell it now: 'tis ranke. Where's AGRIPPINA?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     The princesse is confin'd, to Pandataria.
                     
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Bolts, VULCAN; bolts, for IOVE! PHOEBVS, thy bow;
                     Sterne MARS, thy sword; and blue-ey'd Maid, thy speare;
                     Thy club, ALCIDES: all the armorie
                     Of heauen is too little!—Ha? to guard
                     The gods, I meant. Fine, rare dispatch! This same
                     Was swiftly borne! confin'd? imprison'd? banish'd?
                     Most tripartite! The cause, sir?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Treason.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     O?
                     The complement of all accusings? that
                     Will hit, when all else failes.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     This turne is strange!
                     But yesterday, the people would not heare
                     Farre lesse obiected, but cry'd, CAESARS letters
                     Were false, and forg'd; that all these plots were malice:
                     And that the ruine of the Princes house
                     Was practis'd 'gainst his knowledge. Where are now
                     Their voyces? now, that they behold his heires
                     Lock'd vp, disgrac'd, led into exile?
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Hush'd.
                     Drown'd in their bellies. Wild SEIANVS breath
                     Hath, like a whirle-wind, scatter'd that poore dust,
                     He turnes to Laco, and the rest.
                     With this rude blast. Wee'll talke no treason, sir,
                     If that be it you stand for? Fare you well.
                     We haue no need of horse-leeches. Good spie,
                     Now you are spi'd, be gone.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     I feare, you wrong him.
                     He has the voyce to be an honest Romane.
                     
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     And trusted to this office? LEPIDVS,
                     I'ld sooner trust Greeke-SINON, then a man
                     Our state employes. Hee's gone: and being gone,
                     I dare tell you (whom I dare better trust)
                     That our night-ey'd TIBERIVS doth not see
                     His minions drifts; or, if he doe, h'is not
                     So errant subtill, as we fooles doe take him:
                     To breed a mungrell vp, in his owne house,
                     With his owne bloud, and (if the good gods please)
                     At his owne throte, flesh him, to take a leape.
                     I doe not beg it, heau'n: but, if the fates
                     Grant it these eyes, they must not winke.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     They must
                     
                     Not see it, LVCIVS.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Who should let 'hem?
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Zeale,
                     And dutie; with the thought, he is our Prince.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     He is our monster: forfeited to vice
                     So far, as no rack'd vertue can redeeme him.
                     His lothed person fouler then all crimes:
                     An Emp'rour, only in his lusts. Retir'd
                     (From all regard of his owne fame, or Rome's)
                     Into an obscure Iland; where he liues
                     (Acting his tragedies with a comick face)
                     Amid'st his rout of Chaldee's: spending houres,
                     Dayes, weekes, and months, in the vnkind abuse
                     Of graue astrologie, to the bane of men,
                     Casting the scope of mens natiuities,
                     And hauing found ought worthy in their fortune,
                     Kill, or precipitate them in the sea,
                     And boast, he can mocke fate. Nay, muse not: these
                     Are farre from ends of euill, scarse degrees.
                     He hath his slaughter-house, at Capreae;
                     Where he doth studie murder, as an arte:
                     And they are dearest in his grace, that can
                     Deuise the deepest tortures. Thither, too,
                     He hath his boyes, and beauteous girles tane vp,
                     Out of our noblest houses, the best form'd,
                     Best nurtur'd, and most modest: what's their good
                     Serues to prouoke his bad. Some are allur'd,
                     Some threatned; others (by their friends detain'd)
                     Are rauish'd hence, like captiues, and, in sight
                     Of their most grieued parents, dealt away
                     Vnto his spintries, sellaries, and slaues,
                     Masters of strange, and new-commented lusts,
                     For which wise nature hath not left a name.
                     To this (what most strikes vs, and bleeding Rome,)
                     He is, with all his craft, become the ward
                     To his owne vassall, a stale catamite:
                     Whom he (vpon our low, and suffering necks)
                     Hath rais'd, from excrement, to side the gods,
                     And haue his proper sacrifice in Rome:
                     
                     Which IOVE beholds, and yet will sooner riue
                     A senslesse oke with thunder, then his trunck.
                  
                  LACO, POMPONIVS, MINVTIVS, TERENTIVS.  
                  To them.
                  
                     THese letters make men doubtfull what t'expect,
                     Whether his comming, or his death.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     Troth, both:
                     And which comes soonest, thanke the gods for.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     List,
                     
                     Their talke is CAESAR, I would heare all voyces.)
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     One day, hee's well; and will returne to Rome:
                     The next day, sicke; and knowes not when to hope it.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     True, and to day, one of SEIANVS friends
                     Honour'd by speciall writ; and on the morrow
                     Another punish'd—
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     By more speciall writ.
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     This man receiues his praises of SEIANVS,
                     A second, but slight mention; a third, none:
                     A fourth, rebukes. And thus he leaues the Senate
                     
                     Diuided, and suspended, all vncertayne.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     These forked tricks, I vnderstand 'hem not,
                     Would he would tell vs whom he loues, or hates,
                     That we might follow, without feare, or doubt.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     Good HELIOTROPE! Is this your honest man?
                     Let him be yours so still. He is my knaue.)
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     I cannot tell, SEIANVS still goes on,
                     And mounts, we see: New statues are aduanc'd,
                     Fresh leaues of titles, large inscriptions read,
                     His fortune sworne by, himselfe new gone out
                     CAESARS colleague, in the fifth Consulship,
                     More altars smoke to him, then all the gods:
                     What would wee more?
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     That the deare smoke would choke him,
                     That would I more.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Peace, good ARRVNTIVS.)
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     But there are letters come (they say) eu'n now,
                     Which doe forbid that last.
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     Doe you heare so?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     By POLLVX, that's the worst.
                  
                  
                     (ARR.
                     By HERCVLES, best.)
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     I did not like the signe, when REGVLVS,
                     (Whom all we know no friend vnto SEIANVS)
                     Did, by TIBERIVS so precise command,
                     Succeed a fellow in the Consulship:
                     
                     It boded somewhat.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     Not a mote. His partner,
                     FVLCINIVS TRIO, is his owne, and sure.
                     They whisper with Terentius.
                     Here comes TERENTIVS. He can giue vs more.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     I'le ne're beleeue, but CAESAR hath some sent
                     Of bold SEIANVS footing. These crosse points
                     Of varying letters, and opposing Consuls,
                     Mingling his honours, and his punishments,
                     Fayning now ill, now well, raysing SEIANVS,
                     And then depressing him, (as now of late
                     In all reports we haue it) cannot be
                     Emptie of practice: 'Tis TIBERIVS arte.
                     For (hauing found his fauorite growne too great,
                     And, with his greatnesse, strong; that all the souldiers
                     Are, with their leaders, made at his deuotion;
                     That almost all the Senate are his creatures,
                     Or hold on him their maine dependances,
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                     Either for benefit, or hope, or feare;
                     And that himselfe hath lost much of his owne,
                     By parting vnto him; and by th'increase
                     Of his ranke lusts, and rages, quite disarm'd
                     Himselfe of loue, or other publique meanes,
                     To dare an open contestation)
                     His subtilty hath chose this doubling line,
                     To hold him euen in: not so to feare him,
                     As wholly put him out, and yet giue checke
                     Vnto his farder boldnesse. In meane time,
                     By his employments, makes him odious
                     Vnto the staggering rout, whose aide (in fine)
                     He hopes to vse, as sure, who (when they sway)
                     Beare downe, ore-turne all obiects in their way.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     You may be a LINCEVS, LEPIDVS: yet, I
                     See no such cause, but that a politique tyranne
                     (who can so well disguise it) should haue tane
                     A neerer way: fain'd honest, and come home
                     To cut his throte, by Law.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     I, but his feare
                     Would ne're be masqu'd, all-be his vices were.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     His lordship then is still in grace?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Assure you,
                     Neuer in more, either of grace, or power.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     The gods are wise, and iust.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     (The fiends they are.
                     To suffer thee belie 'hem?)
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     I haue here
                     His last, and present letters, where he writes him
                     The Partner of his cares, and his SEIANVS—
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     But is that true, it 'tis prohibited,
                     To sacrifice vnto him?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Some such thing
                     CAESAR makes scruple of, but forbids it not;
                     No more then to himselfe: sayes, he could wish
                     It were forborne to all.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Is it no other?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     No other, on my trust. For your more surety,
                     Here is that letter too.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     (How easily,
                     Doe wretched men beleeue, what they would haue!
                     Lookes this like plot?
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Noble ARRVNTIVS, stay.)
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     He names him here without his titles.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     (Note.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Yes, and come of your notable foole. I will.)
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     No other, then SEIANVS.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     That's but haste
                     In him that writes. Here he giues large amends.
                  
                  
                     MAR.
                     And with his owne hand written?
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Indeed?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Beleeue it, gentlemen, SEIANVS brest
                     Neuer receiu'd more full contentments in,
                     Then at this present.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     Takes he well th'escape
                     Of young CALIGVLA, with MACRO?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Faith,
                     At the first aire, it somewhat troubled him.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     (Obserue you?
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Nothing. Riddles. TIll I see
                     SEIANVS strooke, no sound thereof strikes me.)
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     I like it not. I muse h' would not attempt
                     Somewhat against him in the Consul-ship,
                     Seeing the people 'ginne to fauour him.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     He doth repent it, now; but h' has employ'd
                     PAGONIANVS after him: and he holds
                     That correspondence, there, with all that are
                     Neere about CAESAR, as no thought can paſse
                     Without his knowledge, thence, in act to front him.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     I gratulate the newes.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     But, how comes MACRO
                     So in trust, and fauour, with CALIGVLA?
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     O sir, he ha's a wife; and the young Prince
                     An appetite: he can looke vp, and spie
                     Flies in the roofe, when there are fleas i' bed;
                     And hath a learned nose to'assure his sleepes.
                     Who, to be fauour'd of the rising sunne,
                     Would not lend little of his waning moone?
                     'T is the saf'st ambition. Noble TERENTIVS.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     The night growes fast vpon vs. At your seruice.
                  
                  CHORVS—Of Musicians.
                  
               
               
                  Act V.
                  
                     SEIANVS.
                     SWell, swell, my ioyes: and faint not to declare
                     Your selues, as ample, as your causes are.
                     I did not liue, till now; this my first hower:
                     Wherein I see my thoughts reach'd by my power.
                     But this, and gripe my wishes. Great, and high,
                     The world knowes only two, that's Rome, and I.
                     My roofe receiues me not; 'tis aire I tread:
                     And, at each step, I feele my aduanced head
                     Knocke out a starre in heau'n! Rear'd to this height,
                     All my desires seeme modest, poore, and sleight,
                     That did before sound impudent: 'Tis place,
                     Not bloud, discernes the noble, and the base.
                     Is there not something more, then to be CAESAR?
                     Must we rest there? It yrkes, t' haue come so far,
                     To be so neere a stay. CALIGVLA,
                     Would thou stood'st stiffe, and many, in our way.
                     Windes lose their strength, when they doe emptie flie,
                     Vn-met of woods or buildings; great fires die
                     
                     That want their matter to with-stand them: so,
                     It is our griefe, and will be' our losse, to know
                     Our power shall want opposites; vnlesse
                     The gods, by mixing in the cause, would blesse
                     Our fortune, with their conquest. That were worth
                     SEIANVS strife: durst fates but bring it forth.
                  
                  TERENTIVS, SEIANVS.
                  SAfety, to great SEIANVS.
                  
                     SEI.
                     Now, TERENTIVS?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Heares not my lord the wonder?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Speake it, no.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     I meete it violent in the peoples mouthes,
                     Who runne, in routs, to POMPEY'S theatre,
                     To view your statue: which, they say, sends forth
                     A smoke, as from a fornace, black, and dreadfull.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Some traytor hath put fire in: (you, goe see.)
                     And let the head be taken off, to looke
                     What 'tis— Some slaue hath practis'd an imposture,
                     To stirre the people. How now? why returne you?
                  
                  SATRIVS, NATTA.
                  To them.
                  
                     THe head, my lord, already is tane off,
                     I saw it: and, at op'ning, there leap't out
                     A great, and monstrous serpent!
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Monstrous! why?
                     Had it a beard? and hornes? no heart? a tongue
                     Forked as flatterie? look'd it of the hue,
                     To such as liue in great mens bosomes? was
                     The spirit of it MACRO'S?
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     May it please
                     The most diuine SEIANVS, in my dayes,
                     (And by his sacred fortune, I affirme it)
                     I haue not seene a more extended, growne,
                     Foule, spotted, venomous, vgly—
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     O, the fates!
                     What a wild muster's here of attributes,
                     T'expresse a worme, a snake?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     But how that should
                     Come there, my lord!
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     What! and you too, TERENTIVS?
                     I thinke you meane to make 't a prodigie
                     In your reporting?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Can the wise SEIANVS
                     Thinke heau'n hath meant it lesse?
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     O, superstition!
                     Why, then the falling of our bed, that brake
                     This morning, burd'ned with the populous weight
                     Of our expecting clients, to salute vs;
                     Or running of the cat, betwixt our legs,
                     As we set forth vnto the capitoll,
                     Were prodigies.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     I thinke them ominous!
                     
                     And, would they had not hap'ned. As, to day,
                     The fate of some your seruants! who, declining
                     Their way, not able, for the throng, to follow,
                     Slip't downe the Gemonies, and brake their necks!
                     Besides, in taking your last augurie,
                     No prosperous bird appear'd, but croking rauens
                     Flag'd vp and downe: and from the sacrifice
                     Flew to the prison, where they sate, all night,
                     Beating the aire with their obstreperous beakes!
                     I dare not counsell, but I could entreat
                     That great SEIANVS would attempt the gods,
                     Once more, with sacrifice.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     What excellent fooles
                     Religion makes of men? Beleeues TERENTIVS,
                     (If these were dangers, as I shame to thinke them)
                     The gods could change the certayne course of fate?
                     Or, if they could, they would (now, in a moment)
                     For a beeues fat, or lesse, be brib'd t'inuert
                     Those long decrees? Then thinke the gods, like flies,
                     Are to be taken with the steame of flesh,
                     Or bloud, diffus'd about their altars: thinke
                     Their power as cheape, as I esteeme it small.
                     Of all the throng, that fill th'Olympian hall,
                     And (without pitty) lade poore ATLAS back,
                     I know not that one deity, but Fortune;
                     To whom, I would throw vp, in begging smoke,
                     One grane of incense: or whose eare I'ld buy
                     With thus much oyle. Her, I, indeed, adore;
                     And keepe her gratefull image in my house,
                     Some-times belonging to a Romane king,
                     But, now call'd mine, as by the better stile:
                     To her, I care not, if (for satisfying
                     Your scrupulous phant'sies) I goe offer. Bid
                     Our priest prepare vs honny, milke, and poppy,
                     His masculine odours, and night-vestments: say,
                     Our rites are instant, which perform'd, you'll see
                     How vaine, and worthy laughter, your feares be.
                  
                  COTTA, POMPONIVS.
                  POMPONIVS! whither in such speed?
                  
                     POM.
                     I goe
                     To giue my lord SEIANVS notice—
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     What?
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     Of MACRO.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Is he come?
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     Entr'd but now
                     The house of REGVLVS.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     The opposite Consul?
                     
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     Some halfe houre since.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     And, by night too! stay, sir;
                     I'le beare you companie.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     Along, then—
                  
                  
                  MACRO, REGVLVS, LACO.
                  TIs CAESARS will, to haue a frequent Senate.
                  
                  And therefore must your edict lay deepe mulct
                  On such, as shall be absent.
                  
                     REG.
                     So it doth.
                     Beare it my fellow Consul to adscribe.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     And tell him it must early be proclaim'd;
                     The place, APOLLO'S temple.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     That's remembred.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     And at what houre?
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     You doe forget
                     To send one for the Prouost of the watch?
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     I haue not: here he comes.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     GRACINVS LACO,
                     You'are a friend most welcome: by, and by,
                     I'le speake with you. (You must procure this list
                     Of the Praetorian cohorts, with the names
                     Of the Centurions, and their Tribunes.
                     
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     I.)
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     I bring you letters, and a health from CAESAR—
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Sir, both come well.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     (And heare you, with your note,
                     Which are the eminent men, and most of action.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     The Consul goes out.
                     That shall be done you too.)
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     Most worthy LACO,
                     CAESAR salutes you. (Consul! death, and furies!
                     Gone now?) the argument will please you, sir.
                     (Hough! REGVLVS? The anger of the gods
                     Follow his diligent legs, and ouer'take 'hem,
                     Returnes:
                     In likenesse of the gout.) O, good my lord,
                     We lackt you present; I would pray you send
                     Another to FVLCINIVS TRIO, straight,
                     To tell him, you will come, and speake with him:
                     (The matter wee'le deuise) to stay him, there,
                     While I, with LACO, doe suruay the watch.
                     Goes out againe.
                     What are your strengths, GRACINVS?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Seuen cohorts.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     You see, what CAESAR writes: and (—gone againe?
                     H'has sure a veine of mercury in his feet)
                     Knew you, what store of the praetorian souldiers
                     SEIANVS holds, about him, for his guard?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     I cannot the iust number: but, I thinke,
                     Three centuries.
                     
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     Three? good.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     At most, not foure.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     And who be those Centurions?
                     
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     That the Consul
                     
                     Can best deliuer you.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     (When h'is away:
                     Spight, on his nimble industrie.) GRACINVS,
                     You find what place you hold, there, in the trust
                     Of royall CAESAR?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     I, and I am—
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     Sir,
                     The honours, there propos'd, are but beginnings
                     Of his great fauours.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     They are more—
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     I heard him
                     When he did studie, what to adde—
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     My life,
                     And all I hold—
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     You were his owne first choise;
                     
                     Which doth confirme as much, as you can speake:
                     And will (if we succeed) make more— Your guardes
                     Are seuen cohorts, you say?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     Those we must
                     Hold still in readinesse, and vndischarg'd.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     I vnderstand so much. But how it can—
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     Be done without suspition, you'll obiect?
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     What's that?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Returnes.
                     The keeping of the watch in armes, 
                     When morning comes.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     The Senate shall be met, and set
                     So early, in the temple, as all marke
                     Of that will be auoided.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     If we need,
                     We haue commission, to possesse the palace,
                     Enlarge prince DRVSVS, and make him our chiefe.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     (That secret would haue burn't his reuerend mouth,
                     Had he not spit it out, now:) by the gods,
                     You carry things too—let me borrow'a man,
                     Or two, to beare these— That of freeing DRVSVS,
                     CAESAR proiected as the last, and vtmost;
                     Not else to be remembred.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     Here are seruants.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     These to ARRVNTIVS, these to LEPIDVS,
                     This beare to COTTA, this to LATIARIS.
                     If they demand you'of me: say, I haue tane
                     Fresh horse, and am departed. You (my lord)
                     To your colleague, and be you sure, to hold him
                     With long narration, of the new fresh fauours,
                     Meant to SEIANVS, his great patron; I,
                     With trusted LACO, here, are for the guards:
                     Then, to diuide. For, night hath many eies,
                     Whereof, though most doe sleepe, yet some are spies.
                  
                  PRAECONES, FLAMEN, MINISTRI, SEIANVS, TERENTIVS, SATRIVS, &c.
                  BE all profane farre hence; Flie, flie farre off:
                  Be absent farre. Farre hence be all profane.
                  
                     FLA.
                     
                        Tub. Tib. Sound, while the Flamen washeth.
                     We haue beene faultie, but repent vs now,
                     And bring pure hands, pure vestments, and pure minds.
                     
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     Pure vessells.
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     And pure offrings.
                     
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     Garlands pure.
                  
                  
                     FLA.
                     Bestow your garlands: and (with reuerence) place
                     The veruin on the altar.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     Fauour your tongues.
                  
                  
                     FLA.
                     Great mother FORTVNE, Queene of humane state,
                     Rectresse of action, Arbitresse of fate,
                     To whom all sway, all power, all empire bowes,
                     Be present, and propitious to our vowes.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     Fauour it with your tongues.
                  
                  
                     
                     MIN.
                     Be present, and propitious to our vowes.
                     
                        While they sound againe, the Flamen takes of the hony, with his finger, & tasts, then ministers to all the rest▪ so of the milk, in an earthen vessel, he deals about; which done, he sprinkleth, vpon the altar, milke; then imposeth the hony, and kindleth his gummes, and after censing about the altar placeth his censer thereon, into which they put seuerall branches of poppy, and the musique ceasing, proceed.
                     
                     Accept our offring, and be pleas'd, great goddesse.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     See, see, the image stirres!
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     And turnes away!
                  
                  
                     NAT.
                     
                        Fortune auerts her face!
                  
                  
                     FLA.
                     Auert, you gods,
                     The prodigie. Still! still! Some pious rite
                     We haue neglected. Yet! heau'n, be appeas'd.
                     And be all tokens false, or void, that speake
                     Thy present wrath.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Be thou dumbe, scrupulous priest:
                     And gather vp thy selfe, with these thy wares,
                     Which I, in spight of thy blind mistris, or
                     Thy iuggling mysterie, religion, throw
                     Thus, scorned on the earth. Nay, hold thy looke
                     Auerted, till I woo thee, turne againe;
                     And thou shalt stand, to all posteritie,
                     Th'eternall game, and laughter, with thy neck
                     Writh'd to thy taile, like a ridiculous cat.
                     Auoid these fumes, these superstitious lights,
                     And all these coos'ning ceremonies: you,
                     Your pure, and spiced conscience. I, the slaue,
                     And mock of fooles, (scorne on my worthy head)
                     That haue beene titled, and ador'd a god,
                     Yea, sacrific'd vnto, my selfe, in Rome,
                     No lesse then IOVE: and I be brought, to doe
                     A peeuish gigglot rites? Perhaps, the thought,
                     And shame of that made Fortune turne her face,
                     Knowing her selfe the lesser deitie,
                     And but my seruant. Bashfull queene, if so,
                     SEIANVS thankes thy modestie. Who's that?
                  
                  POMPONIVS, SEIANVS, MINVTIVS, &c.
                  HIs fortune suffers, till he heares my newes:
                  I haue waited here too long. MACRO, my lord—
                  
                     SEI.
                     Speake lower, & with-draw.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Are these things true?
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     Thousands are gazing at it, in the streets.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     What's that?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     MINVTIVS tells vs here, my lord,
                     That, a new head being set vpon your statue,
                     A rope is since found wreath'd about it! and,
                     But now, a fierie meteor, in the forme
                     Of a great ball, was seene to rowle along
                     The troubled ayre, where yet it hangs, vnperfect,
                     The amazing wonder of the multitude!
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     No more. That MACRO'S come, is more then all!
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Is MACRO come?
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     I saw him.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Where? with whom?
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     With REGVLVS.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     TERENTIVS—
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     My lord?
                  
                  
                     
                     SEI.
                     Send for the Tribunes, we will straight haue vp
                     More of the souldiers, for our guard. MINVTIVS,
                     We pray you, goe for COTTA, LATIARIS,
                     TRIO the Consul, or what Senators
                     
                     You know are sure, and ours. You, my good NATTA,
                     For LACO, Prouost of the watch. Now, SATRIVS,
                     The time of proofe comes on. Arme all our seruants,
                     And without tumult. You, POMPONIVS,
                     Hold some good correspondence, with the Consul,
                     Attempt him, noble friend. These things begin
                     To looke like dangers, now, worthy my fates.
                     Fortune, I see thy worst: Let doubtfull states,
                     And things vncertaine hang vpon thy will:
                     Me surest death shall render certaine still.
                     Yet, why is, now, my thought turn'd toward death,
                     Whom fates haue let goe on, so farre, in breath,
                     Vncheck'd, or vnreprou'd? I, that did helpe
                     To fell the loftie Cedar of the world,
                     GERMANICVS; that, at one stroke, cut downe
                     DRVSVS, that vpright Elme; wither'd his vine;
                     Laid SILIVS, and SABINVS, two strong Okes,
                     Flat on the earth; besides, those other shrubs,
                     CORDVS, and SOSIA, CLAVDIA PVLCHRA,
                     FVRNIVS, and GALLVS, which I haue grub'd vp;
                     And since, haue set my axe so strong, and deepe
                     Into the roote of spreading AGRIPPINE;
                     Lopt off and scatter'd her proud branches, NERO,
                     DRVSVS, and CAIVS too, although re-planted;
                     If you will, destinies, that, after all,
                     I faint, now, ere I touch my period;
                     You are but cruell: and I alreadie haue done
                     Things great inough. All Rome hath beene my slaue;
                     The Senate sate an idle looker on,
                     And witnesse of my power; when I haue blush'd,
                     More, to command, then it to suffer; all
                     The Fathers haue sate readie, and prepar'd,
                     To giue me empire, temples, or their throtes,
                     When I would aske 'hem; and (what crownes the top)
                     
                        Rome, Senate, people, all the world haue seene
                     IOVE, but my equall: CAESAR, but my second.
                     'Tis then your malice, fates, who (but your owne)
                     Enuy, and feare, t'haue any power long knowne.
                  
                  
                  TERENTIVS, TRIBVNES.
                  STay here: I'le giue his lordship, you are come.
                  MINVTIVS, COTTA, LATIARIS.
                  They confer their letters.
                  MARCVS, TERENTIVS, pray you tell my lord,
                  Here's COTTA, and LATIARIS.
                  
                     TER.
                     Sir, I shall.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     My letter is the very same with yours;
                     Onely requires mee to bee present there,
                     And giue my voyce, to strengthen his designe.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Names he not what it is?
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     No, nor to you.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     'Tis strange, and singular doubtfull!
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     So it is?
                     It may bee all is left to lord SEIANVS.
                  
                  NATTA, LACO.
                  To them.
                  
                     GEntlemen, where's my lord?
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     Wee wait him here.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     The Prouost LACO? what's the newes?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     My lord—
                  
                  SEIANVS.
                  To them.
                  
                     NOw, my right deare, noble, and trusted friends;
                     How much I am a captiue to your kindnesse!
                     Most worthy COTTA, LATIARIS; LACO,
                     Your valiant hand; and gentlemen, your loues.
                     I wish I could diuide my selfe vnto you;
                     Or that it lay, within our narrow powers,
                     To satisfie for so enlarged bountie.
                     GRACINVS, we must pray you, hold your guardes
                     Vnquit, when morning comes. Saw you the Consul?
                     
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     TRIO will presently be here, my lord.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     They are but giuing order for the edict,
                     To warne the Senate.
                     
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     How! the Senate?
                     
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Yes.
                     This morning, in APOLLO'S temple.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     We
                     Are charg'd, by letter, to be there, my lord.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     By letter? pray you let's see!
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Knowes not his lordship!
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     It seemes so!
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     A Senate warn'd? without my knowledge?
                     And on this sodaine? Senators by letters
                     Required to be there! who brought these?
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     MACRO.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Mine enemie! And when?
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     This mid-night.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Time,
                     With eu'ry other circumstance, doth giue
                     It hath some streine of engin in't! How now?
                  
                  
                  SATRIVS, SEIANVS, &c.
                  MY lord, SERTORIVS MACRO is without,
                  Alone, and prayes t' haue priuate conference
                  In businesse, of high nature, with your lordship,
                  (He say's to me) and which reguards you much.
                  
                     SEI.
                     Let him come here.
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     Better, my lord, with-draw,
                     You will betray what store, and strength of friends
                     Are now about you; which he comes to spie.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Is he not arm'd?
                  
                  
                     SAT.
                     Wee'll search him.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     No, but take,
                     And lead him to some roome, where you, conceal'd,
                     May keepe a guard vpon vs. Noble LACO,
                     You are our trust: and, till our owne cohorts
                     Can be brought vp, your strengths must be our guard.
                     He salutes them humbly.
                     Now, good MINVTIVS, honour'd LATIARIS,
                     Most worthy, and my most vnwearied friends:
                     I returne instantly.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Most worthy lord!
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     His lordship is turn'd instant kind, me thinkes,
                     I' haue not obseru'd it in him, heretofore.
                  
                  
                     TRI. 1.
                     'Tis true, and it becomes him nobly.
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     I
                     Am rap't withall.
                  
                  
                     TRI. 2.
                     By MARS, he has my liues,
                     (Were they a million) for this onely grace.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     I, and to name a man!
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     As he did me!
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     And me!
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Who would not spend his life and fortunes,
                     To purchase but the looke of such a lord?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     He, that would nor be lords foole, nor the worlds.
                  
                  SEIANVS, MACRO.
                  MACRO! most welcome, as most coueted friend!
                  Let me enioy my longings. When arriu'd you?
                  
                     MAC.
                     About the noone of night.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     SATRIVS, giue leaue.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     I haue beene, since I came, with both the Consuls,
                     On a particular designe from CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     How fares it with our great, and royall master?
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     Right plentifully well; as, with a prince,
                     That still holds out the great proportion
                     Of his large fauours, where his iudgement hath
                     Made once diuine election: like the god,
                     That wants not, nor is wearied to bestow
                     Where merit meets his bountie, as it doth
                     In you, alreadie the most happy, and ere
                     The sunne shall climbe the south, most high SEIANVS.
                     Let not my lord be' amus'd. For, to this end
                     Was I by CAESAR sent for, to the isle,
                     
                     With speciall caution to conceale my iourney;
                     And, thence, had my dispatch as priuately
                     Againe to Rome; charg'd to come here by night;
                     And, onely to the Consuls, make narration
                     Of his great purpose: that the benefit
                     Might come more full, and striking, by how much
                     It was lesse look'd for, or aspir'd by you,
                     Or least informed to the common thought.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     What may this be? part of my selfe, deare MACRO!
                     If good, speake out: and share with your SEIANVS.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     If bad, I should for euer lothe my selfe,
                     To be the messenger to so good a lord.
                     I doe exceed m' instructions, to acquaint
                     Your lordship with thus much; but 'tis my venture
                     On your retentiue wisedome: and, because
                     I would no iealous scruple should molest
                     Or racke your peace of thought. For, I assure
                     My noble lord, no Senator yet knowes
                     The businesse meant: though all, by seuerall letters,
                     Are warned to be there, and giue their voyces,
                     Onely to adde vnto the state, and grace
                     Of what is purpos'd.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     You take pleasure, MACRO,
                     Like a coy wench, in torturing your louer.
                     What can be worth this suffering?
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     That which followes,
                     The tribuniciall dignitie, and power:
                     Both which SEIANVS is to haue this day
                     Confer'd vpon him, and by publique Senate.
                     
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Fortune, be mine againe; thou hast satisfied
                     For thy suspected loyaltie.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     My lord,
                     I haue no longer time, the day approcheth,
                     And I must backe to CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Where's CALIGVLA?
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     That I forgot to tell your lordship. Why,
                     He lingers yonder, about Capreae,
                     Disgrac'd; TIBERIVS hath not seene him yet:
                     He needs would thrust himselfe to goe with me,
                     Against my wish, or will, but I haue quitted
                     His forward trouble, with as tardie note
                     As my neglect, or silence could afford him.
                     Your lordship cannot now command me ought,
                     Because, I take no knowledge that I saw you,
                     But I shall boast to liue to serue your lordship:
                     And so take leaue.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Honest, and worthy MACRO,
                     Your loue, and friendship. Who's there? SATRIVS,
                     Attend my honourable friend forth. O!
                     How vaine, and vile a passion is this feare?
                     
                     What base, vncomely things it makes men doe?
                     Suspect their noblest friends, (as I did this)
                     Flatter poore enemies, intreat their seruants,
                     Stoupe, court, and catch at the beneuolence
                     Of creatures, vnto whom (within this houre)
                     I would not haue vouchsaf'd a quarter-looke,
                     Or piece of face? By you, that fooles call gods,
                     Hang all the skie with your prodigious signes,
                     Fill earth with monsters, drop the scorpion downe,
                     Out of the zodiack, or the fiercer lyon,
                     Shake off the loos'ned globe from her long henge,
                     Rowle all the world in darkenesse, and let loose
                     Th'inraged windes to turne vp groues and townes;
                     When I doe feare againe, let me be strooke
                     With forked fire, and vnpittyed die:
                     Who feares, is worthy of calamitie.
                  
                  POMPONIVS,  REGVLVS, TRIO.
                  To the rest.
                  
                     IS not my lord here?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Sir, he will be straight.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     What newes, FVLCINIVS TRIO?
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     Good, good tidings.
                     (But, keepe it to your selfe) My lord SEIANVS
                     Is to receiue this day, in open Senate,
                     The tribuniciall dignitie.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Is't true?
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     No wordes; not to your thought: but, sir, beleeue it.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     What sayes the Consul?
                     
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     (Speake it not againe,)
                     He tells me, that to day my lord SEIANVS —
                  
                  
                     (TRI.
                     I must entreat you COTTA, on your honour
                     Not to reueale it.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     On my life, sir.)
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Say.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Is to receiue the tribuniciall power.
                     But, as you are an honourable man,
                     Let me coniure you, not to vtter it:
                     For it is trusted to me, with that bond.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     I am HARPOCRATES.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Can you assure it?
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     The Consul told it me, but keepe it close.
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     Lord LATIARIS, what's the newes?
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     I'le tell you,
                     But you must sweare to keepe it secret—
                  
                  SEIANVS.  
                  To them.
                  
                     I Knew the sates had on their distaffe left
                     More of our thread, then so.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     Haile, great SEIANVS.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     Haile, the most honor'd.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Happy.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     High SEIANꝰ.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Doe you bring prodigies too?
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     May all presage
                     Turne to those faire effects, whereof we bring
                     
                     Your lordship newes.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     May 't please my lord with-draw.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     To some that stand by.
                     Yes (I will speake with you, anon.)
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     My lord,
                     What is your pleasure for the Tribunes?
                     
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Why,
                     Let 'hem be thank't, and sent away.
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     My lord—
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Wilt please your lordship to command me—
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     No.
                     You are troublesome.
                  
                  
                     MIN.
                     The mood is chang'd.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     Not speake?
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     Nor looke?
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     I. He is wise, will make him friends
                     Of such, who neuer loue, but for their ends.
                  
                  ARRVNTIVS, LEPIDVS.
                  Diuers other Senators passing by them.
                  
                     I, Goe, make haste; take heed you be not last
                     To tender your All haile, in the wide hall
                     Of huge SEIANVS: runne, a Lictors pace;
                     Stay not to put your robes on; but, away,
                     With the pale troubled ensignes of great friendship
                     Stamp't i' your face! Now, MARCVS LEPIDVS,
                     You still beleeue your former augurie?
                     SEIANVS must goe downe-ward? you perceiue
                     His wane approching fast?
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Beleeue me, LVCIVS,
                     I wonder at this rising!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I, and that we
                     Must giue our suffrage to it? you will say,
                     It is to make his fall more steepe, and grieuous?
                     It may be so. But thinke it, they that can
                     With idle wishes 'ssay to bring backe time:
                     In cases desperate, all hope is crime.
                     See, see! what troups of his officious friends
                     Flock to salute my lord! and start before
                     My great, proud lord! to get a lord-like nod!
                     Attend my lord, vnto the Senate-house!
                     Bring back my lord! like seruile huishers, make
                     Way for my lord! proclaime his idoll lord-ship,
                     More then ten cryers, or sixe noise of trumpets!
                     Make legs, kisse hands, and take a scatter'd haire
                     From my lords eminent shoulder! See, SANQVINIVS!
                     With his slow belly, and his dropsie! looke,
                     What toyling haste he makes! yet, here's another,
                     Retarded with the gout, will be afore him!
                     Get thee liburnian porters, thou grosse foole,
                     To beare thy obsequious fatnesse, like thy peeres.
                     They are met! The gout returnes, and his great carriage.
                  
                  
                  LICTORS,  CONSVLS, SEIANVS, &c.
                  Passe ouer the stage.
                  
                     GIue way, make place; roome for the Consul.
                     
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     Haile,
                     Haile, great SEIANVS.
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     Haile, my honor'd lord.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     We shall be markt anon, for our not-haile.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     That is already done.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     It is a note
                     Of vpstart greatnesse, to obserue, and watch
                     For these poore trisles, which the noble mind
                     Neglects, and scornes.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     I, and they thinke themselues
                     Deepely dishonor'd, where they are omitted,
                     As if they were necessities, that helpt
                     To the perfection of their dignities:
                     And hate the men, that but refraine 'hem.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     O!
                     There is a farder cause of hate. Their brests
                     Are guiltie, that we know their obscure springs,
                     And base beginnings: thence the anger growes. On. Follow.
                  
                  MACRO, LACO.
                  WHen all are entred, shut the temple doores;
                  And bring your guardes vp to the gate.
                  
                     LAC.
                     I will.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     If you shall heare commotion in the Senate,
                     Present your selfe: and charge on any man
                     Shall offer to come forth.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     I am instructed.
                  
                  THE SENATE.
                  HATERIVS, TRIO, SANQVINIVS, COTTA, REGVLVS, SEIANVS, POMPONIVS, LATIARIS, LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS, PRAECONES, LICTORES.
                  HOw well his lordship lookes to day!
                  
                     TRI.
                     As if
                     He had beene borne, or made for this houres state.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Your fellow Consul's come about, me thinkes?
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     I, he is wise.
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     SEIANVS trusts him well.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     SEIANVS is a noble, bounteous lord.
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     He is so, and most valiant.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     And most wise.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     Hee's euery thing.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Worthy of all, and more
                     Then bountie can bestow.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     This dignitie
                     Will make him worthy.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     Aboue CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     Tut,
                     CAESAR is but the rector of an I'sle,
                     He of the empire.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     Now he will haue power
                     
                     More to reward, then euer.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Let vs looke
                     We be not slack in giuing him our voyces.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Not I.
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     Nor I.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     The readier we seeme
                     To propagate his honours, will more bind
                     His thought, to ours.
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     I thinke right, with your lordship.
                     It is the way to haue vs hold our places.
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     I, and get more.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     More office, and more titles.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     I will not lose the part, I hope to share
                     In these his fortunes, for my patrimonie.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     See, how ARRVNTIVS sits, and LEPIDVS.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     Let 'hem alone, they will be markt anon.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     I'le doe with others.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     So will I.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     And I.
                     Men grow not in the state, but as they are planted
                     Warme in his fauours.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Noble SEIANVS!
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     Honor'd SEIANVS!
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     Worthy, and great SEIANVS!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Gods! how the spunges open, and take in!
                     And shut againe! looke, looke! is not he blest
                     That gets a seate in eye-reach of him? more,
                     That comes in eare, or tongue-reach? Ô, but most,
                     Can claw his subtle elbow, or with a buzze
                     Fly-blow his eares.
                  
                  
                     PRAET.
                     Proclaime the Senates peace;
                     And giue last summons by the edict.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     Silence:
                     In name of CAESAR, and the SENATE. Silence.
                     
                        MEMMIVS REGVLVS, and FVLCINIVS TRIO, consuls, these present kalends of Iune, with the first light, shall hold a senate, in the temple of APOLLO PALATINE, all that are Fathers, and are registred Fathers, that haue right of entring the Senate, we warne, or command, you be frequently present, take knowledge the businesse is the common-wealths, whosoeuer is absent, his fine, or mulct, will be taken, his excuse will not be taken.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     Note, who are absent, and record their names.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     Fathers Conscript. May, what I am to vtter.
                     Turne good, and happy, for the common-wealth.
                     And thou APOLLO, in whose holy house
                     We here are met, inspire vs all, with truth,
                     And libertie of censure, to our thought.
                     The maiestie of great TIBERIVS CAESAR
                     Propounds to this graue Senate, the bestowing
                     Vpon the man he loues, honour'd SEIANVS,
                     The tribuniciall dignitie, and power;
                     Here are his letters, signed with his signet:
                     What pleaseth now the Fathers to be done?
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     Reade, reade 'hem, open, publiquely, reade 'hem.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     CAESAR hath honour'd his owne greatnesse much,
                     In thinking of this act.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     It was a thought
                     Happy, and worthy CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     LAT.
                     And the lord,
                     
                     As worthy it, on whom it is directed!
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     Most worthy!
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     
                        Rome did neuer boast the vertue
                     That could giue enuie bounds, but his: SEIANVS —
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     Honour'd, and noble!
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     Good, and great SEIANVS!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     O, most tame slauerie, and fierce flatterie!
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     Silence.
                  
                  The Epistle is read.
                  
                     
                        
                           TIBERIVS CAESAR TO THE SENATE, GREETING.
                           IF you, Conscript Fathers, with your children, bee in health, it is aboundantly well: wee with our friends here, are so. The care of the common-wealth, howsoeuer we are remoou'd in person, cannot be absent to our thought; although, oftentimes, euen to princes most present, the truth of their owne affaires is hid: then which, nothing fals out more miserable to a state, or makes the art of gouerning more difficult. But since it hath beene our ease-full happinesse to enioy both the aides, and industrie of so vigilant a Senate, wee professe to haue beene the more indulgent to our pleasures, not as being carelesse of our office, but rather secure of the necessitie. Neyther doe these common rumors of many, and infamous libels, published against our retirement, at all afflict vs; being born more out of mens ignorance, then their malice: and will, neglected, finde their owne graue quickly; whereas too sensibly acknowledg'd, it would make their obloquie ours. Nor doe we desire their authors (though found) bee censur'd, since in a free state (as ours) all men ought to enioy both their mindes, and tongues free.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (ARR.
                     
                     
                        The lapwing, the lapwing.)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Yet, in things, which shall worthily, and more neere concerne the maiestie of a prince, we shall feare to be so vnnaturally cruell to our owne fame, as to neglect them. True it is, Conscript Fathers, that wee haue raysed SEIANVS, from obscure, and almost vnknowne gentrie,
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (SEN.
                     
                     
                        How! how!)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           to the highest, and most conspicuous point of greatnesse, and (wee hope) deseruingly; yet, not without danger: it being a most bold hazard in that sou'raigne, who, by his particular loue to one, dares aduenture the hatred of all his other subiects.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (ARR.
                     
                     
                        This touches, the bloud turnes.)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           But wee affie in your loues, and vnderstandings, and doe no way suspect the merit of our SEIANVS to make our fauours offensiue to any.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (SEN.
                     
                     
                        O! good, good.)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Though we could haue wished his zeale had runne a calmer course against AGRIPPINA, and our Nephewes, howsoeuer the opennesse of their actions, declared them delinquents; and, that he would haue remembred, no innocence is so safe, but it reioyceth to stand in the sight of mercie: The vse of which in vs, hee hath so quite taken away, toward them, by his loyall furie, as now our clemencie would be thought but wearied crueltie, if we should offer to exercise it.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (ARR.
                     
                     
                        I thanke him, there I look'd for't. A good fox!)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Some there bee, that would interpret this his publique seueritie to bee particular

ambition; and that, vnder a pretext of seruice to vs, hee doth but remooue his owne lets: alleadging the strengths he hath made to himselfe, by the Praetorian souldiers, by his faction in Court, and Senate, by the offices hee holdes himselfe, and conferres on others, his popularitie, and dependents, his vrging (and almost driuing) vs to this our vnwilling retirement, and lastly his aspiring to be our sonne in-law.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (SEN.
                     
                     
                        This 's strange!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ARR.
                     
                     
                        I shall anon beleeue your vultures, MARCVS.)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Your wisedomes, Conscript Fathers, are able to examine, and censure these suggestions. But, were they left to our absoluing voyce, we durst pronounce them, as we thinke them, most malicious.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (SEN.
                     
                     
                        O, he has restor'd all, list.)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Yet, are they offer'd to bee auerr'd, and on the liues of the informers. What wee should say, or rather what we should not say, Lords of the Senate, if this bee true, our gods, and goddesses confound vs if we know! Only, we must thinke, we haue plac'd our benefits ill: and conclude, that, in our choise, either we were wanting to the gods, or the gods to vs.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (ARR.
                     
                     The Senators shift their places.
                      
                        The place growes hot, they shift.)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           We haue not beene couetous, Honourable Fathers, to change; neither is it now, any new lust that alters our affection, or old lothing: but those needfull iealousies of state, that warne wiser princes, hourely, to prouide their safetie; and doe teach them how learned a thing it is to beware of the humblest enemy; much more of those great ones, whom their owne employ'd fauours haue made fit for their feares.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (SEN.
                     
                     
                        Away.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        SEN.
                     
                     
                        Sit farder.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        COT.
                     
                     
                        Let's remooue—
                  
                  
                     
                        ARR.
                     
                     
                        Gods! how the leaues drop off, this little winde!)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           We therefore desire, that the offices he holds, bee first seized by the Senate; and himselfe suspended from all exercise of place, or power—
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        (SEN.
                     
                     
                        How!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        SAN.
                     
                     
                        By your leaue.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ARR.
                     
                     Come, Porcpisce, (wher's HATERIVS?
                     His gout keepes him most miserably constant.)
                     Your dancing shewes a tempest.
                  
                  
                     
                        SEI.
                     
                     Reade no more.
                  
                  
                     
                        REG.
                     
                     Lords of the Senate, hold your seates: reade on.
                  
                  
                     
                        SEI.
                     
                     Late enters with the guards.
                     These letters, they are forg'd.
                  
                  
                     
                        REG.
                     
                     A guard, sit still.
                  
                  
                     
                        ARR.
                     
                     There's change.
                  
                  
                     
                        REG.
                     
                     Bid silence, and reade forward.
                  
                  
                     
                        PRAE.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Silence— and himselfe suspended from all exercise of place, or power, but till due and mature tryall be made of his innocency, which yet we can faintly apprehend the necessitie, to doubt. If, Conscript Fathers, to your more searching wisedomes, there shall appeare farther cause (or of farder proceeding, either to seizure of lands, goods, or more—) it is not our power that shall limit your authoritie, or our fauour, that must corrupt your iustice: either were dishonourable in you, and both vncharitable to our selfe. We would willingly he present with your counsailes in this businesse, but the danger of so potent a faction (if it should proue so) forbids our attempting it: except one of the Consuls would be intreated for our safetie, to vndertake the guard of vs home, then wee should most readily aduenture. In the meane time, it shall not bee fit for vs to

importune so iudicious a Senate, who know how much they hurt the innocent, that spare the guiltie: and how gratefull a sacrifice, to the gods, is the life of an ingratefull person. We reflect not, in this, on SEIANVS (notwithstanding, if you keepe an eye vpon him— and there is LATIARIS a Senator, and PINNARIVS NATTA, two of his most trusted ministers, and so profest, whom we desire not to haue apprênded) but as the necessitie of the cause exacts it.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     A guard on LATIARIS.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     O, the spie!
                     The reuerend spie is caught, who pitties him?
                     Reward, sir, for your se
                           •
                        uice: now, you ha' done
                     Your propertie, you see what vse is made?
                     Hang vp the instrument.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Giue leaue.
                  
                  
                     LAC.
                     Stand, stand,
                     He comes vpon his death, that doth aduance
                     An inch toward my point.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Haue we no friends here?
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Hush't. Where now are all the hailes, and acclamations?
                  
                  MACRO, SENATE.
                  HAile, to the Consuls, and this noble Senate.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Is MACRO here? O, thou art lost, SEIANVS.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     Sit still, and vn-affrighted, reuerend Fathers.
                     
                     MACRO, by CAESARS grace, the new-made Prouost,
                     And now possest of the praetorian bands,
                     An honour late belong'd to that proud man,
                     Bids you, be safe: and to your constant doome
                     Of his deseruings, offers you the surety
                     Of all the souldiers, tribunes, and centurions,
                     Receiu'd in our command.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     SEIANVS, SEIANVS,
                     Stand forth, SEIANVS.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Am I call'd?
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     I, thou,
                     Thou insolent monster, art bid stand.
                  
                  
                     SEI.
                     Why, MACRO,
                     It hath beene otherwise, betweene you, and I?
                     This court, that knowes vs both, hath seene a difference,
                     And can (if it be pleas'd to speake) confirme,
                     Whose insolence is most.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     Come downe Typhoeus,
                     If mine be most, loe, thus I make it more;
                     Kicke vp thy heeles in ayre, teare off thy robe,
                     Play with thy beard, and nostrills. Thus 'tis fit,
                     (And no man take compassion of thy state)
                     To vse th'ingratefull viper, tread his braines
                     Into the earth.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     Forbeare.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     If I could lose
                     All my humanitie now, 'twere well to torture
                     So meriting a traytor. VVherefore, Fathers,
                     Sit you amaz'd, and silent? and not censure
                     This wretch, who in the houre he first rebell'd
                     'Gainst CAESARS bountie, did condemne himselfe?
                     
                     
                        P'hlegra, the field, where all the sonnes of earth
                     Muster'd against the gods, did ne're acknowledge
                     So proud, and huge a monster.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     Take him hence.
                     And all the gods guard CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     Take him hence.
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     Hence.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     To the dungeon with him.
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     He deserues it.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     Crowne all our doores with bayes.
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     And let an oxe
                     With gilded hornes, and garlands, straight be led
                     Vnto the capitoll.
                     
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     And sacrific'd
                     To IOVE, for CAESARS safety.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     All our gods
                     Be present still to CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     PHOEBVS.
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     MARS.
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     DIANA.
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     PALLAS.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     IVNO, MERCVRIE,
                     All guard him.
                  
                  
                     MAC.
                     Forth, thou prodigie of men.
                  
                  
                     COT.
                     Let all the traytors titles be defac'd.
                  
                  
                     TRI.
                     His images, and statues be pull'd downe.
                  
                  
                     HAT.
                     His chariot-wheeles be broken.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     And the legs
                     Of the poore horses, that deserued naught,
                     Let them be broken too.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     O, violent change,
                     And whirle of mens affections!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Like, as both
                     Their bulkes and soules were bound on fortunes wheele,
                     And must act onely with her motion!
                     LEPIDVS, ARRVNTIVS.
                     WHo would depend vpon the popular ayre,
                     Or voyce of men, that haue to day beheld
                     (That which if all the gods had fore-declar'd,
                     Would not haue beene beleeu'd) SEIANVS fall?
                     He, that this morne rose proudly, as the sunne?
                     And, breaking through a mist of clients breath,
                     Came on as gaz'd at, and admir'd, as he
                     When superstitious Moores salute his light!
                     That had our seruile nobles waiting him
                     As common groomes; and hanging on his looke,
                     No lesse then humane life on destinie!
                     That had mens knees as frequent, as the gods;
                     And sacrifices, more, then Rome had altars:
                     And this man fall! fall? I, without a looke,
                     That durst appeare his friend; or lend so much
                     Of vaine reliefe, to his chang'd state, as pitty!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     They, that before like gnats plaid in his beames,
                     And throng'd to circumscribe him, now not seene!
                     Nor deigne to hold a common seate with him!
                     Others, that wayted him vnto the Senate,
                     Now, inhumanely rauish him to prison!
                     
                     Whom (but this morne) they follow'd as their lord,
                     Guard through the streets, bound like a fugitiue!
                     In stead of wreaths, giue fetters; strokes, for stoops:
                     Blind shame, for honours; and black taunts, for titles!
                     Who would trust slippery chance?
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     They, that would make
                     Themselues her spoile: and foolishly forget,
                     When shee doth flatter, that shee comes to prey.
                     Fortune, thou hadst no deitie, if men
                     Had wisedome: we haue placed thee so high,
                     By fond beliefe in thy felicitie.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     Shout within.
                     The gods guard CAESAR. All the gods guard CAESAR.
                     MACRO, REGVLVS, SENATORS.
                     NOw great SEIANVS, you that aw'd the state,
                     And sought to bring the nobles to your whip,
                     That would be CAESARS tutor, and dispose
                     Of dignities, and offices! that had
                     The publique head still bare to your designes,
                     And made the generall voyce to eccho yours!
                     That look'd for salutations, twelue score off,
                     And would haue pyramid's, yea, temples rear'd
                     To your huge greatnesse! now, you lie as flat,
                     As was your pride aduanc'd.
                  
                  
                     REG.
                     Thanks, to the gods.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     And praise to MACRO, that hath saued Rome.
                     
                     Liberty, liberty, liberty. Lead on,
                     And praise to MACRO, that hath saued Rome.
                     
                     ARRVNTIVS, LEPIDVS, TERENTIVS.
                     I Prophesie, out of this Senates flatterie,
                     That this new fellow, MACRO, will become
                     A greater prodigie in Rome, then he
                     That now is falne.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     O you, whose minds are good,
                     And haue not forc'd all mankind, from your brests;
                     That yet haue so much stock of vertue left,
                     To pitty guiltie states, when they are wretched:
                     Lend your soft eares to heare, and eyes to weepe
                     Deeds done by men, beyond the acts of furies.
                     
                     The eager multitude, (who neuer yet
                     Knew why to loue, or hate, but onely pleas'd
                     T'expresse their rage of power) no sooner heard
                     The murmure of SEIANVS in decline,
                     But with that speed, and heate of appetite,
                     
                     With which they greedily deuoure the way
                     To some great sports, or a new theatre;
                     They fill'd the capitoll, and POMPEI'S circke,
                     Where, like so many mastiues, biting stones,
                     As if his statues now were sensitiue
                     Of their wild furie; first, they teare them downe:
                     Then fastning ropes, drag them along the streets,
                     Crying in scorne, this, this was that rich head
                     Was crown'd with garlands, and with odours, this
                     That was in Rome so reuerenced. Now
                     The fornace, and the bellowes shall too worke
                     The great SEIANVS crack, and piece, by piece,
                     Drop i' the founders pit.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     O, popular rage!
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     The whilst, the Senate, at the temple of Concord,
                     Make haste to meet againe, and thronging cry,
                     Let vs condemne him, tread him downe in water,
                     While he doth lie vpon the banke; away:
                     Where some, more tardie, cry vnto their bearers,
                     He will be censur'd ere we come, runne knaues,
                     And vse that furious diligence, for feare
                     Their bond-men should informe against their slacknesse,
                     And bring their quaking flesh vnto the hooke:
                     The rout, they follow with confused voyce,
                     Crying, they'are glad, say they could ne're abide him;
                     Enquire, what man he was? what kind of face?
                     What beard he had? what nose? what lips? protest,
                     They euer did presage h' would come to this:
                     They neuer thought him wise, nor valiant: Aske
                     After his garments, when he dies? what death?
                     And not a beast of all the herd demands,
                     What was his crime? or, who were his accusers?
                     Vnder what roofe, or testimonie, he fell?
                     There came (sayes one) a huge, long, worded letter
                     From Capreae against him. Did there so?
                     O, they are satisfied, no more.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Alas!
                     They follow fortune, and hate men condemn'd,
                     Guiltie, or not.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     But, had SEIANVS thriu'd
                     In his designe, and prosperously opprest
                     The old TIBERIVS, then, in that same minute
                     These very raskals, that now rage like furies,
                     Would haue proclaim'd SEIANVS emperour.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     But what hath follow'd?
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Sentence, by the Senate;
                     To lose his head: which was no sooner off,
                     But that, and th'vnfortunate trunke were seiz'd
                     
                     By the rude multitude; who not content
                     With what the forward iustice of the state,
                     Officiously had done, with violent rage
                     Haue rent it limbe, from limbe. A thousand heads,
                     A thousand hands, ten thousand tongues, and voyces,
                     Employ'd at once in seuerall acts of malice!
                     Old men not staid with age, virgins with shame,
                     Late wiues with losse of husbands, mothers of children,
                     Losing all griefe in ioy of his sad fall,
                     Runne quite transported with their crueltie!
                     These mounting at his head, these at his face,
                     These digging out his eyes, those with his braine,
                     Sprinkling themselues, their houses, and their friends;
                     Others are met, haue rauish'd thence an arme,
                     And deale small pieces of the flesh for fauours;
                     These with a thigh; this hath cut off his hands;
                     And this his feet; these fingers, and these toes;
                     That hath his liuer; he his heart: there wants
                     Nothing but roome for wrath, and place for hatred!
                     What cannot oft be done, is now ore-done.
                     The whole, and all of what was great SEIANVS,
                     And next to CAESAR did possesse the world,
                     Now torne, and scatter'd, as he needs no graue,
                     Each little dust couers a little part:
                     So lyes he no where, and yet often buryed!
                     ARRVNTIVS, NVNTIVS, LEPIDVS, TERENTIVS.
                     MOre of SEIANVS?
                  
                  
                     NVN.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     What can be added?
                     We know him dead.
                  
                  
                     NVN.
                     Then, there begin your pitty.
                     There is inough behind, to melt eu'n Rome,
                     And CAESAR into teares: (since neuer slaue
                     Could yet so highly offend, but tyrannie,
                     In torturing him, would make him worth lamenting.)
                     A sonne, and daughter, to the dead SEIANVS,
                     (Of whom there is not now so much remayning
                     As would giue fastning to the hang-mans hooke)
                     Haue they drawne forth for farder sacrifice;
                     Whose tendernesse of knowledge, vnripe yeares,
                     And childish silly innocence was such,
                     As scarse would lend them feeling of their danger:
                     The girle so simple, as shee often askt,
                     Where they would lead her? for what cause they drag'd her?
                     
                        Cry'd, shee would doe no more. That shee could take
                     
                     
                        Warning with beating. And because our lawes
                     Admit no virgin immature to die,
                     The wittily, and strangely-cruell MACRO,
                     Deliuer'd her to be deflowr'd, and spoil'd,
                     By the rude lust of the licentious hang-man,
                     Then, to be strangled with her harmelesse brother.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     O, act, most worthy hell, and lasting night,
                     To hide it from the world!
                  
                  
                     NVN.
                     Their bodies throwne
                     Into the Gemonies, (I know not how,
                     Or by what accident return'd) the mother,
                     Th'expulsed APICATA, finds them there;
                     Whom when shee saw lie spred on the degrees,
                     After a world of furie on her selfe,
                     Tearing her haire, defacing of her face,
                     Beating her brests, and wombe, kneeling amaz'd,
                     Crying to heauen, then to them; at last,
                     Her drowned voyce gate vp aboue her woes:
                     And with such black, and bitter execrations,
                     (As might affright the gods, and force the sunne
                     Runne back-ward to the east, nay, make the old
                     Deformed CITAOS rise againe, t' ore-whelme
                     Them, vs, and all the world) shee fills the aire;
                     Vpbraids the heauens with their partiall doomes,
                     Defies their tyrannous powers, and demands,
                     What shee, and those poore innocents haue transgress'd,
                     That they must suffer such a share in vengeance,
                     Whilst LIVIA, LYGDVS, and EVDEMVS liue,
                     Who, (as shee say's, and firmely vowes, to proue it
                     To CAESAR, and the Senate) poyson'd DRVSVS?
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Confederates with her husband?
                  
                  
                     NVN.
                     I.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     Strange act!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     And strangely open'd: what say's now my monster,
                     The multitude? they reele now? doe they not?
                  
                  
                     NVN.
                     Their gall is gone, and now they 'gin to weepe
                     The mischiefe they haue done.
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     I thanke 'hem, rogues!
                  
                  
                     NVN.
                     Part are so stupide, or so flexible,
                     As they beleeue him innocent; all grieue:
                     And some, whose hands yet reeke with his warme bloud,
                     And gripe the part which they did teare of him,
                     Wish him collected, and created new.
                  
                  
                     LEP.
                     How fortune plies her sports, when shee begins
                     To practise'hem! pursues, continues, addes!
                     Con
                           •
                        ounds, with varying her empassion'd moodes!
                  
                  
                     ARR.
                     Do'st thou hope fortune to redeeme thy crimes?
                     To make amends, for thy ill placed fauours,
                     
                     With these strange punishments? Forbeare, you things,
                     That stand vpon the pinnacles of state,
                     To boast your slippery height; when you doe fall,
                     You pash your selues in pieces, nere to rise:
                     And he that lends you pitty, is not wise.
                  
                  
                     TER.
                     Let this example mooue th'insolent man,
                     Not to grow proud, and carelesse of the gods:
                     It is an odious wisedome, to blaspheme,
                     Much more to slighten, or denie their powers.
                     For, whom the morning saw so great, and high,
                     Thus low, and little, 'fore the 'euen doth lie.
                  
                  THE END.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  This Tragoedie vvas first acted, in the yeere 1603.
                  By the Kings Maiesties SERVANTS.
                  The principall Tragoedians were,

                        RIC. BVRBADGE.
                        AVG. PHILIPS.
                        WILL. SLY.
                        IOH. LOWIN.
                        WILL. SHAKE-SPEARE.
                        IOH. HEMINGS.
                        HEN. CONDEL.
                        ALEX. COOKE.
                     
                  
                  With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  VOLPONE, OR THE FOXE. A Comoedie. Acted in the yeere 1605. By the K. MAIESTIES SERVANTS.
                  The Author B. I.
                  
                     HORAT.
                     Simul & incunda, & idonea dicere vitae.
                  
                  LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.
                  M. D C. XVI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE MOST NOBLE AND MOST EQVALL SISTERS THE TWO FAMOVS VNIVERSITIES FOR THEIR LOVE AND ACCEPTANCE SHEW'N TO HIS POEME IN THE PRESENTATION BEN. IONSON THE GRATEFVLL ACKNOWLEDGER DEDICATES BOTH IT AND HIMSELFE.
                  
                     
                     NEuer (most equall SISTERS) had any man a wit so presently excellent, as that it could raise it selfe; but there must come both matter, occasion, commenders, and fauourers to it: If this be true, and that the fortune of all writers doth daily proue it, it behoues the carefull to prouide, well, toward these accidents; and, hauing acquir'd them, to preserue that part of reputation most tenderly, wherein the benefit of a friend is also defended. Hence is it, that I now render my selfe gratefull, and am studious to iustifie the bounty of your act: to which, though your mere authority were satisfying, yet, it being an age, wherein Poetrie, and the Professors of it heare so ill, on all sides, there will a reason bee look'd for in the subiect. It is certayne, nor can it with any fore-head be oppos'd, that the too-much licence of Poetasters, in this time, hath much deform'd their Mistris; that, euery day, their manifold, and manifest ignorance, doth sticke vnnaturall reproches vpon her: But for their petulancy, it were an act of the greatest iniustice, either to let the learned suffer; or so diuine a skill (which indeed should not bee attempted with vncleane hands) to fall, vnder the least contempt. For, if men will impartially, and not à-squint, looke toward the offices, and function of a Poet, they will easily conclude to themselues, the impossibility of any mans being the good Poet, without first being a good man. He that

is said to be able to informe yong-men to all good disciplines, inflame growne-men to all great vertues, keep
                        •
                      old-men in their best and supreme state, or as they decline to child-hood, recouer them to their first strength; that comes forth the interpreter, and arbiter of nature, a teacher of things diuine, no lesse then humane, a master in manners; and can alone (or with a few) effect the businesse of man-kind: this, I take him, is no subiect for pride, and ignorance to exercise their rayling rhetorique vpon. But, it will here be hastily answer'd, that the writers of these dayes are other things; that, not only their manners, but their natures are inuerted; and nothing remayning with them of the dignitie of Poet, but the abused name, which euery Scribe vsurps: that now, especially in dramatick, or (as they terme it) stage-poetrie, nothing but ribaldry, profanation, blasphemy, all licence of offence to god, and man, is practis'd. I dare not denie a great part of this (and am sorry, I dare not) because in some mens abortiue features (and would they had neuer boasted the light) it is ouer-true: But, that all are embarqu'd in this bold aduenture for hell, is a most vncharitable thought, and, vtter'd, a more malicious slander. For my particular, I can (and from a most cleare conscience) affirme, that I haue euer trem
                        •
                     led to thinke toward the least prophanenesse; haue lothed the vse of such foule, and vn-wash'd baud
                        •
                     y, as is now made the foode of the scene: And, howsoeuer I cannot escape, from some, the imputation of sharpnesse, but that they will say, I haue taken a pride,

or lust, to be bitter, and not my yongest infant but hath come into the world with all his teeth; I would aske of these supercilious politiques, what nation, societie, or generall order, or state I haue prouok'd? what publique person? whether I haue not (in all these) preseru'd their dignitie, as mine owne person, safe? My workes are read, allow'd, (I speake of those that are intirely mine) looke into them: What broad reproofes haue I vs'd? Where haue I beene particular? Where personall? except to a mimick, cheater, bawd, or buffon, creatures (for their insolencies) worthy to be tax'd? Yet, to which of these so pointingly, as he might not, either ingenuously haue confest, or wisely dissembled his disease? But it is not rumour can make men guiltie, much lesse entitle me, to other mens crimes. I know, that nothing can bee so innocently writ, or carryed, but may be made obnoxious to construction; mary, whil'st I beare mine innocence about mee, I feare it not. Application, is now, growne a trade with many; and there are, that professe to haue a key for the decyphering of euery thing: but let wise and noble persons take heed how they be too credulous, or giue leaue to these inuading interpreters, to bee ouer-familiar with their fames, who cunningly, and often, vtter their owne virulent malice, vnder other mens simplest meanings. As for those, that will (by faults which charitie hath rak'd vp, or common honestie conceal'd) make themselues a name with the multitude, or (to draw their rude, and beastly claps) care not whose liuing faces they intrench, with their petulant stiles;

may they doe it, without a riuall, for me: I choose rather to liue grau'd in obscuritie, then share with them, in so preposterous a fame. Nor can I blame the wishes of those seuere, and wiser patriots, who prouiding the hurts these licentious spirits may doe in a state, desire rather to see fooles, and deuils, and those antique reliques of barbarisme retriu'd, with all other ridiculous, and exploded follies: then behold the wounds of priuate men, of princes, and nations. For, as HORACE makes TREBATIVS speake, among these

                        —Sibi quis
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            timet, quanquam est intactus, & odit.
                     
And men may iustly impute such rages, if continu'd, to the writer, as his sports. The increase of which lust in liberty, together with the present trade of the stage, in all their misc'line enter-ludes, what learned or liberall soule doth not already abhor? where nothing but the filth of the time is vtter'd, and that with such impropriety of phrase, such plenty of soloecismes, such dearth of sense, so bold prolepse's, so rackt metaphor's, with brothelry, able to violate the eare of a pagan, and blasphemy, to turne the bloud of a christian to water. I cannot but be serious in a cause of this nature, wherein my fame, and the reputations of diuers honest, and learned are the question; when a Name, so ful of authority, antiquity, and all great marke, is (through their insolence) become the lowest scorne of the age: and those men subiect to the petulancy of euery vernaculous Orator, that were wont to bee the care of Kings, and happiest Monarchs. This it is, that hath not only rap't me to present


                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     


                     
indignation, but made me studious, heretofore; and, by all my actions, to stand off, from them: which may most appeare in this my latest worke (which you, most learned ARBITRESSES, haue seene, iudg'd, and to my crowne, approu'd) wherein I haue labour'd, for their instruction, and amendment, to reduce, not onely the ancient formes, but manners of the scene, the easinesse, the propriety, the innocence, and last the doctrine, which is the principall end of poesie, to informe men, in the best reason of liuing. And though my catastrophe may, in the strict rigour of comick law, meet with censure, as turning back to my promise; I desire the learned, and charitable critick to haue so much faith in me, to thinke it was done off industrie: For, with what ease I could haue varied it, neerer his scale (but that I feare to boast my owne faculty) I could here insert. But my speciall ayme being to put the s
                        •
                     affle in their mouths, that crie out, we neuer punish vice in our enterludes, &c. I tooke the more liberty; though not without some lines of example, drawne euen in the ancients themselues, the goings out of whose comoedies are not alwaies ioyfull, but oft-times, the bawdes, the seruants, the riuals yea, and the masters are mulcted: and fitly, it being the office of a comick-Poet, to imitate iustice, and instruct to life, as well as puritie of language, or stirre vp gentle affections. To which, I shall take the occasion else-where to speake. For the present (most reuerenced SISTERS) as I haue car'd to be thankefull for your affections past, and here made the vnderstanding acquainted with some

ground of your fauours; let me not despaire their continuance, to the maturing of some worthier fruits: wherein, if my MVSES be true to me, I shall raise the despis'd head of poetrie againe, and stripping her out of those rotten and base rags, wherwith the Times haue adulterated her form, restore her to her primitiue habit, feature, and maiesty, and render her worthy to be imbraced, and kist, of all the great and master-spirits of our world. As for the vile, and slothfull, who neuer affected an act, worthy of celebration, or are so inward with their owne vicious natures, as they worthily feare her; and thinke it a high point of policie, to keepe her in contempt with their declamatorie, and windy inuectiues: shee shall out of iust rage incite her seruants (who are genus iritabile) to spout inke in their faces, that shall eate, farder then their marrow, into their fames; and not CINNAMVS the barber, with his arte, shall be able to take out the brands, but they shall liue, and bee read, till the wretches dye, as things worst deseruing of themselues in chiefe, and then of all mankind.
               
               
                  
                  The Persons of the Play.
                  
                     
                        VOLPONE, a Magnifico.
                     
                        MOSCA, his Parasite.
                     
                        VOLTORE, an Aduocate.
                     
                        CORBACCIO, an old Gentleman.
                     
                        CORVINO, a Merchant.
                     
                        AVOCATORI, four Magistrates
                     
                        NOTARIO, the Register.
                     
                        NANO, a Dwarfe.
                     
                        CASTRONE, an Eunuch.
                     
                        GREGE.
                     
                     
                        POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE, a Knight.
                     
                        PEREGRINE, a Gent.-trauailer.
                     
                        BONARIO, a yong Gentleman.
                     
                        FINE MADAME WOVLD-BEE, the Knights wife.
                     
                        CELIA, the Merchants wife.
                     
                        COMMANDADORI, Officers.
                     
                        MERCATORI, three Merchants.
                     
                        ANDROGYNO, a Hermaphrodite.
                     
                        SERVITORE, a Seruant.
                     
                        WOMEN.
                     
                  
                  THE SCENE VENICE.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  VOLPONE, OR THE FOXE. THE ARGVMENT.
                  
                     VOLPONE, childlesse, rich, faines sicke, despaires,
                  Offers his state to hopes of seuerall heires,
                  Lies languishing; His Parasite receaues
                  Presents of all, assures, deludes: Then weaues
                  Other crosse-plots, which ope' themselues, are told.
                  New tricks for safety, are sought; they thriue: When, bold,
                  Each tempts th' other againe, and all are sold.
               
               
                  PROLOGVE.
                  
                     NOw, luck yet send vs, and a little wit
                  Will serue, to make our play hit;
                  (According to the palates of the season)
                  Here is ri'me, not emptie of reason:
                  This we were bid to credit, from our Poet,
                  Whose true scope, if you would know it,
                  In all his poemes, stil, hath been this measure,
                  To mixe profit, with your pleasure;
                  And not as some (whose throats their enuy fayling)
                  Cry hoarsely, all he writes, is rayling:
                  And, when his playes come forth, thinke they can flout them,
                  With saying, he was a yeere about them.
                  To these there needs no lie, but this his creature,
                  Which was, two months since, no feature;
                  And, though he dares giue them fiue liues to mend it,
                  'Tis knowne, fiue weekes fully pen'd it:
                  
                  From his owne hand, without a co-adiutor,
                  Nouice, iourney-man, or tutor.
                  Yet, thus much I can giue you, as a token
                  Of his playes worth, no egges are broken;
                  Nor quaking custards with fierce teeth affrighted,
                  Wherewith your rout are so delighted;
                  Nor hales he in a gull, old ends reciting,
                  To stop gaps in his loose writing;
                  With such a deale of monstrous, and forc'd action:
                  As might make Bet'lem a faction:
                  Nor made he' his play, for iests, stolne from each table,
                  But makes iests, to fit his fable.
                  And, so presents quick comoedie, resined,
                  As best Criticks haue designed,
                  The lawes of time, place, persons he obserueth,
                  From no needfull rule he swerueth.
                  All gall, and coppresse, from his inke, he drayneth,
                  Onely, a little salt remayneth;
                  Wherewith, he'll rub your cheeks, til (red with laughter)
                  They shall looke fresh, a weeke after.
               
               
                  
                     Act I. 
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     VOLPONE, MOSCA.
                     
                        GOod morning to the day; and, next, my gold:
                        Open the shrine, that I may see my saint.
                        
                        Haile the worlds soule, and mine. More glad then is
                        The teeming earth, to see the long'd-for sunne
                        Peepe through the hornes of the celestiall ram,
                        Am I, to view thy splendor, darkening his:
                        That, lying here, amongst my other hoords,
                        Shew'st like a flame, by night; or like the day
                        Strooke out of chaos, when all darkenesse fled
                        Vnto the center. O, thou sonne of SOL,
                        (But brighter then thy father) let me kisse,
                        With adoration, thee, and euery relique
                        Of sacred treasure, in this blessed roome.
                        Well did wise Poets, by thy glorious name,
                        Title that age, which they would haue the best;
                        Thou being the best of things: and far transcending
                        All stile of ioy, in children, parents, friends,
                        Or any other waking dreame on earth.
                        Thy lookes, when they to VENVS did ascribe,
                        They should haue giu'n her twentie thousand CVPIDS;
                        
                        Such are thy beauties, and our loues! Deare saint,
                        Riches, the dumbe god, that giu'st all men tongues:
                        That canst doe nought, and yet mak'st men doe all things;
                        The price of soules; euen hell, with thee to boot,
                        Is made worth heauen! Thou art vertue, fame,
                        Honour, and all things else! Who can get thee,
                        He shall be noble, valiant, honest, wise—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And what he will, sir. Riches are in fortune
                        A greater good, then wisedome is in nature.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        True, my beloued MOSCA. Yet, I glory
                        More in the cunning purchase of my wealth,
                        Then in the glad possession; since I gaine
                        No common way: I vse no trade, no venter;
                        I wound no earth with plow-shares; fat no beasts
                        To feede the shambles; haue no mills for yron,
                        Oyle, corne, or men, to grinde 'hem into poulder;
                        I blow no subtill glasse; expose no ships
                        To threatnings of the furrow-faced sea;
                        I turne no moneys, in the publike banke;
                        Nor vsure priuate—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, sir, nor deuoure
                        Soft prodigalls. You shall ha' some will swallow
                        A melting heire, as glibly, as your Dutch
                        
                        Will pills of butter, and ne're purge for't;
                        Teare forth the fathers of poore families
                        Out of their beds, and coffin them, aliue,
                        In some kind, clasping prison, where their bones
                        May be forth-comming, when the flesh is rotten:
                        But, your sweet nature doth abhorre these courses;
                        You lothe, the widdowes, or the orphans teares
                        Should wash your pauements; or their pittious cryes
                        Ring in your roofes; and beate the aire, for vengeance.—
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Right, MOSCA, I doe lothe it.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And besides, sir,
                        You are not like the thresher, that doth stand
                        With a huge flaile, watching a heape of corne,
                        And, hungrie, dares not taste the smallest graine,
                        But feeds on mallowes, and such bitter herbs;
                        Nor like the merchant, who hath fill'd his vaults
                        With Romagnia, and rich Candian wines,
                        Yet drinkes the lees of Lombards vineger:
                        You will not lie in straw, whilst moths, and wormes
                        Feed on your sumptuous hangings, and soft beds.
                        You know the vse of riches, and dare giue, now,
                        From that bright heape, to me, your poore obseru
                              •
                           r,
                        Or to your dwarfe, or your hermaphrodite,
                        Your eunuch, or what other houshold-trifle
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        Your pleasure allowes maint'nance.—
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Hold thee, MOSCA,
                        Take, of my hand; thou strik'st on truth, in all:
                        And they are enuious, terme thee parasite.
                        Call forth my dwarfe, my eunuch, and my foole,
                        And let 'hem make me sport. What should I doe,
                        But cocker vp my genius, and liue free
                        To all delights, my fortune calls me to?
                        I haue no wife, no parent, child, allie,
                        To giue my substance to; but whom I make,
                        Must be my heire: and this makes men obserue me.
                        This drawes new clients, daily, to my house,
                        Women, and men, of euery sexe, and age,
                        That bring me presents, send me plate, coyne, iewels,
                        With hope, that when I die, (which they expect
                        Each greedy minute) it shall then returne,
                        Ten-fold, vpon them; whil'st some, couetous
                        Aboue the rest, seeke to engrosse me, whole,
                        And counter worke, the one, vnto the other,
                        Contend in gifts, as they would seeme, in loue:
                        All which I suffer, playing with their hopes,
                        And am content to coyne 'hem into profit,
                        And looke vpon their kindnesse, and take more,
                        And looke on that; still bearing them in hand,
                        Letting the cherry knock against their lips,
                        And, draw it, by their mouths, and back againe. How now!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene II.
                     NANO, ANDROGYNO, CASTRONE, VOLPONE, MOSCA.
                     
                        NOw, roome, for fresh gamsters, who doe will you to know,
                        They doe bring you neither play, nor Vniuersitie show;
                        And therefore doe intreat you, that whatsoeuer they reherse,
                        May not fare a whit the worse, for the false pase of the verse.
                        If you wonder at this, you will wonder more, ere we passe,
                        For know, here is inclos'd the Soule of PYTHAGORAS,
                        That iuggler diuine, as hereafter shall follow;
                        Which Soule (fast, and loose, sir) came first from APOLLO,
                        And was breath'd into AETHALIDES, MERCVRIVS his sonne,
                        Where it had the gift to remember all that euer was done.
                        From thence it fled forth, and made quick transmigration
                        To goldy-lockt EVPHORBVS, who was kill'd, in good fashion,
                        At the siege of old Troy, by the Cuckold of Sparta.
                        
                        
                           HERMOTIMVS was next (I find it, in my charta)
                        
                        To whom it did passe, where no sooner it was missing,
                        But with one PYRRHVS, of Delos, it learn'd to goe a fishing:
                        And thence, did it enter the Sophist of Greece.
                        
                        From PYTHAGORE, shee went into a beautifull peece,
                        Hight ASPASIA, the meretrix; and the next tosse of her
                        Was, againe, of a whore, shee became a Philosopher,
                        
                           CRATES the Cynick: (as it selfe doth relate it)
                        Since, Kings, Knights, and Beggers, Knaues, Lords and Fooles gat it,
                        Besides, oxe, and asse, cammell, mule, goat, and brock,
                        In all which it hath spoke, as in the Coblers cock.
                        But I come not here, to discourse of that matter,
                        Or his one, two, or three, or his great oath, by quater,
                        His musicks, his trigon, his golden thigh,
                        Or his telling how elements shift: but I
                        Would aske, how of late, thou hast suffered translation,
                        And shifted thy coat, in these dayes of reformation?
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        Like one of the reformed, a Foole, as you see,
                        Counting all old doctrine heresie.
                        
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        But not on thine owne forbid meates hast thou venter'd?
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        On fish, when first, a carthusian I enter'd.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        Why, then thy dogmaticall silence hath left thee?
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        Of that an obstreperous Lawyer bereft mee.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        O wonderfull change! when Sir Lawyer forsooke thee,
                        For PYTHAGORE'S sake, what body then tooke thee?
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        A good dull moyle.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        And how! by that meanes,
                        Thou wert brought to allow of the eating of beanes?
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        But, from the moyle, into whom did'st thou passe?
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        Into a very strange beast, by some writers cal'd an asse,
                        By others, a precise, pure, illuminate brother,
                        Of those deuoure flesh, and sometimes one another:
                        And will drop you forth a libell, or a sanctified lie,
                        Betwixt euery spoonefull of a natiuitie-pie.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        Now quit thee, for heauen, of that profane nation;
                        And gently, report thy next transmigration.
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        To the same that I am.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        A creature of delight?
                        And (what is more then a Foole) an hermaphrodite?
                        
                        Now
                              •
                            pray thee, sweet Soule, in all thy variation,
                        Which body would'st thou choose, to take vp thy station?
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        Troth, this I am in, euen here would I tarry.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        'Cause here, the delight of each sexe thou canst vary?
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        Alas, those pleasures be stale, and forsaken;
                        No, 'tis your Foole, wherewith I am so taken,
                        The onely one creature, that I can call blessed:
                        For all other formes I haue prou'd most distressed.
                     
                     
                        
                        NAN.
                        Spoke true, as thou wert in PYTHAGORAS still.
                        This learned opinion we celebrate will,
                        Fellow eunuch (as behooues vs) with all our wit, and art,
                        To dignifie that, whereof our selues are so great, and speciall a part.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Now very, very pretty: MOSCA, this
                        Was thy inuention?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        If it please my patron,
                        Not else.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        It doth, good MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Then it was, sir.
                        SONG.
                        FOoles, they are the onely nation
                        Worth mens enuy, or admiration;
                        Free from care, or sorrow-taking,
                        Selues, and others merry-making:
                        All they speake, or doe, is sterling.
                        Your Foole, he is your great mans dearling,
                        And your ladies sport, and pleasure;
                        Tongue, and bable are his treasure.
                        Eene his face begetteth laughter,
                        And he speakes truth, free from slaughter;
                        Hee's the grace of euery feast,
                        And, sometimes, the chiefest guest:
                        Hath his trencher, and his stoole,
                        When wit waites vpon the foole.
                        O, who would not bee
                        Hee, hee, hee?
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        One knocks without.
                        Who's that? away, looke MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Foole, begone,
                        'Tis signior VOLTORE, the Aduocate,
                        I know him, by his knock.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Fetch me my gowne,
                        My furres and night-caps; say, my couch is changing:
                        And let him entertayne himselfe, awhile,
                        Without i' th' gallerie. Now, now, my clients
                        Beginne their visitation! vulture, kite,
                        Rauen, and gor-crow, all my birds of prey,
                        That thinke me turning carcasse, now they come:
                        I am not for 'hem yet. How now? the newes?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        A piece of plate, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Of what bignesse?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Huge,
                        Massie, and antique, with your name inscrib'd,
                        And arm
                              •
                           s ingrauen.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Good! and not a foxe
                        Stretch'd on the earth, with fine delusiue sleights,
                        Mocking a gaping crow? ha, MOSCA?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sharpe, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Giue me my furres. Why dost thou laugh so, man?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I cannot choose, sir, when I apprehend
                        What thoughts he has (without) now, as he wa
                              •
                           kes:
                        That this might be the last gift, he should giue;
                        
                        That this would fetch you; if you dyed to day,
                        And gaue him all, what he should be to morrow;
                        What large returne would come of all his venters;
                        How he should worship'd be, and reuerenc'd;
                        Ride, with his furres, and foot-clothes; waited on
                        By herds of fooles, and clients; haue cleere way
                        Made for his moyle, as letter'd as himselfe;
                        Be cald the great, and learned Aduocate:
                        And then concludes, there's nought impossible.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Yes, to be learned, MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, no: rich
                        Implies it. Hood an asse, with reuerend purple,
                        So you can hide his two ambitious eares,
                        And, he shall passe for a cathedrall Doctor.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        My caps, my caps, good MOSCA, fetch him in.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Stay, sir, your ointment for your eyes.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        That's true;
                        Dispatch, dispatch: I long to haue possession
                        Of my new present.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        That, and thousands more,
                        I hope, to see you lord of.
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Thankes, kind MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And that, when I am lost in blended dust,
                        And hundred such, as I am, in succession—
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Nay, that were too much, MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        You shall liue,
                        Still, to delude these harpyies.
                        
                     
                     
                        VOL.
                        Louing MOSCA,
                        'Tis well, my pillow now, and let him enter.
                        Now, my fain'd cough, my phthisick, and my gout,
                        My apoplexie, palsie, and catarrhes,
                        Helpe, with your forced functions, this my posture,
                        Wherein, this three yeere, I haue milk'd their hopes.
                        He comes, I heare him (vh, vh, vh, vh) Ô.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene III.
                     MOSCA, VOLTORE, VOLPONE.
                     
                        YOu still are, what you were, sir. Onely you
                        (Of all the rest) are he, commands his loue:
                        And you doe wisely, to preserue it, thus,
                        With early visitation, and kind notes
                        Of your good meaning to him, which, I know,
                        Cannot but come most gratefull. Patron, sir.
                        Here's signior VOLTORE is come—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        What say you?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, signior VOLTORE is come, this morning,
                        To visit you.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I thanke him.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And hath brought
                        A piece of antique plate, bought of S. MARKE,
                        With which he here presents you.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        He is welcome.
                        Pray him, to come more often.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        What sayes he?
                     
                     
                        
                        MOS.
                        He thanks you, and desires you see him often.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        My patron?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Bring him neere, where is he?
                        I long to feele his hand.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        The plate is here, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        How fare you, sir?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I thanke you, signior VOLTORE.
                        Where is the plate? mine eyes are bad.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        I'm sorry,
                        To see you still thus weake.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        That he is not weaker.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        You are too munificent.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        No, sir, would to heauen,
                        I could as well giue health to you, as that plate.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        You giue, sir, what you can. I thanke you. Your loue
                        Hath taste in this, and shall not be vn-answer'd.
                        I pray you see me often.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Yes, I shall, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Be not far from me.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Doe you obserue that, sir?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Harken vnto me, still: It will concerne you.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        You are a happy man, sir, know your good.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I cannot now last long—
                     
                     
                        (MOS.
                        You are his heire, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Am I?)
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I feele me going, (vh, vh, vh, vh.)
                        I am sayling to my port, (vh, vh, vh, vh?)
                        And I am glad, I am so neere my hauen.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Alas, kind gentleman, well, we must all goe—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        But, MOSCA—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Age wil conquer.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        'Pray thee heare me.
                        Am I inscrib'd his heire, for certayne?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Are you?
                        I doe beseech you, sir, you will vouchsafe
                        To write me, i' your family. All my hopes,
                        Depend vpon your worship. I am lost,
                        Except the rising sunne doe shine on me.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        It shall both shine, and warme thee, MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir.
                        I am a man, that haue not done your loue
                        All the worst offices: here I weare your keyes,
                        See all your coffers, and your caskets lockt,
                        Keepe the poore inuentorie of your iewels,
                        Your plate, and moneyes, am your steward, sir,
                        Husband your goods here.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        But am I sole heire?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Without a partner, sir, confirm'd this morning;
                        The waxe is warme yet, and the inke scarse drie
                        Vpon the parchment.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Happy, happy, me!
                        By what good chance, sweet MOSCA?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Your desert, sir;
                        I know no second cause.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Thy modestie
                        Is loth to know it; well, we shall requite it.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        He euer lik'd your course, sir, that first tooke him.
                        I, oft, haue heard him say, how he admir'd
                        Men of your large profession, that could speake
                        To euery cause, and things mere contraries,
                        Till they were hoarse againe, yet all be law;
                        That, with most quick agilitie, could turne,
                        And re-turne; make knots, and vndoe them;
                        
                        Giue forked counsell; take prouoking gold
                        On either hand, and put it vp: these men,
                        He knew, would thriue, with their humilitie.
                        And (for his part) he thought, he should be blest
                        To haue his heire of such a suffering spirit,
                        So wise, so graue, of so perplex'd a tongue,
                        And loud withall, that would not wag, nor scarce
                        Lie still, without a fee; when euery word
                        Your worship but lets fall, is a cecchine!
                        Another knocks.
                        Who's that? one knocks, I would not haue you seene, sir.
                        And yet—pretend you came, and went in haste;
                        I'le fashion an excuse. And, gentle sir,
                        When you doe come to swim, in golden lard,
                        Vp to the armes, in honny, that your chin
                        Is borne vp stiffe, with fatnesse of the floud,
                        Thinke on your vassall; but remember me:
                        I ha' not beene your worst of clients.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        MOSCA—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        When will you haue your inuentorie brought, sir?
                        Or see a coppy of the will? (anon)
                        I'le bring 'hem to you, sir. Away, be gone,
                        Put businesse i' your face.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Excellent, MOSCA!
                        Come hither, let me kisse thee.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Keepe you still, sir.
                        Here is CORBACCIO.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Set the plate away,
                        The vulture's gone, and the old rauen's come.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene IIII.
                     MOSCA, CORBACCIO, VOLPONE.
                     
                        BEtake you, to your silence, and your sleepe:
                        Stand there, and multiply. Now, shall wee see
                        A wretch, who is (indeed) more impotent,
                        Then this can faine to be; yet hopes to hop
                        Ouer his graue. Signior CORBACCIO!
                        Yo' are very welcome, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        How do's your patron?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Troth, as he did, sir, no amends.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        What? mends he?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, sir: he is rather worse.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        That's well. Where is he?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Vpon his couch, sir, newly fall'n asleepe.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Do's he sleepe well?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No winke, sir, all this night,
                        Nor yesterday, but slumbers.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Good! He should take
                        Some counsell of physicians: I haue brought him
                        An opiate here, from mine owne Doctor—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        He will not heare of drugs.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Why? I my selfe
                        Stood by, while 't was made; saw all th'ingredients:
                        And know, it cannot but most gently worke.
                        
                        My life for his, 'tis but to make him sleepe.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I, his last sleepe, if he would take it.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir,
                        He ha's no faith in physick.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        'Say you? 'say you?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        He ha's no faith in physick: he do's thinke,
                        Most of your Doctors are the greater danger,
                        And worse disease, t' escape. I often haue
                        Heard him protest, that your physitian
                        Should neuer be his heire.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Not I his heire?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Not your physitian, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        O, no, no, no,
                        I doe not meane it.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, sir, nor their fees
                        He cannot brooke: he sayes, they flay a man,
                        Before they kill him.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Right, I doe conceiue you.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And then, they doe it by experiment;
                        For which the law not onely doth absolue 'hem,
                        But giues them great reward: and, he is loth
                        To hire his death, so.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        It is true, they kill,
                        With as much licence, as a iudge.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Nay, more;
                        For he but kills, sir, where the law condemnes,
                        And these can kill him, too.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I, or me:
                        Or any man. How do's his apoplexe?
                        Is that strong on him, still?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Most violent.
                        His speech is broken, and his eyes are set,
                        His face drawne longer, then 't was wont—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        How? how?
                        Stronger, then he was wont?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, sir: his face
                        Drawne longer, then 't was wont.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        O, good.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        His mouth
                        Is euer gaping, and his eye-lids hang.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Good.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        A freezing numnesse stiffens all his ioynts,
                        And makes the colour of his flesh like lead.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        'Tis good.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        His pulse beats slow, and dull.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Good symptomes, still.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And, from his brain—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Ha? how? not from his brain?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, sir, and from his brain—
                     
                     
                        (CORB.
                        I conceiue you, good.)
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Flowes a cold sweat, with a continuall rhewme,
                        Forth the resolued corners of his eyes.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Is't possible? yet I am better, ha!
                        How do's he, with the swimming of his head?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, sir, 'tis past, the scotomy; he, now,
                        Hath lost his feeling, and hath left to snort:
                        You hardly can perceiue him, that he breathes.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Excellent, excellent, sure I shall out-last him:
                        This makes me yong againe, a score of yeeres.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I was a comming for you, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Has he made his will?
                        What has he giu'n me?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Nothing? ha?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        He has not made his will, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Oh, oh, oh.
                        What then did VOLTORE, the Lawyer, here?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        He smelt a carcasse, sir, when he but heard
                        
                        My master was about his testament;
                        (As I did vrge him to it, for your good—)
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        He came vnto him, did he? I thought so.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, and presented him this piece of plate.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        To be his heire?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I doe not know, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        True,
                        I know it too.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        By your owne scale, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Well,
                        I shall preuent him, yet. See, MOSCA, looke,
                        Here, I haue brought a bag of bright cecchines,
                        Will quite weigh downe his plate.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yea, mary, sir!
                        This is true physick, this your sacred medicine,
                        No talke of opiates, to this great elixir.
                        
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        'Tis aurum palpabile, if not potabile.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        It shall be minister'd to him, in his bowle?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I, doe, doe, doe.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Most blessed cordiall!
                        This will recouer him.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Yes, doe, doe, doe.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I thinke, it were not best, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        What?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        To recouer him.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        O, no, no, no; by no meanes.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Why, sir, this
                        Will worke some strange effect, if he but feele it.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        'Tis true, therefore forbeare, I'le take my venter:
                        Giue me't againe.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        At no hand, pardon me;
                        You shall not doe your selfe that wrong, sir. I
                        Will so aduise you, you shall haue it all.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        How?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        All, sir, 'tis your right, your owne; no man
                        Can claime a part: 'tis yours, without a riuall,
                        Decree'd by destinie.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        How? how, good MOSCA?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I'le tell you, sir. This fit he shall recouer—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I doe conceiue you.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And, on first aduantage
                        Of his gayn'd sense, will I re-importune him
                        Vnto the making of his testament:
                        And shew him this.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Good, good.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Tis better yet,
                        If you will heare, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Yes, with all my heart.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Now, would I counsell you, make home with speed;
                        There, frame a will: whereto you shall inscribe
                        My master your sole heire.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        And disinherit
                        My sonne?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, sir, the better: for that colour
                        Shall make it much more taking.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        O, but colour?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        This will, sir, you shall send it vnto me.
                        Now, when I come to inforce (as I will doe)
                        Your cares, your watchings, and your many prayers,
                        Your more then many gifts, your this dayes present,
                        And, last, produce your will; where (without thought,
                        Or least regard, vnto your proper issue,
                        A sonne so braue, and highly meriting)
                        The streame of your diuerted loue hath throwne you
                        Vpon my master, and made him your heire:
                        
                        He cannot be so stupide, or stone dead,
                        But, out of conscience, and mere gratitude—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        He must pronounce me, his?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Tis true.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        This plot
                        Did I thinke on before.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I doe beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Doe you not beleeue it?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Mine owne proiect.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Which when he hath done, sir—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Publish'd me his heire?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And you so certayne, to suruiue him—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Being so lusty a man—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        'Tis true.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, sir—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I thought on that too. See, how he should be
                        The very organ, to expresse my thoughts!
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        You haue not onely done your selfe a good—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        But multiplyed it on my sonne?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Tis right, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Still, my inuention.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Lasse sir, heauen knowes,
                        It hath beene all my studie, all my care,
                        (I'eene grow grey withall) how to worke things—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I doe conceiue, sweet MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        You are he,
                        For whom I labour, here.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I, doe, doe, doe:
                        I'le straight about it.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Rooke goe with you, rauen.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I know thee honest.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        You doe lie, sir—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        And—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Your knowledge is no better then your eares, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I doe not doubt, to be a father to thee.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Nor I, to gull my brother of his blessing.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I may ha' my youth restor'd to me, why not?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Your worship is a precious asse—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        What say'st thou?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I doe desire your worship, to make haste, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        'Tis done, 'tis done, I goe.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O, I shall burst;
                        Let out my sides, let out my sides—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Contayne
                        Your fluxe of laughter, sir: you know, this hope
                        Is such a bait, it couers any hooke.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O, but thy working, and thy placing it!
                        I cannot hold; good rascall, let me kisse thee:
                        I neuer knew thee, in so rare a humour.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Alas, sir, I but doe, as I am taught;
                        Follow your graue instructions; giue 'hem wordes;
                        Powre oyle into their eares: and send them hence.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        'Tis true, 'tis true. What a rare punishment
                        Is auarice, to it selfe?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I, with our helpe, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        So many cares, so many maladies,
                        So many feares attending on old age,
                        Yea, death so often call'd on, as no wish
                        Can be more frequent with 'hem, their limbs faint,
                        Their senses dull, their seeing, hearing, going,
                        All dead before them; yea, their very teeth,
                        Their instruments of eating, fayling them:
                        Yet this is reckon'd life! Nay, here was one,
                        
                        Is now gone home, that wishes to liue longer!
                        Feeles not his gout, nor palsie, faines himselfe
                        Yonger, by scores of yeeres, flatters his age,
                        With confident belying it, hopes he may
                        With charmes, like AESON, haue his youth restor'd:
                        And with these thoughts so battens, as if fate
                        Would be as easily cheated on, as he,
                        Another knocks.
                        And all turnes aire! Who's that, there, now? a third?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Close, to your couch againe: I heare his voyce.
                        It is CORVINO, our spruce Merchant.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Dead.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Another bout, sir, with your eyes. Who's there?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene V.
                     MOSCA, CORVINO, VOLPONE.
                     
                        SIgnior CORVINO! come most wisht for! O,
                        How happy were you, if you knew it, now!
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Why? what? wherein?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        The tardie houre is come, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        He is not dead?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Not dead, sir, but as good;
                        He knowes no man.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        How shall I doe, then?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Why, sir?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I haue brought him, here, a pearle.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Perhaps, he has
                        So much remembrance left, as to know you, sir;
                        He still calls on you, nothing but your name
                        Is in his mouth: Is your pearle orient, sir?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        
                           Venice was neuer owner of the like.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Signior CORVINO.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Harke.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Signior CORVINO.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'He calls you, step and giue it him. H'is here, sir,
                        And he has brought you a rich pearle.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        How doe you, sir?
                        Tell him, it doubles the twelfe caract.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir,
                        He cannot vnderstand, his hearing's gone;
                        And yet it comforts him, to see you—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Say,
                        I haue a diamant for him, too.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Best shew't, sir,
                        Put it into his hand; 'tis onely there
                        He apprehends: he has his feeling, yet.
                        See, how he grasps it!
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        'Lasse, good gentleman!
                        How pittifull the sight is!
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Tut, forget, sir.
                        The weeping of an heire should still be laughter,
                        Vnder a visor.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Why? am I his heire?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, I am sworne, I may not shew the will,
                        Till he be dead: But, here has beene CORBACCIO,
                        Here has beene VOLTORE, here were others too,
                        I cannot number 'hem, they were so many,
                        All gaping here for legacies; but I,
                        Taking the vantage of his naming you,
                        
                        (Signior CORVINO, Signior CORVINO) tooke
                        Paper, and pen, and inke, and there I ask'd him,
                        Whom he would haue his heire? CORVINO. Who
                        Should be executor? CORVINO. And,
                        To any question, he was silent too,
                        I still interpreted the nods, he made
                        (Through weakenesse) for consent: and sent home th'others,
                        Nothing bequeath'd them, but to crie, and curse.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        They embrace.
                        O, my deare MOSCA. Do's he not perceiue vs?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No more then a blind harper. He knowes no man,
                        No face of friend, nor name of any seruant,
                        Who't was that fed him last, or gaue him drinke:
                        Not those, he hath begotten, or brought vp
                        Can he remember.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Has he children?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Bastards,
                        Some dozen, or more, that he begot on beggers,
                        
                           Gipseys, and Iewes, and black-moores, when he was drunke.
                        Knew you not that, sir? 'Tis the common fable.
                        The Dwarfe, the Foole, the Eunuch are all his;
                        H'is the true father of his family,
                        In all, saue me: but he has giu'n 'hem nothing.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        That's well, that's well. Art sure he does not heare vs?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sure, sir? why, looke you, credit your owne sense.
                        The poxe approch, and adde to your diseases,
                        If it would send you hence the sooner, sir.
                        For, your incontinence, it hath deseru'd it
                        Throughly, and throughly, and the plague to boot.
                        (You may come neere, sir) would you would once close
                        Those filthy eyes of yours, that slow with slime,
                        Like two frog-pits; and those same hanging cheeks,
                        Couer'd with hide, in stead of skin: (nay, helpe, sir)
                        That looke like frozen dish-clouts, set on end.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Or, like an old smok'd wall, on which the raine
                        Ran downe in streakes.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Excellent, sir, speake out;
                        You may be lowder yet: a culuering,
                        Discharged in his eare, would hardly bore it.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        His nose is like a common sewre, still running.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Tis good! and, what his mouth?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        A very draught.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, stop it vp—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        By no meanes.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Pray you let me.
                        Faith, I could stifle him, rarely, with a pillow,
                        As well, as any woman, that should keepe him.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Doe as you will, but I'le be gone.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Be so;
                        It is your presence makes him last so long.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I pray you, vse no violence.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, sir? why?
                        Why should you be thus scrupulous? pray you, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Nay, at your discretion.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Well, good sir, be gone.
                     
                     
                        
                        CORV.
                        I will not trouble him now, to take my pearle?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Puh, nor your diamant. What a needlesse care
                        Is this afflicts you? Is not all, here, yours?
                        Am not I here? whom you haue made? your creature?
                        That owe my being to you?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Gratefull MOSCA!
                        Thou art my friend, my fellow, my companion,
                        My partner, and shalt share in all my fortunes.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Excepting one.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        What's that?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Your gallant wife, sir.
                        Now, is he gone: we had no other meanes,
                        To shoot him hence, but this.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        My diuine MOSCA!
                        Another knocks.
                        Thou hast to day out-gone thy selfe. Who's there?
                        I will be troubled with no more. Prepare
                        Me musicke, dances, banquets, all delights;
                        The Turke is not more sensuall, in his pleasures,
                        Then will VOLPONE. Let mee see, a pearle?
                        A diamant? plate? cecchines? good mornings purchase;
                        Why, this is better then rob churches, yet:
                        Or fat, by eating (once a mon'th) a man.
                        Who is't?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        The beauteous lady WOVLD-BEE, sir.
                        Wife, to the English Knight, Sir POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE,
                        (This is the stile, sir, is directed mee)
                        Hath sent to know, how you haue slept to night,
                        And if you would be visited.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Not, now.
                        Some three houres, hence—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I told the Squire, so much.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        When I am high with mirth, and wine: then, then.
                        'Fore heauen, I wonder at the desperate valure
                        Of the bold English, that they dare let loose
                        Their wiues, to all encounters!
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, this knight
                        Had not his name for nothing, he is politique,
                        And knowes, how ere his wife affect strange aires,
                        Shee hath not yet the face, to be dishonest.
                        But, had shee signior CORVINO'S wiues face—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Has shee so rare a face?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, sir, the wonder,
                        The blazing starre of Italie! a wench
                        O' the first yeere! a beautie, ripe, as haruest!
                        Whose skin is whiter then a swan, all ouer!
                        Then siluer, snow, or lillies! a soft lip,
                        Would tempt you to eternitie of kissing!
                        And flesh, that melteth, in the touch, to bloud!
                        Bright as your gold! and louely, as your gold!
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Why had not I knowne this, before?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Alas, sir.
                        My selfe, but yesterday, discouer'd it.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        How might I see her?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, not possible;
                        Shee's kept as warily, as is your gold:
                        Neuer do's come abroad, neuer takes ayre,
                        
                        But at a windore. All her lookes are sweet,
                        As the first grapes, or cherries: and are watch'd
                        As neere, as they are.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I must see her—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir.
                        There is a guard, of ten spies thick, vpon her;
                        All his whole houshold: each of which is set
                        Vpon his fellow, and haue all their charge,
                        When he goes out, when he comes in, examin'd.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I will goe see her, though but at her windore.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        In some disguise, then.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        That is true. I must
                        Maintayne mine owne shape, still, the same: wee'll thinke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act II.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE, PEREGRINE.
                     
                        SIr, to a wise man, all the world's his soile.
                        It is not Italie, nor France, nor Europe,
                        That must bound me, if my fates call me forth.
                        Yet, I protest, it is no salt desire
                        Of seeing countries, shifting a religion,
                        Nor any dis-affection to the state
                        Where I was bred (and, vnto which I owe
                        My dearest plots) hath brought me out; much lesse,
                        That idle, antique, stale, grey-headed proiect
                        Of knowing mens minds, and manners, with VLYSSES:
                        But, a peculiar humour of my wiues,
                        Laid for this height of Venice, to obserue,
                        To quote, to learne the language, and so forth—
                        I hope you trauell, sir, with license?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I dare the safelier conuerse— How long, sir,
                        Since you left England?
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Seuen weekes.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        So lately!
                        You ha'not beene with my lord Ambassador?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Not yet, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Pray you, what newes, sir, vents our climate?
                        I heard, last night, a most strange thing reported
                        By some of my lords followers, and I long
                        To heare, how't will be seconded!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        What was't, sir?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Mary, sir, of a rauen, that should build
                        In a ship royall of the Kings.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        This fellow
                        Do's he gull me, trow? or is gull'd? your name, sir?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        My name is POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        O, that speaks him.
                        A Knight, sir?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        A poore knight, sir.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Your lady
                        Lies here, in Venice, for intelligence
                        Of tyres and fashions, and behauiour,
                        Among the curtizans? the fine lady WOVLD-BEE?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Yes, sir, the spider, and the bee, oft-times,
                        
                        Suck from one flowre.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Good sir POLITIQVE!
                        I cry you mercie; I haue heard much of you:
                        'Tis true, sir of your rauen.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        On your knowledge?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Yes, and your lyons whelping, in the Tower.
                        
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Another whelpe!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Another, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Now, heauen!
                        What prodigies be these? The fires at Berwike!
                        
                        And the new starre! these things concurring, strange!
                        And full of omen! Saw you those meteors?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I did, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Fearefull! Pray you sir, confirme me,
                        Were there three porcpisces seene, aboue the bridge,
                        As they giue out?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Sixe, and and a sturgeon, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I am astonish'd!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Nay, sir, be not so;
                        Ile tell you a greater prodigie, then these—
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        What should these things portend!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        The verie day
                        (Let me be sure) that I put forth from London,
                        There was a whale discouer'd, in the riuer,
                        As high as Woolwich, that had waited there
                        (Few know how manie mon'ths) for the subuersion
                        Of the Stode-Fleet.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Is't possible? Beleeue it,
                        'Twas either sent from Spaine, or the Arch-dukes!
                        
                        SPINOLA'S whale, vpon my life, my credit!
                        Will they not leaue these proiects? Worthie sir,
                        Some other newes.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Faith, STONE, the foole, is dead;
                        And they doe lacke a tauerne-foole, extremely.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Is MASS' STONE dead!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        H'is dead, sir, why? I hope
                        You thought him not immortall? O, this Knight
                        (Where he well knowne) would be a precious thing
                        To fit our English stage: He that should write
                        But such a fellow, should be thought to faine
                        Extremely, if not maliciously.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        STONE dead!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Dead. Lord! how deeply, sir, you apprehend it?
                        He was no kinsman to you?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        That I know of.
                        Well! that same fellow was an vnknowne foole.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        And yet you knew him, it seemes?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I did so. Sir,
                        I knew him one of the most dangerous heads
                        Liuing within the state, and so I held him.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Indeed, sir?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        While he liu'd, in action.
                        He has receiu'd weekely intelligence,
                        Vpon my knowledge, out of the low Countries,
                        (For all parts of the world) in cabages;
                        And those dispens'd, againe, to 'Ambassadors,
                        In oranges, musk-melons, apricotes,
                        Limons, pome-citrons, and such like: sometimes,
                        In Colchester-oysters, and your Selsey-cockles.
                     
                     
                        PET.
                        You make me wonder!
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Sir, vpon my knowledge.
                        
                        Nay, I haue obseru'd him, at your publique ordinarie,
                        Take his aduertisement, from a traueller
                        (A conceal'd states-man) in a trencher of meat:
                        And, instantly, before the meale was done,
                        Conuey an answere in a tooth-pick.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Strange!
                        How could this be, sir?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Why, the meat was cut
                        So like his character, and so laid, as he
                        Must easily reade the cypher.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I haue heard,
                        He could not reade, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        So, 'twas giuen out,
                        (In politie) by those, that did imploy him:
                        But he could read, and had your languages,
                        And to't, as sound a noddle—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I haue heard, sir,
                        That your Bab'ouns were spies; and that they were
                        A kind of subtle nation, neere to China.
                        
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I, I, your Mamuluchi. Faith, they had
                        Their hand in a French plot, or two; but they
                        Were so extremely giuen to women, as
                        They made discouery of all: yet I
                        Had my aduises here (on wensday last)
                        From one of their owne coat, they were return'd,
                        Made their relations (as the fashion is)
                        And now stand faire, for fresh imployment.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        'Hart!
                        This, sir POLL. will be ignorant of nothing.
                        It seemes, sir, you know all?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Not all, sir. But,
                        I haue some generall notions; I doe loue
                        To note, and to obserue: though I liue out,
                        Free from the actiue torrent, yet I'ld marke
                        The currents, and the passages of things,
                        For mine owne priuate vse; and know the ebbes,
                        And flowes of state.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Beleeue it, sir, I hold
                        My selfe, in no small tie, vnto my fortunes,
                        For casting me thus luckily, vpon you;
                        Whose knowledge (if your bountie equall it)
                        May doe me great assistance, in instruction
                        For my behauiour, and my bearing, which
                        Is yet so rude, and raw—
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Why? came you forth
                        Emptie of rules, for trauaile?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Faith, I had
                        Some common ones, from out that vulgar grammar,
                        Which he, that cry'd Italian to me, taught me.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Why, this it is, that spoiles all our braue blouds;
                        Trusting our hopefull gentrie vnto pedants:
                        Fellowes of out-side, and mere barke. You seeme
                        To be a gentleman, of ingenuous race—
                        I not professe it, but my fate hath beene
                        To be, where I haue beene consulted with,
                        
                        In this high kind, touching some great mens sonnes,
                        Persons of bloud, and honour—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Who be these, sir?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene II.
                     MOSCA, POLITIQVE, PEREGRINE, VOLPONE, NANO, GREGE.
                     
                        VNder that windore, there't must be. The same.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Fellowes, to mount a banke! Did your instructer
                        In the deare tongues, neuer discourse to you
                        Of the Italian mountebankes?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Why,
                        Here shall you see one.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        They are quack-saluers,
                        Fellowes, that liue by venting oyles, and drugs?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Was that the character he gaue you of them?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        As I remember.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Pitie his ignorance.
                        They are the onely-knowing men of Europe!
                        Great generall schollers, excellent phisicians,
                        Most admir'd states-men, profest fauourites,
                        And cabinet-counsellors, to the greatest princes!
                        The onely languag'd-men, of all the world!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        And, I haue heard, they are most lewd impostors;
                        Made all of termes, and shreds; no lesse belyers
                        Of great-mens fauours, then their owne vile med'cines;
                        Which they will vtter, vpon monstrous othes:
                        Selling that drug, for two pence, ere they part,
                        Which they haue valu'd at twelue crownes, before.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Sir, calumnies are answer'd best with silence:
                        Your selfe shall iudge. Who is it mounts, my friends?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        SCOTO of Mantua, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Is't he? nay, then
                        I'le proudly promise, sir, you shall behold
                        Another man, then has beene phant'sied to you.
                        I wonder, yet, that he should mount his banke
                        Here, in this nooke, that has beene wont t'appeare
                        In face of the piazza! Here, he comes.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Mount, Zany.
                        
                     
                     
                        GRE.
                        Follow, follow, follow, follow, follow.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        See how the people follow him! h'is a man
                        May write 10000 crownes, in banke, here. Note,
                        Marke but his gesture: I doe vse to obserue
                        The state he keeps, in getting vp!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        'Tis worth it, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           Most noble gent: and my worthy patrons, it may seeme strange, that I, your SCOTO MANTVANO, who was euer wont to fixe my banke in face of the publike piazza, neere the shelter of the portico, to the procuratia, should, now (after eight months absence, from this illustrous city of Venice) humbly retire my selfe, into an obscure nooke of the piazza.
                     
                     
                        
                        POL.
                        Did not I, now, obiect the same?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Peace, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           Let me tell you: I am not (as your Lombard prouerb saith) cold on my feet; or content to part with my commodities at a cheaper rate, then I accustomed: looke not for it. Nor, that the calumnious reports of that impudent detractor, and shame to our profession, (ALESSANDRO BVTTONE, I meane) who gaue out, in publike, I was condemn'd a' Sforzato to the galleys, for poysoning the Cardinall BEMBO'S—Cooke, hath at all attached, much lesse deiected me. No, no, worthy gent. (to tell you true) I cannot indure, to see the rabble of these ground Ciarlitani, that spread their clokes on the pauement, as if they meant to do feates of actiuitie, and then come in, lamely, with their mouldy tales out of BOCCACIO, like stale TABARINE, the Fabulist: some of them discoursing their trauells, and of their tedious captiuity in the Turkes galleyes, when indeed (were the truth knowne) they were the Christians galleyes, where very temperately, they eate bread, and drunke water, as a wholesome penance (enioyn'd them by their Confessors) for base pilferies.
                        
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Note but his bearing, and contempt of these.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           These turdy-facy-nasty-paty-lousy-farticall rogues, with one poore groats-worth of vn-prepar'd antimony, finely wrapt vp in seuerall' scartoccios, are able, very well, to kill their twentie a weeke, and play; yet, these meagre staru'd spirits, who haue halfe stopt the organs of their mindes with earthy oppilations, want not their fauourers among your shriuel'd, sallad-eating artizans: who are ouer-ioy'd, that they may haue their halfe-pe'rth of physick, though it purge 'hem into another world, 'tmakes no matter.
                        
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Excellent! ha' you heard better language, sir?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           Well, let'hem goe. And gentlemen, honorable gentlemen, know, that for this time, our banke, being thus remou'd from the clamours of the canaglia, shall be the scene of pleasure and delight: For, I haue nothing to sell, little, or nothing to sell.
                        
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I told you, sir, his end.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        You did so, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           I protest, I, and my sixe seruants, are not able to make of this precious liquor, so fast, as it is fetch'd away from my lodging, by gentlemen of your city; strangers of the terra-ferma; worshipfull merchants; I, and senators too: who, euer since my arriuall, haue detayned me to their vses, by their splendidous liberalities. And worthily. For, what auailes your rich man to haue his magazines stuft with moscadelli, or of the purest grape, when his physitians prescribe him (on paine of death) to drinke nothing but water, cocted with anise-seeds? O, health! health! the blessing of the rich! the riches of the poore! who can buy thee at too deare a rate, since there is no enioying this world, without thee? Be not then so sparing of your purses, honorable gentlemen, as to abridge the naturall course of life—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        You see his end?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I, is't not good?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           For, when a humide fluxe, or catarrhe, by the mutability of aire, falls from your head, into an arme, or shoulder, or any other part; take you a duckat, or your cecchine of gold, and apply to the place affected: see, what good effect it can worke. No, no, 'tis this blessed vnguento, this rare extraction, that hath only

power to disperse all malignant humours, that proceed, either of hot, cold, moist, or windy causes—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I would he had put in drie to.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        'Pray you, obserue.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Pointing to his bill and his glasse.
                        
                           To fortifie the most indigest, and crude stomack, I, were it of one, that (through extreme weakenesse) vomited bloud, applying only a warme napkin to the place, after the vnction, and fricace; for the vertigine, in the head, putting but a drop into your nostrills, likewise, behind the eares; a most soueraigne, and approued remedie: the mal-caduco, crampes, conuulsions, paralysies, epilepsies, tremor-cordia, retyred-nerues, ill vapours of the spleene, stoppings of the liuer, the stone, the strangury, hernia ventosa, iliaca passio; stops a disenteria, immediately; easeth the torsion of the small guts; and cures melancolia hypocondriaca, being taken and applyed, according to my printed receipt. For, 
                           this is the physitian, this the medicine; this counsells, this cures; this giues the direction, this workes the effect: and (in summe) both together may bee term'd an abstract of the theorick, and practick in the Aesculapian arte. 'Twill cost you eight crownes. And, ZAN FRITADA, 'pray thee sing a verse, extempore, in honour of it.
                        
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        How doe you like him, sir?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Most strangely, I!
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Is not his language rare?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        But Alchimy
                        
                        I neuer heard the like: or BROVGHTONS bookes.
                        SONG.
                        HAd old HIPPOCRATES, or GALEN,
                        (That to their bookes put med'cines all in)
                        But knowne this secret, they had neuer
                        (Of which they will be guiltie euer)
                        Beene murderers of so much paper,
                        Or wasted many a hurtlesse taper:
                        No Indian drug had ere beene famed,
                        
                           Tabacco, sassafras not named;
                        Ne yet, of guacum one small stick, sir,
                        Nor RAYMVND LVLLIES great elixir.
                        
                        Ne, had beene knowne the Danish GONSWART.
                        
                        Or PARACELSVS, with his long-sword.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        All this, yet, will not doe, eight crownes is high.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           No more. Gentlemen, if I had but time to discourse to you the miraculous effects of this my oile, surnamed oglio del SCOTO; with the count-lesse catalogue of those I haue cured of th'aforesaid, and many more diseases; the pattents and priuiledges of all the Princes, and common-wealths of Christendome; or but the depositions of those that appear'd on my part, before the signiory of the Sanitâ, and most learned colledge of physitians; where I was authorized, vpon notice taken of the admirable vertues of my medicaments, and mine owne excellency, in matter of rare, and vnknowne secrets, not onely to disperse them publiquely in this famous citie, but in all the territories, that happily ioy vnder the


                              
                                 〈1 page duplicate〉
                              
                              
                              
                                 〈1 page duplicate〉
                              


                              
gouernement of the most pious and magnificent states of Italy. But may some other gallant fellow say, O, there be diuers, that make profession to haue as good, and as experimented receipts, as yours: Indeed, very many haue assay'd, like apes in imitation of that, which is really and essentially in mee, to make of this oyle; bestow'd great cost in furnaces, stilles, alembeks, continuall fires, and preparation of the ingredients, (as indeede there goes to it sixe hundred seuerall simples, besides, some quantity of humane fat, for the conglutination, which we buy of the anatomistes) but, when these practitioners come to the last decoction, blow, blow, puff, puff, and all flies in fumo: ha, ha, ha. Poore wretches! I rather pittie their folly, and indiscretion, then their losse of time, and money; for those may be recouered by industrie: but to bee a foole borne, is a disease incurable. For my selfe, I alwaies from my youth haue indeuour'd to get the rarest secrets, and booke them; either in exchange, or for money: I spared nor cost, nor labour, where any thing was worthy to bee learned. And gentlemen, honourable gentlemen, I will vndertake (by vertue of chymicall art) out of the honourable hat, that couers your head, to extract the foure elements; that is to say, the fire, ayre, water, and earth, and returne you your felt without burne, or staine. For, whil'st others haue beene at the balloo, I haue beene at my booke: and am now past the craggie pathes of studie, and come to the flowrie plaines of honour, and reputation.
                        
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I doe assure you, sir, that is his ayme.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           But, to our price.
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        And that withall, sir POL.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           You all know (honourable gentlemen) I neuer valu'd this ampulla, or viall, at lesse then eight crownes, but for this time, I am content, to be depriu'd of it for sixe; sixe crownes is the price; and lesse in courtesie, I know you cannot offer me: take it, or leaue it, howsoeuer, both it, and I, am at your seruice. I aske you not, as the value of the thing, for then I should demand of you a thousand crownes, so the Cardinals MONTALTO, FERNESE, the great duke of Tuscany, my gossip, with diuers other princes haue giuen me, but I despise money: onely to shew my affection to you, honourable gentlemen, and your illustrous state here, I haue neglected the messages of these princes, mine owne offices, fram'd my iourney hither, onely to present you with the fruits of my trauels. Tune your voices once more to the touch of your instruments, and giue the honourable assembly some delightfull recreation.
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        What monstrous, and most painefull circumstance
                        Is here, to get some three, or foure gazets!
                        Some three-pence, i'th whole, for that 'twill come to.
                     
                     SONG.
                     YOu that would last long, list to my song,
                     Make no more coyle, but buy of this oyle.
                     Would you be euer faire? and yong?
                     Stout of teeth? and strong of tongue?
                     Tart of palat? quick of eare?
                     Sharpe of sight? of nostrill cleare?
                     
                     Moist of hand? and light of foot?
                     (Or I will come neerer to't)
                     Would you liue free from all diseases?
                     Doe the act, your mistris pleases;
                     Yet fright all aches from your bones?
                     Here's a med'cine, for the nones.
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           Well, I am in a humour (at this time) to make a present of the small quantitie my coffer containes: to the rich, in courtesie, and to the poore, for Gods sake. Wherefore, now marke; I ask'd you sixe crownes; and sixe crownes, at other times, you haue paid me; you shall not giue me sixe crownes, nor fiue, nor foure, nor three, nor two, nor one; nor halfe a duckat; no, nor a muccinigo: sixe—pence it will cost you, or sixe hundred pound—expect no lower price, for by the banner of my front, I will not bate a bagatine, that I will haue, only, a pledge of your loues, to carry something from amongst you, to shew, I am not contemn'd by you. Therefore, now, tosse your handkerchiefes, chearefully, chearefully; and be aduertised, that the first heroique spirit, that deignes to grace me, with a handkerchiefe, I will giue it a little remembrance of something, beside, shall please it better, then if I had presented it with a double pistolet.
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        CELIA at the windo' throwes downe her handkerchiefe.
                        Will you be that heroique sparke, sir POL?
                        O, see! the windore has preuented you.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        
                           Lady, I kisse your bountie: and, for this timely grace, you haue done your poore SCOTO of Mantua, I will returne you, ouer and aboue my oile, a secret, of that high, and inestimable nature, shall make you for euer enamour'd on that minute, wherein your eye first descended on so meane, (yet not altogether to be despis'd) an obiect. Here is a poulder, conceal'd in this paper, of which, if I should speake to the worth, nine thousand volumes were but as one page, that page as a line, that line as a word: so short is this pilgrimage of man (which some call life) to the expressing of it. Would I reflect on the price? why, the whole world were but as an empire, that empire as a prouince, that prouince as a banke, that banke as a priuate purse, to the purchase of it. I will, onely, tell you; It is the poulder, that made VENVS a goddesse (giuen her by APOLLO) that kept her perpetually yong, clear'd her wrincles, firm'd her gummes, fill'd her skin, colour'd her haire; from her, deriu'd to HELEN, and at the sack of Troy (vnfortunately) lost: till now, in this our age, it was as happily recouer'd, by a studious Antiquarie, out of some ruines of Asia, who sent a moyetie of it, to the court of France (but much sophisticated) wherewith the ladies there, now, colour their haire. The rest (at this present) remaines with me; extracted, to a quintessence: so that, where euer it but touches, in youth it perpetually preserues, in age restores the complexion; seat's your teeth, did they dance like virginall iacks, firme as a wall; makes them white, as iuory, that were black, as—
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act II. Scene III.
                     CORVINO, POLITIQVE, PEREGRINE.
                     
                        He beates away the mont
                              •
                           banke &c.
                        SPight o' the deuill, and my shame! come downe, here;
                        Come downe: no house but mine to make your scene?
                        
                        Signior FLAMINIO, will you downe, sir? downe?
                        What is my wife your FRANCISCINA? sir?
                        No windores on the whole piazza, here,
                        To make your properties, but mine? but mine?
                        Hart! ere to morrow, I shall be new christen'd,
                        And cald the PANTALONE di besogniosi,
                        About the towne.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        What should this meane, sir POL?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Some trick of state, beleeue it. I will home.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        It may be some designe, on you.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I know not.
                        I'le stand vpon my guard.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        It is your best, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        This three weekes, all my aduises, all my letters,
                        They haue beene intercepted.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Indeed, sir?
                        Best haue a care.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Nay, so I will.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        This knight,
                        I may not lose him, for my mirth, till night.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene IIII.
                     VOLPONE, MOSCA.
                     
                        O, I am wounded.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Where, sir?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Not without;
                        Those blowes were nothing: I could beare them euer.
                        But angry CVPID, bolting from her eyes,
                        Hath shot himselfe into me, like a flame;
                        Where, now, he flings about his burning heat,
                        As in a fornace, an ambitious fire,
                        Whose vent is stopt. The fight is all within me.
                        I cannot liue, except thou helpe me, MOSCA;
                        My liuer melts, and I, without the hope
                        Of some soft aire, from her refreshing breath,
                        Am but a heape of cinders.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Lasse, good sir!
                        Would you had neuer seene her.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Nay, would thou
                        Had'st neuer told me of her.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, 'tis true;
                        I doe confesse, I was vnfortunate,
                        And you vnhappy: but I'am bound in conscience,
                        No lesse then duty, to effect my best
                        To your release of torment, and I will, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Deare MOSCA, shall I hope?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, more then deare,
                        I will not bid you to despaire of ought,
                        
                        Within a humane compasse.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O, there spoke
                        My better Angell. MOSCA, take my keyes,
                        Gold, plate, and iewells, all's at thy deuotion;
                        Employ them, how thou wilt; nay, coyne me, too:
                        So thou, in this, but crowne my longings. MOSCA?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Vse but your patience.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        So I haue.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I doubt not
                        To bring successe to your desires.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Nay, then,
                        I not repent me of my late disguise.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        If you can horne him, sir, you need not.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        True:
                        Besides, I neuer meant him for my heire.
                        Is not the colour o' my beard, and eye-browes,
                        To make me knowne?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No iot.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I did it well.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        So well, would I could follow you in mine,
                        With halfe the happinesse; and, yet, I would
                        Escape your epilogue.
                        
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        But, were they gull'd
                        With a beliefe, that I was SCOTO?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir,
                        SCOTO himselfe could hardly haue distinguish'd!
                        I haue not time to flatter you, now, wee'll part:
                        And, as I prosper, so applaud my art.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene V.
                     CORVINO, CELIA, SERVITORE.
                     
                        DEath of mine honour, with the cities foole?
                        A iuggling, tooth-drawing, prating mountebanke?
                        And, at a publike windore? where whil'st he,
                        With his strain'd action, and his dole of faces,
                        To his drug-lecture drawes your itching eares,
                        A crue of old, vn-marri'd, noted lechers,
                        Stood leering vp, like Satyres: and you smile,
                        Most graciously! and fan your fauours forth,
                        To giue your hot spectators satisfaction!
                        What, was your mountebanke their call? their whistle?
                        Or were you' enamour'd on his copper rings?
                        His saffron iewell, with the toade-stone in't?
                        Or his imbroidred sute, with the cope-stitch,
                        Made of a herse-cloth? or his old tilt-feather?
                        Or his starch'd beard? well! you shall haue him, yes.
                        He shall come home, and minister vnto you
                        The fricace, for the moother. Or, let me see,
                        I thinke, you' had rather mount? would you not mount?
                        Why, if you'll mount, you may; yes truely, you may:
                        And so, you may be seene, downe to' th'foot.
                        Get you a citterne, lady vanitie,
                        
                        And be a dealer, with the vertuous man;
                        Make one: I'le but protest my selfe a cuckold,
                        And saue your dowrie. I am a Dutchman, I!
                        
                        For, if you thought me an Italian,
                        You would be damn'd, ere you did this, you whore:
                        Thou'ldst tremble, to imagine, that the murder
                        Of father, mother, brother, all thy race,
                        Should follow, as the subiect of my iustice!
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Good sir, haue patience!
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        What coul'dst thou propose
                        Lesse to thy selfe, then, in this heat of wrath,
                        And stung with my dishonour, I should strike
                        This steele vnto thee, with as many stabs,
                        As thou wert gaz'd vpon with goatish eyes?
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Alasse sir, be appeas'd! I could not thinke
                        My being at the windore should more, now,
                        Moue your impatience, then at other times.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        No? not to seeke, and entertaine a parlee,
                        With a knowne knaue? before a multitude?
                        You were an actor, with your handkerchiefe!
                        Which he, most sweetly, kist in the receipt,
                        And might (no doubt) returne it, with a letter,
                        And point the place, where you might meet: your sisters,
                        Your mothers, or your aunts might serue the turne.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Why, deare sir, when doe I make these excuses?
                        Or euer stirre, abroad, but to the church?
                        And that, so seldome—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Well, it shall be lesse;
                        And thy restraint, before, was libertie,
                        To what I now decree: and therefore, marke me.
                        First, I will haue this bawdy light dam'd vp;
                        And, til 't be done, some two, or three yards off,
                        I'le chalke a line: o're which, if thou but chance
                        To set thy desp'rate foot; more hell, more horror,
                        More wilde, remorcelesse rage shall seize on thee,
                        Then on a coniurer, that, had heedlesse left
                        His circles safetie, ere his deuill was laid.
                        Then, here's a locke, which I will hang vpon thee;
                        And, now I thinke on't, I will keepe thee backe-wards;
                        Thy lodging shall be backe-wards; thy walkes back-wards;
                        Thy prospect-all be backe-wards; and no pleasure,
                        That thou shalt know but backe-wards: Nay, since you force
                        My honest nature, know, it is your owne
                        Being too open, makes me vse you thus.
                        Since you will not containe your subtle nostrils
                        In a sweet roome, but they must snuffe the ayre
                        
                        Knocke within.
                        Of ranke, and sweatie passengers—One knockes.
                        Away, and be not seene, paine of thy life;
                        Not looke toward the windore: if thou dost—
                        (Nay stay, heare this) let me not prosper, whore,
                        But I will make thee an anatomie,
                        Dissect thee mine owne selfe, and read a lecture
                        Vpon thee, to the citie, and in publique.
                        Away. Who's there?
                     
                     
                        SER.
                        'Tis signior MOSCA, sir.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act. II. Scene. VI.
                     CORVINO, MOSCA.
                     
                        LEt him come in, his master's dead: There's yet
                        Some good, to helpe the bad. My MOSCA, welcome,
                        I ghesse your newes.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I feare you cannot, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Is't not his death?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Rather the contrarie.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Not his recouerie?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, sir,
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I am curst,
                        I am bewitch'd, my crosses meet to vex me.
                        How? how? how? how?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Why, sir, with SCOTO'S oyle!
                        CORBACCIO, and VOLTORE brought of it,
                        Whil'st I was busie in an inner roome—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Death! that damn'd mountebanke! but, for the law,
                        Now, I could kill the raskall: 't cannot be,
                        His oyle should haue that vertue. Ha' not I
                        Knowne him a common rogue, come fidling in
                        To th'osteria, with a tumbling whore,
                        And, when he ha's done all his forc'd trickes, beene glad
                        Of a poore spoonefull of dead wine, with flyes in't?
                        It cannot be. All his ingredients
                        Area sheepes gall, a rosted bitches marrow,
                        Some few sod earewigs, pounded caterpillers,
                        A little capons grease, and fasting spittle:
                        I know 'hem, to a dram.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I know not, sir,
                        But some on't, there they powr'd into his eares,
                        Some in his nostrils, and recouer'd him;
                        Applying but the fricace.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        POX o' that fricace.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And since, to seeme the more officious,
                        And flatt'ring of his health, there, they haue had
                        (At extreme fees) the colledge of physicians
                        Consulting on him, how they might restore him;
                        Where, one would haue a cataplasme of spices,
                        Another, a flayd ape clapt to his brest,
                        A third would ha'it a dogge, a fourth an oyle
                        
                        With wild cats skinnes: at last, they all resolu'd
                        That, to preserue him, was no other meanes,
                        But some yong woman must be streight sought out,
                        Lustie, and full of iuice, to sleepe by him;
                        And, to this seruice (most vnhappily,
                        And most vnwillingly) am I now imploy'd,
                        Which, here, I thought to pre-acquaint you with,
                        For your aduice, since it concernes you most,
                        Because, I would not doe that thing might crosse
                        Your ends, on whom I haue my whole dependance, sir:
                        Yet, if I doe it not, they may delate
                        My slacknesse to my patron, worke me out
                        Of his opinion; and there, all your hopes,
                        Venters, or whatsoeuer, are all frustrate.
                        I doe but tell you, sir. Besides, they are all
                        Now striuing, who shall first present him. Therefore—
                        I could intreat you, briefly, conclude some-what:
                        Preuent 'hem if you can.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Death to my hopes!
                        This is my villanous fortune! Best to hire
                        Some common curtezan?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I, I thought on that, sir.
                        But they are all so subtle, full of art,
                        And age againe doting, and flexible,
                        So as—I cannot tell—we may perchance
                        Light on a queane, may cheat vs all.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        'Tis true.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, no: it must be one, that ha's no trickes, sir,
                        Some simple thing, a creature, made vnto it;
                        Some wench you may command. Ha' you no kinswoman?
                        Gods so—Thinke, thinke, thinke, thinke, thinke, thinke, thinke, sir.
                        One o'the Doctors offer'd, there, his daughter.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, signior LVPO, the physician,
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        His daughter?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And a virgin, sir. Why? Alasse
                        He knowes the state of's bodie, what it is;
                        That nought can warme his bloud, sir, but a feuer;
                        Nor any incantation rayse his spirit:
                        A long forgetfulnesse hath seiz'd that part.
                        Besides, sir, who shall know it? some one, or two—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I pray thee giue me leaue. If any man
                        But I had had this lucke—The thing in't selfe,
                        I know, is nothing—Wherefore should not I
                        As well command my bloud, and my affections,
                        As this dull Doctor? In the point of honour,
                        The cases are all one, of wife, and daughter.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I heare him comming.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Shee shall doo't: 'Tis done.
                        Slight, if this Doctor, who is not engag'd,
                        
                        Vnlesse 't be for his counsell (which is nothing)
                        Offer his daughter, what should I, that am
                        So deeply in? I will preuent him: wretch!
                        Couetous wretch! MOSCA, I haue determin'd.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        How, sir?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        We'll make all sure. The party, you wot of,
                        Shall be mine owne wife, MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir. The thing,
                        (But that I would not seeme to counsell you)
                        I should haue motion'd to you, at the first:
                        And, make your count, you haue cut all their throtes.
                        Why! 'tis directly taking a possession!
                        And, in his next fit, we may let him goe.
                        'Tis but to pull the pillow, from his head,
                        And he is thratled: 't had beene done, before,
                        But for your scrupulous doubts.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I, a plague on't,
                        My conscience fooles my wit. Well, I'le be briefe,
                        And so be thou, lest they should be before vs;
                        Goe home, prepare him, tell him, with what zeale,
                        And willingnesse, I doe it: sweare it was,
                        On the first hearing (as thou maist doe, truely)
                        Mine owne free motion.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, I warrant you,
                        I'le so possesse him with it, that the rest
                        Of his staru'd clients shall be banisht, all;
                        And onely you receiu'd. But come not, sir,
                        Vntill I send, for I haue some-thing else
                        To ripen, for your good (you must not know't)
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        But doe not you forget to send, now.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Feare not.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene VII.
                     CORVINO, CELIA.
                     
                        WHere are you, wife? my CELIA? wife? what, blubbering?
                        Come, drie those teares. I thinke, thou thought'st me in earnest?
                        Ha? by this light, I talk'd so but to trie thee.
                        Me thinkes, the lightnesse of the occasion
                        Should ha' confirm'd thee. Come, I am not iealous.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        No?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Faith, I am not, I, nor neuer was:
                        It is a poore, vnprofitable humour.
                        Doe not I know, if women haue a will,
                        They'll doe 'gainst all the watches, o' the world?
                        And that the fiercest spies, are tam'd with gold?
                        Tut, I am confident in thee, thou shalt see't:
                        And see, I'le giue thee cause too, to beleeue it.
                        Come, kisse me. Goe, and make thee ready straight,
                        In all thy best attire, thy choicest iewells,
                        
                        Put 'hem all on, and, with 'hem, thy best lookes:
                        We are inuited to a solemne feast,
                        At old VOLPONE'S, where it shall appeare
                        How far I am free, from iealousie, or feare.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act III.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     MOSCA.
                     
                        I Feare, I shall begin to grow in loue
                        With my deare selfe, and my most prosp'rous parts,
                        They doe so spring, and burgeon; I can feele
                        A whimsey i' my bloud: (I know not how)
                        Successe hath made me wanton. I could skip
                        Out of my skin, now, like a subtill snake,
                        I am so limber. O! Your Parasite
                        Is a most precious thing, dropt from aboue,
                        Not bred 'mong'st clods, and clot-poules, here on earth.
                        I muse, the mysterie was not made a science,
                        It is so liberally profest! almost
                        All the wise world is little else, in nature,
                        But Parasites, or Sub-parasites. And, yet,
                        I meane not those, that haue your bare towne-arte,
                        To know, who's fit to feede 'hem; haue no house,
                        No family, no care, and therefore mould
                        Tales for mens eares, to bait that sense; or get
                        Kitchin-inuention, and some stale receipts
                        To please the belly, and the groine; nor those,
                        With their court-dog-tricks, that can fawne, and fleere,
                        Make their reuennue out of legs, and faces,
                        Eccho my-Lord, and lick away a moath:
                        But your fine, elegant rascall, that can rise,
                        And stoope (almost together) like an arrow;
                        Shoot through the aire, as nimbly as a starre;
                        Turne short, as doth a swallow; and be here,
                        And there, and here, and yonder, all at once;
                        Present to any humour, all occasion;
                        And change a visor, swifter, then a thought!
                        This is the creature, had the art borne with him;
                        Toiles not to learne it, but doth practise it
                        Out of most excellent nature: and such sparkes,
                        Are the true Parasites, others but their Zant's.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act III. Scene II.
                     MOSCA, BONARIO.
                     
                        WHo's this? BONARIO? old CORBACCIO's sonne?
                        The person I was bound to seeke. Faire sir,
                        You are happ'ly met.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        That cannot be, by thee.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Why, sir?
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Nay 'pray thee know thy way, & leaue me:
                        I would be loth to inter-change discourse,
                        With such a mate, as thou art.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Courteous sir,
                        Scorne not my pouertie.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Not I, by heauen:
                        But thou shalt giue me leaue to hate thy basenesse.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Basenesse?
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        I, answere me, is not thy sloth
                        Sufficient argument? thy flatterie?
                        Thy meanes of feeding?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Heauen, be good to me.
                        These imputations are too common, sir,
                        And eas'ly stuck on vertue, when shee's poore;
                        You are vnequall to me, and how ere
                        Your sentence may be righteous, yet you are not,
                        That ere you know me, thus, proceed in censure:
                        St. MARKE beare witnesse 'gainst you, 'tis inhumane.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        What? do's he weepe? the signe is soft, and good!
                        I doe repent me, that I was so harsh.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Tis true, that, sway'd by strong necessitie,
                        I am enforc'd to eate my carefull bread
                        With too much obsequie; 'tis true, beside,
                        That I am faine to spin mine owne poore rayment,
                        Out of my mere obseruance, being not borne
                        To a free fortune: but that I haue done
                        Base offices, in rending friends asunder,
                        Diuiding families, betraying counsells,
                        Whispering false lyes, or mining men with praises,
                        Train'd their credulitie with periuries,
                        Corrupted chastitie, or am in loue
                        With mine owne tender ease, but would not rather
                        Proue the most rugged, and laborious course,
                        That might redeeme my present estimation;
                        Let me here perish, in all hope of goodnesse.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        This cannot be a personated passion!
                        I was to blame, so to mistake thy nature;
                        'Pray thee forgiue me: and speake out thy bus'nesse.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, it concernes you; and though I may seeme,
                        At first, to make a maine offence, in manners,
                        And in my gratitude, vnto my master,
                        Yet, for the pure loue, which I beare all right,
                        
                        And hatred of the wrong, I must reueale it.
                        This verie houre, your father is in purpose
                        To disinherit you—
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And thrust you forth,
                        As a mere stranger to his bloud; 'tis true, sir:
                        The worke no way ingageth me, but, as
                        I claime an interest in the generall state
                        Of goodnesse, and true vertue, which I heare
                        T'abound in you: and, for which mere respect,
                        Without a second ayme, sir, I haue done it.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        This tale hath lost thee much of the late trust,
                        Thou hadst with me; it is impossible:
                        I know not how to lend it any thought,
                        My father should be so vnnaturall.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        It is a confidence, that well becomes
                        Your pietie; and form'd (no doubt) it is,
                        From your owne simple innocence: which makes
                        Your wrong more monstrous, and abhor'd. But, sir,
                        I now, will tell you more. This verie minute,
                        It is, or will be doing: And, if you
                        Shall be but pleas'd to goe with me, I'le bring you,
                        (I dare not say where you shall see, but) where
                        Your eare shall be a witnesse of the deed;
                        Heare your selfe written bastard: and profest
                        The common issue of the earth.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        I'm maz'd!
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, if I doe it not, draw your iust sword,
                        And score your vengeance, on my front, and face;
                        Marke me your villaine: You haue too much wrong,
                        And I doe suffer for you, sir. My heart
                        Weepes bloud, in anguish—
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Lead. I follow thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene III.
                     VOLPONE, NANO, ANDROGYNO, CASTRONE.
                     
                        MOSCA stayes long, me thinkes. Bring forth your sports
                        And helpe, to make the wretched time more sweet.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        Dwarfe, Foole, and Eunuch, well met here we be.
                        A question it were now, whether of vs three,
                        Being all the knowne delicates of a rich man,
                        In pleasing him, claime the precedencie can?
                     
                     
                        CAS.
                        I claime for my selfe.
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        And, so doth the foole.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        'Tis foolish indeed: let me set you both to schoole.
                        First, for your dwarfe, hee's little, and wittie,
                        And euery thing, as it is little, is prittie;
                        
                        Else why doe men say to a creature of my shape,
                        So soone as they see him, it's a pritty little ape?
                        And, why a pritty ape? but for pleasing imitation
                        Of greater mens action, in a ridiculous fashion.
                        Beside, this feat body of mine doth not craue
                        Halfe the meat, drinke, and cloth, one of your bulkes will haue.
                        Admit, your fooles face be the mother of laughter,
                        Yet, for his braine, it must alwaies come after:
                        And, though that doe feed him, it's a pittifull case,
                        His body is beholding to such a bad face.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        One knocks.
                        Who's there? my couch, away, looke, NANO, see:
                        Giue me my cappes, first—go, enquire. Now, CVPID
                        Send it be MOSCA, and with faire returne.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        It is the beauteous madam—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        WOVLD-BE—is it?
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        The same.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Now, torment on me; squire her in:
                        For she will enter, or dwell here for euer.
                        Nay, quickely, that my fit were past. I feare
                        A second hell too, that my loathing this
                        Will quite expell my appetite to the other:
                        Would shee were taking, now, her tedious leaue.
                        Lord, how it threates me, what I am to suffer!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene IIII.
                     LADY, VOLPONE, NANO, WOMEN. 2.
                     
                        I Thanke you, good sir. 'Pray you signifie
                        Vnto your patron, I am here. This band
                        Shewes not my neck inough (I trouble you, sir,
                        Let me request you, bid one of my women
                        Come hither to me) in good faith, I, am drest
                        Most fauourably, to day, it is no matter,
                        'Tis well inough. Looke, see, these petulant things!
                        How they haue done this!
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I do feele the feuer
                        Entring, in at mine eares; Ô, for a charme,
                        To fright it hence.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Come neerer: is this curle
                        In his right place? or this? why is this higher
                        Then all the rest? you ha' not wash'd your eies, yet?
                        Or do they not stand euen i'your head?
                        Where's your fellow? call her.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        NOW, St. MARKE
                        Deliuer vs: anon, shee'll beate her women,
                        Because her nose is red.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I pray you, view
                        This tire, forsooth: are all things apt, or no?
                     
                     
                        WOM.
                        One haire a little, here, stick out, forsooth.
                     
                     
                        
                        LAD.
                        Do's 't so forsooth? and where was your deare sight
                        When it did so, forsooth? what now? bird-ey'd?
                        And you, too? 'pray you both approch, and mend it.
                        Now (by that light) I muse, yo'are not asham'd!
                        I, that haue preach'd these things, so oft, vnto you,
                        Read you the principles, argu'd all the grounds,
                        Disputed euery fitnesse, euery grace,
                        Call'd you to counsell of so frequent dressings—
                     
                     
                        (NAN.
                        More carefully, then of your fame, or honour)
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Made you acquainted, what an ample dowrie
                        The knowledge of these things would be vnto you,
                        Able, alone, to get you noble husbands
                        At your returne: and you, thus, to neglect it?
                        Besides, you seeing what a curious nation
                        Th'Italians are, what will they say of me?
                        The English lady cannot dresse her selfe;
                        Here's a fine imputation, to our countrie!
                        Well, goe your wayes, and stay, i'the next roome.
                        This fucus was too course too, it's no matter.
                        Good-sir, you'll giue'hem entertaynement?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        The storme comes toward me.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        How do's my VOLP?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Troubled with noise, I cannot sleepe; I dreamt
                        That a strange furie entred, now, my house,
                        And, with the dreadfull tempest of her breath,
                        Did cleaue my roofe asunder.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Beleeue me, and I
                        Had the most fearefull dreame, could I remember't—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Out on my fate; I ha' giu'n her the occasion
                        How to torment me: shee will tell me hers.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Me thought, the golden mediocritie
                        Polite, and delicate—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O, if you doe loue me,
                        No more; I sweat, and suffer, at the mention
                        Of any dreame: feele, how I tremble yet.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Alas, good soule! the passion of the heart.
                        Seed-pearle were good now, boild with syrrope of apples,
                        Tincture of gold, and corrall, citron-pills,
                        Your elicampane roote, mirobalanes —
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Ay me, I haue tane a grasse-hopper by the wing.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Burnt silke, and amber, you haue muscadell
                        Good i'the house—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        You will not drinke, and part?
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        No, feare not that. I doubt, we shall not get
                        Some english saffron (halfe a dram would serue)
                        Your sixteene cloues, a little muske, dri'd mints.
                        Buglosse, and barley-meale—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Shee's in againe,
                        Before I fayn'd diseases, now I haue one.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        And these appli'd, with a right scarlet-cloth—
                     
                     
                        
                        VOLP.
                        Another floud of wordes! a very torrent!
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Shall I, sir, make you a poultise?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        No, no, no;
                        I'am very well: you need prescribe no more.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I haue, a little, studied physick; but, now,
                        I'am all for musique: saue, i'the fore-noones,
                        An houre, or two, for painting. I would haue
                        A lady, indeed, t'haue all, letters, and artes,
                        Be able to discourse, to write, to paint,
                        But principall (as PLATO holds) your musique
                        (And, so do's wise PYTHAGORAS, I take it)
                        Is your true rapture; when there is concent
                        In face, in voyce, and clothes: and is, indeed,
                        Our sexes chiefest ornament.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        The Poet,
                        As old in time, as PLATO, and as knowing,
                        Say's that your highest female grace is silence.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Which o'your Poets? PETRARCH? or TASSO? or DANTE?
                        GVERRINI? ARIOSTO? ARETINE?
                        CIECO di Hadria? I haue read them all.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Is euery thing a cause, to my destruction?
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I thinke, I ha'two or three of'hem, about me.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        The sunne, the sea will sooner, both, stand still,
                        Then her eternall tongue! nothing can scape it.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Here's PASTOR FIDO—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Professe obstinate silence,
                        That's, now, my safest.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        All our English writers,
                        I meane such, as are happy in th'Italian,
                        Will deigne to steale out of this author, mainely;
                        Almost as much, as from MONTAGNIE:
                        He has so moderne, and facile a veine,
                        Fitting the time, and catching the court-eare.
                        Your PETRARCH is more passionate, yet he,
                        In dayes of sonetting, trusted 'hem, with much:
                        DANTE is hard, and few can vnderstand him.
                        But, for a desperate wit, there's ARETINE!
                        Onely, his pictures are a little obscene—
                        You marke me not?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Alas, my mind's perturb'd.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Why, in such cases, we must cure our selues,
                        Make vse of our philosophie—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O'y me.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        And, as we find our passions doe rebell,
                        Encounter 'hem with reason; or diuert 'hem,
                        By giuing scope vnto some other humour
                        Of lesser danger: as, in politique bodies,
                        There's nothing, more, doth ouer-whelme the iudgement,
                        And clouds the vnderstanding, then too much
                        Settling, and fixing, and (as't were) subsiding
                        Vpon one obiect. For the incorporating
                        
                        Of these same outward things, into that part,
                        Which we call mentall, leaues some certaine faeces,
                        That stop the organs, and, as PLATO sayes,
                        Assassinates our knowledge.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Now, the spirit
                        Of patience helpe me.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Come, in faith, I must
                        Visit you more, a dayes; and make you well:
                        Laugh, and be lusty.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        My good angell saue me.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        There was but one sole man, in all the world,
                        With whom I ere could sympathize; and he
                        Would lie you often, three, foure houres together,
                        To heare me speake: and be (sometime) so rap't,
                        As he would answere me, quite from the purpose,
                        Like you, and you are like him, iust. I'le discourse
                        (And 't be but only, sir, to bring you a-sleepe
                        How we did spend our time, and loues, together,
                        For some sixe yeeres.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        For we were coaetanci, and brought vp—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Some power, some fate, some fortune rescue me.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene V.
                     MOSCA, LADY, VOLPONE.
                     
                        GOd saue you, Madam.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Good sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        MOSCA? welcom,
                        Welcome to my redemption.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Why, sir?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Oh,
                        Rid me of this my torture, quickly, there;
                        My Madam, with the euerlasting voyce:
                        The bells, in time of pestilence, ne're made
                        Like noise, or were in that perpetuall motion;
                        The cock-pit comes not neere it. All my house,
                        But now, steam'd like a bath, with her thicke breath.
                        A lawyer could not haue beene heard; nor scarse
                        Another woman, such a hayle of wordes
                        Shee has let fall. For hells sake, rid her hence.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Has shee presented?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O, I doe not care,
                        I'le take her absence, vpon any price,
                        With any losse.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Madam—
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I ha' brought your patron
                        A toy, a cap here, of mine owne worke—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Tis well,
                        I had forgot to tell you, I saw your Knight,
                        Where you'ld little thinke it—
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Where?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Mary,
                        Where yet, if you make haste, you may apprehend him,
                        Rowing vpon the water in a gondole,
                        With the most cunning curtizan, of Venice.
                        
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Is't true?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Pursue 'hem, and beleeue your eyes:
                        Leaue me, to make your gift. I knew, 't would take.
                        
                        For lightly, they that vse themselues most licence,
                        Are still most iealous.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        MOSCA, hearty thankes,
                        For thy quicke fiction, and deliuery of mee.
                        Now, to my hopes, what saist thou?
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        But doe you heare, sir?—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Againe; I feare a paroxisme.
                        
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Which way
                        Row'd they together?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Toward the rialto.
                        
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I pray you lend me your dwarfe.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I pray you, take him.
                        Your hopes, sir, are like happie blossomes, faire,
                        And promise timely fruit, if you will stay
                        But the maturing; keepe you, at your couch,
                        CORBACCIO will arriue straight, with the will:
                        When he is gone, ile tell you more.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        My blood,
                        My spirits are return'd; I am aliue:
                        And like your wanton gam'ster, at primero,
                        Whose thought had whisper'd to him, not goe lesse,
                        Methinkes I lie, and draw—for an encounter.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene VI.
                     MOSCA, BONARIO.
                     
                        SIr, here conceald, you may heare all. But 'pray you
                        One knockes.
                        Haue patience, sir; the same's your father, knocks:
                        I am compeld, to leaue you.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Do so. Yet,
                        Cannot my thought imagine this a truth.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act. III. Scene. VII.
                     MOSCA, CORVINO, CELIA, BONARIO, VOLPONE.
                     
                        DEath on me! you are come too soone, what meant you?
                        Did not I say, I would send?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Yes, but I feard
                        You might forget it, and then they preuent vs.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Preuent? did ere man haste so, sor his hornes?
                        A courtier would not ply it so, for a place.
                        Well, now there's no helping it, stay here;
                        Ile presently returne.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Where are you, CELIA?
                        You know not wherefore I haue brought you hither?
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Not well, except you told me.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Now, I will:
                        Harke hither.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        To Bonario.
                        Sir, your father hath sent word,
                        It will be halfe an houre, ere he come;
                        And therefore, if you please to walke, the while,
                        Into that gallery—at the vpper end,
                        There are some bookes, to entertaine the time:
                        
                        And ile take care, no man shall come vnto you, sir.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Yes, I will stay there, I doe doubt this fellow.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        There, he is farre enough; he can heare nothing:
                        And, for his father, I can keepe him off.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Nay, now, there is no starting backe; and therefore,
                        Resolue vpon it: I haue so decree'd.
                        It must be done. Nor, would I moue't afore,
                        Because I would auoide all shifts and tricks,
                        That might denie me.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Sir, let me beseech you,
                        Affect not these strange trials; if you doubt
                        My chastitie, why locke me vp, for euer:
                        Make me the heyre of darkenesse. Let me liue,
                        Where I may please your feares, if not your trust.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Beleeue it, I haue no such humor, I.
                        All that I speake, I meane; yet I am not mad:
                        Not horne-mad, see you? Go too, shew your selfe
                        Obedient, and a wife.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        O heauen!
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I say it,
                        Do so.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Was this the traine?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I'haue told you reasons;
                        What the physitians haue set downe; how much,
                        It may concerne me; what my engagements are;
                        My meanes; and the necessitie of those meanes,
                        For my recouery: wherefore, it you bee
                        Loyall, and mine, be wonne, respect my venture.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Before your honour?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Honour? tut, a breath;
                        There's no such thing, in nature: a meere terme
                        Inuented to awe fooles. What is my gold
                        The worse, for touching? clothes, for being look'd on?
                        Why, this 's no more. An old, decrepit wretch,
                        That ha's no sense, no sinew; takes his meate
                        With others fingers; onely knowes to gape,
                        When you doe scald his gummes; a voice; a shadow;
                        And, what can this man hurt you?
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Lord! what spirit
                        Is this hath entred him?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        And for your fame,
                        That's such a Iigge; as if I would goe tell it,
                        Crie it, on the piazza! who shall know it?
                        But hee, that cannot speake it; and this fellow,
                        Whose lippes are i' my pocket: saue your selfe,
                        If you'll proclaime't, you may. I know no other,
                        Should come to know it.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Are heauen, and saints then nothing?
                        Will they be blinde, or stupide?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        How?
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Good Sir,
                        Be iealous still, aemulate them; and thinke
                        What hate they burne with, toward euery sinne.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I grant you: if I thought it were a sinne,
                        I would not vrge you. Should I offer this
                        To some yong Frenchman, or hot Tuscane bloud,
                        
                        That had read ARETINE, conn'd all his printes,
                        Knew euery quirke within lusts laborinth,
                        And were profest critique, in lechery;
                        And I would looke vpon him, and applaud him,
                        This were a sinne: but here, 'tis contrary,
                        A pious worke, mere charity, for physick,
                        And honest politie, to assure mine owne.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        O heauen! canst thou suffer such a change?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Thou art mine honor, MOSCA, and my pride;
                        My ioy, my tickling, my delight! goe, bring 'hem.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Please you draw neere, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Come on, what—
                        You will not be rebellious? by that light—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, signior CORVINO, here, is come to see you.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Oh.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And hearing of the consultation had,
                        So lately, for your health, is come to offer,
                        Or rather, sir, to prostitute—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Thankes, sweet MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Freely, vn-ask'd, or vn-intreated—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Well.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        (As the true, feruent instance of his loue)
                        His owne most faire and proper wife; the beauty,
                        Onely of price, in Venice—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        'Tis well vrg'd.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        To be your comfortresse, and to preserue you.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Alasse, I am past already! 'pray you, thanke 'him,
                        For his good care, and promptnesse, but for that,
                        'Tis a vaine labour, eene to fight, 'gainst heauen;
                        Applying fire to a stone: (vh, vh, vh, vh.)
                        Making a dead leafe grow againe. I take
                        His wishes gently, though; and, you may tell him,
                        What I' haue done for him: mary; my state is hopelesse!
                        Will him, to pray for me; and t'vse his fortune,
                        With reuerence, when he comes to't.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Do you heare, sir?
                        Go to him, with your wife.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Heart of my father!
                        Wilt thou persist thus? come, I pray thee, come.
                        Thou seest 'tis nothing. CELIA. By this hand,
                        I shall grow violent. Come, do't, I say.
                     
                     
                        CEL
                        Sir, kill me, rather: I will take downe poyson,
                        Eate burning coales, doe any thing—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Be damn'd.
                        (Heart) I will drag thee hence, home, by the haire;
                        Cry thee a strumpet, through the streets; rip vp
                        Thy mouth, vnto thine eares; and slit thy nose,
                        Like a raw rotchet—Do not tempt me, come.
                        Yeld, I am loth— (Death) I will buy some slaue,
                        Whom I will kill, and binde thee to him, aliue;
                        And at my windore, hang you forth: deuising
                        Some monstrous crime, which I, in capitall letters,
                        Will eate into thy flesh, with aqua-fortis,
                        
                        And burning cor'siues, on this stubborne brest.
                        Now, by the bloud, thou hast incens'd, ile do't.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Sir, what you please, you may, I am your martyr.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Be not thus obstinate. I ha' not deseru'd it:
                        Thinke, who it is, intreats you. 'Pray thee, sweet;
                        (Good faith) thou shalt haue iewells, gownes, attires,
                        What thou wilt thinke, and aske. Do, but, go kisse him.
                        Or touch him, but. For my sake. At my sute.
                        This once. No? not? I shall remember this.
                        Will you disgrace me, thus? do' you thirst my'vndoing?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Nay, gentle lady, be aduis'd.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        No, no.
                        She has watch'd her time. God's precious, this is skiruy;
                        'Tis very skiruie: and you are—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Nay, good, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        An errant locust, by heauen, a locust. Whore,
                        Crocodile, that hast thy thy teares prepar'd,
                        Expecting, how thou'lt bid 'hem flow.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Nay, 'Pray you, sir,
                        Shee will consider.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Would my life would serue
                        To satisfie.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        (S'death) if shee would but speake to him,
                        And saue my reputation, 'twere somewhat;
                        But, spightfully to affect my vtter ruine.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I, now you' haue put your fortune, in her hands.
                        Why i'faith, it is her modesty, I must quit her;
                        If you were absent, shee would be more comming;
                        I know it: and dare vndertake for her.
                        What woman can, before her husband? 'pray you,
                        Let vs depart, and leaue her, here.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Sweet CELIA,
                        Thou mayst redeeme all, yet; I'le say no more:
                        If not, esteeme your selfe as lost. Nay, stay there.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        O god, and his good angels! whether, whether.
                        Is shame fled humane brests? that with such ease,
                        Men dare put off your honours, and their owne?
                        Is that, which euer was a cause of life,
                        Now plac'd beneath the basest circumstance?
                        And modestie an exile made, for money?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        He leapes off from his couch.
                        I, in CORVINO, and such earth-fed mindes,
                        That neuer tasted the true heau'n of loue.
                        Assure thee, CELIA, he that would sell thee,
                        Onely for hope of gaine, and that vncertaine,
                        He would haue sold his part of paradise
                        For ready money, had he met a cope-man.
                        Why art thou maz'd, to see me thus reuiu'd?
                        Rather applaud thy beauties miracle;
                        'Tis thy great worke: that hath, not now alone,
                        But sundry times, 'rays'd me, in seuerall shapes,
                        And, but this morning, like a mountebanke,
                        
                        To see thee at thy windore. I, before
                        I would haue left my practice, for thy loue,
                        In varying figures, I would haue contended
                        With the blue PROTEVS, or the horned Floud.
                        
                        Now, art thou welcome.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Sir!
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Nay, flie me not.
                        Nor, let thy false imagination
                        That I was bedrid, make thee thinke, I am so:
                        Thou shalt not find it. I am, now, as fresh,
                        As hot, as high, and in as iouiall plight,
                        As when (in that so celebrated scene,
                        At recitation of our comoedie,
                        For entertainement of the great VALOYS)
                        I acted yong ANTINOVS; and attracted
                        The eyes, and eares of all the ladies, present,
                        T' admire each gracefull gesture, note, and footing.
                     
                     SONG.
                     COme, my CELIA, let vs proue,
                     While we can, the sports of loue;
                     Time will not be ours, for euer,
                     He, at length, our good will seuer;
                     Spend not then his gifts, in vaine.
                     Sunnes, that set, may rise againe:
                     But if, once, we lose this light,
                     'Tis with vs perpetuall night.
                     Why should wee deferre our ioyes?
                     Fame, and rumor are but toies.
                     Cannot we delude the eyes
                     Of a few poore houshold-spies?
                     Or his easier eares beguile,
                     Thus remooued, by our wile?
                     'Tis no sinne, loues fruits to steale;
                     But the sweet thefts to reueale:
                     To be taken, to be seene,
                     These haue crimes accounted beene.
                     
                        CEL.
                        Some serene blast me, or dire lightning strike
                        This my offending face.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Why droopes my CELIA?
                        Thou hast in place of a base husband, found
                        A worthy louer: vse thy fortune well,
                        With secrecie, and pleasure. See, behold,
                        What thou art queene of; not in expectation,
                        As I feed others: but possess'd, and crown'd.
                        See, here, a rope of pearle; and each, more orient
                        Then that the braue Aegyptian queene carrous'd:
                        
                        Dissolue, and drinke 'hem. See, a carbuncle,
                        May put out both the eyes of our St. MARKE;
                        A diamant, would haue bought LOLLIA PAVLINA,
                        When she came in, like star-light hid with iewels,
                        That were the spoiles of prouinces; take these,
                        And weare, and loose 'hem: yet remaines an eare-ring
                        To purchase them againe, and this whole state.
                        A gem, but worth a priuate patrimony,
                        Is nothing: we will eate such at a meale.
                        The heads of parrats, tongues of nightingales,
                        The braines of peacoks, and of estriches
                        Shall be our food: and, could we get the phoenix,
                        (Though nature lost her kind) shee were our dish.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        Good sir, these things might moue a minde affected
                        With such delights; but I, whose innocence
                        Is all I can thinke wealthy, or worth th'enioying,
                        And which once lost, I haue nought to loose beyond it,
                        Cannot be taken with these sensuall baites:
                        If you haue conscience—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        'Tis the beggers vertue,
                        If thou hast wisdome, heare me, CELIA.
                        Thy bathes shall be the iuyce of iuly-flowres,
                        Spirit of roses, and of violets,
                        The milke of vnicornes, and panthers breath
                        Gather'd in bagges, and mixt with cretan wines.
                        Our drinke shall be prepared gold, and amber;
                        Which we will take, vntill my roofe whirle round
                        With the vertigo: and my dwarfe shall dance,
                        My eunuch sing, my foole make vp the antique.
                        Whil'st, we, in changed shapes, act OVIDS tales,
                        Thou, like EVROPA now, and I like IOVE,
                        Then I like MARS, and thou like ERYCINE,
                        So, of the rest, till we haue quite run through
                        And weary'd all the fables of the gods.
                        Then will I haue thee in more moderne formes,
                        Attired like some sprightly dame of France,
                        Braue Tuscan lady, or proud Spanish beauty;
                        Sometimes, vnto the Persian Sophies wife;
                        Or the grand-Signiors mistresse; and, for change,
                        To one of our most art-full courtizans,
                        Or some quick Negro, or cold Russian;
                        And I will meet thee, in as many shapes:
                        Where we may, so, trans-fuse our wandring soules,
                        Out at our lippes, and score vp summes of pleasures,
                        That the curious shall not know,
                        How to tell them, as they slow;
                        
                        And the enuious, when they find
                        What their number is, be pind.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        If you haue eares that will be pierc'd; or eyes,
                        That can be open'd; a heart, may be touch'd;
                        Or any part, that yet sounds man, about you:
                        If you haue touch of holy saints, or heauen,
                        Do me the grace, to let me scape. If not,
                        Be bountifull, and kill me. You doe know,
                        I am a creature, hither ill betrayd,
                        By one, whose shame I would forget it were,
                        If you will daigne me neither of these graces,
                        Yet feed your wrath, sir, rather then your lust;
                        (It is a vice, comes neerer manlinesse)
                        And punish that vnhappy crime of nature,
                        Which you miscal my beauty: flay my face,
                        Or poison it, with oyntments, for seducing
                        Your bloud to this rebellion. Rub these hands,
                        With what may cause an eating leprosie,
                        E'ene to my bones, and marrow: any thing,
                        That may disfauour me, saue in my honour.
                        And I will kneele to you, pray for you, pay downe
                        A thousand hourely vowes, sir, for your health,
                        Report, and thinke you vertuous—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Thinke me cold,
                        Frosen, and impotent, and so report me?
                        That I had NESTOR'S hernia, thou wouldst thinke.
                        I doe degenerate, and abuse my nation,
                        To play with oportunity, thus long:
                        I should haue done the act, and then haue parlee'd.
                        Yeeld, or Ile force thee.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        O! iust God.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        In vaine—
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        He 
                              〈◊〉
                            from 
                              〈◊〉
                            Mo
                              ••
                           a 
                              〈◊〉
                            plac'd 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                        Forbeare, foule rauisher, libidinous swine,
                        Free the forc'd lady, or thou dy'st, impostor.
                        But that I am loth to snatch thy punishment
                        Out of the hand of iustice, thou shouldst, yet,
                        Be made the timely sacrifice of vengeance,
                        Before this altar, and this drosse, thy idoll.
                        Lady, let's quit the place, it is the den
                        Of villany; feare nought, you haue a guard:
                        And he, ere long, shall meet his iust reward.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Fall on me, roofe, and bury me in ruine,
                        Become my graue, that wert my shelter. O!
                        I am vn-masqu'd, vn-spirited, vn-done,
                        Betray'd to beggery, to infamy—
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act III. Scene VIII.
                     MOSCA, VOLPONE.
                     
                        WHere shall I runne, most wretched shame of men,
                        To beate out my vn-luckie braines?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Here, here.
                        What! dost thou bleed?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, that his wel-driu'n sword
                        Had beene so courteous to haue cleft me downe,
                        Vnto the nauill; ere I liu'd to see
                        My life, my hopes, my spirits, my patron, all
                        Thus desperately engaged, by my error.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Woe, on thy fortune.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And my follies, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Th' hast made me miserable.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And my selfe, sir.
                        Who would haue thought, he would haue harken'd, so?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        What shall we do?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I know not, if my heart
                        Could expiate the mischance, Il'd pluck it out.
                        Will you be pleas'd to hang me? or cut my throate?
                        And i'le requite you, sir. Let's die like Romanes,
                        They knock without.
                        Since wee haue liu'd, like Grecians.
                        
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Harke, who's there?
                        I heare some footing, officers, the Saffi,
                        Come to apprehend vs! I doe feele the brand
                        Hissing already, at my fore-head: now,
                        Mine eares are boring.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        To your couch, sir, you
                        Make that place good, how euer. Guilty men
                        Suspect, what they deserue still. Signior CORBACCIO!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene IX.
                     CORBACCIO, MOSCA, VOLTORE, VOLPONE.
                     
                        WHy! how now? MOSCA!
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, vndone, amaz'd, sir.
                        Your sonne (I know not, by what accident)
                        Acquainted with your purpose to my patron,
                        Touching your will, and making him your heire;
                        Entred our house with violence, his sword drawne,
                        Sought for you, call'd you wretch, vnnaturall,
                        Vow'd he would kill you.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Me?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, and my patron.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        
                           
                              •
                           This act, shall disinherit him indeed:
                        Here is the will.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Tis well, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Right and well.
                        Be you as carefull now, for me.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        My life, sir,
                        Is not more tender'd, I am onely yours.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        How do's he? will he die shortly, think'st thou?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I feare.
                        He'll out-last May.
                        
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        To day?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, last-out May, sir.
                     
                     
                        
                        CORB.
                        Couldst thou not gi' him a dram?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, by no meanes, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Nay, I'le not bid you.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        This is a knaue, I see.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        How, signior VOLTORE! did he heare me?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Parasite.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Who's that? O, sir, most timely welcome—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Scarce,
                        To the discouery of your tricks, I feare.
                        You are his, onely? and mine, also? are you not?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Who? I, sir!
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        You, sir. What deuice is this
                        About a will?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        A plot for you, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Come,
                        Put not your foist's vpon me, I shall sent 'hem.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Did you not heare it?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Yes, I heare, CORBACCIO
                        Hath made your patron, there, his heire.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'Tis true,
                        By my deuice, drawne to it by my plot,
                        With hope—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Your patron should reciprocate?
                        And, you haue promis'd?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        For your good, I did, sir.
                        Nay more, I told his sonne, brought, hid him here,
                        Where he might heare his father passe the deed;
                        Being perswaded to it, by this thought, sir,
                        That the vnnaturalnesse, first, of the act,
                        And then, his fathers oft disclaiming in him,
                        (Which I did meane t'helpe on) would sure enrage him
                        To doe some violence vpon his parent.
                        On which the law should take sufficient hold,
                        And you be stated in a double hope:
                        Truth be my comfort, and my conscience,
                        My onely ayme was, to dig you a fortune
                        Out of these two, old rotten sepulchers—
                     
                     
                        (VOLT.
                        I cry thee mercy, MOSCA.)
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Worth your patience,
                        And your great merit, sir. And, see the change!
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Why? what successe?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Most haplesse! you must helpe, sir.
                        Whilst we expected th'old rauen, in comes
                        CORVINO'S wife, sent hither, by her husband—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        What, with a present?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, sir, on visitation:
                        (I'le tell you how, anone) and, staying long,
                        The youth, he growes impatient, rushes forth,
                        Seizeth the lady, wound's me, makes her sweare
                        (Or he would murder her, that was his vow)
                        T'affirme my patron to haue done her rape:
                        Which how vnlike it is, you see! and, hence,
                        With that pretext, hee's gone, t'accuse his father;
                        Defame my patron; defeat you—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Where's her husband?
                        Let him be sent for, streight.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, I'le goe fetch him.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Bring him, to the Scrutineo.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, I will.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        This must be stopt.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, you do nobly, sir.
                        Alasse, 'twas labor'd all, sir, for your good;
                        Nor, was there want of counsel, in the plot:
                        
                        But fortune can, at any time, orethrow
                        The proiects of a hundred learned clearkes, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        What's that?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Wilt please you sir, to goe along?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Patron, go in, and pray for our successe.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Neede makes deuotion: heauen your labor blesse.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act IIII.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     POLITIQVE, PEREGRINE.
                     
                        I Told you, sir, it was a plot: you see
                        What obseruation is. You mention'd mee,
                        For some instructions: I will tell you, sir,
                        (Since we are met, here in this height of Venice)
                        Some few particulars, I haue set downe,
                        Onely for this meridian; fit to be knowne
                        Of your crude traueller, and they are these.
                        I will not touch, sir, at your phrase, or clothes,
                        For they are old.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Sir, I haue better.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Pardon
                        I meant, as they are theames.
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        O, sir, proceed:
                        I'le slander you no more of wit, good sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        First, for your garbe, it must be graue, and serious;
                        Very reseru'd, and lock't; not tell a secret,
                        On any termes, not to your father; scarse
                        A fable, but with caution; make sure choise
                        Both of your company, and discourse; beware,
                        You neuer spake a truth—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Not to strangers,
                        For those be they you must conuerse with, most;
                        Others I would not know, sir, but, at distance,
                        So as I still might be a fauer, in 'hem:
                        You shall haue tricks, else, past vpon you, hourely.
                        And then, for your religion, professe none;
                        But wonder, at the diuersitie of all;
                        And, for your part, protest, were there no other
                        But simply the lawes o' th' land, you could content you:
                        NIC: MACHIAVEL, and monsieur BODINE, both,
                        Were of this minde. Then, must you learne the vse,
                        And handling of your siluer forke, at meales;
                        The mettall of your glasse: (these are maine matters,
                        With your Italian) and to know the houre,
                        When you must eat your melons, and your figges.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Is that a point of state, too?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Here it is.
                        For your Venetian, if he see a man
                        Preposterous, in the least, he has him straight;
                        
                        He has: he strippes him. I'le acquaint you, sir,
                        I now haue liu'd here ('tis some fourteene monthes)
                        Within the first weeke, of my landing here,
                        All tooke me for a citizen of Venice:
                        I knew the formes, so well—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        And nothing else.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I had read CONTARENE, tooke me a house,
                        Dealt with my Iewes, to furnish it with moueables—
                        Well, if I could but finde one man, one man,
                        To mine owne heart, whom I durst trust, I would—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        What? what, sir?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Make him rich; make him a fortune:
                        He should not thinke, againe. I would command it.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        As how?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        With certaine proiects, that I haue:
                        Which, I may not discouer.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        If I had
                        But one to wager with, I would lay odds, now,
                        He tels me, instantly.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        One is, (and that
                        I care not greatly, who knowes) to serue the state
                        Of Venice, with red herrings, for three yeeres,
                        And at a certaine rate, from Roterdam,
                        Where I haue correspondence. There's a letter,
                        Sent me from one o'th' States, and to that purpose;
                        He cannot write his name, but that's his marke.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        He is a chaundler?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        No, a cheesemonger.
                        There are some other too, with whom I treate,
                        About the same negotiation;
                        And, I will vndertake it: For 'tis thus,
                        I'le do't with ease, I' haue cast it all. Your hoigh
                        Carries but three men in her, and a boy;
                        And she shall make me three returnes, a yeare:
                        So, if there come but one of three, I saue,
                        If two, I can defalke. But, this is now,
                        If my mayne proiect faile.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Then, you haue others?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I should be loath to draw the subtill ayre
                        Of such a place, without my thousand aymes.
                        Ile not dissemble, sir, where ere I come,
                        I loue to be consideratiue; and, 'tis true,
                        I haue, at my free houres, thought vpon
                        Some certaine goods, vnto the state of Venice,
                        Which I doe call my cautions: and, sir, which
                        I meane (in hope of pension) to propound
                        To the great councell, then vnto the forty,
                        So to the ten. My meanes are made already—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        By whom?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Sir, one, that though his place b'obscure,
                        Yet, he can sway, and they will heare him. H'is
                        A commandadore.
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        What, a common sergeant?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Sir, such, as they are, put it in their mouthes,
                        
                        What they should say, sometimes: as well as greater.
                        I thinke I haue my notes, to shew you —
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Good, sir,
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        But, you shall sweare vnto me, on your gentry,
                        Not to anticipate—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I, sir?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Nor reueale
                        A circumstance—My paper is not with mee.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        O, but, you can remember, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        My first is,
                        Concerning tinder-boxes. You must know,
                        No family is, here, without it's boxe.
                        Now sir, it being so portable a thing,
                        Put case, that you, or I were ill affected
                        Vnto the state; sir, with it in our pockets,
                        Might not I goe into the arsenale?
                        
                        Or you? come out againe? and none the wiser?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Except your selfe, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Goe too, then. I, therefore,
                        Aduertise to the state, how fit it were,
                        That none, but such as were knowne patriots,
                        Sound louers of their countrey, should be sufferd
                        T'enioy them in their houses: and, euen those,
                        Seal'd, at some office, and, at such a bignesse,
                        As might not lurke in pockets.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Admirable!
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        My next is, how t'enquire, and be resolu'd,
                        By present demonstration, whether a ship,
                        Newly arriued from Soría, or from
                        Any suspected part of all the leuant,
                        Be guilty of the plague: And, where they vse,
                        To lie out fortie, fifty daies, sometimes,
                        About the Lazaretto, for their triall;
                        Ile saue that charge, and losse vnto the merchant,
                        And, in an houre, cleare the doubt.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Indeede, sir?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Or—I will loose my labour.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        'My faith, that's much.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Nay, sir, conceiue me. 'Twill cost me, in onions,
                        Some thirtie liu'res—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Which is one pound sterling.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Beside my water-workes: for this I doe, sir.
                        First, I bring in your ship, 'twixt two brickwalles;
                        (But those the state shall venter) on the one
                        I straine me a faire tarre-paulin; and, in that,
                        I stick my onions, cut in halfes: the other
                        Is full of loope-holes, out at which, I thrust
                        The noses of my bellowes; and, those bellowes
                        I keepe, with water-workes, in perpetuall motion,
                        (Which is the easi'st matter of a hundred)
                        Now, sir, your onion, which doth naturally
                        Attract th' infection, and your bellowes, blowing
                        The ayre vpon him, will shew (instantly)
                        By his chang'd colour, if there be contagion,
                        
                        Or else, remaine as faire, as at the first.
                        Now 'tis knowne, 'tis nothing.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        You are right, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I would, I had my note.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        'Faith, so would I:
                        But, you ha' done well, for once, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Were I false,
                        Or would be made so, I could shew you reasons,
                        How I could sell this state, now, to the Turke;
                        Spight of their galleis, or their —
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Pray you, sir POLL.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I haue 'hem not, about me.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        That I fear'd.
                        They' are there, sir?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        No, this is my diary,
                        Wherein I note my actions of the day.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        'Pray you, let's see, sir. What is here? notandum,
                        A rat had gnawne my spurre-lethers; notwithstanding,
                        I put on new, and did goe forth: but, first,
                        I threw three beanes ouer the threshold. Item,
                        I went, and bought two tooth-pickes, whereof one
                        I burst, immediatly, in a discourse
                        With a dutch merchant, 'bout ragion del stato.
                        
                        From him I went, and payd a moccinigo,
                        For peecing my silke stockings; by the way,
                        I cheapen'd sprats: and at St. MARKES, I vrin'd.
                        'Faith these are politique notes!
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Sir, I do slippe
                        No action of my life, thus, but I quote it.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Beleeue me it is wise!
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Nay, sir, read forth.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene II.
                     LADY, NANO, WOMEN, POLITIQVE, PEREGRINE.
                     
                        WHere should this loose knight be, trow? sure, h'is hous'd.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        Why, then he's fast.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I, he plaies both, with me:
                        I pray you, stay. This heate will doe more harme
                        To my complexion, then his heart is worth.
                        (I do not care to hinder, but to take him)
                        How it comes of!
                     
                     
                        WOM.
                        My master's yonder.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Where?
                     
                     
                        WOM.
                        With a yong gentleman.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        That same's the party!
                        In mans apparell. 'Pray you, sir, iog my knight:
                        I will be tender to his reputation,
                        How euer he demerit.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        My lady!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Where?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        'Tis shee indeed, sir, you shall know her. She is,
                        Were she not mine, a lady of that merit,
                        For fashion, and behauiour; and, for beauty
                        I durst compare—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        It seemes, you are not iealous,
                        That dare commend her.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Nay, and for discourse—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Being your wife, shee cannot misse that.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Madame,
                        
                        Here is a gentleman, 'pray you, vse him, fairely,
                        He seemes a youth, but he is —
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        None?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Yes, one
                        Has put his face, as soone, into the world—
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        You meane, as earely? but to day?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        How's this!
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Why in this habit, sir, you apprehend me.
                        Well, master WOVLD-BEE, this doth not become you;
                        I had thought, the odour, sir, of your good name,
                        Had beene more precious to you; that you would not
                        Haue done this dire massacre, on your honour;
                        One of your grauity, and ranke, besides!
                        But, knights, I see, care little for the oath
                        They make to ladies: chiefely, their owne ladies.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Now, by my spurres (the symbole of my knight-hood)
                     
                     
                        (PER.
                        Lord! how his braine is humbled, for an oath)
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I reach you not.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Right, sir, your politie
                        May beare it through, thus. Sir, a word with you.
                        I would be loth, to contest publikely,
                        With any gentlewoman; or to seeme
                        Froward, or violent (as the courtier sayes)
                        It comes too neere rusticity, in a lady,
                        Which I would shun, by all meanes: and, how-euer
                        I may deserue from master WOVLD-BEE, yet,
                        T'haue one faire gentlewoman, thus, be made
                        Th'vnkind instrument, to wrong another,
                        And one she knowes not, I, and to perseuer;
                        In my poore iudgement, is not warranted
                        From being a soloecisme in our sexe,
                        If not in manners.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        How is this!
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Sweet madame,
                        Come neerer to your ayme.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Mary, and will, sir.
                        Since you prouoke me, with your impudence,
                        And laughter of your light land-siren, here,
                        Your SPORVS, your hermaphrodite—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        What's here?
                        Poetique fury, and historique stormes!
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        The gentleman, beleeue it, is of worth,
                        And of our nation.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I, your white-Friers nation?
                        Come, I blush for you, master WOVLD-BEE, I;
                        And am asham'd, you should ha' no more forehead,
                        Then, thus, to be the patron, or St. GEORGE
                        To a lewd harlot, a base fricatrice,
                        A female deuill, in a male out-side.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Nay,
                        And you be such a one! I must bid adieu
                        To your delights. The case appeares too liquide.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I, you may carry't cleare, with your state-face!
                        But, for your carniuale concupiscence,
                        Who here is fled for liberty of conscience,
                        
                        From furious persecution of the Marshall,
                        Her will I disc'ple.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        This is fine, i'faith!
                        And do you vse this, often? is this part
                        Of your wits exercise, 'gainst you haue occasion?
                        Madam—
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Go to, sir.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Do you heare me, lady?
                        Why, if your knight haue set you to begge shirts,
                        Or to inuite me home, you might haue done it
                        A neerer way, by farre.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        This cannot work you,
                        Out of my snare.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Why? am I in it, then?
                        Indeede, your husband told me, you were faire,
                        And so you are; onely your nose enclines
                        (That side, that's next the sunne) to the queene-apple.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        This cannot be endur'd, by any patience.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene III.
                     MOSCA, LADY, PEREGRINE.
                     
                        WHat's the matter, madame?
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        If the Senate
                        
                        Right not my quest, in this; I will protest 'hem,
                        To all the world, no aristocracie.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        What is the iniurie, lady?
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Why, the callet,
                        You told me of, here I haue tane disguis'd.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Who? this? what meanes your ladiship? the creature
                        I mention'd to you, is apprehended, now,
                        Before the Senate, you shall see her—
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Where?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I'le bring you to her. This yong gentleman
                        I saw him land, this morning, at the port.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Is't possible! how has my iudgement wander'd!
                        Sir, I must, blushing, say to you, I haue err'd:
                        And plead your pardon.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        What! more changes, yet?
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I hope, yo' ha' not the malice to remember
                        A gentlewomans passion. If you stay,
                        In Venice, here, please you to vse me, sir—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Will you go, madame?
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        'Pray you, sir, vse mee. In faith,
                        The more you see me, the more I shall conceiue,
                        You haue forgot our quarrell.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        This is rare!
                        Sir POLITIQV
                              •
                            WOVLD-BEE? no, sir POLITIQVE bawd!
                        To bring me, th
                              •••
                            acquainted with his wife!
                        Well, wise sir POL: since you haue practis'd, thus,
                        Vpon my freshman-ship, I'le trie your salt-head,
                        What proofe it is against a counter-plot.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene IIII.
                     VOLTORE, CORBACCIO, CORVINO, MOSCA.
                     
                        WEll, now you know the carriage of the businesse,
                        Your constancy is all, that is requir'd
                        Vnto the safety of it.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Is the lie
                        Safely conuai'd amongst vs? is that sure?
                        Knowes euery man his burden?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Then, shrink not.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        But, knowes the Aduocate the truth?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, sir,
                        By no meanes. I deuis'd a formall tale,
                        That salu'd your reputation. But, be valiant, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I feare no one, but him; that, this his pleading
                        Should make him stand for a co-heire—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Co-halter.
                        Hang him: we will but vse his tongue, his noise,
                        As we doe croakers, here.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I, what shall he do?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        When we ha' done, you meane?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Why, we'll thinke,
                        Sell him for mummia. hee's halfe dust already.
                        To Voltore.
                        Do not you smile, to see this buffalo,
                        How he doth sport it with his head? — I' should
                        To Corbac
                              •
                           io.
                        If all were well, and past. Sir, onely you
                        Are he, that shall enioy the crop of all,
                        And these not know for whom they toile.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I, peace.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        To Coruino, then to Voltore againe.
                        But you shall eate it. Much! Worshipfull sir,
                        MERCVRY sit vpon your thundring tongue,
                        Or the French HERCVLES, and make your language
                        As conquering as his club, to beate along,
                        (As with a tempest) flat, our aduersaries:
                        But, much more, yours, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Here they come, ha' done.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I haue another witnesse, if you neede, sir,
                        I can produce.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Who is it?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, I haue her.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene V.
                     AVOCATORI, 4. BONARIO, CELIA, VOLTORE, CORBACCIO, CORVINO, MOSCA, NOTARIO, COMMANDADORI.
                     
                        THe like of this the Senate neuer heard of.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 2.
                        'Twil come most strange to them, when we report it.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 4.
                        The gentlewoman has beene euer held
                        Of vn-reproued name.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 3.
                        So, the yong man.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 4.
                        The more vnnaturall part that of his father.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 2.
                        More of the husband.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        I not know to giue
                        
                        His act a name, it is so monstrous!
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 4.
                        But the impostor, he is a thing created
                        T'exceed example!
                     
                     
                        AVOC.
                        And all after times!
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 2.
                        I neuer heard a true voluptuary
                        Describ'd, but him.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 3.
                        Appeare yet those were cited?
                     
                     
                        NOTA.
                        All, but the old magnifico, VOLPONE.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        Why is not hee here?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Please your father-hoods,
                        Here is his Aduocate. Himselfe's, so weake,
                        So feeble—
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 4.
                        What are you?
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        His parasite,
                        His knaue, his pandar: I beseech the court,
                        He may be forc'd to come, that your graue eyes
                        May beare strong witnesse of his strange impostures.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Vpon my faith, and credit, with your vertues,
                        He is not able to endure the ayre.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Bring him, how euer.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        We will see him.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        Fetch him.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Your father-hoods fit pleasures be obey'd,
                        But sure, the sight will rather mooue your pitties,
                        Then indignation; may it please the court,
                        In the meane time, he may be heard in me:
                        I know this place most voide of preiudice,
                        And therefore craue it, since we haue no reason
                        To feare our truth should hurt our cause.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 3.
                        Speak free.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Then know, most honor'd fathers, I must now
                        Discouer, to your strangely' abused eares,
                        The most prodigious, and most frontlesse piece
                        Of solid impudence, and trecherie,
                        That euer vicious nature yet brought foorth
                        To shame the state of Venice. This lewd woman
                        (That wants no artificiall lookes, or teares,
                        To helpe the visor, she has now put on)
                        Hath long beene knowne a close adulteresse,
                        To that lasciuious youth there; not suspected,
                        I say, but knowne; and taken, in the act;
                        With him; and by this man, the easie husband,
                        Pardon'd: whose timelesse bounty makes him, now,
                        Stand here, the most vnhappie, innocent person,
                        That euer mans owne goodnesse made accus'd.
                        For these, not knowing how to owe a gift
                        Of that deare grace, but with their shame; being plac'd
                        So' aboue all powers of their gratitude,
                        Began to hate the benefit: and, in place
                        Of thankes, deuise t'extirpe the memorie
                        Of such an act. Wherein, I pray your father-hoods,
                        To obserue the malice, yea, the rage of creatures
                        Discouer'd in their euils; and what heart
                        
                        Such take, euen, from their crimes. But that, anone,
                        Will more appeare. This gentleman, the father,
                        Hearing of this foule fact, with many others,
                        VVhich dayly strooke at his too-tender eares,
                        And, grieu'd in nothing more, then that he could not
                        Preserue him selfe a parent (his sonnes ills
                        Growing to that strange floud) at last decreed
                        To dis-inherit him.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        These be strange turnes!
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 2.
                        The yong mans fame was euer faire, and honest.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        So much more full of danger is his vice,
                        That can beguile so, vnder shade of vertue.
                        But as I said (my honour'd sires) his father
                        Hauing this setled purpose, (by what meanes
                        To him betray'd, we know not) and this day
                        Appointed for the deed; that parricide,
                        (I cannot stile him better) by confederacy
                        Preparing this his paramour to be there,
                        Entred VOLPONE'S house (who was the man
                        Your father-hoods must vnderstand, design'd
                        For the inheritance) there, sought his father:
                        But, with what purpose sought he him, my lords?
                        (I tremble to pronounce it, that a sonne
                        Vnto a father, and to such a father
                        Should haue so foule, felonious intent)
                        It was, to murder him. When, being preuented
                        By his more happy absence, what then did he?
                        Not check his wicked thoughts; no, now new deeds:
                        (Mischiefe doth euer end, where it begins)
                        An act of horror, fathers! he drag'd forth
                        The aged gentleman, that had there lien, bed-red,
                        Three yeeres, and more, out off his innocent couch,
                        Naked, vpon the floore, there left him; wounded
                        His seruant in the face; and, with this strumpet
                        The stale to his forg'd practise, who was glad
                        To be so actiue, (I shall here desire
                        Your father-hoods to note but my collections,
                        As most remarkable) thought, at once, to stop
                        His fathers ends; discredit his free choice,
                        In the old gentleman; redeeme themselues,
                        By laying infamy vpon this man,
                        To whom, with blushing, they should owe their liues.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        What proofes haue you of this?
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Most honour'd fathers,
                        I humbly craue, there be no credit giuen
                        To this mans mercenary tongue.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 2.
                        Forbeare.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        His soule moues in his fee.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 3.
                        O, sir.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        This fellow,
                        
                        For six sols more, would pleade against his maker.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        You do forget your selfe.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Nay, nay, graue fathers,
                        Let him haue scope: can any man imagine
                        That he will spare' his accuser, that would not
                        Haue spar'd his parent?
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Well, produce your proofes.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        I would I could forget, I were a creature.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Signior CORBACCIO.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        What is he?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        The father.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Has he had an oth?
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        What must I do now?
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        Your testimony's crau'd.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Speake to the knaue?
                        I'le ha' my mouth, first, stopt with earth; my heart
                        Abhors his knowledge: I disclaime in him.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        But, for what cause?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        The meere portent of nature.
                        He is an vtter stranger, to my loines.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Haue they made you to this!
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I will not heare thee,
                        Monster of men, swine, goate, wolfe, parricide,
                        Speake not, thou viper.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Sir, I will sit downe,
                        And rather wish my innocence should suffer,
                        Then I resist the authority of a father.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Signior CORVINO.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        This is strange!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Who's this?
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        The husband.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        Is he sworn?
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        He is.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        Speak then.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        This woman (please your father-hoods) is a whore,
                        Of most hot exercise, more then a partrich,
                        Vpon record—
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        No more.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Neighes, like a iennet.
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        Preserue the honour of the court.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I shall,
                        And modestie of your most reuerend eares.
                        And, yet, I hope that I may say, these eyes
                        Haue seene her glew'd vnto that peece of cedar;
                        That fine well-timber'd gallant: and that, here,
                        The letters may be read, thorough the horne,
                        That make the story perfect.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Excellent! sir.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        There is no shame in this, now, is there?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        None.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Or if I said, I hop'd that she were onward
                        To her damnation, if there be a hell
                        Greater then whore, and woman; a good catholique
                        May make the doubt.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        His griefe hath made him frantique.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        She swownes.
                        Remoue him, hence.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Looke to the woman.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Prettily fain'd! againe!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        Stand from about her.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Giue her the ayre.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        What can you say?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        My wound Rare!
                        (May't please your wisdomes) speakes for me, receiu'd
                        In ayde of my good patron, when he mist
                        His sought-for father, when that well-taught dame
                        Had her eue giuen her, to cry out a rape.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        O, most lay'd impudence! Fathers—
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        Sir, be silent,
                        You had your hearing free, so must they theirs.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        I do begin to doubt th' imposture here.
                     
                     
                        
                        AVO. 4.
                        This woman, has too many moodes.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Graue fathers,
                        She is a creature, of a most profest,
                        And prostituted lewdnesse.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Most impetuous!
                        Vnsatisfied, graue fathers!
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        May her fainings
                        Not take your wisdomes: but, this day, she baited
                        A stranger, a graue knight, with her loose eyes,
                        And more lasciuious kisses. This man saw 'hem
                        Together, on the water, in a gondola.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Here is the lady her selfe, that saw 'hem too,
                        Without; who, then, had in the open streets
                        Pursu'd them, but for sauing her knights honour.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Produce that lady.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Let her come.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        These things,
                        They strike, with wonder!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        I am turn'd a stone!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VI.
                     MOSCA, LADY, AVOCATORI, &c.
                     
                        BEe resolute, madame.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        I, this same is shee.
                        Out, thou chameleon harlot; now, thine eies
                        Vie teares with the hyaena: dar'st thou looke
                        Vpon my wronged face? I cry your pardons.
                        I feare, I haue (forgettingly) transgrest
                        Against the dignitie of the court—
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        No, madame.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        And beene exorbitant—
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        You haue not, lady.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        These proofes are strong.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Surely, I had no purpose:
                        To scandalize your honours, or my sexes.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        VVe do beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Surely, you may beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Madame, we do.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Indeede, you may; my breeding
                        Is not so course—
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        VVe know it.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        To offend
                        VVith pertinacy—
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        Lady.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Such a presence:
                        No, surely.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        VVe well thinke it.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        You may thinke it.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Let her o'recome. VVhat witnesses haue you,
                        To make good your report?
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Our consciences.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        And heauen, that neuer failes the innocent.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        These are no testimonies.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Not in your courts,
                        VVhere multitude, and clamour ouercomes.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Nay, then you do waxe insolent.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Here, here,
                        Volpone is brought in, as impotent.
                        The testimonie comes, that will conuince,
                        And put to vtter dumbnesse their bold tongues.
                        See here, graue fathers, here's the rauisher,
                        The rider on mens wiues, the great impostor,
                        The grand voluptuary! do you not think,
                        These limbes should affect venery? or these eyes
                        
                        Couet a concubine? 'pray you, marke these hands.
                        Are they not fit to stroake a ladies brests?
                        Perhaps, he doth dissemble?
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        So he do's.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Would you ha' him tortur'd?
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        I would haue him prou'd.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Best try him, then, with goades, or burning Irons;
                        Put him to the strappado: I haue heard,
                        The racke hath cur'd the gout, faith, giue it him,
                        And helpe him of a maladie, be courteous.
                        I'le vndertake, before these honour'd fathers,
                        He shall haue, yet, as many left diseases,
                        As she has knowne adulterers, or thou strumpets.
                        O, my most equall hearers, if these deedes,
                        Acts, of this bold, and most exorbitant straine,
                        May passe with sufferance, what one citizen,
                        But owes the forfeit of his life, yea fame,
                        To him that dares traduce him? which of you
                        Are safe, my honour'd fathers? I would aske
                        (With leaue of your graue father-hoods) if their plot
                        Haue any face, or colour like to truth?
                        Or if, vnto the dullest nostrill, here,
                        It smell not rancke, and most abhorred slander?
                        I craue your care of this good gentleman,
                        Whose life is much indanger'd, by their fable;
                        And, as for them, I will conclude with this,
                        That vicious persons when they are hot, and flesh'd
                        In impious acts, their constancy abounds:
                        Damn'd deeds are done with greatest confidence.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        Take 'hem to custody, and seuer them.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 2.
                        'Tis pittie, two such prodigies should liue.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        Let the old gentleman be return'd, with care:
                        I'am sorry, our credulitie wrong'd him.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        These are two creatures!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        I haue an earthquake in me!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Their shame (euen in their cradles) fled their faces.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        You' haue done a worthy seruice to the state, sir,
                        In their discouerie.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        You shall heare, ere night,
                        What punishment the court decrees vpon 'hem.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        We thanke your fatherhoods. How like you it?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Rare.
                        I'ld ha' your tongue, sir, tipt with gold, for this;
                        I'ld ha' you be the heire to the whole citie;
                        The earth I'ld haue want men, ere you want liuing:
                        They'are bound to erect your statue, in St. MARKES.
                        Signior CORVINO, I would haue you goe,
                        And shew your selfe, that you haue conquer'd.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        It was much better, that you should professe
                        Your selfe a cuckold, thus, then that the other
                        
                        Should haue beene prou'd.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Nay, I consider'd that:
                        Now, it is her fault.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Then, it had beene yours.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        True, I doe doubt this Aduocate, still.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I'faith,
                        You need not, I dare ease you of that care.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I trust thee, MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        As your owne soule, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Now for your businesse, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        How? ha' you business?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, yours, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        O, none else?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        None else, not I.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Be carefull then.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Rest you, with both your eyes, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Dispatch it.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Instantly.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        And looke, that all,
                        What-euer, be put in, iewels, plate, moneyes,
                        Household-stuffe, bedding, cortines.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Cortine-rings, sir,
                        Onely, the Aduocates see must be deducted.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I'le pay him, now: you'll be too prodigall.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, I must tender it.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Two cecchines is well?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        No, six, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        'Tis too much.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        He talk'd a great while,
                        You must consider that, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Well, there's three—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I'le giue it him.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Doe so, and there's for thee.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Bountifull bones! What horride strange offence
                        Did he commit 'gainst nature, in his youth,
                        Worthy this age? you see, sir, how I worke
                        Vnto your ends; take you no notice.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        No,
                        I'le leaue you.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        All, is yours; the deuill, and all:
                        Good Aduocate. Madame, I'le bring you home.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        No, I'le goe see your patron.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        That you shall not:
                        I'le tell you, why. My purpose is, to vrge
                        My patron to reforme his will; and, for
                        The zeale you' haue shew'n to day, whereas before
                        You were but third, or, fourth, you shall be now
                        Put in the first: which would appeare as beg'd,
                        If you were present. Therefore—
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        You shall sway me.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act V.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     VOLPONE.
                     
                        WEll, I am here; and all this brunt is past:
                        I ne're was in dislike with my disguise,
                        Till this fled moment; here, 'twas good, in priuate,
                        But, in your publike, Caue, whil'st I breathe.
                        'Fore god, my left legge 'gan to haue the crampe;
                        And I apprehended, straight, some power had strooke me
                        With a dead palsey: well, I must be merry,
                        And shake it off. A many of these feares
                        Would put me into some villanous disease,
                        Should they come thick vpon me: I'le preuent 'hem.
                        
                        Giue me a boule of lustie wine, to fright
                        He drinkes.
                        This humor from my heart; (hum, hum, hum)
                        'Tis almost gone, already: I shall conquer.
                        Any deuice, now, of rare, ingenious knauery,
                        That would possesse me with a violent laughter,
                        Drinkes againe.
                        Would make me vp, againe! So, so, so, so.
                        This heate is life; 'tis bloud, by this time: MOSCA!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene II.
                     MOSCA, VOLPONE, NANO, CASTRONE.
                     
                        HOw now, sir? do's the day looke cleare againe?
                        Are we recouer'd? and wrought out of error,
                        Into our way? to see our path, before vs?
                        Is our trade free, once more?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Exquisite MOSCA!
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Was it not carry'd learnedly?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        And stoutly.
                        Good wits are greatest in extremities.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        It were a folly, beyond thought, to trust
                        Any grand act vnto a cowardly spirit:
                        You are not taken with it, enough, me thinkes?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O, more, then if I had enioy'd the wench:
                        The pleasure of all woman-kind's not like it.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Why, now you speake, sir. We must, here be 
                              •
                           ixt;
                        Here, we must rest; this is our master-peece:
                        We cannot thinke, to goe beyond this.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        True,
                        Thou 'hast playd thy prise, my precious MOSCA.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Nay, sir,
                        To gull the court—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        And, quite diuert the torrent,
                        Vpon the innocent.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, and to make
                        So rare a musique out of discordes—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Right.
                        That, yet, to me's the strangest! how th' hast borne it!
                        That these (being so diuided 'mongst themselues)
                        Should not sent some-what, or in me, or thee,
                        Or doubt their owne side.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        True, they will not see't.
                        Too much light blinds 'hem, I thinke. Each of'hem
                        Is so possest, and stuft with his owne hopes,
                        That any thing, vnto the contrary,
                        Neuer so true, or neuer so apparent,
                        Neuer so palpable, they will resist it—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Like a temptation of the diuell.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Right, sir.
                        Merchants may talke of trade, and your great signiors
                        Of land, that yeelds well; but if Italy
                        
                        Haue any glebe, more fruitfull, then these fellowes,
                        
                        I am deceiu'd. Did not your Aduocate rare?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O (my most honor'd fathers, my graue fathers,
                        Vnder correction of your father-hoods,
                        What face of truth is, here? If these strange deeds
                        May passe, most honour'd fathers—) I had much a doe
                        To forbeare laughing.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        'T seem'd to mee, you sweat, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        In troth, I did a little.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        But confesse, sir,
                        Were you not daunted?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        In good faith, I was
                        A little in a mist; but not deiected:
                        Neuer, but still my selfe.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I thinke it, sir
                        Now (so truth helpe me) I must needes say this, sir.
                        And, out of conscience, for your aduocate:
                        He' has taken paines, in faith, sir, and deseru'd,
                        (In my poore iudgement, I speake it, vnder fauour,
                        Not to contrary you, sir) very richly—
                        Well—to be cosen'd.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        'Troth, and I thinke so too,
                        By that I heard him, in the latter end.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, but before, sir; had you heard him, first,
                        Draw it to certaine heads, then aggrauate,
                        Then vse his vehement figures—I look'd still,
                        When he would shift a shirt; and, doing this
                        Out of pure loue, no hope of gaine—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        'Tis right.
                        I cannot answer him, MOSCA, as I would,
                        Not yet; but for thy sake, at thy intreaty,
                        I will beginne, eu'n now, to vexe 'hem all:
                        This very instant.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Good, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Call the dwarfe,
                        And eunuch, forth.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        CASTRONE, NANO.
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        Here.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Shal we haue a jig, now?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        What you please, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Go,
                        Streight giue out, about the streetes, you two,
                        That I am dead; doe it with constancy,
                        Sadly, doe you heare? impute it to the griefe
                        Of this late slander.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        What doe you meane, sir?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O,
                        I shall haue, instantly, my vulture, crow,
                        Rauen, come flying hither (on the newes)
                        To peck for carrion, my shee-wolfe, and all,
                        Greedy, and full of expectation—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And then to haue it rauish'd from their mouthes?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        'Tis true, I will ha' thee put on a gowne,
                        And take vpon thee, as thou wert mine heire;
                        Shew 'hem a will: open that chest, and reach
                        Forth one of those, that has the blankes. I'le straight
                        Put in thy name.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        It will be rare, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I,
                        When they e'enegape, and finde themselues deluded—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        And thou vse them skiruily. Dispatch,
                        Get on thy gowne.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        But, what, sir, if they aske
                        
                        After the body?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Say, it was corrupted.
                     
                     
                        MOS
                        I'le say, it stunke, sir; and was faine t' haue it
                        Coffin'd vp instantly, and sent away.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Any thing, what thou wilt. Hold, here's my will.
                        Get thee a cap, a count-booke, pen and inke,
                        Papers afore thee; sit, as thou wert taking
                        An inuentory of parcels: I'le get vp,
                        Behind the cortine, on a stoole, and harken;
                        Sometime, peepe ouer; see, how they doe looke;
                        With what degrees, their bloud doth leaue their faces!
                        O, 'twill afford me a rare meale of laughter.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Your Aduocate will turne stark dull, vpon it.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        It will take off his oratories edge.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        But your Clarissimo, old round-backe, he
                        Will crumpe you, like a hog-louse, with the touch.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        And what CORVINO?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, sir, looke for him,
                        To morrow morning, with a rope, and a dagger,
                        To visite all the streetes; he must runne mad.
                        My Lady too, that came into the court,
                        To beare false witnesse, for your worship—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Yes,
                        And kist mee 'fore the fathers; when my face
                        Flow'd all with oyles.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        And sweate, sir. Why, your gold
                        Is such another med'cine, it dries vp
                        All those offensiue sauors! It transformes
                        The most deformed, and restores 'hem louely,
                        As 'twere the strange poeticall girdle.

                              Cesti
                                    •
                                 .
                            IOVE
                        Could not inuent, t' himselfe, a shroud more subtile,
                        To passe ACRISIVS guardes. It is the thing
                        Makes all the world her grace, her youth, her beauty.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I thinke, she loues me.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Who? the lady, sir?
                        Shee's iealous of you.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Do'st thou say so?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Harke,
                        There's some already.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Looke.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        It is the vulture:
                        He has the quickest sent.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I'le to my place,
                        Thou, to thy posture.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I am set.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        But, MOSCA,
                        Play the artificer now, torture 'hem, rarely.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act. V. Scene. III.
                     VOLTORE, MOSCA, CORBACCIO, CORVINO, LADY, VOLPONE.
                     
                        HOw now, my MOSCA?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Turkie carpets, nine—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Taking an inuentory? that is well.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Two sutes of bedding, tissew—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Where's the will?
                        Let me read that, the while.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        So, set me downe:
                        
                        And get you home.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Is he come, now, to trouble vs?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Of cloth of gold, two more—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Is it done, MOSCA?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Of seuerall vellets, eight—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        I like his care.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Dost thou not heare?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Ha? is the houre come, MOSCA?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Volpone peepes from behinde a trauerse.
                        I, now, they muster.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        What do's the aduocate here?
                        Or this CORBACCIO?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        What do these here?
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        MOSCA?
                        Is his thred spunne?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Eight chests of linnen—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O,
                        My sine dame WOVLD-BEE, too!
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        MOSCA, the will,
                        That I may shew it these, and rid 'hem hence.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Six chests of diaper, foure of damaske—There.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Is that the will?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Down-beds, and boulsters—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Rare!
                        Be busie still. Now, they begin to flutter:
                        They neuer thinke of me. Looke, see, see, see!
                        How their swift eies runne ouer the long deed,
                        Vnto the name, and to the legacies,
                        What is bequeath'd them, there—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Ten sutes of hangings—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I, i'their garters, MOSCA. Now, their hopes
                        Are at the gaspe.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        MOSCA the heire!
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        What's that?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        My aduocate is dumbe, looke to my merchant,
                        Hee has heard of some strange storme, a ship is lost,
                        He faints: my lady will swoune. Old glazen-eyes,
                        He hath not reach'd his dispaire, yet.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        All these
                        Are out of hope, I' am sure the man.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        But, MOSCA—
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Two cabenets—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Is this in earnest?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        One
                        Of ebony.—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Or, do you but delude me?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        The other, mother of pearle—I am very busie.
                        Good faith, it is a fortune throwne vpon me —
                        
                           Item, one salt of agat — not my seeking.
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Do you heare, sir?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        A perfum'd boxe—'pray you forbeare,
                        You see I am troubled—made of an onyx—
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Tomorrow, or next day, I shall be at leasure,
                        To talke with you all.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Is this my large hopes issue?
                     
                     
                        LAD.
                        Sir, I must haue a fayrer answer.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Madame!
                        Mary, and shall: 'pray you, fairely quit my house.
                        Nay, raise no tempest with your lookes; but, harke you:
                        Remember, what your ladiship offred me,
                        To put you in, an heire; goe to, thinke on't.
                        And what you said, eene your best madames did
                        For maintenance, and, why not you? inough.
                        Goe home, and vse the poore sir POL, your knight, well;
                        For feare I tell some riddles: go, be melancholique.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O, my fine diuell!
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        MOSCA, 'pray you a word.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Lord! will not you take your dispatch hence, yet?
                        Me thinkes (of all) you should haue beene th'example.
                        VVhy should you stay, here? with what thought? what promise?
                        
                        Heare you, doe not you know, I know you an asse?
                        And, that you would, most faine, haue beene a wittoll,
                        If fortune would haue let you? that you are
                        A declar'd cuckold, on good termes? this pearle,
                        You'll say, was yours? right: this diamant?
                        I'le not deny't, but thanke you. Much here, else?
                        It may be so. VVhy, thinke that these good works
                        May helpe to hide you bad: I'le not betray you,
                        Although you be but extraordinary,
                        And haue it onely in title, it sufficeth.
                        Go home, be melancholique too, or mad.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Rare, MOSCA! how his villany becomes him!
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Certaine, he doth delude all these, for me.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        MOSCA, the heire?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O, his foure eyes haue found it!
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I' am cosen'd, cheated, by a parasite-slaue;
                        Harlot, t'hast gul'd me.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, sir. Stop your mouth,
                        Or I shall draw the onely tooth, is left.
                        Are not you he, that filthy couetous wretch,
                        Wi
                              •
                           h the three legges, that here, in hope of prey,
                        Haue, any time this three yeere, snuft about,
                        With your most grou'ling nose; and would haue hir'd
                        Me to the pois'ning of my patron? sir?
                        Are not you he, that haue, to day, in court,
                        Profess'd the dis-inheriting of your sonne?
                        Periur'd your selfe? Go home, and die, and stinke;
                        If you but croake a sillable, all comes out:
                        Away and call your porters, go, go, stinke.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Excellent varlet!
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Now, my faithfull MOSCA,
                        I finde thy constancie.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Sincere.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        A table
                        Of porphiry—I mar'le, you'll be thus troublesome.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Nay, leaue off now, they are gone.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Why? who are you?
                        VVhat? who did send for you? O'cry you mercy,
                        Reuerend sir! good faith, I am greeu'd for you,
                        That any chance of mine should thus defeate
                        Your (I must needs say) most deseruing trauels:
                        But, I protest, sir it was cast vpon me,
                        And I could, almost, wish to be without it,
                        But, that the will o' th' dead, must be obseru'd.
                        Mary, my ioy is, that you need it not,
                        You haue a gift, sir, (thanke your education)
                        VVill neuer let you want, while there are men,
                        And malice, to breed causes. VVould I had
                        But halfe the like, for all my fortune, sir.
                        If I haue any suites (as I doe hope,
                        Things being so easie, and direct, I shall not)
                        
                        I wil make bold with your obstreperous aide,
                        (Conceiue me) for your fee, sir. In meane time,
                        You, that haue so much law, I know ha' the conscience,
                        Not to be couetous of what is mine.
                        Good sir, I thanke you for my plate: 'twill helpe
                        To set vp a yong man. Good faith, you looke
                        As you were cos
                              •
                           iue; best go home, and purge, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Bid him, eat lettuce well: my wittie mischiefe,
                        Let me embrace thee. O, that I could now
                        Transforme thee to a VENVS— MOSCA, goe,
                        Streight, take my habit of Clarissimo;
                        And walke the streets; be seene, torment 'hem more:
                        We must pursew, as well as plot. Who would
                        Haue lost this feast?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I doubt it will loose them.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O, my recouery shall recouer all.
                        That I could now but thinke on some disguise,
                        To meet 'hem in: and aske 'hem questions.
                        How I would vexe 'hem still, at euery turne?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, I can fit you.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Canst thou?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Yes, I know
                        One o' the Commandatori, sir, so like you,
                        Him will I streight make drunke, and bring you his habit.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        A rare disguise, and answering thy braine!
                        O, I will be a sharpe disease vnto 'hem.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Sir, you must looke for curses—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Till they burst;
                        The Foxe fares euer best, when he is curst.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene IIII.
                     PEREGRINE, MERCATORI. 3. WOMAN, POLITIQVE.
                     
                        AM I enough disguis'd?
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        All my ambition is to fright him, onely.
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        If you could ship him away, 'twere excellent.
                     
                     
                        MER. 3.
                        To Zant, or to Alepo?
                        
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Yes, and ha' his
                        Aduentures put i' th' booke of voyages,
                        And his guld story registred, for truth?
                        Well, gentlemen, when I am in, a while,
                        And that you thinke vs warme in our discourse,
                        Know your approaches.
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        Trust it to our care.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Saue you, faire lady. Is sir POLL. within?
                     
                     
                        WOM.
                        I do not know, sir.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        'Pray you, say vnto him,
                        Here is a merchant, vpon earnest businesse,
                        Desires to speake with him.
                     
                     
                        WOM.
                        I will see, sir.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        'Pray you.
                        I see, the family is all female, here.
                     
                     
                        
                        WOM.
                        He sai's, sir, he has waighty affaires of state,
                        That now require him whole, some other time
                        You may possesse him.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        'Pray you say againe,
                        If those require him whole, these will exact him▪
                        
                        VVhereof I bring him tidings. VVhat might be
                        His graue affaire of state, now? how, to make
                        
                           Bolognian sauseges, here, in Venice, sparing
                        One o'th'ingredients.
                     
                     
                        VVOM.
                        Sir, he sai's, he knowes
                        By your word, tidings, that you are no states-man,
                        And therefore, wills you stay.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Sweet, 'pray you returne him,
                        I haue not read so many proclamations,
                        And studied them, for words, as he has done,
                        But— Here he deignes to come.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Sir, I must craue
                        Your courteous pardon. There hath chanc'd (to day)
                        Vnkinde disaster, 'twixt my lady, and mee:
                        And I was penning my apologie
                        To giue her satifaction, as you came, now.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Sir, I am grieu'd, I bring you worse disaster;
                        The gentleman, you met at th' port, to day,
                        That told you, he was newly arriu'd—
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I, was
                        A fugitiue punke?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        No, sir, a spie, set on you:
                        And, he has made relation to the Senate,
                        That you profest to him, to haue a plot,
                        To sell the state of Venice, to the Turke.
                        
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        O me!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        For which, warrants are sign'd by this time▪
                        
                        To apprehend you, and to search your study,
                        For papers—
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Alasse, sir. I haue none, but notes,
                        Drawne out of play-bookes—
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        All the better, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        And some essayes. What shall I doe?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Sir, best
                        Conuay your selfe into a sugar-chest,
                        Or, if you could lie round, a fraile were rare:
                        And I could send you, aboard.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Sir, I but talk'd so,
                        They knocke without.
                        For discourse sake, merely.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Harke, they are there.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        I am a wretch, a wretch.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        What, will you doe, sir?
                        Ha you ne're a curren-but to leape into?
                        They'll put you to the racke, you must be sudden.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Sir, I haue an ingine—
                     
                     
                        (MER. 3.
                        Sir POLITIQVE WOVLD-BE?
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        Where is he?)
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        That I haue thought vpon, before time.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        What is it?
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        (I shall ne're indure the torture.)
                        Mary, it is, sir, of a tortoyse-shell,
                        Fitted, for these extremities: 'pray you sir, helpe me.
                        Here, I' haue a place, sir, to put backe my leggs,
                        (Please you to lay it on, sir) with this cap,
                        And my blacke gloues, I'le lye, sir, like a tortoyse,
                        Till they are gone.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        And, call you this an ingine?
                     
                     
                        
                        POL.
                        Mine owne deuice— good sir, bid my wiues women
                        They rush in.
                        To burne my papers.
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        Where's he hid?
                     
                     
                        MER. 3.
                        We must,
                        And will, sure, find him.
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        Which is his study?
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        What
                        Are you, sir?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        I'am a merchant, that came heere
                        To looke vpon this tortoyse.
                     
                     
                        MER. 3.
                        How?
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        St. MARKE!
                        What beast is this?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        It is a fish.
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        Come out, here.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Nay, you may strike him, sir, and tread vpon him:
                        Hee'll beare a cart.
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        What, to runne ouer him?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        MER. 3.
                        Let's iump, vpon him.
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        Can he not go?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        He creeps, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        Let's see him creepe.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        No, good sir, you will hurt him.
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        (Heart) I'le see him creepe; or pricke his guts.
                     
                     
                        MER. 3.
                        Come out, here.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        'Pray you sir, (creepe a little)
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        Foorth.
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        Yet furder.
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Good sir, (creep)
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        We'll see his legs.
                     
                     
                        MER. 3.
                        They pu
                              •
                            of the shel and discouer him.
                        Gods so, he has garters!
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        I, and gloues!
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        Is this
                        Your fearefull tortoyse?
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Now, sir POLL. we are euen;
                        For your next proiect, I shall be prepar'd:
                        I am sorry, for the funerall of your notes, sir.
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        'Twere a rare motion, to be seene in Fleet-street!
                     
                     
                        MER. 2.
                        I, i'the terme.
                     
                     
                        MER. 1.
                        Or Smithfield, in the faire.
                     
                     
                        MER. 3.
                        Me thinkes, tis but a melancholique sight!
                     
                     
                        PER.
                        Farewell, most politique tortoyse.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Where's my lady?
                        Knowes shee of this?
                     
                     
                        WOM.
                        I know not, sir.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        Enquire.
                        O, I shall be the fable of all feasts;
                        The freight of the gazetti; ship-boyes tale;
                        And, which is worst, euen talke for ordinaries.
                     
                     
                        WOM.
                        My lady's come most melancholique, home,
                        And say's, sir, she will straight to sea, for physick.
                     
                     
                        POL.
                        And I, to shunne, this place, and clime for euer;
                        Creeping, with house, on backe: and thinke it well,
                        To shrinke my poore head, in my politique shell.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene V.
                     VOLPONE, MOSCA.
                     The first, in the habit of a Commandadora: the other, of a Clarissimo.
                     
                        AM I then like him?
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        O, sir, you are he:
                        No man can seuer you.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Good.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        But, what am I?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        'Fore heau'n, a braue Clarissimo, thou becom'st it!
                        Pitty, thou wert not borne one.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        If I hold
                        My made one, 'twill be well.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I'le goe, and see
                        What newes, first, at the court.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Doe so. My FOXE
                        Is out on his hole, and, ere he shall re-enter,
                        I'le make him languish, in his borrow'd case,
                        Except he come to composition, with me:
                        
                        ANDROGINO, CASTRONE, NANO.
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        Here.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Goe, recreate your selues, abroad; goe, sport:
                        So, now I haue the keies, and am possest.
                        Since he will, needes, be dead, afore his time,
                        I'le burie him, or gaine by him. I'am his heire:
                        And so will keepe me, till he share at least.
                        To cosen him of all, were but a cheat
                        Well plac'd; no man would construe it a sinne:
                        Let his sport pay for't, this is call'd the FOXE-trap.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene VI.
                     CORBACCIO, CORVINO, VOLPONE.
                     
                        THey say, the court is set.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        We must maintaine
                        Our first tale good, for both our reputations.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Why? mine's no tale: my sonne would, there, haue kild me.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        That's true, I had forgot: mine is, I am sure.
                        But, for your will, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        I, I'le come vpon him,
                        For that, hereafter, now his Patron's dead.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Signior CORVINO! and CORBACCIO! sir,
                        Much ioy vnto you.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Of what?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        The sodaine good,
                        Dropt downe vpon you—
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Where?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        (And, none knowes (how)
                        From old VOLPONE, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Out, errant knaue.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Let not your too much wealth, sir, make your furious.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Away, thou varlet.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Why sir?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Do'st thou mocke me?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        You mocke the world, sir, did you not change wills?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Out, harlot.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O! belike you are the man,
                        Signior CORVINO? 'faith, you carry it well;
                        You grow not mad withall: I loue your spirit.
                        You are not ouer-leauen'd, with your fortune.
                        You should ha' some would swell, now like a wine-fat,
                        With such an Autumne— Did he gi'you all, sir?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Auoid, you rascall.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Troth, your wife has shew'ne
                        Her selfe a very woman: but, you are well,
                        You neede not care, you haue a good estate,
                        To beare it out, sir, better by this chance.
                        Except CORBACCIO haue a share?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Hence, varlet.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        You will not be a' knowne, sir: why 'tis wise.
                        Thus doe all gam'sters, at all games, dissemble.
                        No man will seeme to winne. Here, comes my vulture,
                        Heauing his beake vp i' the ayre, and snuffing.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act V. Scene VII.
                     VOLTORE, VOLPONE.
                     
                        OVt-stript thus, by a parasite? a slaue?
                        Would run on errands? and make legs, for crummes?
                        Well, what I'le do—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        The court staies for you worship.
                        I eêne reioyce, sir, at your worships happinesse,
                        And that it fell into so learned hands,
                        That vnderstand the fingering.—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        What doe you meane?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I meane to be a sutor to your worship,
                        For the small tenement, out of reparations;
                        That, at the end of your long row of houses,
                        By the piscaria: it was, in VOLPONE'S time,
                        Your predecessor, ere he grew diseas'd,
                        A handsome, pretty, custom'd, bawdy-house,
                        As any was in Venice (none disprais'd)
                        But fell with him; his body, and that house
                        Decay'd, together.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Come, sir, leaue your prating.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Why, if your worship giue me but your hand,
                        That I may ha' the refusall; I haue done.
                        'Tis a meere toy, to you, sir; candle rents:
                        As your learn'd worship knowes—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        What doe I know?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Mary no end of your wealth, sir, god decrease it.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Mistaking knaue! what, mock'st thou my mis-fortune?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        His blessing on your heart, sir, would 'twere more.
                        (Now, to my first, againe; at the next corner.)
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene VIII.
                     CORBACCIO, CORVINO, (MOSCA, passant) VOLPONE.
                     
                        SEe, in our habite! see the impudent varlet!
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        That I could shoote mine eies at him, like gun-stones.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        But, is this true, sir, of the parasite?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Againe, t'afflict vs? monster?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        In good faith, sir,
                        I'am hartily greeu'd, a beard of your graue length
                        Should be so ouer-reach'd. I neuer brook'd
                        That parasites haire, me thought his nose should cosen:
                        There still was somewhat, in his looke, did promise
                        The bane of a Clarissimo.
                        
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Knaue—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Me thinkes,
                        Yet you, that are so traded i' the world,
                        A witty merchant, the fine bird, CORVINO,
                        That haue such morall emblemes on your name,
                        
                        Should not haue sung you shame; and dropt your cheese:
                        To let the FOXE laugh at your emptinesse.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Sirrah, you thinke, the priuiledge of the place,
                        And your red saucy cap, that seemes (to me)
                        Nayl'd to your iolt-head, with those two cecchines,
                        Can warrant your abuses; come you, hither:
                        You shall perceiue, sir, I dare beate you. Approch.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        No haste, sir, I doe know your valure, well:
                        Since you durst publish what you are, sir.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Tarry,
                        I'ld speake, with you.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Sir, sir, another time —
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Nay, now.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O god, sir! I were a wise man,
                        Would stand the fury of a distracted cuckold.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Mosca walkes by 'hem.
                        What! come againe?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Vpon 'hem, MOSCA; saue me,
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        The ayre's infected, where he breathes.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Lets flye him.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Excellent Basiliske! turne vpon the vulture.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene IX.
                     VOLTORE, MOSCA, VOLPONE.
                     
                        VVEll, flesh-flie, it is sommer with you, now;
                        Your winter will come on.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Good Aduocate,
                        'Pray thee, not raile, nor threaten out of place, thus;
                        Thou'lt make a soloecisme (as madame sayes.)
                        Get you a biggen, more: your braine breakes loose.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Well, sir.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Would you ha' me beate the insolent slaue?
                        Throw dirt, vpon his first good cloathes?
                     
                     
                        VOLT,
                        This same
                        Is, doubtlesse, some familiar!
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Sir, the court
                        In troth, stayes for you. I am mad, a mule,
                        That neuer read IVSTINIAN, should get vp,
                        And ride an Aduocate. Had you no quirke,
                        To auoide gullage, sir, by such a creature?
                        I hope you doe but iest; he has not done't:
                        This's but confederacy, to blind the rest.
                        You are the heire?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        A strange, officious,
                        Trouble-some knaue! thou dost torment me.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I know—
                        It cannot be, sir, that you should be cosen'd;
                        'Tis not within the wit of man, to doe it:
                        You are so wise, so prudent, and, 'tis fit,
                        That wealth, and wisdome still, should goe together.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act V. Scene 10.
                     AVOCATORIA, 4. NOTARIO, COMMANDADORE, BONARIO, CELIA, CORBACCIO, CORVINO, VOLTORE, VOLPONE.
                     
                        ARe all the parties, here?
                     
                     
                        NOT.
                        All, but the Aduocate.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        And, here he comes.
                     
                     
                        AVO.
                        Then bring 'hem foorth to sentence.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        O, my most honour'd fathers, let your mercy
                        Once winne vpon your iustice, to forgiue—
                        I am distracted—
                     
                     
                        (VOLP.
                        What will he doe, now?)
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        O,
                        I know not which t'addresse my selfe to, first,
                        Whether your father-hoods, or these innocents—
                     
                     
                        (CORV.
                        Will he betray himselfe?)
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Whom, equally,
                        I haue abus'd, out of most couetous endes—
                     
                     
                        (CORV.
                        The man is mad?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        What's that!
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        He is possest.)
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        For which; now strooke in conscience, here I prostrate
                        My selfe, at your offended feet, for pardon.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.2.
                        Arise.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        O heau'n, how iust thou art!
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I'am caught
                        I'mine owne noose—
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Be constant, sir, nought now
                        Can helpe, but impudence.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Speake forward.
                     
                     
                        COM.
                        Silence.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        It is not passion in me, reuerend fathers,
                        But onely conscience, conscience my good sires,
                        That makes me, now, tell truth. That parasite,
                        That knaue hath been the instrument of all.
                     
                     
                        AVO.
                        Where is that knaue? fetch him.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I goe.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Graue fathers,
                        This man's distracted; he confest it, now:
                        For, hoping to be old VOLPONE'S heire,
                        Who now is dead —
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 3.
                        How?
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Is VOLPONE dead?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Dead since, graue fathers—
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        O, sure vengeance!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Stay,
                        Then, he was no deceiuer?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        O, no, none:
                        The parasite, graue fathers.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        He do's speake,
                        Out of meere enuie, 'cause the seruant's made
                        The thing, he gap't for; please your father-hoods,
                        This is the truth: though, I'le not iustifie
                        The other, but he may be some-deale faulty.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        I, to your hopes, as well as mine, CORVINO:
                        But I'le vse modesty. Pleaseth your wisdomes
                        To viewe these certaine notes, and but conferre them;
                        As I hope fauour, they shall speake clear truth.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        The deuill ha's entred him!
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Or bides in you.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        We haue done ill, by a publike officer,
                        To send for him, if he be heire.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        For whom?
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        Him, that they call the parasite.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        'Tis true;
                        He is a man, of great estate, now left.
                     
                     
                        
                        AVO. 4.
                        Goe you, and learne his name; and say, the court
                        Intreates his presence, here; but, to the clearing
                        Of some few doubts.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        This same's a labyrinth!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Stand you vnto your first report?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        My state,
                        My life, my fame—
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        (Where is't?)
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Are at the stake.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Is yours so too?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        The Aduocate's a knaue:
                        And has a forked tongue—
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        (Speake to the point.)
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        So is the parasite, too.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        This is confusion.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        I doe beseech your father-hoods, read but those;
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        And credit nothing, the false spirit hath writ:
                        It cannot be, but he is possest, graue fathers.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene XI.
                     VOLPONE, NANO, ANDROGINO, CASTRONE.
                     
                        TO make a snare, for mine owne necke! and run
                        My head into it, wilfully! with laughter!
                        When I had newly scap't, was free, and cleare!
                        Out of mere wantonnesse! Ô, the dull deuill
                        Was in this braine of mine, when I deuis'd it;
                        And MOSCA gaue it second: he must now
                        Helpe to 
                              •
                           eare vp this veyne, or we bleed dead.
                        How now! who let you loose? whither goe you, now?
                        What? to buy ginger-bread? or to drowne kitlings?
                     
                     
                        NAN.
                        Sir, master MOSCA call'd vs out of doores,
                        And bid vs all goe play, and tooke the keies.
                     
                     
                        AND.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Did master MOSCA take the keyes? why, so!
                        I am farder, in. These are my fine conceipts!
                        I must be merry, with a mischiefe to me!
                        What a vile wretch was I, that could not beare
                        My fortune soberly? I must ha' my crotchets?
                        And my conundrums! well, goe you, and seeke him:
                        His meaning may be truer, then my feare.
                        Bid him, he streight come to me, to the court;
                        Thither will I, and, if 't be possible,
                        Vn-screw my aduocate, vpon new hopes:
                        When I prouok'd him, then I lost my selfe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act V. Scene XII.
                     AVOCATORI, &c.
                     
                        THese things can nere be reconcil'd. He, here,
                        Professeth, that the gentleman was wrong'd;
                        And that the gentlewoman was brought thither,
                        Forc'd by her husband: and there left.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Most true.
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        How ready is heau'n to those, that pray!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        But, that
                        VOLPONE would haue rauish'd her, he holds
                        Vtterly false; knowing his impotence.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Graue fathers, he is possest; againe, I say,
                        Possest: nay, if there be possession,
                        And obsession, he has both.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        Here comes our officer.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        The parasite will streight be, here, graue fathers.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        You might inuent some other name, sir varlet.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        Did not the notarie meet him?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Not that I know.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        His comming will cleare all.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Yet it is mistie.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Volpone whispers the Aduocate.
                        May't please your father hoods—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Sir, the parasite
                        Will'd me to tell you, that his master liues;
                        That you are still the man; your hopes the same;
                        And this was, onely a iest—
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        How?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Sir, to trie
                        If you were, firme, and how you stood affected.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Art' sure he liues?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Doe I liue, sir?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        O me!
                        I was to violent.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Sir, you may redeeme it,
                        They said, you were possest; fall downe, and seeme so:
                        Voltore falls.
                        I'le helpe to make it good. God blesse the man!
                        (Stop your wind hard, and swell) see, see, see, see!
                        He vomits crooked pinnes! his eyes are set,
                        Like a dead hares, hung in a poulters shop!
                        His mouth's running away! doe you see, signior?
                        Now, 'tis in his belly.
                     
                     
                        (CORV.
                        I, the deuill!)
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Now, in his throate.
                     
                     
                        (CORV.
                        I, I perceiue it plaine.)
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        'Twill out, t'will out; stand cleere. See, where it flies!
                        In shape of a blew toad, with a battes wings!
                        Doe not you see it, sir?
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        What? I thinke I doe.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        'Tis too manifest.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Looke! he comes t'himselfe!
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Where am I?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Take good heart, the worst is past, sir.
                        You are dis-possest.
                     
                     
                        ATO. 1
                        What accident is this?
                     
                     
                        AVO.
                        Sodaine, and full of wonder!
                     
                     
                        ATO. 3.
                        If he were.
                        Possest, as it appeares, all this is nothing.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        He has beene, often, subbiect to these fits,
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Shew him that writing, do you know it, sir?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Deny it, sir, forsweare it, know it not.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Yes, I doe know it well, it is my hand:
                        
                        But all, that it containes, is false.
                     
                     
                        BON. 3.
                        O practise!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        What maze is this!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Is he not guilty, then,
                        Whom you, there, name the parasite?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Graue fathers,
                        No more then, his good patron, old VOLPONE.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        Why, he is dead?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        O no, my honor'd fathers.
                        He liues—
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        How! liues?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Liues.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        This is subtler, yet!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        You said, he was dead?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        Neuer.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        You said so?
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        I heard so.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        Here comes the gentleman make him way.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        A stoole.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 4.
                        A proper man! and were VOLPONE dead,
                        A fit match for my daughter.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 3.
                        Giue him way.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        MOSCA, I was a'most lost, the Aduocate
                        Had betray'd all; but, now, it is recouer'd:
                        Al's o' the hinge againe—say, I am liuing.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        What busie knaue is this! most reuerend fathers,
                        I sooner, had attended your graue pleasures,
                        But that my order, for the funerall
                        Of my deare patron did require me—
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        (MOSCA!)
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Whom I intend to bury, like a gentleman.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I, quicke, and cosen me of all.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Still stranger!
                        More intricate!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        And come about againe!
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        It is a match, my daughter is bestow'd.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        (Wil you gi'me halfe?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        First, I'le be hang'd.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I know,
                        Your voice is good, cry not so lowd')
                     
                     
                        AVO. 1.
                        Demand
                        The Aduocate. Sir, did not you affirme,
                        VOLPONE was aliue?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Yes, and he is;
                        This gent'man told me so, (thou shalt haue halfe.)
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Whose drunkard is this same? speake some, that know him:
                        I neuer saw his face. (I cannot now
                        Affoord it you so cheape.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        No?)
                     
                     
                        AVO 1.
                        What say you?
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        The officer told mee.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I did, graue fathers,
                        And will maintaine, he liues, with mine owne life.
                        And, that this creature told me. (I was borne,
                        With all good starres my enemies.)
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Most graue fathers,
                        If such an insolence, as this, must passe
                        Vpon me, I am silent: 'twas not this,
                        For which you sent, I hope.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 2.
                        Take him away.
                     
                     
                        (VOLP.
                        MOSCA.)
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        Let him be whipt.
                     
                     
                        (VOLP.
                        Wilt thou betray me?
                        Cosen me?)
                     
                     
                        AOC. 3.
                        And taught to beare himselfe
                        Toward a person of his ranke.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        Away.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        I humbly thank your father-hoods.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Soft, soft: whipt?
                        And loose all that I haue? if I confesse,
                        It cannot be much more.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 4.
                        Sir, are you married?
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        He puts off his disguise.
                        They'll be ally'd, anon; I must be resolute:
                        The FOXE shall, here, vncase.
                     
                     
                        (MOS.
                        Patron.)
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        Nay, now,
                        
                        My ruines shall not come alone; your match
                        I'le hinder sure: my substance shall not glew you,
                        Nor screw you, into a family.
                     
                     
                        (MOS.
                        Why, patron!)
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        I am VOLPONE, and this is my knaue;
                        This, his owne knaue; this, auarices foole;
                        This, a Chimaera of wittall, foole, and knaue;
                        And, reuerend fathers, since we all can hope
                        Nought, but a sentence, let's not now despaire it.
                        You heare me briefe.
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        May it please your father-hoods—
                     
                     
                        COM.
                        silence.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        The knot is now vndone, by miracle!
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 2.
                        Nothing can be more cleare.
                     
                     
                        AVO. 3.
                        Or can more proue
                        These innocent.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        Giue 'hem their liberty.
                     
                     
                        BON.
                        Heauen could not, long, let such grosse crimes be hid.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 2.
                        If this be held the high way to get riches,
                        May I be poore.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 3.
                        This 's not the gaine, but torment.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        These possesse wealth, as sicke men possesse feuers,
                        Which, trulyer may be said to possesse them.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 2.
                        Disroabe that parasite.
                     
                     
                        CORV. MOS.
                        Most honor'd fathers.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        Can you plead ought to stay the course of iustice?
                        If you can, speake.
                     
                     
                        CORV. VOLT.
                        We beg fauor,
                     
                     
                        CEL.
                        And mercy.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        You hurt your innocence, suing for the guilty.
                        Stand forth; and, first, the parasite. You appeare
                        T' haue beene the chiefest minister, if not plotter,
                        In all these lewd impostures; and now, lastly,
                        Haue, with your impudence, abus'd the court,
                        And habit of a gentleman of Venice,
                        Being a fellow of no birth, or bloud:
                        For which, our sentence is, first thou be whipt;
                        Then liue perpetuall prisoner in our gallies.
                     
                     
                        VOLT.
                        I thanke you, for him.
                     
                     
                        MOS.
                        Ban
                              •
                            to thy wooluish nature.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        Deliuer him to the Saffi. Thou, VOLPONE,
                        By bloud, and ranke a gentleman, canst not fall
                        Vnder like censure; but our iudgement on thee
                        Is, that thy substance all be straight confiscate
                        To the hospitall, of the Incurabili:
                        
                        And, since the most was gotten by imposture,
                        By faining lame, gout, palsey, and such diseases,
                        Thou art to lie in prison, crampt with irons,
                        Till thou bee'st sicke, and lame indeed. Remoue him.
                     
                     
                        VOLP.
                        This is call'd mortifying of a FOXE.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        Thou VOLTORE, to take away the scandale
                        Thou hast giu'n all worthy men, of thy profession,
                        Art banish'd from their fellowship, and our state.
                        CORBACCIO, bring him neere. We here possesse
                        Thy sonne, of all thy state; and confine thee
                        
                        To the monasterie of San' Spirito:
                        Where, since thou knew'st not how to liue well here,
                        Thou shalt be learn'd to die well.
                     
                     
                        CORB.
                        Ha! what said he?
                     
                     
                        COM.
                        You shall know anone, sir.
                     
                     
                        AVOC.
                        Thou CORVINO, shalt
                        Be straight imbarqu'd from thine owne house, and row'd
                        Round about Venice, through the grand canale,
                        Wearing a cap, with faire, long asses eares,
                        In stead of hornes: and, so to mount (a paper
                        Pin'd on thy brest) to the berlino —
                     
                     
                        CORV.
                        Yes,
                        And, haue mine eies beat out with stinking fish,
                        Bruis'd fruit, and rotten egges—'Tis well. I'am glad,
                        I shall not see my shame, yet.
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        And to expiate
                        Thy wrongs done to thy wife, thou art to send her
                        Home, to her father, with her dowrie trebled:
                        And these are all your iudgements.
                     
                     
                        (ALL.
                        Honour'd fathers.)
                     
                     
                        AVOC. 1.
                        Which may not be reuok'd. Now, you begin,
                        When crimes are done, and past, and to be punish'd,
                        To thinke what your crimes are: away with them.
                        Let all, that see these vices thus rewarded,
                        Take heart, and loue to study'hem. Mischiefes feed
                        Like beasts, till they be fat, and then they bleed.
                        VOLPONE.
                        THe seasoning of a play is the applause.
                        Now, though the FOXE be punish'd by the lawes,
                        He, yet, doth hope there is no suffring due,
                        For any fact, which he hath done 'gainst you;
                        If there be, sensure him: here he, doubtfull, stands.
                        If not, fare iouially, and clap your hands.
                     
                  
                  THE END.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  This Comoedie vvas first acted, in the yeere 1605.
                  By the Kings Maiesties SERVANTS.
                  The principall Comoedians were,

                        RIC. BVRBADGE.
                        HEN. CONDEL.
                        WILL. SLY.
                        IOH. HEMINGS.
                        IOH. LOWIN.
                        ALEX. COOKE.
                     
                  
                  With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  EPICOENE, OR The silent VVoman. A Comoedie. Acted in the yeere 1609. By the Children of her Maiesties REVELLS.
                  The Author B. I.
                  
                     HORAT.
                     Vt sis tu similis Caelî, Byrrhi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         latronum,
                     Non ego sim Caprî, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Sulcî. Cur metuas me?
                  
                  LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.
                  M. D C. XVI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, BY ALL TITLES. Sir Francis Stuart:
                  
                     
                        SIR,
                     
                  
                  
                     MY hope is not so nourish'd by example, as it will conclude, this dumbe peece should please you, by cause it hath pleas'd others before: but by trust, that when you haue read it, you will find it worthy to haue dis-pleas'd none. This makes, that I now number you, not onely in the Names of fauour, but the Names of iustice, to what I write; and doe, presently, call you to the exercise of that noblest, and manlyest vertue: as coueting rather to be freed in my fame, by the authority of a Iudge, then the credit of an Vndertaker. Read therefore, I pray you, and censure. There is not a line, or syllable in it changed from the simplicity of the first Copy. And, when you shall consider, through the certaine hatred of some, how much a mans innocency may bee indanger'd by an vn-certaine accusation; you will, I doubt not, so beginne to hate the iniquitie of such natures, as I shall loue the contumely done me, whose end was so honorable, as to be wip'd off by your sentence.
                  
                     
                        Your vnprofitable, but true louer, BEN. IONSON.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Persons of the Play.
                  
                     
                        MOROSE. A Gent. that loues no noise▪
                     
                     
                        DAVP. EVGENIE. A Knight his nephew.
                     
                        CLERIMONT. A Gent. his friend.
                     
                        TRVE-WIT. Another friend.
                     
                        EPICOENE. A yong Gent. suppos'd the silent Woman.
                     
                        IOH. DAW. A Knight, her seruant.
                     
                        AMOROVS LA FOOLE. A Knight also.
                     
                        TITOM: OTTER. A land, and sea-Captaine.
                     
                        CVTBERD. A Barber.
                     
                        MVTE. One of MOROSE his seruants.
                     
                        MAD. HAVGHTY. Ladies Collegiates.
                     
                        MAD. CENTAVRE. Ladies Collegiates.
                     
                        Mrs. MAVIS. Ladies Collegiates.
                     
                        Mrs. TRVSTY. The La. HAVGHTIES woman.
                     
                        Mrs. OTTER. The Captaines wife. Pretenders.
                     
                        PARSON.
                     
                     
                        PAGES.
                     
                     
                        SERVANTS.
                     
                  
                  THE SCENE LONDON.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  EPISCOENE, OR The silent Woman. PROLOGVE.
                  
                     TRuth sayes, of old, the art of making plaies
                  Was to content the people; & their praise
                  Was to the Poet money, wine, and bayes.
                  But in this age, a sect of writers are,
                  That, onely, for particular likings care,
                  And will taste nothing that is populare.
                  With such we mingle neither braines, nor brests;
                  Our wishes, like to those (make publique feasts)
                  Are not to please the cookes tastes, but the guests.
                  Yet, if those cunning palates hether come,
                  They shall find guests entreaty, and good roome;
                  And though all relish not, sure, there will be some,
                  That, when they leaue their seates, shall make 'hem say,
                  Who wrot that piece, could so haue wroten a play:
                  But that, he knew, this was the better way.
                  For, to present all custard, or all tart,
                  And haue no other meats, to beare a part,
                  Or to want bread, and salt, were but course art.
                  The Poet prayes you then, with better thought
                  To sit; and, when his cares are all in brought,
                  Though there be none far fet, there will deare-bought
                  Be sit for ladies: some for lords, knights, squires,
                  Some for your waiting wench, and citie-wires,
                  Some for your men, and daughters of White-Friars.
                  
                  
                  Nor is it, onely, while you keepe your seate
                  Here, that his feast will last; but you shall eate
                  A weeke at ord'naries, on his broken meat:
                  If his Muse be true,
                  Who commends her to you.
               
               
                  Another. Occasion'd by some persons impertinent exception.
                  
                  THe ends of all, who for the Scene doe write,
                  Are, or should be, to profit, and delight.
                  And still't hath beene the praise of all best times,
                  So persons were not touch'd, to taxe the crimes.
                  Then, in this play, which we present to night,
                  And make the obiect of your eare, and sight,
                  On forfeit of your selues, thinke nothing true:
                  Lest so you make the maker to iudge you.
                  For he knowes, Poet neuer credit gain'd
                  By writing truths, but things (like truths) well fain'd.
                  If any, yet, will (with particular slight
                  Of application) wrest what he doth write;
                  And that he meant or him, or her, will say:
                  They make a libell, which he made a play.
               
               
                  
                     Act I. 
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     CLERIMONT, BOY, TRVE-WIT.
                     He comes out making himselfe ready.
                     
                        HA' you got the song yet perfect I ga'you, boy?
                     
                     
                        BOY.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Let me heare it.
                     
                     
                        BOY.
                        You shall, sir, but i' faith let no body else.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, I pray?
                     
                     
                        BOY.
                        It will get you the dangerous name of a Poet in towne, sir, besides me a perfect deale of ill will at the mansion you wot of, whose ladie is the argument of it: where now I am the welcom'st thing vnder a man that comes there.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I thinke, and aboue a man too, if the truth were rack'd out of you.
                     
                     
                        BOY.
                        No faith, I'll confesse before, sir. The gentlewomen play with me, and throw me o' the bed; and carry me in to my lady; and shee kisses me with her oil'd face; and puts a perruke o' my head; and askes mean' I will weare her gowne; and I say, no: and then she hits me a blow o'the eare, and calls me innocent, and lets me goe.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No maruell, if the dore bee kept shut against your master, when the entrance is so easie to you—well sir, you shall goe there no more, lest

I bee faine to seeke your voyce in my ladies rushes, a fortnight hence. Sing, Boy sings. sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, here's the man that can melt away his time, and neuer feeles it! what, betweene his mistris abroad, and his engle at home, high fare, soft lodging, fine clothes, and his fiddle; hee thinkes the houres ha' no wings, or the day no post-horse. Well, sir gallant, were you strooke with the plague this minute, or condemn'd to any capitall punishment to morrow, you would beginne then to thinke, and value euery article o' your time, esteeme it at the true rate, and giue all for't.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, what should a man doe?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, nothing: or that, which when 'tis done, is as idle. Harken after the next horse-race,

                              Horses o
                                    •
                                  the time.
                            or hunting-match; lay wagers, praise Puppy, or Pepper-corne, White-foote, Franklin; sweare vpon White-maynes partie; spend aloud, that my lords may heare you; visite my ladies at night, and bee able to giue 'hem the character of euery bowler, or better o' the greene. These be the things, wherein your fashionable men exercise themselues, and I for companie.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nay, if I haue thy authoritie, I'le not leaue yet. Come, the other are considerations, when wee come to haue gray heads, and weake hammes, moist eyes, and shrunke members. Wee'll thinke on 'hem then; then wee'll pray, and fast.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I, and destine onely that time of age to goodnesse, which our want of abilitie will not let vs employ in euill?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, then 'tis time enough.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes: as if a man should sleepe all the terme, and thinke to effect his businesse the last day. O, CLERIMONT, this time, because it is an incorporeall thing, and not subiect to sense, we mocke our selues the fineliest out of it, with vanitie, and miserie indeede: not seeking an end of wretchednesse, but onely changing the matter still.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nay, thou'lt not leaue now—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        See but our common disease! with what iustice can wee complaine, that great men will not looke vpon vs, nor be at leisure to giue our affaires such dispatch, as wee expect, when wee will neuer doe it to our selues: nor heare, nor regard our selues.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Foh, thou hast read PLVTARCHS moralls, now, or some such tedious fellow; and it showes so vilely with thee: 'Fore god, 'twill spoile thy wit vtterly. Talke me of pinnes, and feathers, and ladies, and rushes, and such things: and leaue this Stoicitie alone, till thou mak'st sermons.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Well, sir. If it will not take, I haue learn'd to loose as little of my kindnesse, as I can. I'le doe good to no man against his will, certainely. When were you at the colledge?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        What colledge?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        As if you knew not!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No faith, I came but from court, yesterday.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, is it not arriu'd there yet, the newes? A new foundation,

sir, here i' the towne, of ladies, that call themselues the Collegiates, an order betweene courtiers, and country-madames, that liue from their husbands; and giue entertainement to all the Wits, and Braueries o' the time, as they call 'hem: crie downe, or vp, what they like, or dislike in a braine, or a fashion, with most masculine, or rather hermaphroditicall authoritie: and, euery day, gaine to their colledge some new probationer.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Who is the President?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        The graue, and youthfull matron, the lady HAVGHTY.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        A poxe of her autumnall face, her peec'd beautie: there's no man can bee admitted till shee be ready, now adaies, till shee has painted, and perfum'd, and wash'd, and scour'd, but the boy here; and him shee wipes her oil'd lips vpon, like a sponge. I haue made a song, I pray thee heare it, o' the subiect.
                        SONG.
                        
                           STill to be neat, still to be drest,
                           As, you were going to a feast;
                           Still to be pou'dred, still perfum'd:
                           Lady, it is to be presum'd,
                           Though arts hid causes are not found,
                           All is not sweet, all is not sound.
                        
                        
                           Giue me a looke, giue me a face,
                           That makes simplicitie a grace;
                           Robes loosely flowing, haire as free:
                           Such sweet neglect more taketh me,
                           Then all th'adulteries of art.
                           Thy strike mine eyes, but not my heart.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And I am, clearely, o'the other side: I loue a good dressing, before any beautie o' the world. O, a woman is, then, like a delicate garden; nor, is there one kind of it: she may varie, euery houre; take often counsell of her glasse, and choose the best. If shee haue good eares, shew 'hem; good haire, lay it out; good legs, weare short cloathes; a good hand, discouer it often; practise any art, to mend breath, clense teeth, repaire eye-browes, paint, and professe it.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        How? publiquely?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        The doing of it, not the manner: that must bee priuate. Many things, that seeme foule, i' the doing, doe please, done. A lady should, indeed, studie her face, when wee thinke shee sleepes: nor, when the dores are shut, should men bee inquiring, all is sacred within, then. Is it for vs to see their perrukes put on, their false teeth, their complexion, their eye-browes, their nailes? you see guilders will not worke, but inclos'd. They must not discouer, how little serues, with the helpe of art, to adorne a great deale. How long did the canuas hang afore

                           Ald-gate? were the people suffer'd to see the cities Loue, and Charitie, while they were rude stone, before they were painted, and burnish'd? No. No more should seruants approch their mistresses, but when they are compleat, and finish'd.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Well said, my TRVE-WIT.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And a wise ladie will keepe a guard alwaies vpon the place, that shee may doe things securely. I once followed a rude fellow into a chamber, where the poore madame, for haste, and troubled, snatch'd at her perruke, to couer her baldnesse: and put it on, the wrong way.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O prodigie!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And the vn-conscionable knaue held her in complement an houre, with that reuerst face, when I still look'd when shee should talke from the t'other side.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, thou should'st ha' releeu'd her.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        No faith, I let her alone, as wee'l let this argument, if you please, and passe to another. When saw you DAVPHINE EVGENIE?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Not these 
                              ••
                           ee daies. Shall we goe to him this morning? he is very melancholique, I heare.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Sicke o' the vncle? is hee? I met that stiffe peece of formalitie, his vncle, yesterday, with a huge turbant of night-caps on his head, buckled ouer his cares.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, that's his custome when he walkes abroad. Hee can endure no noise, man.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        So I haue heard. But is the disease so ridiculous in him, as it is made? they say, hee has beene vpon diuers treaties with the Fish-wiues, and Orenge-women; and articles propounded betweene them: mary, the Chimney-sweepers will not be drawne in.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No, nor the Broome-men: they stand out stiffely. He cannot endure a Costard-monger, he swounes if he heare one.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Me thinkes, a Smith should be ominous.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Or any Hāmer-man. A Brasier is not suffer'd to dwel in the parish, nor an Armorer. He would haue hang'd a Pewterers 'prentice once vpon a shroue-tuesdaies riot, for being o' that trade, when the rest were quit.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        A Trumpet should fright him terribly, or the Hau'-boyes?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Out of his senses. The Waights of the citie haue a pension of him, not to come neere that ward. This youth practis'd on him, one night, like the Bell-man; and neuer left till hee had brought him downe to the doore, with a long-sword: and there left him flourishing with the aire.
                     
                     
                        BOY.
                        Why, sir! hee hath chosen a street to lie in, so narrow at both ends, that it will receiue no coaches, nor carts, nor any of these common noises: and therefore, we that loue him, deuise to bring him in such as we may, now and then, for his exercise, to breath him. Hee would grow resty else in his ease. His vertue would rust without action. I entreated a Beare-ward, one day, to come downe with the dogs of some foure parishes that way, and I thanke him, he did; & cryed his games vnder master

MOROSE'S windore: till he was sent crying away, with his head made a most bleeding spectacle to the multitude. And, another time, a Fencer, marching to his prize, had his drum most tragically run through, for taking that street in his way, at my request.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        A good wag. How do's he for the bells?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, i' the Queenes time, he was wont to goe out of towne euery satterday at ten a clock, or on holy-day-eues. But now, by reason of the sicknesse, the perpetuitie of ringing has made him deuise a roome, with double walls, and treble feelings; the windores close shut, and calk'd: and there he liues by candle-light. He turn'd away a man, last weeke, for hauing a paire of new shooes that creak'd. And this fellow waits on him, now, in tennis-court socks, or slippers sol'd with wooll: and they talke each to other, in a trunke. See, who comes here.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene II.
                     DAVPHINE, TRVE-WIT, CLERIMONT.
                     
                        HOw now! what aile you sirs? dumbe?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Strooke into stone, almost, I am here, with tales o' thine vncle! There was neuer such a prodigie heard of.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        I would you would once loose this subiect, my masters, for my sake. They are such as you are, that haue brought mee into that predicament, I am, with him.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        How is that?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Mary, that he will dis-inherit me, no more. Hee thinks, I, and my companie are authors of all the ridiculous acts, and moniments are told of him.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        S'lid, I would be the author of more, to vexe him, that purpose, deserues it: it giues thee law of plaguing him. I'll tell thee what I would doe. I would make a false almanack; get it printed: and then ha' him drawne out on a coronation day to the tower-wharfe, and kill him with the noise of the ordinance. Dis-inherit thee! hee cannot, man. Art not thou next of bloud, and his sisters sonne?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        I, but he will thrust me out of it, he vowes, and marry.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        How! that's a more portent. Can he endure no noise, and will venter on a wife?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Yes▪ why, thou art a stranger, it seemes, to his best trick, yet. He has imploid a fellow this halfe yeere, all ouer England, to harken him out a dumbe woman; bee shee of any forme, or any qualitie, so shee bee able to beare children: her silence is dowrie enough, he saies.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        But, I trust to god, he has found none.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No, but hee has heard of one that's lodg'd i' the next street to him, who is exceedingly soft-spoken; thrifty of her speech; that spends but sixe words a day. And her hee's about now, and shall haue her.
                     
                     
                        
                        TRV.
                        Is't possible! who is his agent i' the businesse?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Mary, a Barber, one CVT-BERD: an honest fellow, one that tells DAVPHINE all here.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, you oppresse mee with wonder! A woman, and a barber, and loue no noise!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Yes faith. The fellow trims him silently, and has not the knacke with his sheeres, or his fingers: and that continence in a barber hee thinkes so eminent a vertue, as it has made him chiefe of his counsell.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Is the barber to be seene? or the wench?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Yes, that they are.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I pray thee, DAVPHINE, let's goe thether.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        I haue some businesse now: I cannot i'faith.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You shall haue no businesse shall make you neglect this, sir, wee'll make her talke, beleeue it; or if shee will not, wee can giue out, at least so much as shall interrupt the treatie: wee will breake it. Thou art bound in conscience, when hee suspects thee without cause, to torment him.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Not I, by any meanes. I'll giue no suffrage to't. He shall neuer ha' that plea against me, that I oppos'd the least phant'sie of his. Let it lie vpon my starres to be guiltie, I'll be innocent.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes, and be poore, and beg; doe, innocent: when some groome of his has got him an heire, or this barber, if hee himselfe cannot. Innocent! I pray thee, NED, where lyes shee? let him be innocent, still.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, right ouer against the barbers; in the house, where sir IOHN DAW lyes.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You doe not meane to confound me!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Do's he, that would marry her, know so much?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I cannot tell.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        'Twere inough of imputation to her, with him.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        The onely talking sir i' th' towne! IACK DAW! And he teach her not to speake—God b'w'you. I haue some businesse too.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Will you not goe thether then?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Not with the danger to meet DAW, for mine eares.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why? I thought you two had beene vpon very good termes.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes, of keeping distance.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        They say he is a very good scholler.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I, and hee sayes it first. A poxe on him, a fellow that pretends onely to learning, buyes titles, and nothing else of bookes in him.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        The world reports him to be very learned.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I am sorry, the world should so conspire to belie him.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Good faith, I haue heard very good things come from him.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You may. There's none so desperately ignorant to denie that:

would they were his owne. God b'w' you, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        This is very abrupt!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene III.
                     DAVPHINE, CLERIMONT, BOY.
                     
                        COme, you are a strange open man, to tell euery thing, thus.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, beleeue it DAVPHINE, TRVE-WIT'S a very honest fellow.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        I thinke no other: but this franke nature of his is not for secrets.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nay, then, you are mistaken DAVPHINE: I know where he has beene well trusted, and discharg'd the trust very truely, and heartily.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        I contend not, NED, but, with the fewer a businesse is carried, it is euer the safer. Now we are alone, if you'll goe thether, I am for you.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        When were you there?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Last night: and such a decameron of sport fallen out! BOCCACE neuer thought of the like. DAW do's nothing but court her; and the wrong way. Hee would lie with her, and praises her modestie; desires that shee would talke, and bee free, and commends her silence in verses: which hee reades, and sweares, are the best that euer man made. Then railes at his fortunes, stamps, and mutines, why he is not made a counsellor, and call'd to affaires of state.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I pray thee let's goe. I would faine partake this. Some water, Boy.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Wee are inuited to dinner together, he and I, by one that came thether to him, sir LA-FOOLE.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, that's a precious mannikin!
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Doe you know him?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I, and he will know you too, if ere he saw you but once, though you should meet him at church in the midst of praiers. Hee is one of the Braueries, though he be none o' the Wits. He will salute a Iudge vpon the bench, and a Bishop in the pulpit, a Lawyer when hee is pleading at the barre, and a Lady when shee is dauncing in a masque, and put her out. He do's giue playes, and suppers, and inuites his guests to 'hem, aloud, out of his windore, as they ride by in coaches. He has a lodging in the Strand for the purpose. Or to watch when ladies are gone to the China houses, or the Exchange, that hee may meet 'hem by chance, and giue 'hem presents, some two or three hundred pounds-worth of toyes, to be laught at. He is neuer without a spare banquet, or sweet-meats in his chamber, for their women to alight at, and come vp to, for a bait.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Excellent! He was a fine youth last night, but now he is much siner! what is his christen-name? I ha' forgot.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Sir AMOROVS LA-FOOLE.
                     
                     
                        
                        BOY.
                        The gentleman is here below, that ownes that name.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Hart, hee's come, to inuite me to dinner, I hold my life.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Like enough: pray thee, let's ha' him vp.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Boy, marshall him.
                     
                     
                        BOY.
                        With a truncheon, sir?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Away, I beseech you. I'le make him tell vs his pedegree, now; and what meat he has to dinner; and, who are his guests; and, the whole course of his fortunes: with a breath.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act I. Scene IIII.
                     LA-FOOLE, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE.
                     
                        S'Aue, deare sir DAVPHINE, honor'd master CLERIMONT.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Sir AMOROVS! you haue very much honested my lodging, with your presence.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Good faith, it is a fine lodging! almost, as delicate a lodging, as mine.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Not so, sir.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Excuse me, sir, if it were i' the Strand, I assure you. I am come, master CLERIMONT, to entreat you wait vpon two or three ladies, to dinner, to day.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        How, sir! wait vpon 'hem? did you euer see me carry dishes?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        No, sir, dispence with me; I meant, to beare 'hem companie.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, that I will, sir. The doubtfulnesse o' your phrase, beleeue it, sir, would breed you a quarrell, once an houre, with the terrible boyes, if you should but keepe 'hem fellowship a day.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        It should be extremely against my will, sir, if I contested with any man.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I beleeue it, sir; where hold you your feast?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        At TOM OTTERS, sir.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        TOM OTTER? what's he?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Captaine OTTER, sir; he is a kind of gamster: but he has had command, both by sea, and by land.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        O, then he is animal amphibium?
                        
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I, sir: his wife was the rich China-woman, that the courtiers visited so often, that gaue the rare entertainment. She commands all at home.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Then, shee is Captaine OTTER?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        You say very well, sir: she is my kins-woman, a LA-FOOLE by the mother side, and will inuite, any great ladies, for my sake.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Not of the LA-FOOLES of Essex?
                        
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        No, sir, the LA-FOOLES of London.
                        
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Now, h'is in.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        They all come out of our house, the LA-FOOLES o' the north, the LA-FOOLES of the west, the LA-FOOLES of the east, and south—we

are as ancient a family, as any is in Europe—but I my selfe am descended lineally of the french LA-FOOLES—and, wee doe beare for our coate Yellow, or Or, checker'd Azure, and Gules, and some three or foure colours more, which is a very noted coate, and has, some-times, beene solemnely worne by diuers nobilitie of our house—but let that goe, antiquitie is not respected now—I had a brace of fat Does sent me, gentlemen, & halfe a dosen of phesants, a dosen or two of godwits, and some other fowle, which I would haue eaten, while they are good, and in good company— there will bee a great lady, or two, my lady HAVGHTY, my lady CENTAVRE, mistris DOL MAVIS—and they come a'purpose, to see the silent gentlewoman, mistris EPICOENE, that honest sir IOHN DAW has promis'd to bring thether—and then, mistris TRVSTY, my ladies woman, will be there too, and this honorable Knight, sir DAVPHINE, with your selfe, master CLERIMONT—and wee'll bee very merry, and haue fidlers, and daunce—I haue beene a mad wag, in my time, and haue spent some crownes since I was a page in court, to my lord LOFTY, and after, my ladies gentleman-vsher, who got mee knighted in Ireland, since it pleas'd my elder brother to die—I had as faire a gold ierkin on that day, as any was worne in the Iland-voyage, or at Caliz, none disprais'd, and I came ouer in it hither, show'd my selfe to my friends, in court, and after went downe to my tenants, in the countrey, and suruai'd my lands, let new leases, tooke their money, spent it in the eye o' the land here, vpon ladies— and now I can take vp at my pleasure.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Can you take vp ladies, sir?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, let him breath, he has not recouer'd.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Would I were your halfe, in that commoditie—
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        No, sir, excuse mee: I meant money, which can take vp any thing. I haue another guest, or two, to inuite, and say as much to, gentlemen. I'll take my leaue abruptly, in hope you will not faile—Your seruant.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Wee will not faile you, sir precious LA-FOOLE; but shee shall, that your ladies come to see: if I haue credit, afore sir DAW.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Did you euer heare such a wind-fucker, as this?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Or, such a rooke, as the other! that will betray his mistris, to be seene. Come, 'tis time, we preuented it.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Goe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act II.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     MOROSE, MVTE.
                     
                        CAnnot I, yet, find out a more compendious method, then by this trunke, to saue my seruants the labour of speech, and mine eares, the discord of sounds? Let mee see: all discourses, but mine owne, afflict mee, they seeme harsh, impertinent, and irksome. Is it not

possible, that thou should'st answere me, by signes, and, I apprehend thee, fellow? speake not, though I question you. You haue taken the ring, off from the street dore, At the breaches, still the fellow makes legs: or signes. as I bad you? answere me not, by speech, but by silence; vnlesse, it be otherwise (—) very good. And, you haue fastened on a thicke quilt, or flock-bed, on the out-side of the dore; that if they knocke with their daggers, or with bricke-bats, they can make no noise? but with your leg, your answere, vnlesse it be otherwise (—) very good. This is not, onely, fit modestie in a seruant, but good state, and discretion in a master. And you haue beene with CVTBERD, the barber, to haue him come to me? (—) good. And, he will come presently? answere me not but with your leg, vnlesse it be otherwise: if it be otherwise, shake your head, or shrug (—) so. Your Italian, and Spaniard, are wise in these! and it is a frugall, and comely grauitie. How long will it bee, ere CVTBERD come? stay, if an houre, hold vp your whole hand; if halfe an houre, two singers; if a quarter, one; (—) good: halfe a quarter? 'tis well. And haue you giuen him a key, to come in without knocking? (—) good. And, is the lock oild, and the hinges, to day? (—) good. And the quilting of the staires no where worne out, and bare? (—) very good. I see, by much doctrine, and impulsion, it may be effected: stand by. The Turke, in this diuine discipline, is admirable, exceeding all the potentates of the earth; still waited on by mutes; and all his commands so executed; yea, euen in the warre (as I haue heard) and in his marches, most of his charges, and directions, giuen by signes, and with silence: an exquisite art! and I am heartily asham'd, and angrie often-times, that the Princes of Christendome, should suffer a Barbarian, to transcend 'hem in so high a point of felicitie. I will practise it, One windes a horne without. Againe. hereafter. How now? oh! oh! what villaine? what prodigie of mankind is that? looke. Oh! cut his throat, cut his throat: what murderer, hell-hound, deuill can this be?
                     
                     
                        MVT.
                        It is a post from the court—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Out rogue, and must thou blow thy horne, too?
                     
                     
                        MVT.
                        Alas, it is a post from the court, sir, that sayes, hee must speake with you, paine of death—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Paine of thy life, be silent.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene II.
                     TRVE-WIT, MOROSE, CVTBERD.
                     
                        BY your leaue, sir (I am a stranger here) is your name, master MOROSE? is your name, master MOROSE? fishes! Pythagoreans all! this is strange! What say you, sir, nothing? Has HARPOCRATES beene here, with his club, among you? well sir, I will beleeue you to bee the man, at this time: I will venter vpon you, sir. Your friends at court commend 'hem to you, sir—
                     
                     
                        
                        (MOR.
                        O men! Ô manners! was there euer such an impudence?)
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And are extremely sollicitous for you, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Whose knaue are you!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Mine owne knaue, and your compere, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Fetch me my sword—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You shall taste the one halfe of my dagger, if you do (groome) and you, the other, if you stirre, sir: be patient, I charge you, in the kings name, and heare mee without insurrection. They say, you are to marry? to marry! doe you marke, sir?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        How then, rude companion!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        He shewes him a halter.
                        Mary, your friends doe wonder, sir, the Thames being so neere, wherein you may drowne so handsomely; or London-bridge, at a low fall, with a fine leape, to hurry you downe the streame; or, such a delicate steeple, i'the towne, as Bow, to vault from; or, a brauer height, as Pauls, or, if you affected to doe it neerer home, and a shorter way, an excellent garret windore, into the street; or, a beame, in the said garret, with this halter; which they haue sent, and desire, that you would sooner commit your graue head to this knot, then to the wed-lock nooze; or, take a little sublimate, and goe out of the world, like a rat; or a flie (as one said) with a straw i' your arse: any way, rather, then to follow this goblin matrimony. Alas, sir, doe you euer thinke to find a chaste wife, in these times? now? when there are so many masques, plaies, puritane preachings, mad-folkes, and other strange sights to be seene daily, priuate and publique? if you had liu'd in king ETHELDRED'S time, sir, or EDWARD the Confessors, you might, perhaps, haue found in some cold countrey-hamlet, then, a dull frostie wench, would haue beene contented with one man: now, they will as soone be pleas'd with one leg, or one eye. I'le tell you, sir, the monstrous hazards you shall runne with a wife.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Good sir! haue I euer cosen'd any friends of yours of their land? bought their possessions? taken forfeit of their morgage? begg'd a reuersion from 'hem? bastarded their issue? what haue I done, that may deserue this?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nothing, sir, that I know, but your itch of marriage.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Why? if I had made an assassinate vpon your father; vitiated your mother; rauished your sisters—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I would kill you, sir, I would kill you, if you had.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Why? you doe more in this, sir: It were a vengeance centuple, for all facinorous acts, that could be nam'd, to doe that you doe—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Alas, sir, I am but a messenger: I but tell you, what you must heare. It seemes, your friends are carefull after your soules health, sir, and would haue you know the danger (but you may doe your pleasure, for all them, I perswade not, sir) If, after you are married, your wife doe run away with a vaulter, or the Frenchman that walkes vpon ropes, or him that daunces the iig, or a sencer for his skill at his weapon, why it is not their fault; they haue discharged their consciences: when you know

what may happen. Nay, suffer valiantly, sir, for I must tell you, all the perills that you are obnoxious too. If shee be faire, yong, and vegetous, no sweet meats euer drew more flies; all the yellow doublets, and great roses i' the towne will bee there. If foule, and crooked, shee'll bee with them, and buy those doublets and roses, sir. If rich, and that you marry her dowry, not her; shee'll raigne in your house, as imperious as a widow. If noble, all her kindred will be your tyrannes. If fruitfull, as proud as May, and humorous as April; she must haue her doctors, her midwiues, her nurses, her longings euery houre: though it be for the dearest morsell of man. If learned, there was neuer such a parrat; all your patrimony will be too little for the guests, that must be inuited, to heare her speake Latine and Greeke: and you must lie with her in those languages too, if you will please her. If precise, you must feast all the silenc'd brethren, once in three daies; salute the sisters; entertaine the whole family, or wood of 'hem; and heare long-winded exercises, singings, and catechisings, which you are not giuen to, and yet must giue for: to please the zealous matron your wife, who, for the holy cause, will cosen you, ouer and aboue. You beginne to sweat, sir? but this is not halfe, i'faith: you may do your pleasure notwithstanding, as I said before, I come not to perswade you. Vpon my faith, The Mute is stealing away. master seruing man, if you doe stirre, I will beat you.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, what is my sinne! what is my sinne?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Then, if you loue your wife, or rather, dote on her, sir: Ô, how shee'll torture you! and take pleasure i'your torments! you shall lye with her but when she lists; she will not hurt her beauty, her complexion; or it must be for that iewell, or that pearle, when she do's; euery halfe houres pleasure must be bought anew: and with the same paine, and charge, you woo'd her at first. Then, you must keepe what seruants shee please; what company shee will; that friend must not visit you without her licence; and him shee loues most shee will seeme to hate eagerliest, to decline your ielousie; or, faigne to bee ielous of you first; and for that cause goe liue with her she-friend, or cosen at the colledge, that can instruct her in all the mysteries, of writing letters, corrupting seruants, taming spies; where shee must haue that rich goune for such a great day; a new one for the next; a richer for the third; bee seru'd in siluer; haue the chamber sill'd with a succession of groomes, foot-men, vshers, and other messengers; besides embroyderers, iewellers, tyre-women, sempsters, fether-men, perfumers; while shee feeles not how the land drops away; nor the acres melt; nor forsees the change, when the mercer has your woods for her veluets; neuer weighes what her pride costs, sir: so shee may kisse a page, or a smoth chinne, that has the despaire of a beard; bee a states-woman, know all the newes, what was done at Salisbury, what at the Bath, what at court, what in progresse; or, so shee may censure poets, and authors, and stiles, and compare 'hem, DANIEL with SPENSER, IONSON with the tother youth, and so foorth; or, be thought cunning in controuersies, or the very knots of diuinitie; and haue, often in her mouth, the state of

the question: and then skip to the Mathematiques, and demonstration and answere, in religion to one; in state, to another, in baud'ry to a third.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, Ô!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        All this is very true, sir. And then her going in disguise to that coniurer, and this cunning woman: where the first question is, how soone you shall die? next, if her present seruant loue her? next that, if she shall haue a new seruant? and how many? which of her family would make the best baud, male, or female? what precedence shee shall haue by her next match? and sets downe the answers, and beleeues 'hem aboue the scriptures. Nay, perhaps she'll study the art.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Gentle sir, ha' you done? ha' you had your pleasure o' me? I'll thinke of these things.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes sir: and then comes reeking home of vapor and sweat, with going afoot, and lies in, a moneth, of a new face, all oyle, and birdlime; and rises in asses milke, and is clens'd with a new fucus: god b'w' you, sir. One thing more (which I had almost forgot.) This too, with whom you are to marry, may haue made a conuayance of her virginity afore hand, as your wise widdowes doe of their states, before they marry, in trust to some friend, sir: who can tell? or if she haue not done it yet, she may doe, vpon the wedding day, or the night before, and antidate you cuckold. The like has beene heard of, in nature. 'Tis no deuis'd impossible thing, sir. God b'w' you: I'll be bold to leaue this rope with you, sir, for a remembrance. Farewell MVTE.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        The horne againe.
                         Come, ha' me to my chamber: but first shut the dore. O, shut the dore, shut the dore: Is he come againe?
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        'Tis I, sir, your barber.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O CVTBERD, CVTBERD, CVTBERD! here has bin a cut-throate with me: helpe me in to my bed, and giue me physicke with thy counsell.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene III.
                     DAW, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE, EPICOENE.
                     
                        NAy, and she will, let her refuse, at her owne charges: 'tis nothing to me, gentlemen. But she will not bee inuited to the like feasts, or guests, euery day.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        They disswade her, priuately.
                         O, by no meanes, shee may not refuse—to stay at home, if you loue your reputation: 'Slight, you are inuited thither o' purpose to bee seene, and laught at by the lady of the colledge, and her shadowes. This trumpeter hath proclaim'd you.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        You shall not goe; let him be laught at in your steade, for not bringing you: and put him to his extemporall faculty of fooling, and talking loud to satisfie the company.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        He will suspect vs, talke aloud. 'Pray' mistris EPICOENE, let's see

your verses; we haue sir IOHN DAW'S leaue: doe not conceale your seruants merit, and your owne glories.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        They'll proue my seruants glories, if you haue his leaue so soone.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        His vaine glories, lady!
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Shew 'hem, shew 'hem, mistris, I dare owne 'hem.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Iudge you, what glories?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Nay, I'll read 'hem my selfe, too: an author must recite his own workes. It is a madrigall of modestie.

                              Modest, and faire, for faire and good are neere
                              Neighbours, how ere.—
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Very good.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I, Is't not?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        No noble vertue euer was alone,
                        But two in one.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Excellent!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        That againe, I pray'sir IOHN.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        It has some thing in't like rare wit, and sense.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Peace.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        No noble vertue euer was alone,
                        But two in one.
                        Then, when I praise sweet modestie, I praise
                        Bright beauties raies:
                        And hauing prais'd both beauty' and modestee,
                        I haue prais'd thee.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Admirable!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        How it chimes, and cries tinke i' the close, diuinely!
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        I, 'tis SENECA.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No, I thinke 'tis PLVTARCH.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        The dor on PLVTARCH, and SENECA, I hate it: they are mine owne imaginations, by that light. I wonder those fellowes haue such credit with gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        They are very graue authors.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Graue asses! meere Essaists! a few loose sentences, and that's all. A man would talke so, his whole age, I doe vtter as good things euery houre, if they were collected, and obseru'd, as either of'hem.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Indeede! sir IOHN?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Hee must needs, liuing among the Wits, and Braueries too.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        I, and being president of'hem, as he is.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        There is ARISTOTLE, a mere common place-fellow; PLATO, a discourser; THVCIDIDES, and LIVIE, tedious and drie; TACITVS, an entire knot: sometimes worth the vntying, very seldome.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        What doe you think of the Poets, sir IOHN?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Not worthy to be nam'd for authors. HOMER, an old tedious prolixe asse, talkes of curriers, and chines of beefe. VIRGIL, of dunging of land, and bees. HORACE, of I know not what.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I thinke so.
                     
                     
                        
                        DAW.
                        And so PINDARVS, LYCOPHRON, ANACREON, CATVLLVS, SENECA the tragoedian, LVCAN, PROPERTIVS, TIBVLLVS, MARTIAL, IVVENAL, AVSONIVS, STATIVS, POLITIAN, VALERIVS FLACCVS, and the rest—
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        What a sacke full of their names he has got!
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        And how he poures 'hem out! POLITIAN, with VALERIVS FLACCVS!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Was not the character right, of him?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        As could be made, i' faith.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        And PERSIVS, a crabbed cockescombe, not to be endur'd.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Why? whom do you account for authors, sir IOHN DAW?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        
                           Syntagma Iuris ciuilis, Corpus Iuris ciuilis, Corpus Iuris canonice, the King of Spaines bible.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Is the King of Spaines bible an author?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Yes, and Syntagma.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        What was that Syntagma, sir?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        A ciuill lawer, a Spaniard.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Sure, Corpus was a Dutch-man.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I, both the Corpusses, I knew 'hem: they were very corpulent authors.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        And, then there's VATABLVS, POMPONATIVS, SYMANCHA, the other are not to be receiu'd, within the thought of a scholler.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Fore god, you haue a simple learn'd seruant, lady, in titles.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I wonder that hee is not called to the helme, and made a councellor!
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        He is one extraordinary.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nay, but in ordinarie! to say truth, the state wants such.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Why, that will follow.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I muse, a mistris can be so silent to the dotes of such a seruant.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        'Tis her vertue, sir. I haue written somewhat of her silence too.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        In verse, sir IOHN?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        What else?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Why? how can you iustifie your owne being of a Poet, that so slight all the old Poets?
                        
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Why? euery man, that writes in verse, is not a Poet; you haue of the Wits, that write verses, and yet are no Poets: they are Poets that liue by it, the poore fellowes that liue by it.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Why? would not you liue by your verses, sir IOHN.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No, 'twere pittie he should. A knight liue by his verses? he did not make 'hem to that ende, I hope.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        And yet the noble SIDNEY liues by his, and the noble family not asham'd.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I, he profest himselfe; but sir IOHN DAW has more caution: hee'll not hinder his owne rising i'the state so much! doe you thinke hee will? Your verses, good sir IOHN, and no poems.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Silence in woman, is like speech in man,
                        Deny't who can.
                     
                     
                        
                        DAV.
                        Not I, beleeue it: your reason, sir.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Nor, i'st a tale,
                        That female vice should be a vertue male,
                        Or masculine vice, a female vertue be:
                        You shall it see
                        Prou'd with increase,
                        I know to speake, and shee to hold her peace.
                        Do you conceiue me, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        No faith, how meane you with increase, sir IOHN?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Why, with increase is, when I court her for the comon cause of mankind; and she sayes nothiug, but consentire videtur: and in time is grauida.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Then, this is a ballad of procreation?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        A madrigall of proceation, you mistake.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        'Pray giue me my verses againe, seruant.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        If you you'll aske 'hem aloud, you shal.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        See, here's TRVE-WIT againe!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene IIII.
                     CLERIMONT, TRVE-WIT, DAVPHINE, CVTBERD, DAW, EPICOENE.
                     
                        WHere hast thou beene, in the name of madnesse! thus accoutred with thy horne?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Where the sound of it might haue pierc'd your senses, with gladnes, had you beene in eare-reach of it. DAVPHINE, fall downe and worship me: I haue forbid the banes, lad. I haue been with thy vertuous vncle, and haue broke the match.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        You ha'not, I hope.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes faith; and thou shouldst hope otherwise, I should repent me: this horne got me entrance, kisse it. I had no other way to get in, but by faining to be a post; but when I got in once, I prou'd none, but rather the contrary, turn'd him into a post, or a stone, or what is stiffer, with thundring into him the incommodities of a wife, and the miseries of marriage. If euer GORGON were seene in the shape of a woman, hee hath seene her in my description. I hane put him off o'that sent, for euer. Wby doe you not applaud, and adore me, sirs? why stand you mute? Are you stupid? you are not worthy o'the benefit.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Did not I tell you? mischiefe!—
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I would you had plac'd this benefit somewhere else.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why so?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Slight, you haue done the most inconsiderate, rash, weake thing, that euer man did to his friend.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Friend! if the most malicious enemy I haue, had studied to

inflict an iniury vpon me, it could not bee a greater.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Wherein? for gods-sake! Gent: come to your selues againe.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        But I presag'd thus much afore, to you.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Would my lips had beene soldred, when I spak on't. Slight, what mou'd you to be thus impertinent?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        My masters, doe not put on this strange face to pay my courtesie: off with this visor. Haue good turnes done you, and thanke 'hem this way?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Fore heau'n, you haue vndone me. That, which I haue plotted for, and beene maturing now these foure moneths, you haue blasted in a minute: now I am lost, I may speake. This gentlewoman was lodg'd here by me o'purpose, and, to be put vpon my vncle, hath profest this obstinate silence for my sake, being my entire friend; and one, that for the requitall of such a fortune, as to marry him, would haue made mee very ample conditions: where now, all my hopes are vtterly miscaried by this vnlucky accident.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Thus 'tis, when a man will be ignorantly officious; doe seruices, and not know his why: I wonder what curteous itch possess'd you! you neuer did absurder part i' your life, nor a greater trespasse to friendship, to humanity.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Faith, you may forgiue it, best: 'twas your cause principally.
                     
                     
                        DLE.
                        I know it, would it had not.
                     
                     
                        CAVP.
                        How now CVTBERD? what newes?
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The best, the happiest that euer was, sir. There has beene a mad gentleman with your vncle, this morning (I thinke this be the gentleman) that has almost talk'd him out of his wits, with threatning him from marriage—
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        On, I pray thee.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        And your vnkle, sir, hee thinkes 'twas done by your procurement; therefore he will see the party, you wot of, presently: and if he like her, he sayes, and that she be so inclining to dombe, as I haue told him, he sweares hee will marry her, to day, instantly, and not deferre it a minute longer.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Excellent! beyond our expectation!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Beyond your expectation? by this light, I knewe it would bee thus.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Nay, sweet TRVE-WIT, forgiue me.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        No, I was ignorantly officious, impertinent: this was the absurd, weake part.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Wilt thou ascribe that to merit, now, was meere fortune?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Fortune? mere prouidence. Fortune had not a finger in't. I saw it must necessarily in nature fall out so: my genius is neuer false to me in these things. Shew me, how it could be otherwise.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Nay, gentlemen, contend not, tis well now.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Alasse, I let him goe on with inconsiderate, and rash, and what he pleas'd.
                     
                     
                        
                        CLE.
                        Away thou strange iustifier of thy selfe, to bee wiser then thou wert, by the euent.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Euent! By this light, thou shalt neuer perswade me, but I foresaw it, aswell as the starres themselues.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Nay, gentlemen, 'tis well now: doe you two entertaine sir IOHN DAW, with discourse, while I send her away with instructions.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I'll be acquainted with her, first, by your fauour.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Master TRVE-WIT, lady, a friend of ours.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I am sorry, I haue not knowne you sooner, lady, to celebrate this rare vertue of your silence.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Faith, an' you had come sooner, you should ha'seene, and heard her well celebrated in sir IOHN DAW'S madrigalls.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        IACK DAW, god saue you, when saw you LA-FOOLE?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Not since last night, master TRVE-WIT.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        That's miracle! I thought you two had beene inseparable.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Hee's gone to inuite his guests.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Gods so! tis true! what a false memory haue I towards that man! I am one: I met him e'ne now, vpon that he calls his delicate fine blacke horse, rid into a foame, with poasting from place to place, and person to person, to giue 'hem the cue—
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Lest they should forget?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes: there was neuer poore captaine tooke more paines at a muster to show men, then he, at this meale, to shew friends.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        It is his quarter-feast, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        What! doe you say so, sir IOHN?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, IACK DAW will not be out, at the best friends hee has, to the talent of his wit: where's his mistris, to heare and applaud him? is she gone!
                     
                     
                        DAW
                        Is mistris EPICOENE gone?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Gone afore, with sir DAVPHINE, I warrant, to the place.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Gone afore! that were a manifest iniurie; a disgrace and a halfe: to refuse him at such a festiuall time, as this, being a Brauery, and a Wit too.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Tut, hee'll swallow it like creame: hee's better read in iure ciuili, then to esteeme any thing a disgrace is offer'd him from a mistris.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Nay, let her eene goe; she shall sit alone, and bee dumbe in her chamber, a weeke together, for IOHN DAW, I warrant her: do's she refuse me?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No, sir, doe not take it so to heart: shee do's not refuse you, but a little neglect you. Good faith, TRVE-WIT, you were too blame to put it into his head, that shee do's refuse him.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Shee do's refuse him, sir, palpably: how euer you mince it. An' I were as hee, I would sweare to speake ne're a word to her, to day, for't.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        By this light, no more I will not.
                     
                     
                        
                        TRV.
                        Nor to any body else, sir.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Nay, I will not say so, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        It had beene an excellent happy condition for the company, if you could haue drawne him to it.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I'll be very melancholique, i'faith.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        As a dog, if I were as you, sir IOHN.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Or a snaile, or a hog-louse: I would roule my selfe vp for this day, introth, they should not vnwinde me.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        By this pick-tooth, so I will.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        'Tis well done: he beginnes already to be angry with his teeth.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Will you goe, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nay, you must walke alone, if you bee right melancholique, sir IOHN.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes sir, wee'll dog you, wee'll follow you a farre off.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Was there euer such a two yards of knighthood, measur'd out by Time, to be sold to laughter?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        A meere talking mole! hang him: no mushrome was euer so fresh. A fellow so vtterly nothing, as he knowes not what he would be.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Let's follow him: but first, let's goe to DAVPHINE, hee's houering about the house, to heare what newes.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Content.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene V.
                     MOROSE, EPICOENE, CVTBERD, MVTE.
                     
                        He goes about her, and viewes her.
                        WElcome CVTBERD; draw neere with you faire chardge: and, in her eare, softly intreat her to vnmasque (—) So. Is the dore shut? (—) inough. Now, CVTBERD, with the same discipline I vse to my family, I will question you. As I conceiue, CVTBERD, this gentlewoman is shee, you haue prouided, and brought, in hope shee will sit me in the place and person of a wife? Answer me not, but with your leg, vnlesse it be otherwise: (—) very well done CVTBERD. I conceiue, besides, CVTBERD, you haue beene pre-acquainted with her birth, education, and quallities, or else you would not preferre her to my acceptance, in the waighty consequence of marriage. (—) this I conceiue, CVTBERD. Answer me not but with your leg, vnlesse it bee otherwise. (—) Very well done CVTBERD. Giue aside now a little, and leaue me to examine her condition, and aptitude to my affection. Shee is exceeding faire, and of a speciall good fauour; a sweet composition, or harmony of limmes: her temper of beauty has the true height of my blood. The knaue hath exceedingly wel fitted me without: I will now trie her within. Come neere, faire gentlewoman: let not my behauiour seeme rude, though vnto you, She curtsies. being rare, it may happely appeare strange. (—(Nay,

lady, you may speake, though CVTBERD, and my man, might not: for, of all sounds, onely, the sweet voice of a faire lady has the iust length of mine eares. I beseech you, say lady, out of the first fire of meeting eyes, (they say) loue is stricken: doe you feele any such motion, sodenly shot into you, Curt'sie. from any part you see in me? ha, lady? (—) Alasse, lady, these answers by silent curt'sies, from you, are too courtlesse, and simple. I haue euer had my breeding in court: and shee that shall bee my wife, must bee accomplished with courtly, and audacious ornaments. Can you speake lady?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        She speakes softly.
                        Iudge you, forsooth.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What say you, lady? speake out, I beseech you.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Iudge you, forsooth.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Curt'sie.
                        O'my iudgement, a diuine softnes! but can you naturally, lady, as I enioyne these by doctrine & industry, referre your self to the search of my iudgement, and (not taking pleasure in your tougue, which is a womans chiefest pleasure) thinke it plausible, to answer me by silent gestures, so long as my speeches iumpe right, with what you conceiue? (—) Excellent! diuine! if it were possible she should hold out thus! Peace CVTBRD, thou art made for euer, as thou hast made mee, if this felicitie haue lasting: but I will trie her further. Deare lady, I am courtly, I tell you, and I must haue mine eares banqueted with pleasant, and wittie conferences, pretty girds, scoffes, and daliance in her, that I meane to choose for my bedpheere. The ladies in court, thinke it a most desperate impaire to their quickenesse of wit, and good carriage, if they cannot giue occasion for a man to court 'hem; and, when an amorous discourse is set on foot, minister as good matter to continue it, as himselfe: and doe you alone so much differ from all them, that, what they (with so much circumstance) affect, and toile for, to seeme learn'd, to seeme iudicious, to seeme sharpe, and conceited, you can bury in your selfe, with silence? and rather trust your graces to the faire conscience of vertue, then to the worlds, or your owne proclamation?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I should be sorry else.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What say you, ladie? good ladie, speake out.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I should be sorrie, else
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        That sorrow doth fill me with gladnesse! O MOROSE! thou art happie aboue mankinde! pray that thou maiest containe thy selfe. I will onely put her to it once more, and it shall be with the vtmost touch, and test of their sexe. But heare me, faire lady, I doe also loue to see her, whom I shall choose for my heicfar, to be the first and principall in all fashions; praecede all the dames at court, by a fortnight; haue her counsell of taylors, linneners, lace-women, embroyderers, and sit with 'hem sometimes twise a day, vpon French intelligences; and then come foorth, varied like Nature, or oftner then she, and better, by the helpe of Art, her aemulous seruant. This doe I affect. And how will you be able, lady, with this frugalitie of speech, to giue the manifold (but necessarie) instructions,

for that bodies, these sleeues, those skirts, this cut, that stitch, this embroyderie, that lace, this wire, those knots, that ruffe, those roses, this girdle, that fanne, the tother skarfe, these gloues? ha! what say you, ladie.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I'll leaue it to you, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        How lady? pray you, rise a note.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I leaue it to wisdome, and you sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Admirable creature! I will trouble you no more: I will not sinne against so sweet a simplicity. Let me now be bold to print on those diuine lips, the seale of being mine. CVTBERD, I giue thee the lease of thy house free: thanke me not, but with thy leg (—) I know what thou woulst say, shee's poore, and her friends deceased; shee has brought a wealthy dowr
                              •
                           e in her silence, CVTBERD: and in respect of her pouerty, CVTBERD, I shall haue her more louing, and obedient, CVTBERD. Goe thy waies, and get me a minister presently, with a soft-low voice to marry vs, and pray him he will not be impertinent, but briefe as he can; away: softly, CVTBERD. Sirrah, conduct your mistris into the dining roome, your now—mistris. O my felicity! how I shall bee reueng'd on mine insolent kinsman, and his plots, to fright me from marrying! This night I will get an heire, and thrust him out of my bloud like a stranger; he would be knighted, forsooth, and thought by that meanes to raigne ouer me, his title must doe it: no kinsman, I will now make you bring mee the tenth lords, and the sixteenth ladies letter, kinsman; and it shall doe you no good kinsman. Your knighthood it selfe shall come on it's knees, and it shall be reiected; it shall bee sued for it's fees to execution, and not bee redeem'd; it shall cheat at the tweluepeny ordinary, it knighthood, for it's diet all the terme time, and tell tales for it in the vacation, to the hostesse: or it knighthood shall doe worse; take sanctuary in Coleharbor, and fast. It shall fright all it friends, with borrowing letters; and when one of the foure-score hath brought it knighthood ten shillings, it knighthood shall go to the Cranes, or the Beare at the Bridge-foot, and be drunk in feare: it shal not haue money to discharge one tauerne reckoning, to inuite the old creditors, to forbeare it knighthood; or the new, that should be, to trust it knighthood. It shall be the tenth name in the bond, to take vp the commoditie of pipkins, and stone jugs; and the part thereof shall not furnish it knighthood forth, for the attempting of a bakers widdow, a browne bakers widdow. It shall giue it knighthoods name, for a stallion, to all gamesome citizens wiues, and bee refus'd; when the master of a dancing schoole, or (How do you call him) the worst reueller in the towne is taken: it shall want clothes, and by reason of that, wit, to foole to lawyers. It shall not haue hope to repaire it selfe by Constantinople, Ireland, or Virginia; but the best, and last fortune to it knighthood shall be, to make DOL TEARE-SHEET, or KATE COMMON, a lady: and so, it knighthood may eate.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act II. Scene VI.
                     TRVE-WIT, DAVPHINE, CLERIMONT, CVTBERD.
                     
                        ARe you sure he is not gone by?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        No, I staid in the shop euer since.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        But, he may take the other end of the lane.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        No, I told him I would be here at this end: I appointed him hether.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        What a barbarian it is to stay then!
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Yonder he comes.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        And his charge left behinde him, which is a very good signe, DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        How now CVTBERD, succeedes it, or no?
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Past imagination, sir, omnia secunda; you could not haue pray'd, to haue had it so wel: Saltat senex, as it is i'the prouerbe, he do's triumph in his felicity; admires the party! he has giuen me the lease of my house too! and, I am now going for a silent minister to marry 'hem, and away.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Slight, get one o'the silenc'd ministers, a zealous brother would torment him purely.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        
                           Cum priuilegio, sir.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        O, by no meanes, let's doe nothing to hinder it now when 'tis done and finished, I am for you: for any deuise of vexation.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        And that shall be, within this halfe houre, vpon my dexterity, gentlemen. Contriue what you can, in the meane time, bonis auibus.
                        
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        How the slaue doth latine it!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        It would be made a iest to posterity, sirs, this daies mirth, if yee will.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Beshrew his heart that will not, I pronounce.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        And, for my part. What is't?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        To translate all LA-FOOLES company, and his feast hether, to day, to celebrate this bride-ale.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        I mary, but how will't be done?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I'll vndertake the directing of all the ladie-guests thether, and then the meat must follow.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        For gods sake, let's effect it: it will be an excellent comoedy of affliction, so many seuerall noyses.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        But are they not at the other place already, thinke you?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I'll warrant you for the colledge-honors: one o' their faces has not the priming color laid on yet, nor the other her smocke sleek'd.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, but they'll rise earlier then ordinary, to a feast.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Best goe see, and assure our selues.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Who knowes the house?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I'll lead you, were you neuer there yet?
                     
                     
                        
                        DAVP.
                        Not I.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nor I.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Where ha'you liu'd then? not know TOM OTTER!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No: for gods sake, what is he?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        An excellent animal, equall with your DAW, or LA-FOOLE, if not transcendent; and do's latine it as much as your barber: hee is his wifes Subiect, he calls her Princesse, and at such times as these, followes her vp and downe the house like a page, with his hat off, partly for heate, partly for reuerence. At this instant, hee is marshalling of his bull, beare, and horse.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        What be those, in the name of Sphinx?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why sir? hee has beene a great man at the beare-garden in his time: and from that subtle sport, has tane the witty denomination of his chiefe carousing cups. One he calls his bull, another his beare, another his horse. And then hee has his lesser glasses, that hee calls his deere, and his ape; and seuerall degrees of'hem too: and neuer is well, nor thinkes any intertainement perfect, till these be brought out, and set o'the cupbord.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        For gods loue! we should misse this, if we should not goe.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, he has a thousand things as good, that will speake him all day. He will raile on his wife, with certaine common places, behinde her backe; and to her face—
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        No more of him. Let's goe see him, I petition you.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act III.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     OTTER, Mrs. OTTER, TRVE-WIT, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE.
                     
                        NAy, good Princesse, heare me pauca verba.
                        
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        By that light, I'll ha'you chain'd vp, with your bul-dogs, and beare-dogges, if you be not ciuill the sooner. I'll send you to kennell, i'faith. You were best baite me with your bull, beare, and horse? Neuer a time, that the courtiers, or collegiates come to the house, but you make it a shrouetuesday! I would haue you get your whitsontide-veluet-cap, and your staffe i'your hand, to intertaine 'hem: yes introth, doe.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Not so, Princesse, neither, but vnder correction, sweete Princesse, gi'me leaue—these things I am knowne to the courtiers by. It is reported to them for my humor, and they receiue it so, and doe expect it. TOM OTTERS bull, beare, and horse is knowne all ouer England, in rerum natura.
                        
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Fore me, I wil na-ture 'hem ouer to Paris-garden, and na-ture you thether too, if you pronounce 'hem againe. Is a beare a fit beast, or a bull, to mixe in society with great ladies? thinke i' your discretion, in any good politie.
                     
                     
                        
                        OTT.
                        The horse then, good Princesse.
                     
                     
                        Mrs OT.
                        Well, I am contented for the horse: they loue to bee well hors'd, I know. I loue it my selfe.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        And it is a delicate fine horse this. Poetarum Pegasus. Vnder correction, Princesse, IVPITER did turne himselfe into a—Taurus, or Bull, vnder correction, good Princesse.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        By my integritie, I'll send you ouer to the banke-side, I'll commit you to the Master of the garden, if I heare but a syllable more. Must my house, or my roofe, be polluted with the sent of beares, and buls, when it is perfum'd for great ladies? Is this according to the instrument, when I married you? That I would bee Princesse, and raigne in mine owne house: and you would be my subiect, and obay me? What did you bring me, should make you thus peremptory? Do I allow you your halfe-crowne a day, to spend, where you will, among your gamsters, to vexe and torment me, at such times as these? Who giues you your maintenance, I pray you? who allowes you your horse-meat, and mans-meat? your three sutes of apparell a yeere? your foure paire of stockings, one silke, three worsted? your cleane linnen, your bands, and cuffes when I can get you to weare 'hem? 'Tis mar'l you ha'hem on now. Who graces you with courtiers, or great personages, to speake to you out of their coaches, and come home to your house? Were you euer so much as look'd vpon by a lord, or a lady, before I married you: but on the Easter or Whitson-holy-daies? and then out at the banquetting-house windore, when NED WHITING, or GEORGE STONE, were at the stake?
                     
                     
                        (TRV.
                        For gods sake, let's goe staue her off him.)
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Answere me to that. And did not I take you vp from thence, in an old greasie buffe-doublet, with points; and greene vellet sleeues, out at the elbowes? you forget this.
                     
                     
                        (TRV.
                        Shee'll worry him, if we helpe not in time.)
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        O, here are some o'the gallants! Goe to, behaue your selfe distinctly, and with good moralitie; Or, I protest, I'll take away your exhibition.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act. III. Scene II.
                     TRVE-WIT, Mrs. OTTER, CAP. OTTER, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE, CVTBERD.
                     
                        BY your leaue, faire mistris OTTER, I'll be bold to enter these gentlemen in your acquaintance.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        It shall not be obnoxious, or difficill, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        How do's my noble Captaine? Is the bull, beare, and horse, in rerum natura still?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Sir, Sic visum superis.
                        
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        I would you would but intimate 'hem, doe. Goe your waies in, and get tosts, and butter, made for the wood-cocks. That's a sit prouince for you.
                     
                     
                        
                        CLE.
                        Alas, what a tyrannie, is this poore fellow married too.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, but the sport will be anon, when we get him loose.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Dares he euer speake?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        No Anabaptist euer rail'd with the like licence: but marke her language in the meane time, I beseech you.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Gentlemen, you are very aptly come. My cosin, sir AMOROVS, will be here briefly.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        In good time lady. Was not sir IOHN DAW here, to aske for him, and the companie?
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        I cannot assure you, Mr. TRVE-WIT. Here was a very melancholy knight in a ruffe, that demanded my subiect for some body, a gentleman, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I, that was he, lady.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        But he departed straight, I can resolue you.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        What an excellent choice phrase, this lady expresses in!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, sir! shee is the onely authenticall courtier, that is not naturally bred one, in the citie.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        You haue taken that report vpon trust, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        No, I assure you, the court gouernes it so, lady, in your behalfe.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        I am the seruant of the court, and courtiers, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        They are rather your idolaters.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Not so, sir.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        How now, CVTBERD? Any crosse?
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        O, no sir: Omnia bene. 'Twas neuer better o'the hinges, all's sure. I haue so pleas'd him with a curate, that hee's gone too't almost with the delight he hopes for soone.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        What is he, for a vicar?
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        One that has catch'd a cold, sir, and can scarse bee heard sixe inches off; as if he spoke out of a bull-rush, that were not pickt, or his throat were full of pith: a fine quick fellow, and an excellent barber of prayers. I came to tell you, sir, that you might omnem mouere lapidem (as they say) be readie with your vexation.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Gramercy, honest CVTBERD, be there abouts with thy key to let vs in.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        I will not faile you, sir: Ad manum.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Well, I'll goe watch my coaches.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Doe; and wee'll send DAW to you, if you meet him not.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Is master TRVE-WIT gone?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Yes, lady, there is some vnfortnnate businesse fallen out.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        So I iudg'd by the phisiognomy of the fellow, that came in; and I had a dreame last night too of the new pageant, and my lady Maioresse, which is alwaies very ominous to me. I told it my lady HAVGHTY t'other day; when her honour came hether to see some China stuffes: and shee expounded it, out of ARTEMIDORVS, and I haue found it since very true. It has done me many affronts.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Your dreame, lady?
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Yes, sir, anything I doe but dreame o'the city. It staynd me a damasque table-cloth, cost me eighteen pound at one time; and burnt me

a blacke satten gowne, as I stood by the fire, at my ladie CENTAVRES chamber in the colledge, another time. A third time, at the Lords masque, it dropt all my wire, and my ruffe with waxe-candle, that I could not goe vp to the banquet. A fourth time, as I was taking coach to goe to Ware, to meet a friend, it dash'd me a new sute all ouer (a crimson sattin doublet, and blacke veluet skirts) with a brewers horse, that I was faine to goe in and shift mee, and kept my chamber a leash of daies for the anguish of it.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        These were dire mischances, lady.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I would not dwell in the citie, and 'twere so fatall to mee.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Yes sir, but I doe take aduise of my doctor, to dreame of it as little, as I can.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        You doe well, mistris OTTER.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Will it please you to enter the house farther, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        And your fauour, lady: but we stay to speake with a knight, sir IOHN DAW, who is here come. We shall follow you, lady.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        At your owne time, sir. It is my cosen sir AMOROVS his feast.—
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        I know it lady.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        And mine together. But it is for his honour; and therefore I take no name of it, more then of the place.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        You are a bounteous kinswoman.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Your seruant, sir.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene III.
                     CLERIMONT, DAW, LA-FOOLE, DAVPHINE, OTTER.
                     
                        WHy doe not you know it, sir IOHN DAW?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        No, I am a rooke if I doe.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I'll tell you then, shee's married by this time! And whereas you were put i' the head, that shee was gone with sir DAVPHINE, I assure you, sir DAVPHINE has beene the noblest, honestest friend to you, that euer gentleman of your quality could boast off. He has discouer'd the whole plot, and made your mistris so acknowledging, and indeed, so ashamed of her iniurie to you, that she desires you to forgiue her, and but grace her wedding with your presence to day— She is to be married to a very good fortune, she saies, his vnkle, old MOROSE: and she will'd me in priuate to tell you, that she shall be able to doe you more fauours, and with more securitie now, then before.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Did she say so, i'faith?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, what doe you thinke of mee, sir IOHN! aske sir DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Nay, I beleeue you. Good sir DAVPHINE, did shee desire mee to forgiue her?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I assure you, sir IOHN, she did.
                     
                     
                        
                        DAW.
                        Nay then, I doe with all my heart, and I'll be iouiall.
                        
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Yes, for looke you sir, this was the iniury to you. LA-FOOLE intended this feast to honour her bridale day, and made you the propertie to inuite the colledge ladies, and promise to bring her: and then at the time, shee should haue appear'd (as his friend) to haue giuen you the dor. Whereas now, sir DAVPHINE has brought her to a feeling of it, with this kinde of satisfaction, that you shall bring all the ladies to the place where shee is, and be verie iouiall; and there, shee will haue a dinner, which shall be in your name: and so dis-appoint LA-FOOLE, to make you good againe, and (as it were) a sauer i' the man.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        As I am a knight, I honour her, and forgiue her hartily.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        About it then presently, TRVE-WIT is gone before to confront the coaches, and to acquaint you with so much, if hee meet you. Ioyne with him, and 'tis well. See, here comes your Antagonist, but take you no notice, but be verie iouiall.
                        
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Are the ladies come, sir IOHN DAW, and your mistris? sir DAVPHINE! you are exceeding welcome, and honest master CLERIMONT. Where's my cossen? did you see no collegiats, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Collegiats! Doe you not heare, sir AMOROVS, how you are abus'd?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        How sir!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Will you speake so kindly to sir IOHN DAW, that has done you such an affront?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Wherein, gentlemen? let me be a sutor to you to know, I beseech you!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why sir, his mistris is married to day, to sir DAVPHINES vncle, your cosens neighbour, and hee has diuerted all the ladies, and all your company thether, to frustrate your provision, and sticke a digrace vpon you. He was here, now, to haue intic'd vs away from you too: but we told him his owne, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Has sir IOHN DAW wrong'd me so in-humanely?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        He has done it, sir AMOROVS, most maliciously, and trecherously: but if you'll be rul'd by vs, you shall quit him i' faith.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Good gentlemen! I'll make one, beleeue it. How I pray?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Mary sir, get me your phesants, and your godwits, and your best meat, and dish it in siluer dishes of your cosens presently, and say nothing, but clap mee a cleane towell about you, like a sewer; and bare-headed, march afore it with a good confidence ('tis but ouer the way, hard by) and we'll second you, where you shal set it o'the boord, and bid 'hem welcome to't, which shall show 'tis yours, and disgrace his preparation vtterly: and, for your cosen, whereas shee should bee troubled here at home with care of making and giuing welcome, shee shall transferre all that labour thether, and bee a principall guest her selfe, sit rank'd with the colledge-Honors, and bee honor'd, and haue her health drunke as often, as bare, and as lowd as the best of 'hem.
                     
                     
                        
                        LA-F.
                        I'll goe tell her presently. It shall be done, that's resolu'd.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I thought he would not heare it out, but 'twould take him.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Well, there be guests, & meat now; how shal we do for musique?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        The smell of the venison, going through the street, will inuite one noyse of fidlers, or other.
                     
                     
                        DAVP:
                        I would it would call the trumpeters thether.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Faith, there is hope, they haue intelligence of all feasts. There's good correspondence betwixt them, and the London-cookes. 'Tis twenty to one but we haue 'hem.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        'Twill be a most solemne day for my vncle, and an excellent fit of mirth for vs.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I, if we can hold vp the aemulation betwixt FOOLE, and DAW, and neuer bring them to expostulate.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Tut, flatter 'hem both (as TRVE-WIT sayes) and you may take their vnderstandings in a purse-net. They'll beleeue themselues to be iust such men as we make 'hem, neither more nor lesse. They haue nothing, not the vse of their senses, but by tradition.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        He enters like a sewer.
                        See! Sir AMOROVS has his towell on already. Haue you perswaded your cossen?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Yes, 'tis verie faesible: shee'll do any thing she sayes, rather then the LA-FOOLES shall be disgrac'd.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        She is a noble kinswoman. It will be such a pest'ling deuice, sir AMOROVS! It will pound all your enemies practises to poulder, and blow him vp with his owne mine, his owne traine.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Nay, wee'll giue fire, I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        But you must carry it priuatly, without any noyse, and take no notice by any meanes—
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Gentlemen, my Princesse sayes, you shall haue all her siluer dishes, festinate: and she's gone to alter her tyre a little, and go with you—
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        And yourselfe too, captaine OTTER.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        By any meanes, sir.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Yes sir, I doe meane it: but I would entreate my cosen sir AMOROVS, and you gentlemen, to be sutors to my Princesse, that I may carry my bull, and my beare, as well as my horse.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        That you shall doe, captaine OTTER.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        My cosen will neuer consent, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        She must consent, sir AMOROVS, to reason.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Why, she sayes they are no decorum among ladies.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        But they are decora, and that's better, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I, shee must heare argument. Did not PASIPHAE, who was a queene, loue a bull? and was not CALISTO, the mother of ARCAS, turn'd into a beare, and made a starre, mistris VRSVLA, i' the heauens?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        O God! that I could ha' said as much! I will haue these stories painted i' the beare-garden, ex Ouidij metamorphosi.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Where is your Princesse, Captaine? pray' be our leader.
                     
                     
                        
                        OTT.
                        That I shall, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Make haste, good sir AMOROVS.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene IIII.
                     MOROSE, EPICOENE, PARSON, CVTBERD.
                     
                        SIr, there's an angel for your selfe, and a brace of angels for your cold. Muse not at this mannage of my bounty. It is fit wee should thanke fortune, double to nature, for any benefit she conferres vpon vs; besides, it is your imperfection, but my solace.
                     
                     
                        PAR.
                        The parson speakes, as hauing a cold.
                         I thanke your worship, so is it mine, now.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What sayes he, CVTBERD?
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        He saies, Praesto, sir, whensoeuer your worship needes him, hee can be ready with the like. He got this cold with sitting vp late, and singing catches with cloth-workers.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        No more. I thanke him.
                     
                     
                        PAR.
                        He coughes.
                        God keepe your worship, and giue you much ioy with your faire spouse. (Vmh, vmh.)
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, Ô, stay CVTBERD! let him giue me fiue shillings of my money backe. As it is bounty to reward benefits, so is it equity to mulct iniuries. I will haue it. What sayes he?
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        He cannot change it, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        It must be chang'd.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Cough againe.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What sayes he?
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        He will cough out the rest, sir.
                     
                     
                        PAR.
                        Againe.
                         (Vmh, vmh, vmh.)
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Away, away with him, stop his mouth, away, I forgiue it.—
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Fye, master MOROSE, that you will vse this violence to a man of the church.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        It do's not become your grauity, or breeding, (as you pretend in court) to haue offer'd this outrage on a water-man, or any more boystrous creature, much lesse on a man of his ciuill coat.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        You can speake then!
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Speake out I meane.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I sir. Why, did you thinke you had married a statue? or a motion, onely? one of the French puppets, with the eyes turn'd with a wire? or some innocent out of the hospitall, that would stand with her hands thus, and a playse mouth, and looke vpon you.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O immodestie! a manifest woman! what CVTBERD?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Nay, neuer quarrell with CVTBERD, sir, it is too late now. I

confesse, it doth bate somewhat of the modestie I had, when I writ simply maide: but I hope, I shall make it a stocke still competent, to the estate, and dignity of your wife.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Shee can talke!
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Yes indeed, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What, sirrah. None of my knaues, there? where is this impostor, CVTBERD?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Speake to him, fellow, speake to him. I'll haue none of this coacted, vnnaturall dumbnesse in my house, in a family where I gouerne.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        She is my Regent already! I haue married a PENTHESILEA, a SEMIRAMIS, sold my liberty to a distaffe!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene V.
                     TRVE-WIT, MOROSE, EPICOENE
                     
                        WHere's master MOROSE?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Is he come againe! lord haue mercy vpon me.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I wish you all ioy, mistris EPICOENE, with your graue and honourable match.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I returne you the thankes, master TRVE-WIT, so friendly a wish deserues.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        She has acquaintance, too!
                     
                     
                        TRV
                        God saue you, sir, and giue you all contentment in your faire choise, here. Before I was the bird of night to you, the owle but now I am the messenger of peace, a doue, and bring you the glad wishes of many friends, to the celebration of this good houre.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What houre, sir?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Your marriage houre sir. I commend your resolution, that (notwithstanding all the dangers I laid afore you, in the voice of a night-crow) would yet goe on, and bee your selfe. It shewes you are a man constant to your own ends, and vpright to your purposes, that would not be put off with left-handed cries.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        How should you arriue at the knowledge of so much!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, did you euer hope, sir, committing the secrecie of it to a barber, that lesse then the whole towne should know it? you might as well ha' told it the conduit, or the bake-house, or the infant'ry that follow the court, and with more securitie. Could your grauitie forget so olde and noted a remnant, as lippis & tonsoribus notum. Well sir, forgiue it your selfe now, the fault, and be communicable with your friends. Here will bee three or foure fashionable ladies, from the colledge to visit you presently, and their traine of minions, and followers.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Barre my dores! barre my dores! where are all my eaters? my mouthes now? barre vp my dores, you varlets.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        He is a varlet, that stirres to such an office. Let 'hem stand open.

I would see him that dares mooue his eyes toward it. Shal I haue a barricado made against my friends, to be barr'd of any pleasure they can bring in to me with honorable visitation.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O Amazonian impudence!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay faith, in this, sir, she speakes but reason: and me thinkes is more continent then you. Would you goe to bed so presently, sir, afore noone? a man of your head, and haire, should owe more to that reueuerend ceremony, and not mount the marriage-bed, like a towne-bul, or a mountaine-goate; but stay the due season; and ascend it then with religion, and feare. Those delights are to be steep'd in the humor, and silence of the night; and giue the day to other open pleasures, and jollities of feast, or musique, of reuells, of discourse: wee'll haue all, sir, that may make your Hymen high, and happy.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, my torment, my torment!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, if you indure the first halfe houre, sir, so tediously, and with this irksomnesse; what comfort, or hope, can this faire gentlewoman make to her selfe hereafter, in the consideration of so many yeeres as are to come—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Of my affliction. Good sir, depart, and let her doe it alone.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I haue done, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        That cursed barber!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        (Yes faith, a cursed wretch indeed, sir.)
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I haue married his citterne, that's common to all men. Some plague, aboue the plague—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        (All Egypts ten plagues)
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Reuenge me on him.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        'Tis very well, sir. If you laid on a curse or two, more, I'll assure you hee'll beare 'hem. As, that he may get the poxe with seeking to cure it, sir? Or, that while he is curling another mans haire, his owne may drop off? Or, for burning some male-baudes lock, he may haue his braine beat out with the curling-iron?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        No, let the wretch liue wretched. May he get the itch, and his shop so lousie, as no man dare come at him, nor he come at no man.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        (I, and if he would swallow all his balles for pills, let not them purge him)
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Let his warning pan be euer cold.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        (A perpertuall frost vnderneath it, sir)
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Let him neuer hope to see fire againe.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        (But in hell, sir)
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        His chaires be alwaies empty, his scissors rust, and his combes mould in their cases.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Very dreadfull that! (And may hee loose the inuention, sir, of caruing lanternes in paper)
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Let there be no baud carted that yeere, to employ a bason of his: but let him be glad to eate his sponge, for bread.
                     
                     
                        
                        TRV.
                        And drinke lotium to it, and much good doe him.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Or, for want of bread—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Eat eare-waxe, sir. I'll helpe you. Or, draw his owne teeth, and adde them to the lute-string.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        No, beate the old ones to poulder, and make bread of them.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        (Yes, make meale o'the millstones.)
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        May all the botches, and burnes, that he has cur'd on others, breake out vpon him.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And he now forget the cure of 'hem in himselfe, sir: or, if he do remember it, let him ha' scrap'd all his linnen into lint for't, and haue not a rag left him, to set vp with.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Let him neuer set vp againe, but haue the gout in his hands for euer. Now, no more, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O that last was too high set! you might goe lesse with him i'faith, and bee reueng'd enough: as, that he be neuer able to new-paint his pole—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Good sir, no more. I forgot my selfe.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Or, want credit to take vp with a combe-maker—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        No more, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Or, hauing broken his glasse in a former despaire, fall now into a much greater, of euer getting another—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I beseech you, no more.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Or, that he neuer be trusted with trimming of any but chimney-sweepers —
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Sir—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Or, may he cut a colliers throat with his rasor, by chance-medlee, and yet hang for't.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I will forgiue him, rather then heare any more. I beseech you, sir.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene VI.
                     DAW, MOROSE, TRVE-WIT, HAVGHTY, CENTAVRE, MAVIS, TRVSTY.
                     
                        THis way, madame.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, the sea breakes in vpon me! another floud! an inundation! I shall be orewhelm'd with noise. It beates already at my shores. I feele an earthquake in my selfe, for't.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        'Giue you ioy, mistresse.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Has shee seruants too!
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        She kisses them seuerally as he presents them.
                        I haue brought some ladies here to see, and know you. My ladie HAVGHTY, this my lady CENTAVRE, mistresse DOL MAVIS, mistresse TRVSTIE my ladie HAVGHTIES woman. Where's your husband? let's see him: can he endure no noise? let me come to him.
                     
                     
                        
                        MOR.
                        What nomenclator is this!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Sir IOHN DAW, sir, your wifes seruant, this.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        A DAW, and her seruant! O, 'tis decreed, 'tis decreed of mee, and shee haue such seruants.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay sir, you must kisse the ladies, you must not goe away, now; they come toward you, to seeke you out.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        I'faith, master MOROSE, would you steale a marriage thus, in the midst of so many friends, and not acquaint vs? Well, I'll kisse you, notwithstanding the iustice of my quarrell: you shall giue me leaue, mistresse, to vse a becomming familiarity with your husband.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Your ladiship do's me an honour in it, to let me know hee is so worthy your fauour: as, you haue done both him and me grace, to visit so vnprepar'd a paire to entertaine you.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Complement! complement!
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        But I must lay the burden of that, vpon my seruant, here.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        It shall not need, mistresse MOROSE, we will all beare, rather then one shall be opprest.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I know it: and you will teach her the faculty, if shee bee to learne it.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Is this the silent woman?
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Nay, shee has found her tongue since shee was married, master TRVE-WIT sayes.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        O, master TRVE-WIT! 'saue you. What kinde of creature is your bride here? she speakes, me thinkes!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes madame, beleeue it, she is a gentlewoman of very absolute behauiour, and of a good race.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        And IACK DAW told vs, she could not speake.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        So it was carried in plot, madam, to put her vpon this old fellow, by sir DAVPHINE, his nephew, and one or two more of vs: but shee is a woman of an excellent assurance, and an extraordinarie happie wit, and tongue. You shall see her make rare sport with DAW, ere night.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        And he brought vs to laugh at her!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        That falls out often, madame, that he that thinkes himselfe the master-wit, is the master-foole. I assure your lady-ship, yee cannot laugh at her.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        No, well haue her to the colledge: and shee haue wit, she shall bee one of vs! shall shee not CENTAVRE? wee'll make her a collegiate.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Yes faith, madame, and MAVIS, and shee will set vp a side.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Beleeue it madame, and mistris MAVIS, shee will sustaine her part.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        I'll tell you that, when I haue talk'd with her, and try'd her.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Vse her very ciuilly, MAVIS.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        So I will, madame.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Blessed minute, that they would whisper thus euer.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        In the meane time, madame, would but your lady-ship helpe to

vexe him a little: you know his disease, talke to him about the wedding ceremonies, or call for your gloues, or—
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Let me alone. CENTAVRE, helpe me. Mr. bride-groome, where are you?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, it was too miraculously good to last!
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Wee see no ensignes of a wedding, here; no character of a brideale: where be our skarfes, and our gloues? I pray you, giue 'hem vs. Let's know your brides colours, and yours, at least.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Alas, madame, he has prouided none.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Had I knowne your ladiships painter, I would.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        He has giuen it you, CENTAVRE, yfaith. But, doe you heare, M. MOROSE, a iest will not absolue you in this manner. You that haue suck'd the milke of the court, and from thence haue beene brought vp to the very strong meates, and wine, of it; beene a courtier from the biggen, to the night-cap: (as we may say) and you, to offend in such a high point of ceremonie, as this! and let your nuptialls want all markes of solemnitie! How much plate haue you lost to day (if you had but regarded your profit) what guifts, what friends, through your meere rusticitie?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Madame—
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Pardon mee, sir, I must insinuate your errours to you. No gloues? no garters? no skarfes? no epithalamium? no masque?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Yes, madame, I'll make an epithalamium, I promis'd my mistris, I haue begunne it already: will your ladiship heare it?
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        I, good IACK DAW.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Will it please your ladiship command a chamber, and be priuate with your friend? you shall haue your choice of roomes, to retire to after: my whole house is yours. I know, it hath beene your ladiships errand, into the city, at other times, how euer now you haue beene vnhappily diuerted vpon mee: but I shall be loth to breake any honorable custome of your ladiships. And therefore, good madame—
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Come, you are a rude bride-groome, to entertayne ladies of honour in this fashion.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        He is a rude groome, indeed.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        By that light, you deserue to be grafted, and haue your hornes reach from one side of the Iland, to the other. Doe not mistake me, sir, I but speake this, to giue the ladies some heart againe, not for any malice to you.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Is this your Brauo, ladies?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        As god helpe me, if you vtter such another word, I'll take mistris bride in, and beginne to you, in a very sad cup, doe you see? Goe too, know your friends, and such, as loue you.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act III. Scene VII.
                     CLERIMONT, MOROSE, TRVE-WIT, DAVPHINE, LA-FOOLE, OTTER, Mrs. OTTER, &c.
                     
                        Musique of all sorts.
                        BY your leaue, ladies. Doe you want any musique? I haue brought you varietie of noyses. Play, sirs, all of you.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, a plot, a plot, a plot, a plot vpon me! This day, I shall be their anvile to worke on, they will grate me asunder. 'Tis worse then the noyse of a saw.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No, they are haire, rosin, and guts. I can giue you the receipt.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Peace, boyes.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Play, I
                              •
                           say.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        La-Foole passes oue
                              •
                            sewing the meate.
                        Peace, rascalls. You see who's your friend now, sir? Take courage, put on a martyrs resolution. Mocke downe all their attemptings, with patience. 'Tis but a day, and I would suffer heroically. Should an asse exceed me in fortitude? No. You betray your infirmitie with your hanging dull eares, and make them insult: beare vp brauely, and constantly. Looke you here, sir, what honour is done you vnexpected, by your nephew; a wedding dinner come, and a Knight sewer before it, for the more reputation: and fine Mrs. OTTER, your neighbour, in the rump, or tayle of it.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Is that Gorgon, that Medusa come? Hide me, hide me.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I warrant you, sir, shee will not transforme you. Looke vpon her with a good courage. Pray you entertayne her, and conduct your guests in. No? Mistris bride, will you entreat in the ladies? your bridegroome is so shame-fac'd, here—
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Will it please your ladiship, madame?
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        With the benefit of your companie, mistris.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Seruant, pray you performe your duties.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        And glad to be commanded, mistris.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        How like you her wit, MAVIS.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Very prettily, absolutely well.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        'Tis my place.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        You shall pardon me, mistris OTTER.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Why I am a collegiate.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        But not in ordinary.
                     
                     
                        Mrs OT.
                        But I am.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Wee'll dispute that within.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Would this had lasted a little longer.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And that they had sent for the Heralds. Captayne OTTER, what newes?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I haue brought my bull, beare, and horse, in priuate, and yonder are the trumpetters without, and the drum, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        
                        MOR.
                        The Drum, and Trumpets sound.
                        O, Ô, Ô. 
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        And we will haue a rouse in each of'hem, anon, for bold Britons, yfaith.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, Ô, Ô.
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        Follow, follow, follow.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act IIII.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     TRVE-WIT, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE.
                     
                        WAs there euer poore bride-groome so tormented? or man indeed?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I haue not read of the like, in the chronicles of the land.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Sure, hee cannot but goe to a place of rest, after all this purgatorie.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        He may presume it, I thinke.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        The spitting, the coughing, the laughter, the neesing, the farting, dauncing, noise of the musique, and her masculine, and lowd commanding, and vrging the whole family, makes him thinke he has married a furie.
                        
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        And shee carries it vp brauely.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I, shee takes any occasion to speake: that's the height on't.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        And how soberly DAVPHINE labours to satisfie him, that it was none of his plot!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And has almost brought him to the faith, i' the article. Here he comes. Where is he now? what's become of him, DAVPHINE?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        O, hold me vp a little, I shall goe away i' the iest else. Hee has got on his whole nest of night-caps, and lock'd himselfe vp, i' the top o' the house, as high, as euer he can climbe from the noise. I peep'd in at a crany, and saw him fitting ouer a crosse-beame o' the roofe, like him o' the sadlers horse in Fleetstreet, vp-right: and he will sleepe there.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        But where are your collegiates?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        With-drawne with the bride in priuate.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, they are instructing her i' the colledge-Grammar. If shee haue grace with them, shee knowes all their secrets instantly.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Methinks, the lady HAVGHTY lookes well to day, for all my dispraise of her i' the morning. I thinke, I shall come about to thee againe, TRVE-WIT.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Beleeue it, I told you right. Women ought to repaire the losses, time and yeeres haue made i' their features, with dressings. And an intelligent woman, if shee know by her selfe the least defect, will bee most curious, to hide it: and it becomes her. If shee be short, let her sit much, lest when shee stands, shee be thought to sit. If shee haue an ill foot, let her weare her gowne the longer, and her shoo the thinner. If a fat hand, and scald nailes, let her carue the lesse, and act in gloues. If a sowre breath, let

her neuer discourse fasting: and alwaies talke at her distance. If shee haue black and rugged teeth, let her offer the lesse at laughter, especially if shee laugh wide, and open.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, you shall haue some women, when they laugh, you would thinke they bray'd, it is so rude, and —
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I, and others, that will stalke i' their gait like an Estrich, and take huge strides. I cannot endure such a sight. I loue measure i' the feet, and number i' the voice: they are gentlenesses, that oft-times draw no lesse then the face.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        How cam'st thou to studie these creatures so exactly? I would thou would'st make me a proficient.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes, but you must leaue to liue i'your chamber then a month together vpon AMADIS de Gaule, or Don QVIXOTE, as you are wont; and come abroad where the matter is frequent, to court, to tiltings, publique showes, and feasts, to playes, and church sometimes: thither they come to shew their new tyres too, to see, and to be seene. In these places a man shall find whom to loue, whom to play with, whom to touch once, whom to hold euer. The varietie arrests his iudgement. A wench to please a man comes not downe dropping from the seeling, as he lyes on his backe droning a tobacco pipe. He must goe where shee is.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Yes, and be neuer the neere.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Out heretique. That diffidence makes thee worthy it should bee so.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        He sayes true to you, DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Why?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        A man should not doubt to ouer-come any woman. Thinke he can vanquish 'hem, and he shall: for though they denie, their desire is to be tempted. PENELOPE her selfe cannot hold out long. Ostend, you saw, was taken at last. You must perseuer, and hold to your purpose. They would sollicite vs, but that they are afraid. Howsoeuer, they wish in their hearts we should sollicite them. Praise 'hem, flatter 'hem, you shal neuer want eloquence, or trust: euen the chastest delight to feele themselues that way rub'd. With praises you must mixe kisses too. If they take them, they'll take more. Though they striue, they would bee ouer-come.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, but a man must beware of force.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        It is to them an acceptable violence, and has oft-times the place of the greatest courtesie. Shee that might haue beene forc'd, and you let her goe free without touching, though shee then seeme to thanke you, will euer hate you after: and glad i' the face, is assuredly sad at the heart.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        But all women are not to be taken alwaies.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        'Tis true. No more then all birds, or all fishes. If you appeare learned to an ignorant wench, or iocund to a sad, or witty to a foolish, why shee presently begins to mistrust her selfe. You must approch them i' their owne height, their owne line: for the contrary makes many that feare to

commit themselues to noble and worthy fellowes, run into the imbraces of a rascall. If shee loue wit, giue verses, though you borrow 'hem of a friend, or buy 'hem, to haue good. If valour, talke of your sword, and be frequent in the mention of quarrels, though you be staunch in fighting. If actiuitie, be seene o' your barbary often, or leaping ouer stooles, for the credit of your back. If shee loue good clothes or dressing, haue your learned counsell about you euery morning, your french taylor, barber, linnener, &c. Let your poulder, your glasse, and your combe, be your dearest acquaintance. Take more care for the ornament of your head, then the safetie: and wish the common-wealth rather troubled, then a haire about you. That will take her. Then if shee be couetous and crauing, doe you promise any thing, and performe sparingly: so shall you keepe her in appetite still. Seeme as you would giue, but be like a barren field that yeelds little, or vnlucky dice, to foolish, and hoping gamesters. Let your gifts be slight, and daintie, rather then pretious. Let cunning be aboue cost. Giue cherries at time of yeere, or apricots; and say they were sent you out o' the countrey, though you bought 'hem in Cheap-side. Admire her tyres; like her in all fashions; compare her in euery habit to some deitie; inuent excellent dreames to slatter her, and riddles; or, if shee bee a great one, performe alwaies the second parts to her: like what shee likes, praise whom she praises, and faile not to make the houshold and seruants yours, yea the whole family, and salute 'hem by their names: ('tis but light cost if you can purchase 'hem so) and make her physitian your pensioner, and her chiefe woman. Nor will it bee out of your gaine to make loue to her too, so shee follow, no vsher, her ladies pleasure. All blabbing is taken away, when shee comes to be a part of the crime.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        On what courtly lap hast thou late slept, to come forth so sudden and absolute a courtling?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Good faith, I should rather question you, that are so harkning after these mysteries. I begin to suspect your diligence. DAVPHINE. Speake, art thou in loue in earnest?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Yes by my troth am I: 'twere ill dissembling before thee.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        With which of 'hem, I pray thee?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        With all the collegiates.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Out on thee. Wee'll keepe you at home, beleeue it, i' the stable, and you be such a stallion.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        No. I like him well. Men should loue wisely, and all women: some one for the face, and let her please the eye; another for the skin, and let her please the touch; a third for the voice, and let her please the eare; and where the obiects mixe, let the senses so too. Thou wouldst thinke it strange, if I should make 'hem all in loue with thee afore night!
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        I would say thou had'st the best philtre i' the world, and couldst doe more then madame MEDEA, or Doctor FOREMAN.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        If I doe not, let me play the mounte-banke for my meate while I liue, and the bawd for my drinke.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        So be it, I say.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene II.
                     OTTER, CLERIMONT, DAW, DAVPHINE, MOROSE, TRVE-WIT, LA-FOOLE, Mrs. OTTER.
                     
                        O Lord, gentlemen, how my knights and I haue mist you here!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, Captaine, what seruice? what seruice?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        To see me bring vp my bull, beare, and horse to fight.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Yes faith, the Captaine saies we shall be his dogs to baite 'hem.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        A good imployment.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Come on, let's see a course then.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I am afraid my cousin will be offended if shee come.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Be afraid of nothing. Gentlemen, I haue plac'd the drum and the trumpets, and one to giue 'hem the signe when you are ready. Here's my bull for my selfe, and my beare for sir IOHN DAW, and my horse for sir AMOROVS. Now set your foot to mine, and yours to his, and —
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Pray god my cousin come not.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Saint GEORGE, and saint ANDREW, feare no cousins. Come, sound, sound. Et rauco strepuerunt cornua cantu.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Well said, Captaine, yfaith: well fought at the bull.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Well held at the beare.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Low, low, Captayne.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        O, the horse has kickt off his dog alreadie.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I cannot drinke it, as I am a Knight.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Gods so, off with his spurres, some-body.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        It goes againe my conscience. My cousin will bee angrie with it.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I ha' done mine.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You fought high and faire, sir IOHN.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        At the head.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Like an excellent beare-dog.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        You take no notice of the businesse, I hope.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Not a word, sir, you see we are iouiall.
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Sir AMOROVS, you must not aequiuocate. It must bee pull'd downe, for all my cousin.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Sfoot, if you take not your drinke, they'll thinke you are discontented wit some thing: you'll betray all, if you take the least notice.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Not I, I'll both drinke, and talke then.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        You must pull the horse on his knees, sir AMOROVS: feare no cousins. Iacta est alea.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, now hee's in his vaine, and bold. The least hint giuen him of his wife now, will make him raile desperately.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Speake to him of her.
                     
                     
                        
                        TRV.
                        Doe you, and I'll fetch her to the hearing of it.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Captaine hee-OTTER, your shee-OTTER is comming, your wife.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Wife! Buz. Titiuilitium. There's no such thing in nature. I confesse, gentlemen, I haue a cook, a laundresse, a house-drudge, that serues my necessary turnes, and goes vnder that title: But hee's an asse that will be so vxorious, to tie his affections to one circle. Come, the name dulls appetite. Here, replenish againe: another bout. Wiues are nasty sluttish animalls.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        O, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        As euer the earth bare, tribus verbis. Where's master TRVE-WIT?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Hee's slipt aside, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        But you must drinke, and be iouiall.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Yes, giue it me.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        And me, too.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Let's be iouiall.
                        
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        As iouiall as you will.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Agreed. Now you shall ha' the beare, cousin, and sir IOHN DAW the horse, and I'll ha' the bull still. Sound Tritons o' the Thames. Nunc est bibendum, nunc pede libero—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Morose speakes from aboue: the trumpets sounding.
                        Villaines, murderers, sonnes of the earth, and traitors, what doe you there?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, now the trumpets haue wak'd him, we shall haue his companie.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        A wife is a sciruy clogdogdo; an vnlucky thing, a very foresaid beare-whelpe, without any good fashion or breeding: mala bestia.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        His wife is brought out to beare him.
                        Why did you marry one then, Captaine?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        A poxe—I married with sixe thousand pound, I▪ I was in loue with that. I ha' not kist my furie, these fortie weekes.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        The more to blame you, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, mistris OTTER, heare him a little first.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Shee has a breath worse then my grand-mothers, profecto.
                        
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        O treacherous lyar. Kisse mee, sweet master TRVE-WIT, and proue him a slaundering knaue.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I'll rather beleeue you, lady.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        And shee has a perruke, that's like a pound of hempe, made vp in shoo-thrids.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        O viper, mandrake!
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        A most vile face! and yet shee spends me fortie pound a yeere in mercury, and hogs-bones. All her teeth were made i' the Blacke-Friers: both her eye-browes i' the Strand, and her haire in Siluer-street. Euery part o' the towne ownes a peece of her.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        I cannot hold.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        She takes her selfe asunder still when she goes to bed, into some

twentie boxes; and about next day noone is put together againe, like a great Germane clocke: and so comes forth and rings a tedious larum to the whole house, and then is quiet againe for an houre, but for her quarters. Ha' you done me right, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Shee falls vpon him and beates him.
                         No, sir, I'll do you right with my quarters, with my quarters.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        O, hold, good Princesse.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Sound, sound.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        A battell, a battell.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        You notorious stinkardly beareward, do's my breath smell?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Vnder correction, deare Princesse: looke to my beare, and my horse, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Doe I want teeth, and eye-browes, thou bull-dog?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Sound, sound still.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        No, I protest, vnder correction—
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        I, now you are vnder correction, you protest: but you did not protest before correction, sir. Thou IVDAS, to offer to betray thy Princesse! I'll make thee an example—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Morose descends with a long sword.
                         I will haue no such examples in my house, lady OTTER.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Ah—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Mrs. MARY AMBREE, your examples are dangerous. Rogues, Hell-hounds, Stentors, out of my dores, you sonnes of noise and tumult, begot on an ill May-day, or when the Gally-foist is a-floate to Westminster! A trumpetter could not be conceiu'd, but then!
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        What ailes you, sir?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        They haue rent my roofe, walls, and all my windores asunder, with their brazen throates.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Best follow him, DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        So I will.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Where's DAW, and LA-FOOLE?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        They are both run away, sir. Good gentlemen, helpe to pacifie my Princesse, and speake to the great ladies for me. Now must I goe lie with the beares this fortnight, and keepe out o' the way, till my peace be made, for this scandale shee has taken. Did you not see my bull-head, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Is't not on, Captayne?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        No: but he may make a new one, by that, is on.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        O, here 'tis. And you come ouer, gentlemen, and aske for TOM OTTER, wee'll goe downe to Rat
                                 •
                              liffe, and haue a course ysaith: for all these disasters. There's bona spes left.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Away, Captaine, get off while you are well.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I am glad we are rid of him.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You had neuer beene, vnlesse wee had put his wife vpon him. His humour is as tedious at last, as it was ridiculous at first.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene III.
                     HAVGHTY, Mrs. OTTER, MAVIS, DAW, LA-FOOLE, CENTAVRE, EPICOENE, TRVEWIT, CLERIMONT.
                     
                        WE wondred why you shreek'd so, Mrs. OTTER.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        O god, madame, he came downe with a huge long naked weapon in both his hands, and look'd so dreadfully! Sure, hee's beside himselfe.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Why what made you there, mistris OTTER?
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Alas, mistris MAVIS, I was chastising my subiect, and thought nothing of him.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Faith, mistris, you must doe so too. Learne to chastise. Mistris OTTER corrects her husband so, hee dares not speake, but vnder correction.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        And with his hat off to her: 'twould doe you good to see.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        In sadnesse 'tis good, and mature counsell: practise it, MOROSE. I'll call you MOROSE still now, as I call CENTAVRE, and MAVIS: we foure will be all one.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        And you'll come to the colledge, and liue with vs?
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Make him giue milke, and hony.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Looke how you manage him at first, you shall haue him euer after.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Let him allow you your coach, and foure horses, your woman, your chamber-maid, your page, your gentleman-vsher, your french cooke, and foure groomes.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        And goe with vs, to Bed'lem, to the China houses, and to the Exchange.
                        
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        It will open the gate to your fame.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Here's CENTAVRE has immortaliz'd her selfe, with taming of her wilde male.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        I, shee has done the miracle of the kingdome.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        But ladies, doe you count it lawfull to haue such pluralitie of seruants, and doe 'hem all graces?
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Why not? why should women denie their fauours to men? Are they the poorer, or the worse?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Is the Thames the lesse for the dyers water, mistris?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Or a torch, for lighting many torches?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Well said, LA-FOOLE; what a new one he has got?
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        They are emptie losses, women feare, in this kind.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Besides, ladies should be mindfull of the approach of age, and let no time want his due vse. The best of our daies passe first.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        We are riuers, that cannot be call'd backe, madame: shee that

now excludes her louers, may liue to lie a forsaken beldame, in a frozen bed.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        'Tis true, MAVIS: and who will wait on vs to coach then? or write, or tell vs the newes then? Make anagrammes of our names, and inuite vs to the cock-pit, and kisse our hands all the play-time, and draw their weapons for our honors?
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Not one.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Nay, my mistris is not altogether vn-intelligent of these things; here be in presence haue tasted of her fauours.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        What a neighing hobby-horse is this!
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        But not with intent to boast 'hem againe, seruant. And haue you those excellent receits, madame, to keepe your selues from bearing of children?
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        O yes, MOROSE. How should we maintayne our youth and beautie, else? Many births of a woman make her old, as many crops make the earth barren.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene IIII.
                     MOROSE, DAVPHINE, TRVE-WIT, EPICOENE, CLERIMONT, DAW, HAVGHTY, LA-FOOLE, CENTAVRE, MAVIS, Mrs. OTTER, TRVSTY.
                     
                        O My cursed angell, that instructed me to this fate!
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Why, sir?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        That I should bee seduc'd by so foolish a deuill, as a barber will make!
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        I would I had beene worthy, sir, to haue partaken your counsell, you should neuer haue trusted it to such a minister.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Would I could redeeme it with the losse of an eye (nephew) a hand, or any other member.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Mary, god forbid, sir, that you should geld your selfe, to anger your wife.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        So it would rid me of her! and, that I did supererogatorie penance, in a bellfry, at Westminster-hall, i' the cock-pit, at the fall of a stagge; the tower-whar
                              •
                           e (what place is there else?) London-bridge, Paris-garden, Belins-gate, when the noises are at their height and lowdest. Nay, I would sit out a play, that were nothing but fights at sea, drum, trumpet, and target!
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        I hope there shall be no such need, sir. Take patience, good vncle. This is but a day, and 'tis well worne too now.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, 'twill bee so for euer, nephew, I foresee it, for euer. Strife and tumult are the dowrie that comes with a wife.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I told you so, sir, and you would not beleeue me.
                     
                     
                        
                        MOR.
                        Alas, doe not rub those wounds, master TRVE-WI
                              •
                           , to bloud againe: 'twas my negligence. Adde not affliction to affliction. I haue perceiu'd the effect of it, too late, in madamme OTTER.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        How doe you, sir?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Did you euer heare a more vnnecessary question? as if she did not see! Why, I doe as you see, Empresse, Empresse.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        You are not well, sir! you looke very ill! something has distempered you.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O horrible, monstrous impertinencies! would not one of these haue seru'd? doe you thinke, sir? would not one of these haue seru'd?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes, sir, but these are but notes of female kindnesse, sir: certaine tokens that shee has a voice, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, is't so? come, and 't be no otherwise—what say you?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        How doe you feele your selfe, sir?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Againe, that!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, looke you, sir: you would be friends with your wife vpon vn-conscionable termes, her silence—
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        They say you are run mad, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Not for loue, I assure you, of you; doe you see?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        O lord, gentlemen! Lay hold on him for gods sake: what shal I doe? who's his physitian (can you tel) that knowes the state of his body best, that I might send for him? Good sir, speake. I'll send for one of my doctors else.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What, to poyson me, that I might die intestate, and leaue you possest of all?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Lord, how idly he talkes, and how his eyes sparkle! He lookes greene about the temples! Doe you see what blue spots he has?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I, it's melancholy.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Gentlemen, for heauens sake counsell me. Ladies! Seruant, you haue read PLINY, and PARACELSVS: Ne're a word now to comfort a poore gentlewoman? Ay me! what fortune had I to marry a distracted man?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I'll tell you, mistris—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        How rarely shee holds it vp!
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What meane you, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        What will you tell me, seruant?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        The disease in Greeke is called , in Latine, Insania, Furor, vel Ecstasis melancholica, that is, Egressio, when a man ex melancholico, euadit fanaticus.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Shall I haue a lecture read vpon me aliue?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        But he may be but Phreneticus, yet, mistris? and Phrenetis is only delirium, or so—
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I, that is for the disease, seruant: but what is this to the cure? we are sure inough of the disease.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Let me goe.
                     
                     
                        
                        TRV.
                        Why, wee'll intreat her to hold her peace, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, no. Labour not to stop her. Shee is like a conduit-pipe, that will gush out with more force, when shee opens againe.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        I'll tell you, MOROSE, you must talke diuinitie to him altogether, or morall philosophie.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I, and there's an excellent booke of morall philosophie, madame, of RAYNARD the foxe, and all the beasts, call'd, DONES philosophie.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        There is, indeed, sir AMOROVS LA-FOOLE.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O miserie!
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I haue read it, my lady CENTAVRE, all ouer to my cousin, here.
                     
                     
                        Mrs OT.
                        I, and 'tis a very good booke as any is, of the Modernes.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Tut, hee must haue SENECA read to him, and PLVTARCH, and the Ancients; the Modernes are not for this disease.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, you discommended them too, to day, sir IOHN.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I, in some cases: but in these they are best, and ARISTOTLES Ethicks.
                        
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Say you so, sir IOHN? I thinke you are deceiu'd: you tooke it vpon trust.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Where's TRVSTY, my woman? I'll end this difference. I pr'ythee, OTTER, call her. Her father and mother were both mad, when they put her to me.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I thinke so. Nay, gentlemen, I am tame. This is but an exercise, I know, a marriage ceremonie, which I must endure.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        And one of 'hem (I know not which) was cur'd with the Sickmans salue; and the other with GREENES groates-worth of wit.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        A very cheape cure, madame.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        I, it very faesible.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        My lady call'd for you, mistris TRVSTY: you must decide a controuersie.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        O TRVSTY, which was it you said, your father, or your mother, that was cur'd with the Sicke-mans salue?
                        
                     
                     
                        TRVS.
                        My mother, madame, with the salue.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Then it was the Sicke-womans salue.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRVS.
                        And my father with the Groates-worth of wit. But there was other meanes vs'd: we had a Preacher that would preach folke asleepe still; and so they were prescrib'd to goe to church, by an old woman that was their physitian, thrise a weeke—
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        To sleepe?
                     
                     
                        TRVS.
                        Yes forsooth: and euery night they read themselues asleepe on those bookes.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Good faith, it stands with great reason. I would I knew where to procure those bookes.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Oh.
                     
                     
                        
                        LA-F.
                        I can helpe you with one of 'hem, mistris MOROSE, the groatsworth of wit.
                        
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        But I shall disfurnish you, sir AMOROVS: can you spare it?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        O, yes, for a weeke, or so; I'll reade it my selfe to him.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        No, I must doe that, sir: that must be my office.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Oh, oh!
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Sure, he would doe well inough, if he could sleepe.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        No, I should doe well inough, if you could sleepe. Haue I no friend that will make her drunke? or giue her a little ladanum? or opium?
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, sir, shee talkes ten times worse in her sleepe.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Doe you not know that, sir? neuer ceases all night.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And snores like a por
                                 •
                              pisce.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, redeeme me, fate, redeeme me, fate. For how many causes may a man be diuorc'd, nephew?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        I know not truely, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Some Diuine must resolue you in that, sir, or canon-Lawyer.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I will not rest, I will not thinke of any other hope or comfort, till I know.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Alas, poore man.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You'll make him mad indeed, ladies, if you pursue this.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        No, wee'll let him breathe, now, a quarter of an houre, or so.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        By my faith, a large truce.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Is that his keeper, that is gone with him?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        It is his nephew, madame.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Sir DAVPHINE EVGENIE.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        He lookes like a very pittifull knight—
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        As can be. This marriage, has put him out of all.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        He has not a penny in his purse, madame—
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        He is readie to crie all this day.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        A very sharke, he set me i' the nicke t'other night at primero.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        How these swabbers talke!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I, OTTERS wine has swell'd their humours aboue a springtide.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Good MOROSE, let's goe in againe. I like your couches exceeding well: wee'll goe lie, and talke there.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I wait on you, madame.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        'Slight, I wil haue 'hem as silent as Signes, & their posts too, e're I ha' done. Doe you heare, lady-bride? I pray thee now, as thou art a noble wench, continue this discourse of DAVPHINE within: but praise him exceedingly. Magni
                              •
                           ie him with all the height of affection thou canst. (I haue some purpose in't) and but beate off these two rookes, IACK DAW, and his fellow, with any discontentment hither, and I'll honour thee for euer.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I was about it, here. It angred mee to the soule, to heare 'hem

beginne to talke so malepert.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Pray thee performe it, and thou win'st mee an idolater to thee, euerlasting.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Will you goe in, and heare me doe it?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        No, I'll stay here. Driue 'hem out of your companie, 'tis all I aske: which cannot bee any way better done, then by extolling DAVPHINE, whom they haue so slighted.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I warrant you: you shall expect one of 'hem presently.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        What a cast of kastrils are these, to hawke after ladies, thus?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I, and strike at such an eagle as DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        He will be mad, when we tell him. Here he comes.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene V.
                     CLERIMONT, TRVE-WIT, DAVPHINE, DAW, LA-FOOLE.
                     
                        O Sir, you are welcome.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Where's thine vncle?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Run out o' dores in's night-caps, to talke with a Casuist about his diuorce. It workes admirably.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Thou would'st ha' said so, and thou had'st beene here! The ladies haue laught at thee, most comically, since thou wentst, DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        And askt, if thou wert thine vncles keeper?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And the brace of Babouns answer'd, yes; and said, thou wert a pittifull poore fellow, and did'st liue vpon posts: and had'st nothing but three sutes of apparell, and some few beneuolences that lords ga' thee to foole to 'hem, and swagger.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Let me not liue, I'll beate 'hem. I'll binde 'hem both to grand Madames bed-postes, and haue 'hem bayted with monkeyes.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Thou shalt not need, they shall be beaten to thy hand, DAVPHINE. I haue an execution to serue vpon 'hem, I warrant thee shall serue: trust my plot.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        I, you haue many plots! So you had one, to make all the wenches in loue with me.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, if I doe not yet afore night, as neere as 'tis; and that they doe not euery one inuite thee, and be ready to scratch for thee: take the morgage of my wit.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        'Fore god, I'll be his witnesse; thou shalt haue it, DAVPHINE: thou shalt be his foole for euer, if thou doest not.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Agreed. Perhaps 'twill bee the better estate. Doe you obserue this gallerie? or rather lobby, indeed? Here are a couple of studies, at each end one: here will I act such a tragi-comoedy betweene the Guelphes, and the Ghibellines, DAW and LA-FOOLE—which of 'hem comes out first, will I

seize on: (you two shall be the chorus behind the arras, and whip out betweene the acts, and speake.) If I doe not make 'hem keepe the peace, for this remnant of the day, if not of the yeere, I haue faild once—I heare DAW comming: Hide, and doe not laugh, for gods sake.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Which is the way into the garden, trow▪
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, IACK DAW! I am glad I haue met with you. In good faith, I must haue this matter goe no furder betweene you. I must ha' it taken vp.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        What matter, sir? Betweene whom?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Come, you disguise it—Sir AMOROVS and you. If you loue me IACK, you shall make vse of your philosophy now, for this once, and deliuer me your sword. This is not the wedding the CENTAVRES were at, though there be a shee-one here. The bride has entreated me I will see no bloud shed at her bridall, you saw her whisper me ere-while.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        As I hope to finish TACITVS, I intend no murder.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Doe you not wait for sir AMOROVS?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Not I, by my knight-hood.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And your schollership too?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        And my schollership too.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Goe to, then I returne you your sword, and aske you mercy; but put it not vp, for you will be assaulted. I vnderstood that you had apprehended it, and walkt here to braue him: and that you had held your life contemptible, in regard of your honor.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        No, no, no such thing I assure you. He and I parted now, as good friends as could be.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Trust not you to that visor. I saw him since dinner with another face: I haue knowne many men in my time vex'd with losses, with deaths, and with abuses, but so offended a wight as sir AMOROVS, did I neuer see, or read of. For taking away his guests, sir, to day, that's the cause: and hee declares it behind your backe, with such threatnings and contempts— He said to DAVPHINE, you were the errandst asse—
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I, he may say his pleasure.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And sweares, you are so protested a coward, that hee knowes you will neuer doe him any manly or single right, and therefore hee will take his course.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I'll giue him any satisfaction, sir—but fighting.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I, sir, but who knowes what satisfaction hee'll take? bloud he thirsts for, and bloud he will haue: and where-abouts on you he will haue it, who knowes, but himselfe?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I pray you, master TRVE-WIT, be you a mediator.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        He puts him vp.
                        Well, sir, conceale your selfe then in this studie, till I returne. Nay, you must bee content to bee lock'd in: for, for mine owne reputation I would not haue you seene to receiue a publique disgrace, while I haue the matter in managing. Gods so, here hee comes: keepe your

breath close, that hee doe not heare you sigh. In good faith, sir AMOROVS, hee is not this way, I pray you bee mercifull, doe not murder him; hee is a christian as good as you: you are arm'd as if you sought a reuenge on all his race. Good DAVPHINE, get him away from this place. I neuer knew a mans choller so high, but hee would speake to his friends, hee would heare reason. IACK DAW, IACK DAW! a-sleepe?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Is he gone, master TRVE-WIT?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I, did you heare him?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        O god, yes.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        What a quick eare feare has?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        But is he so arm'd, as you say?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Arm'd? did you euer see a fellow, set out to take possession?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        That may giue you some light, to conceiue of him: but 'tis nothing to the principall. Some false brother i' the house has furnish'd him strangely▪ Or, if it were out o' the house, it was TOM OTTER.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Indeed, hee's a Captayne, and his wife is his kinswoman.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Hee has got some-bodies old two-hand-sword, to mow you off at the knees. And that sword hath spawn'd such a dagger!—but then he is so hung with pikes, halberds, peitronells, calliuers, and muskets, that he lookes like a Iustice of peace's hall: a man of two thousand a yeere, is not sess'd at so many weapons, as he has on. There was neuer fencer challeng'd at so many seuerall foiles. You would thinke hee meant to murder all Saint PVLCHRES parish. If hee could but victuall himselfe for halfe a yeere, in his breeches, hee is sufficiently arm'd to ouer-runne a countrie.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Good lord, what meanes he, sir! I pray you, master TRVEWIT, be you a mediator.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Well, I'll trie if he will be appeas'd with a leg or an arme, if not, you must die once.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I would be loth to loose my right arme, for writing madrigalls.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, if he will be satisfied with a thumb, or a little finger, all's one to me. You must thinke, I'll doe my best.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Good sir, doe.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        He puts him vp againe, and then came forth.
                         What hast thou done?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        He will let me doe nothing, man, he do's all afore me, he offers his left arme.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        His left wing, for a IACK DAW.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Take it, by all meanes.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        How! Maime a man for euer, for a iest? what a conscience hast thou?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        'Tis no losse to him: he has no employment for his armes, but to eate spoone-meate. Beside, as good maime his body as his reputation.
                     
                     
                        
                        TRV.
                        He is a scholler, and a Wit, and yet he do's not thinke so. But he looses no reputation with vs, for we all resolu'd him an asse before. To your places againe.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        I pray thee, let me be in at the other a little.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Looke, you'll spoile all: these be euer your tricks.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No, but I could hit of some things that thou wilt misse, and thou wilt say are good ones.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I warrant you. I pray forbeare, I'll leaue it off, else.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Come away, CLERIMONT.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Sir AMOROVS!
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Master TRVE-WIT.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Whether were you going?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Downe into the court, to make water.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        By no meanes, sir, you shall rather tempt your breeches.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Why, sir?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Enter here, if you loue your life.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Why! why!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Question till your throat bee cut, doe: dally till the enraged soule find you.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Who's that?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        DAW it is: will you in?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I, I, I'll in: what's the matter?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, if hee had beene coole inough to tell vs that, there had beene some hope to attone you, but he seemes so implacably enrag'd.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        'Slight, let him rage. I'll hide my selfe.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Doe, good sir. But what haue you done to him within, that should prouoke him thus? you haue broke some iest vpon him, afore the ladies—
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Not I, neuer in my life, broke iest vpon any man. The bride was praising sir DAVPHINE, and he went away in snuffe, and I followed him, vnlesse he tooke offence at me, in his drinke ere while, that I would not pledge all the horse full.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        By my faith, and that may bee, you remember well: but hee walkes the round vp and downe, through euery roome o' the house, with a towell in his hand, crying, where's LA-FOOLE? who saw LA-FOOLE? and when DAVPHINE, and I, demanded the cause, wee can force no answere from him, but (Ô reuenge, how sweet art thou! I will strangle him in this towell) which leads vs to coniecture, that the maine cause of his furie is for bringing your meate to day, with a towell about you, to his discredit.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Like inough. Why, and he be angrie for that, I'll stay here, till his anger be blowne ouer.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        A good becomming resolution, sir. If you can put it on o' the sudden.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Yes, I can put it on. Or, I'll away into the country presently.
                     
                     
                        
                        TRV.
                        How will you get out o' the house, sir? Hee knowes you are i' the house, and hee'll watch you this se'n-night but hee'll haue you. Hee'll out-wait a sargeant for you.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Why, then I'll stay here.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You must thinke, how to victuall your selfe in time, then.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Why, sweet master TRVE-WIT, will you entreat my cousin OTTER, to send me a cold venison pasty, a bottle or two of wine, and a chamber pot.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        A stoole were better, sir, of sir A-IAX his inuention.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I, that will be better indeed: and a pallat to lie on.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, I would not aduise you to sleepe by any meanes.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Would you not, sir? why, then I will not.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yet, there's another feare—
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Is there, sir? What is't?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        No, he cannot breake open this dore with his foot, sure.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I'll set my backe against it, sir. I haue a good backe.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        But, then if he should batter.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Batter! if he dare, I'll haue an action of batt'ry, against him.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        He faines, as if one were present, 
                              •
                           o fright the other, who is run in to hide himselfe.
                        Cast you the worst. He has sent for poulder alreadie, and what he will doe with it, no man knowes: perhaps blow vp the corner o' the house, where he suspects you are. Here he comes, in quickly. I protest, sir IOHN DAW, he is not this way: what will you doe? before god, you shall hang no petarde here. I'll die rather. Will you not take my word? I neuer knew one but would be satisfied. Sir AMOROVS, there's no standing out. He has made a petarde of an old brasse pot, to force your dore. Thinke vpon some satisfaction, or termes, to offer him.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Sir, I'll giue him any satisfaction. I dare giue any termes.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You'll leaue it to me, then?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I, sir. I'll stand to any conditions.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        He calls forth Clerimont, and Dauphine.
                         How now, what thinke you, sirs? wer't not a difficult thing to determine, which of these two fear'd most.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Yes, but this feares the brauest: the other a whiniling dastard, IACK DAW! but LA-FOOLE, a braue heroique coward! and is afraid in a great looke, and a stout accent. I like him rarely.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Had it not beene pitty, these two should ha' beene conceal'd?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Shall I make a motion?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Briefly. For I must strike while 'tis hot.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Shall I goe fetch the ladies to the catastrophe?
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Vmh? I, by my troth.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        By no mortall meanes. Let them continue in the state of ignorance, and erre still: thinke 'hem wits, and fine fellowes, as they haue done. 'Twere sinne to reforme them.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Well, I will haue 'hem fetch'd, now I thinke on't, for a priuate purpose of mine: doe, CLERIMONT, fetch 'hem, and discourse to hem all that's past, and bring 'hem into the gallery here.
                     
                     
                        
                        DAV.
                        This is thy extreme vanitie, now: thou think'st thou wert vndone, if euery iest thou mak'st were not publish'd.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Thou shalt see, how vniust thou art, presently. CLERIMONT, say it was DAVPHINE'S plot. Trust me not, if the whole drift be not for thy good. There's a carpet i' the next roome, put it on, with this scarfe ouer thy face, and a cushion o' thy head, and bee ready when I call AMOROVS. Away—IOHN DAW.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        What good newes, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Faith, I haue followed, and argued with him hard for you. I told him, you were a knight, and a scholler; and that you knew fortitude did consist magis patiendo quam faciendo, magis ferendo quam feriendo.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        It doth so indeed, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And that you would suffer, I told him: so, at first he demanded, by my troth, in my conceipt, too much.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        What was it, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Your vpper lip, and sixe o'your fore-teeth.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        'Twas vnreasonable.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, I told him plainely, you could not spare 'hem all. So after long argument (pro & con, as you know) I brought him downe to your two butter-teeth, and them he would haue.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        O, did you so? why, he shall haue 'hem.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        But he shall not, sir, by your leaue. The conclusion is this, sir, because you shall be very good friends hereafter, and this neuer to bee remembred, or vp-braided; besides, that he may not boast, he has done any such thing to you in his owne person: hee is to come here in disguise, giue you fiue kicks in priuate, sir, take your sword from you, and lock you vp in that studie, during pleasure. Which will be but a little while, wee'll get it releas'd presently.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Fiue kicks? he shall haue sixe, sir, to be friends.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Beleeue mee, you shall not ouer-shoot your selfe, to send him that word by me.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Deliuer it, sir. He shall haue it with all my heart, to be friends.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Friends? Nay, and he should not be so, and heartily too, vpon these termes, he shall haue me to enemie while I liue. Come, sir, beare it brauely.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        O god, sir, 'tis nothing.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        True. What's sixe kicks to a man, that reads SENECA?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I haue had a hundred, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Dauphine comes forth, and kick him.
                        Sir AMOROVS. No speaking one to another, or rehearsing old matters.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        One, two, three, foure, fiue. I protest, sir AMOROVS, you shall haue sixe.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, I told you should not talke. Come, giue him six, & he will needs. Your sword. Now returne to your safe custody: you shall presently meet afore the ladies, and be the dearest friends one to another—Giue me

the scarfe, now, thou shalt beat the other bare-fac'd. Stand by, sir AMOROVS.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        What's here? A sword.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I cannot helpe it, without I should take the quarrell vpon my selfe: here he has sent you his sword—
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I'll receiue none on't.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        And he wills you to fasten it against a wall, and breake your head in some few seuerall places against the hilts.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I will not: tell him roundly. I cannot endure to shed my owne bloud.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Will you not?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        No. I'll beat it against a faire flat wall, if that will satisfie him: If not, he shall beat it himselfe, for AMOROVS.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, this is strange starting off, when a man vnder-takes for you! I offered him another condition: Will you stand to that?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I, what is't.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        That you will be beaten, in priuate.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Yes. I am content, at the blunt.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Then you must submit your selfe to bee hood-wink'd in this skarfe, and bee led to him, where hee will take your sword from you, and make you beare a blow, ouer the mouth, gules, and tweakes by the nose, sans numbre.
                        
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I am content. But why must I be blinded?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        That's for your good, sir: because, if hee should grow insolent vpon this, and publish it hereafter to your disgrace (which I hope he will not doe) you might sweare safely and protest, hee neuer beat you, to your knowledge.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        O, I conceiue.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I doe not doubt, but you'll be perfect good friends vpon't, and not dare to vtter an ill thought one of another, in future.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Not I, as god helpe me, of him.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nor he of you, sir. If he should— Come, sir. All hid, sir IOHN.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Dauphine enters to tweake him.
                         Oh, sir IOHN, sir IOHN. Oh, Ô-Ô-Ô-Ô-Ô-Oh—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Good, sir IOHN, leaue tweaking, you'll blow his nose off. 'Tis sir IOHN'S pleasure, you should retire into the studie. Why, now you are friends. All bitternesse betweene you, I hope, is buried; you shall come forth by and by, DAMON & PYTHIAS vpon't: and embrace with all the ranknesse of friendship that can be. I trust, wee shall haue 'hem tamer i' their language hereafter. DAVPHINE, I worship thee. Gods will, the ladies haue surpris'd vs!
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VI.
                     HAVGHTY,  CENTAVRE, MAVIS, Mrs. OTTER, EPICOENE, TRVSTY, DAVPHINE, TRVE-WIT, &c.
                     
                        Hauing discouerd part of the past scene, above.
                     
                     
                        CENTAVRE, how our iudgements were impos'd on by these adulterate knights!
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Nay, madame, MAVIS was more deceiu'd then we, 'twas her commendation vtter'd 'hem in the colledge.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        I commended but their wits, madame, and their braueries. I neuer look'd toward their valours.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Sir DAVPHINE is valiant, and a wit too, it seemes?
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        And a brauerie too.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Was this his proiect?
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        So master CLERIMONT intimates, madame.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Good MOROSE, when you come to the colledge, will you bring him with you? He seemes a very perfect gentleman.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        He is so, madame, beleeue it.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        But when will you come, MOROSE?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Three or foure dayes hence, madame, when I haue got mee a coach, and horses.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        No, to morrow, good MOROSE, CENTAVRE shall send you her coach.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Yes faith, doe, and bring sir DAVPHINE with you.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Shee has promis'd that, MAVIS.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        He is a very worthy gentleman, in his exteriors, madame.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        I, he showes he is iudiciall in his clothes.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        And yet not so superlatiuely neat as some, madame, that haue their faces set in a brake!
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        I, and haue euery haire in forme!
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        That weare purer linnen then our selues, and professe more neatnesse, then the french hermaphrodite!
                        
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I ladies, they, what they tell one of vs, haue told a thousand, and are the only theeues of our fame: that thinke to take vs with that perfume, or with that lace, and laugh at vs vn-conscionably when they haue done.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        But, sir DAVPHINES carelesnesse becomes him.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        I could loue a man, for such a nose!
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Or such a leg!
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        He has an exceeding good eye, madame!
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        And a very good lock!
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Good MOROSE, bring him to my chamber first.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Please your honors, to meet at my house, madame?
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        See, how they eye thee, man! they are taken, I warrant thee.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        You haue vnbrac'd our brace of knights, here, master TRVE-WIT.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Not I, madame, it was sir DAVPHINES ingine: who, if he haue
disfurnish'd your ladiship of any guard, or seruice by it, is able to make
the place good againe, in himselfe.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        There's no suspition of that, sir.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        God so, MAVIS, HAVGHTY is kissing.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Let vs goe too, and take part.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        But I am glad of the fortune (beside the discouerie of two such
emptie caskets) to gaine the knowledge of so rich a mine of vertue, as sir
DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        We would be al glad to stile him of our friendship, and see him
at the colledge.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        He cannot mixe with a sweeter societie, I'll prophesie, and I
hope he himselfe will thinke so.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        I should be rude to imagine otherwise, lady.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Did not I tell thee, DAVPHINE? Why, all their actions are gouerned
by crude opinion, without reason or cause; they know not why
they doe any thing, without reason or cause; they know not why
they doe any thing: but as they are inform'd, beleeue, iudge, praise,
condemne, loue, hate, and in aemulation one of another, doe all these things
alike. Onely, they haue a naturall inclination swayes 'hem generally to the
worst, when they are left to themselues. But, pursue it, now thou hast 'hem.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Shall we goe in againe, MOROSE?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Yes, madame.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Wee'll entreat sir DAVPHINES companie.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Stay, good madame, the inter-view of the two friends,
PYLADES and ORESTES: I'll fetch 'hem out to you straight.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Will you, master TRVE-WIT?
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        I, but noble ladies, doe not confesse in your countenance, or
outward bearing to 'hem any discouerie of their follies, that wee may see,
how they will beare vp againe, with what assurance, and erection.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        We will not, sir DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        CEN. MAV.
                        Vpon our honors, sir DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Sir AMOROVS, sir AMOROVS. The ladies are here.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Are they?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes, but slip out by and by, as their backs are turn'd, and meet
sir IOHN here, as by chance, when I call you. IACK DAW.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        What say you, sir?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Whip out behind me suddenly: and no anger i' your lookes to
your aduersarie. Now, now.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Noble sir IOHN DAW! where ha' you beene?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        To seeke you, sir AMOROVS.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Me! I honor you.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I preuent you, sir.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        They haue forgot their rapiers!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, they meet in peace, man.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Where's your sword, sir IOHN?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        And yours, sir AMOROVS?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Mine! my boy had it forth, to mend the handle, eene now.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        And my gold handle was broke too, and my boy had it forth.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Indeed, sir? How their excuses meet!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        What a consent there is, i' the handles?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, there is so i' the points too, I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        O me! madame, he comes againe, the man man, away.
                     
                  
                  
                     Act IIII. Scene VII.
                     MOROSE, TRVE-WIT, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE.
                     He had found the two swords drawne within.
                     
                        VVHat make these naked weapons here, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, sir! here hath like to been murder since you went!
A couple of knights fallen out about the brides fauours: wee
were faine to take away their weapons, your house had beene beg'd by
this time else—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        For what?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        For man-slaughter, sir, as being accessary.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        And, for her fauours?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        I, sir, heretofore, not present. CLERIMONT, carry 'hem their
swords, now. They haue done all the hurt they will doe.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Ha' you spke with a lawyer, sir?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, no! there is such a noyse i' the court, that they haue frighted
mee home, with more violence then I went! such speaking, and counter-speaking,
with their seuerall voyces of citations, appellations, allegations,
certificates, attachments, intergatories, references, conuictions, and
afflictions indeed, among the Doctors and Proctors! that the noise here is
silence too 't! a kind of calme mid-night!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, sir, if you would be resolu'd indeed, I can bring you hether
a very sufficient Lawyer, and a learned Diuine, that shall inquire into
euery least scruple for you.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Can you, master TRVE-WIT?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes, and are very sober graue persons, that will dispatch it in a
chamber, with a whisper, or two.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Good sir, shall I hope this benefit from you, and trust my selfe
into your hands?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Alas, sir! your nephew, and I, haue beene asham'd, and oft-times
mad since you went, to thinke how you are abus'd. Goe in, good
sir, and lock your selfe vp til! we call you, wee'll tell you more anon, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Doe your pleasure with me, gentlemen; I beleeue in you: and
that deserues no delusion—
                     
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You shall find none, sir: but heapt, heapt plentie of vexation.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        What wilt thou doe now, WIT?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Recouer me hether OTTER, and the Barber, if you can, by any meanes, presently.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Why? to what purpose?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, I'll make the deepest Diuine, and grauest Lawyer, out o' them two, for him—
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Thou canst not man, these are waking dreames.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Doe not feare me. Clap but a ciuill gowne with a welt, o' the one; and a canonical cloake with sleeues, o' the other: and giue 'hem a few termes i' their mouthes, if there come not forth as able a Doctor, and compleat a Parson, for this turne, as may be wish'd, trust not my election. And, I hope, without wronging the dignitie of either profession, since they are but persons put on, and for mirths sake, to torment him. The Barber smatters latin, I remember.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Yes, and OTTER too.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Well then, if I make 'hem not wrangle out this case, to his no comfort, let me be thought a IACK DAW, or LA-FOOLE, or any thing worse. Goe you to your ladies, but first send for them.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        I will.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act V.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     LA-FOOLE, CLERIMONT, DAW, MAVIS.
                     
                        WHere had you our swords, master CLERIMONT?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, DAVPHINE tooke 'hem from the mad-man.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        And he tooke 'hem from our boyes, I warrant you?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Very like, sir.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Thanke you, good master CLERIMONT. Sir IOHN DAW, and I are both beholden to you.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Would I knew how to make you so, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Sir AMOROVS, and I are your seruants, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Gentlemen, haue any of you a pen-and-inke. I would faine write out a riddle in Italian, for sir DAVPHINE, to translate.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Not I, in troth lady, I am no scriuener.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I can furnish you, I thinke, lady.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        He has it in the haft of a knife, I beleeue!
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        No, he has his boxe of instruments.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Like a surgean!
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        For the mathematiques: his squire, his compasses, his brasse pens, and black-lead, to draw maps of euery place, and person, where he comes.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        How, maps of persons!
                     
                     
                        
                        LA-F.
                        Yes, sir, of NOMENTACK, when he was here, and of the Prince of Moldauia, and of his mistris, mistris EPICoeNE.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Away! he has not found out her latitude, I hope.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        You are a pleasant gentleman, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Faith, now we are in priuate, let's wanton it a little, and talke waggishly. Sir IOHN, I am telling sir AMOROVS here, that you two gouerne the ladies, where e're you come, you carry the feminine gender afore you.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        They shall rather carry vs afore them, if they will, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nay, I beleeue that they doe, withall—But, that you are the prime-men in their affections, and direct all their actions—
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Not I: sir AMOROVS is.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I protest, sir IOHN is.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        As I hope to rise i'the state, sir AMOROVS, you ha' the person.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Sir IOHN, you ha' the person, and the discourse too.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Not I, sir. I haue no discourse—and then you haue actiuitie beside.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I protest, sir IOHN, you come as high from Tripoly, as I doe euery whit: and lift as many ioyn'd stooles, and leape ouer 'hem, if you would vse it—
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Well, agree on't together knights; for betweene you, you diuide the kingdome, or common-wealth of ladies affections: I see it, and can perceiue a little how they obserue you, and feare you, indeed. You could tell strange stories, my masters, if you would, I know.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Faith, we haue seene somewhat, sir.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        That we haue—vellet petti-coates, & wrought smocks, or so.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I, and—
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nay, out with it, sir IOHN: doe not enuie your friend the pleasure of hearing, when you haue had the delight of tasting.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Why—a—doe you speake, sir AMOROVS.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        No, doe you, sir IOHN DAW.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        I'faith, you shall.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I'faith, you shall.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Why, we haue beene—
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        In the great bed at Ware together in our time. On, sir IOHN.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Nay, doe you, sir AMOROVS.
                     
                     
                        CRE.
                        And these ladies with you, Knights?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        No, excuse vs, sir.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        We must not wound reputation.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        No matter—they were these, or others. Our bath cost vs fifteene pound, when we came home.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Doe you heare, sir IOHN, you shall tell me but one thing truely, as you loue me.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        If I can, I will, sir.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        You lay in the same house with the bride, here?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Yes, and conuerst with her hourely, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        And what humour is shee of? is shee comming, and open, free?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        O, exceeding open, sir. I was her seruant, and sir AMOROUS was to be.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Come, you haue both had fauours from her? I know, and haue heard so much.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        O, no, sir.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        You shall excuse vs, sir: we must not wound reputation.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Tut, shee is married, now; and you cannot hurt her with any report, and therefore speake plainely: how many times, yfaith? which of you lead first? Ha?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Sir IOHN had her mayden-head, indeed.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        O, it pleases him to say so, sir, but sir AMOROVS knowes what's what, as well.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Do'st thou yfaith, AMOROVS?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        In a manner, sir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, I commend you lads. Little knowes Don Bride-groome of this. Nor shall he, for me.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Hang him, mad oxe.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        SPeake softly: here comes his nephew, with the lady HAVGHTY. Hee'll get the ladies from you, sirs, if you looke not to him in time.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Why, if he doe, wee'll fetch 'hem home againe, I warrant you.
                     
                  
                  
                     Act V. Scene II.
                     HAVGHTY, DAVPHINE, CENTAVRE, MAVIS, CLERIMONT.
                     
                        I Assure you, sir DAVPHINE, it is the price and estimation of your vertue onely,
that hath embarqu'd me to this aduenture, and I could not but make out to tell you so;
nor can I repent me of the act, since it is alwayes an argument of some vertue in our selues,
that we loue and affect it so in others.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        Your ladiship sets too high a price, on my weakenesse.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Sir, I can distinguish gemmes from peebles—
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        (Are you so skilfull in stones?)
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        And, howsoeuer I may suffer in such a iudgement as yours, by
admitting equality of ranke, or societie, with CENTAVRE, or MAVIS—
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        You doe not, madame, I perceiue they are your mere foiles.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Then are you a friend to truth, sir. It makes mee loue you the
more. It is not the outward, but the inward man that I affect. They are
not apprehensiue of an eminent perfection, but loue flat, and dully.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Where are you, my lady HAVGHTY?
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        I come presently, CENTAVRE. My chamber, sir, my Page shall
show you; and TRVSTY, my woman, shall be euer awake for you: you
need not feare to communicate anything with her, for shee is a FIDELIA.
I pray you weare this iewell for my sake, sir DAVPHINE. Where's MAVIS,
CENTAVRE?
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Within, madame, a writing. I'll follow you presently. I'll but
speake a word with sir DAVPHINE.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        With me, madame?
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Good sir DAVPHINE, doe not trust HAVGHTY, nor make any
credit to her, what euer you doe besides. Sir DAVPHINE, I giue you this
caution, shee is a perfect courtier, and loues no body, but for her vses:
and for her vses, shee loues all. Besides, her physitians giue her out to be
none o' the clearest, whether she pay 'hem or no, heau'n knowes: and she's
aboue fiftie too, and pargets! See her in a fore-noone. Here comes MAVIS,
a worse face then shee! you would not like this, by candle-light. If
you'll come to my chamber one o' these mornings early, or late in an euening,
I'll tell you more. Where's HAVGHTY, MAVIS?
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Within, CENTAVRE.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        What ha' you, there?
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        An Italian riddle for sir DAVPHINE, (you shall not see it yfaith,
CENTAVRE.) Good sir DAVPHINE, solue it for mee. I'll call for it
anon.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        How now, DAVPHINE? how do'st thou quit thy selfe of these females?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        'S light, they haunt me like fayries, and giue me iewells here, I
cannot be rid of 'hem.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        O, you must not tell, though.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Masse, I forgot that: I was neuer so assaulted. One loues for vertue, and bribes me with this. Another loues me with caution, and so would possesse me. A third brings me a riddle here, and all are iealous: and raile each at other.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        A riddle? pray' le' me see 't? Sir DAVPHINE, I chose this way of
intimation for priuacie. The ladies here, I know, haue both hope, and purpose,
to make a collegiate and seruant of you. If I might be so honor'd, as to appeare
at any end of so noble a worke, I would enter into a fame of taking physique tomorrow,
and continue it foure or fiue dayes, or longer, for your visitation. MAVIS.
By my faith, a subtle one! Call you this a reiddle? What's their plaine
dealing, trow?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        We lack TRVE-WIT, to tell vs that.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        We lack him for somewhat else too: his Knights reformados
are wound vp as high, and insolent, as euer they were.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        You iest.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        No drunkards, either with wine or vanitie, euer confess'd such
stories of themselues. I would not giue a flies leg, in ballance against all
the womens reputations here, if they could bee but thought to speake

truth: and, for the bride, they haue made their affidauit against her directly—
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        What, that they haue lyen with her?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Yes, and tell times, and circumstances, with the cause why, and the place where. I had almost brought 'hem to affirme that they had done it, to day.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Not both of 'hem.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Yes faith: with a sooth or two more I had effected it. They would ha' set it downe vnder their hands.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Why, they will be our sport, I see, still! whether we will, or no.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene III.
                     TRVE-WIT, MOROSE, OTTER, CVTBERD, CLERIMONT, DAVPHINE.
                     
                        O, Are you here? Come DAVPHINE. Goe, call your vncle presently. I haue fitted my Diuine, & my Canonist, died their beards and all: the knaues doe not know themselues they are so exalted, and alter'd. Preferment changes any man. Thou shalt keepe one dore, and I another, and then CLERIMONT in the midst, that he may haue no meanes of escape from their cauilling, when they grow hot once. And then the women (as I haue giuen the bride her instructions) to breake in vpon him, i' the l'enuoy. O, 'twill be full and twanging! Away, fetch him. Come, master Doctor, and master Parson, looke to your parts now, and discharge 'hem brauely: you are well set forth, performe it as well. If you chance to be out, doe not confesse it with standing still, or humming, or gaping one at another: but goe on, and talke alowd, and eagerly, vse vehement action, and onely remember your termes, and you are safe. Let the matter goe where it will: you haue many will doe so. But at first, bee very solemne, and graue like your garments, though you loose your selues after, and skip out like a brace of iugglers on a table. Here hee comes! set your faces, and looke superciliously, while I present you.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Are these the two learned men?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes, sir, please you salute 'hem?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Salute 'hem? I had rather doe any thing, then weare out time so vnfruitfully, sir. I wonder, how these common formes, as god saue you, and you are well-come, are come to be a habit in our liues! or, I am glad to see you! when I cannot see, what the profit can bee of these wordes, so long as it is no whit better with him, whose affaires are sad, & grieuous, that he heares this salutation.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        'Tis true, sir, wee'll goe to the matter then. Gentlemen, master Doctor, and master Pastor, I haue acquainted you sufficiently with the busines, for which you are come hether. And you are not now to enforme

your selues in the state of the question, I know. This is the gentleman, who expects your resolution, and therefore, when you please, beginne.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Please you, master Doctor.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Please you, good master Parson.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I would heare the Canon-law speake first.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        It must giue place to positiue Diuinitie, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Nay, good gentlemen, doe not throw me into circumstances. Let your comforts arriue quickly at me, those that are. Be swift in affoording me my peace, if so I shall hope any. I loue not your disputations, or your court-tumults. And that it be not strange to you, I will tell you. My father, in my education, was wont to aduise mee, that I should alwayes collect, and contayne my mind, not suffring it to 
                              •
                           low loosely; that I should looke to what things were necessary to the carriage of my life, and what not: embracing the one and eschewing the other. In short, that I should endeare my selfe to rest, and auoid turmoile: which now is growne to be another nature to me. So that I come not to your publike pleadings, or your places of noise; not that I neglect those things, that make for the dignitie of the common-wealth: but for the meere auoiding of clamors, & impertinencies of Orators, that know not how to be silent. And for the cause of noise, am I now a sutor to you. You doe not know in what a miserie I haue beene exercis'd this day, what a torrent of euill! My very house turnes round with the tumult! I dwell in a wind-mill! The perpetuall motion is here, and not at Eltham.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Well, good master Doctor, will you breake the ice? master Parson will wade after.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Sir, though vnworthy, and the weaker, I will presume.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        'Tis no presumption, domine Doctor.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Yet againe!
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Your question is, for how many causes a man may haue diuortium legitimum, a lawfull diuorce. First, you must vnderstand the nature of the word diuorce, à diuertendo—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        No excursions vpon words, good Doctor, to the question briefly.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        I answere then, the Canon-law affords diuorce but in few cases, and the principall is in the common case, the adulterous case. But there are duodecim impedimenta, twelue impediments (as we call 'hem) all which doe not dirimere contractum, but irritum reddere matrimonium, as wee say in the Canon-law, not take away the bond, but cause a nullitie therein.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I vnderstood you, before: good sir, auoid your impertinencie of translation.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        He cannot open this too much, sir, by your fauour.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Yet more!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        O, you must giue the learned men leaue, sir. To your impediments, master Doctor.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The first is impedimentum erroris.
                        
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Of which there are seuerall species.
                        
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        I, as error personae.
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        If you contract your selfe to one person, thinking her another.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The, error fortunae.
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        If shee be a begger, and you thought her rich.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Then, error qualitatis.
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        If shee proue stubborne, or head-strong, that you thought obedient.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        How? is that, sir a lawfull impediment? One at once, I pray you
gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I, ante copulam, but not post copulam, sir.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Mr. Parson saies right. Nec post nuptiarum benedictionem. It doth indeed but irrita reddere sponsalia, annull the contract: after marriage it is of no onstancy.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Alas, sir, what a hope are we fall'n from, by this time!
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The next is conditio: if you thought her free borne, and shee proue a bond-woman, there is impediment of estate and condition.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I, but Mr. Doctor, those seruitudes are sublatae, now, among vs christians.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        By your fauour, master Parson—
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        You shall giue me leaue, master Doctor.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Nay, gentlemen, quarrell not in that question; it concernes not
my case: passe to the third.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Well then, the third is votum. If either partie haue made a
vow of chastitie. But that practice, as master Parson said of the other, is
taken away among vs, thanks be to discipline. The fourth is cognatio: if
the persons be of kinne, within the degrees.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I: doe you know, what the degrees are, sir?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        No, nor I care not, sir: they offer me no comfort in the question, I am sure.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        But, there is a branch of this impediment may, which is cognitio spiritualis. If you were her god-father, sir, then the marriage is incestuous.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        That comment is absurd, and superstitious, master Doctor. I cannot endure it. Are we not all brothers and sisters, and as much a kinne in that, as god-fathers, and god-daughters?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O me! to end the controuersie, I neuer was a god-father, I neuer was a god-father in my life, sir. Passe to the next.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The fift is crimen adulterij: the knowne case. The sixt, cultus disparitas, difference of religion: haue you euer examin'd her, what religion shee is of?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        No, I would rather shee were of none, then bee put to the trouble of it!
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        You may haue it done for you, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        By no meanes, good sir, on, to the rest: shall you euer come to an end, thinke you?
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Yes, hee has done halfe, sir. (On, to the rest) be patient, and expect, sir.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The ſeuenth is, vis: if it were vpon compulſion, or force.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O no, it was too voluntarie, mine: too voluntarie.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The eight is, or do: if euer ſhee haue taken holy orders.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        That's ſuperſtitious, too.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        No matter, maſter Parſon: would ſhee would goe into a nunnerie yet.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The ninth is, ligamen: if you were bound, ſir, to any other before.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I thruſt my ſelfe too ſoone into theſe fetters.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The tenth is, publica honeſtas: which is inchoata quaedam affinitas.
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I, or affinitas orta ex ſponſalibus: and is but leue impedimentum.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I feele no aire of comfort blowing to me, in all this.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The eleuenth is, affitas ex fornicatione.
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Which is no leſſe vera affinitas, then the other, maſter Doctor.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        True, quae oritur ex legitimo matrimonio.
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        You ſay right, venerable Doctor. And, naſcitur ex eo, quod per coniugium duae perſonae efficiuntur vna caro—
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Hey-day, now they beginne.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        I conceiue you, maſter Parſon. Ita per fornicationem aeque est verus pater, qui sic generat—
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Et vere filius qui ſic generatur—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What's all this to me?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Now it growes warme.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        The twelfth, and laſt is, ſi forte coire nequibis.
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I, that is impedimentum grauiſsimum. It doth vtterly annull, and annihilate, that. If you haue manifeſtam frigiditatem, you are well, ſir.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, there is comfort come at length, ſir. Confeſſe your ſelfe but a man vnable, and ſhee will ſue to be diuorc'd firſt.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I, or if there be morbus perpetuus, & inſanabilis, as Paraliſis, Elephantiaſis, or ſo—
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        O, but frigiditas is the fairer way, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        You ſay troth, ſir, and as it is in the canon, maſter Doctor.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        I conceiue you, ſir.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Before he ſpeakes.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        That a boy, or child vnder yeeres, is not fit for marriage, becauſe he cannot reddere debitum. So your omnipotentes—
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Your impotentes, you whorſon Lobſter.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Your impotentes, I ſhould ſa,y, are minime apti ad contrahenda matrimonium.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        
                           Matrimonium? Wee ſhall haue moſt vn-matrimoniall latin, with you: matrimonia, and be hang'd.
                     
                     
                        DAV.
                        You put 'hem out, man.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        But then there will ariſe a doubt, maſter Parſon, in our caſe,



                           post matrimonium: that frigiditate praeditus (doe you conceiue me, sir?)
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Very well, sir.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Who cannot vti vxore pro vxore, may habere eam pro sorore.
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Absurd, absurd, absurd, and merely apostaticall.
                        
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        You shall pardon me, master Parson, I can proue it.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        You can proue a Will, master Doctor, you can proue nothing else. Do's not the verse of your owne canon say. Haec socianda vetant conubia, facta retractant—
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        I grant you, but how doe they retractare, master Parson?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        (O, this was it, I fear'd.)
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        In aeternum, sir.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        That's false in diuinitie, by your fauour.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        'Tis false in humanitie, to say so. Is hee not prorsus invtilis ad thorum? Can he praestare fidem datam? I would faine know.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Yes: how if he doe conualere?
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        He can not conualere, it is impossible.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, good sir, attend the learned men, they'll thinke you neglect 'hem else.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Or, if he doe simulare himselfe frigidum, odio vxoris, or so?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I say, he is adulter manifestus, then.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        (They dispute it very learnedly, yfaith.)
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        And prostitutor vxoris, and this is positiue.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Good sir, let me escape.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You will not doe me that wrong, sir?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        And therefore, if he be manifeste frigidus, sir—
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        I, if he be manifeste frigidus, I grant you—
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Why, that was my conclusion.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        And mine too.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, heare the conclusion, sir.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Then, frigiditatis causa—
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Yes, causa frigiditatis—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, mine eares!
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Shee may haue libellum diuortij, against you.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        I, diuortij libellum shee will sure haue.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Good eccho's, forbeare.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        If you confesse it.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Which I would doe, sir—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I will doe any thing—
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        And cleere my selfe in foro conscientiae—
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Because you want indeed—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Yet more?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        
                           Exercendi potestate.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act V. Scene IIII.
                     EPICOENE, MOROSE, HAVGHTY, CENTAVRE, MAVIS, Mrs. OTTER, DAW, TRVE-WIT, DAVPHINE, CLERIMONT, LA-FOOLE, OTTER, CVTBERD.
                     
                        I Will not endure it any longer. Ladies, I beseech you helpe me. This is such a wrong, as neuer was offer'd to poore bride before. Vpon her marriage day, to haue her husband conspire against her, and a couple of mercinarie companions, to be brought in for formes sake, to perswade a separation! If you had bloud, or vertue in you, gentlemen, you would not suffer such eare-wigs about a husband, or scorpions, to creep between man and wife—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, the varietie and changes of my torment!
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Let 'hem be cudgell'd out of dores, by our groomes.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        I'll lend you my foot-man.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Wee'll haue our men blanket 'hem i' the hall.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        As there was one, at our house, madame, for peeping in at the dore.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Content, yfaith.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Stay, ladies, and gentlemen, you'll heare, before you proceed?
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        I'lld ha' the bride-groome blanketted, too.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Beginne with him first.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Yes, by my troth.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, mankind generation!
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Ladies, for my sake forbeare.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Yes, for sir DAVPHINES sake.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        He shall command vs.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        He is as fine a gentleman of his inches, madame, as any is about the towne, and weares as good colours when he list.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Be briefe, sir, and confesse your infirmitie, shee'll be a-fire to be quit of you, if shee but heare that nam'd once, you shall not entreat her to stay. Shee'll flie you, like one that had the marks vpon him.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Ladies, I must craue all your pardons—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Silence, ladies.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        For a wrong I haue done to your whole sexe, in marrying this faire, and vertuous gentlewoman—
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Heare him, good ladies.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Being guiltie of an infirmitie, which before I confer'd with these learned men, I thought I might haue conceal'd—
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        But now being better inform'd in his conscience by them, hee is to declare it, & giue satisfaction, by asking your publique forgiuenesse.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        I am no man, ladies.
                     
                     
                        ALL.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Vtterly vn-abled in nature, by reaſon of frigidity, to performe the duties, or any the leaſt office of a husband.
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Now, out vpon him, prodigious creature!
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        Bride-groome vncarnate.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        And would you offer it, to a young gentlewoman?
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        A lady of her longings?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Tut, a deuice, a deuice, this, it ſmells rankly, ladies. A mere comment of his owne.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, if you ſuſpect that, ladies, you may haue him ſearch'd.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        As the cuſtome is, by a iurie of phyſitians.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Yes faith, 'twill be braue.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O me, muſt I vnder-goe that!
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        No, let women ſearch him, madame: we can doe it our ſelues.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Out on me, worſe!
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        No, ladies, you ſhall not need, I'll take him with all his faults.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Worſt of all!
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Why, then 'tis no diuorce, Doctor, if ſhee conſent not?
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        No, if the man be frigidus, it is de parte vxoris, that wee grant libellum diuortij, in the law.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I, it is the ſame in theologie.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Worſe, worſe then worſt!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Nay, ſir, bee not vtterly diſ-heartned, wee haue yet a ſmall relique of hope left, as neere as our comfort is blowne out. CLERIMONT, produce your brace of Knights. What was that, maſter Parſon, you told me in errore qualitatis, e'ne now? DAVPHINE, whiſper the bride, that ſhee carry it as if ſhee were guiltie, and aſham'd.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Mary ſir, in errore qualitatis (which maſter Doctor did forbeare to vrge) if ſhee bee found corrupta, that is, vitiated or broken vp, that was pro virgine deſponſa, eſpous'd for a maid—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What then, ſir?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        It doth dirimere contractum, and irritum reddere too.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        If this be true, we are happy againe, ſir, once more. Here are an honorable brace of Knights, that ſhall affirme ſo much.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Pardon vs, good maſter CLERIMONT.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        You ſhall excuſe vs, maſter CLERIMONT.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nay, you muſt make it good now, Knights, there is no remedie, I'll eate no words for you, nor no men: you know you ſpoke it to me?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Is this gentleman-like, ſir?
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        IACK DAW, hee's worſe then ſir AMOROVS: fiercer a great deale. Sir AMOROVS, beware, there be ten DAWES in this CLERIMONT.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I'll confeſſe it, ſir.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Will you, ſir AMOROVS? will you wound reputation?
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        I am reſolu'd.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        So ſhould you be too, IACK DAW: what ſhould keepe you off?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Will he? I thought he would ha' beene angrie.
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        You will diſpatch, Knights, it muſt be done, yfaith.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Why, an' it muſt it ſhall, ſir, they ſay. They'll ne're goe backe. Doe not tempt his patience.
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        It is true indeed, ſir.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        Yes, I aſſure you, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        What is true gentlemen? what doe you aſſure me?
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        That we haue knowne your bride, ſir —
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        In good faſhion. Shee was our miſtris, or ſo —
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        Nay, you muſt be plaine, Knights, as you were to me.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I, the queſtion is, if you haue carnaliter, or no.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        
                           Carnaliter? what elſe, ſir?
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        It is inough: a plaine nullitie.
                        
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I am vn-done, I am vn-done!
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, let me worſhip and adore you, gentlemen!
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        I am vn-done!
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Yes, to my hand, I thanke theſe Knights: maſter Parſon, let me thanke you otherwiſe.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        And, ha' they confeſs'd?
                     
                     
                        MAV.
                        Now out vpon 'hem, informers!
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        You ſee, what creatures you may beſtow your fauours on, madames.
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        I would except againſt 'hem as beaten Knights, wench, and not good witneſſes in law.
                     
                     
                        Mrs. OT.
                        Poore gentlewoman, how ſhee takes it!
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Be comforted, MOROSE, I loue the better for't.
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        So doe I, I proteſt.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        But gentlemen, you haue not knowne her, ſince matrimonium?
                        
                     
                     
                        DAW.
                        Not to day, maſter Doctor.
                     
                     
                        LA-F.
                        No, ſir, not to day.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        Why, then I ſay, for any act before, the matrimonium is good and perfect: vnleſſe, the worſhipfull Bride-groome did preciſe, before witneſſe demand, if ſhee were virgo ante nuptias.
                        
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        No, that he did not, I aſſure you, maſter Doctor.
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        If he cannot proue that, it is ratum coniugium, notwithſtanding the premiſes. And they doe no way impedire. And this is my ſentence, this I pronounce.
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        I am of maſter Doctors reſolution too, ſir: if you made not that demand, ante nuptias.
                        
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O my heart! wilt thou breake? wilt thou breake? this is worſt of all worſt worſts! that hell could haue deuis'd! Marry a whore! and ſo much noiſe!
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Come, I ſee now plaine confederacie in this Doctor, and this

Parson, to abuse a gentleman. You studie his affliction. I pray' bee gone companions. And gentlemen, I begin to suspect you for hauing parts with 'hem. Sir, will it please you heare me?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, doe not talke to me, take not from mee the pleasure of dying in silence, nephew.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Sir, I must speake to you. I haue beene long your poore despis'd kins-man, and many a hard thought has strength'ned you against me: but now it shall appeare if either I loue you or your peace, and preferre them to all the world beside. I will not bee long or grieuous to you, sir. If I free you of this vnhappy match absolutely, and instantly after all this trouble, and almost in your despaire, now—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        (It cannot be.)
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Sir, that you bee neuer troubled with a murmure of it more, what shall I hope for, or deserue of you?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, what thou wilt, nephew! thou shalt deserue mee, and haue mee.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Shall I haue your fauour perfect to me, and loue hereafter?
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        That, and any thing beside. Make thine owne conditions. My whole estate is thine. Manage it, I will become thy Ward.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Nay, sir, I will not be so vn-reasonable.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Will sir DAVPHINE be mine enemie too?
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        You know, I haue beene long a suter to you, vncle, that out of your estate, which is fifteen hundred a yeere, you would allow me but fiue hundred during life, and assure the rest vpon me after: to which I haue often, by my selfe and friends tendred you a writing to signe, which you would neuer consent, or incline too. If you please but to effect it now—
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Thou shalt haue it, nephew. I will doe it, and more.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        If I quit you not presently? and for-euer of this cumber, you shall haue power instantly, afore all these, to reuoke your act, and I will become, whose slaue you will giue me to, for-euer.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Where is the writing? I will seale to it, that, or to a blanke, and write thine owne conditions.
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        O me, most vnfortunate wretched gentlewoman!
                     
                     
                        HAV.
                        Will sir DAVPHINE doe this?
                     
                     
                        EPI.
                        Good sir, haue some compassion on me.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        O, my nephew knowes you belike: away crocodile.
                        
                     
                     
                        CEN.
                        He do's it not sure, without good ground.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Here, sir.
                     
                     
                        MOR.
                        Come, nephew: giue me the pen. I will subscribe to any thing, and seale to what thou wilt, for my deliuerance. Thou art my restorer. Here, I deliuer it thee as my deed. If there bee a word in it lacking, or writ with false orthographie, I protest before—I will not take the aduantage.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        He takes of Epi
                           
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           nes perruke.
                         Then here is your release, sir; you haue married a boy: a gentlemans son, that I haue brought vp this halfe yeere, at my great charges, and for this composition, which I haue now made with you. What say

you, master Doctor? this is iustum impedimentum, I hope, error personae?
                        
                     
                     
                        OTT.
                        Yes sir, in primo gradu.
                        
                     
                     
                        CVT.
                        
                           In primo gradu.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        He pulls of their beardes, and disguise.
                        I thanke you, good Doctor CVTBERD, and Parson OTTER. You are beholden to 'hem, sir, that haue taken this paines for you: and my friend, master TRVE-WIT, who enabled 'hem for the businesse. Now you may goe in and rest, be as priuate as you will, sir. I'll not trouble you, till you trouble me with your funerall, which I care not how soone it come. CVTBERD, I'll make your lease good. Thanke mee not, but with your leg, CVTBERD. And TOM OTTER, your Princesse shall be reconcil'd to you. How now, gentlemen! doe you looke at me?
                     
                     
                        CLE.
                        A boy.
                     
                     
                        DAVP.
                        Yes, mistris EPICOENE.
                     
                     
                        TRV.
                        Well, DAVPHINE, you haue lurch'd your friends of the better halfe of the garland, by concealing this part of the plot! but much good doe it thee, thou deseru'st it, lad. And CLERIMONT, for thy vnexpected bringing in these two to confession, weare my part of it freely. Nay, sir DAW, and sir LA-FOOLE, you see the gentlewoman that has done you the fauours! we are all thankefull to you, and so should the woman-kind here, specially for lying on her, though not with her! You meant so, I am sure? But, that we haue stuck it vpon you to day, in your own imagin'd persons, and so lately; this Amazon, the champion of the sexe, should beate you now thriftily, for the common slanders, which ladies receiue from such cuckowes, as you are. You are they, that when no merit or fortune can make you hope to enioy their bodies, will yet lie with their reputations, and make their fame suffer. Away you common moths of these, and all ladies honors. Goe, trauaile to make legs and faces, and come home with some new matter to be laught at: you deserue to liue in an aire as corrupted, as that wherewith you feed rumor. Madames, you are mute, vpon this new metamorphosis! but here stands shee, that has vindicated your fames. Take heed of such insectae hereafter. And let it not trouble you that you haue discouer'd any mysteries to this yong gentleman. He is (a'most) of yeeres, & will make a good visitant within this twelue-month. In the meane time, wee'll all vndertake for his secrecie, that can speake so well of his silence. Spectators, if you like this comoedie, rise cheerefully, and now MOROSE is gone in, clap your hands. It may be, that noyse will cure him, at least please him.
                     
                  
                  THE END.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  This Comoedie vvas first acted, in the yeere 1609.
                  By the Children of her Maiesties REVELLS.
                  The principall Comoedians were,

                        NAT. FIELD.
                        GIL. CARIE.
                        HVG. ATTAWEL.
                        IOH. SMITH.
                        WILL. BARKSTED.
                        WILL. PEN.
                        RIC. ALLIN.
                        IOH. BLANET.
                     
                  
                  With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE ALCHEMIST. A Comoedie. Acted in the yeere 1610. By the Kings MAIESTIES Seruants.
                  The Author B. I.
                  
                     LVCRET.
                     —petere inde coronam,
                     Vnde priùs nulli velarint tempora Musae.
                  
                  LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY
                  M. D C. XVI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE LADY, MOST DESERVING HER NAME, AND BLOVD: Mary, LA. WROTH.
                  
                     
                        MADAME,
                     
                  
                  
                     IN the age of sacrifices, the truth of religion was not in the greatnesse, & fat of the offrings, but in the deuotion, and zeale of the sacrificers: Else, what could a handfull of gummes haue done in the sight of a hecatombe? or, how might I appeare at this altar, except with those affections, that no lesse loue the light and witnesse, then they haue the conscience of your vertue? If what I offer beare an acceptable odour, & hold the first strength, it is your value of it, which remembers, where, when, and to whom it was kindled. Otherwise, as the times are, there comes rarely forth that thing, so full of authoritie, or example, but by assiduitie and custome, growes lesse, and looses. This, yet, safe in your iudgement (which is a SIDNEYS) is forbidden to speake more; lest it talke, or looke like one of the ambitious Faces of the time: who, the more they paint, are the lesse themselues.
                  
                     
                        Your La: true honorer, BEN. IONSON.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Persons of the Play.
                  
                     SVBTLE, The Alchemist.
                     
                     FACE, The house-keeper.
                     
                     DOL. COMMON, Their Colleague.
                     
                     DAPPER, A Clarke.
                     
                     DRVGGER, A Tabacco-man.
                     
                     LOVE-WIT, Master of the house.
                     
                     EPICVRE MAMMON, A Knight.
                     
                     SVRLEY, A Gamster.
                     
                     TRIBVLATION, A Pastor of Amsterdī.
                     
                     ANANIAS, A Deacon there.
                     
                     KASTRILL, The angry Boy.
                     
                     DA. PLIANT, His sister: A widdow.
                     
                     NEIGHBOVRS.
                     OFFICERS.
                     MVTES.
                  
                  THE SCENE LONDON.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The Alchemist. THE ARGVMENT.
                  The sicknesse hot, a master quit, for feare,
                  His house in towne: and left one seruant there.
                  Ease him corrupted, and gaue meanes to know
                  A cheater, and his punque; who, now brought low,
                  Leauing their narrow practise, were become
                  Cos'ners at large: and, onely wanting some
                  House to set vp, with him they here contract,
                  Each for a share, and all begin to act.
                  Much company they draw, and much abuse,
                  In casting figures, telling fortunes, newes,
                  Selling of flyes, flat bawdry, with the stone:
                  
                  Till it, and they, and all in fume are gone.
               
               
                  PROLOGVE.
                  
                     FORTVNE, that fauours fooles, these two short houres
                  We wish away; both for your sakes, and ours,
                  Iudging Spectators: and desire in place,
                  To th'Author iustice, to our selues but grace.
                  Our Scene is London, 'cause we would make knowne,
                  No countries mirth is better then our owne.
                  No clime breeds better matter, for your whore,
                  Bawd, squire, impostor, many persons more,
                  
                  Whose manners, now call'd humors, feed the stage:
                  And which haue still beene subiect, for the rage
                  Or spleene of comick-writers. Though this pen
                  Did neuer aime to grieue, but better men;
                  How e'er the age, he liues in, doth endure
                  The vices that shee breeds, aboue their cure.
                  But, when the wholsome remedies are sweet,
                  And, in their working, gaine, and profit meet,
                  He hopes to find no spirit so much diseas'd,
                  But will, with such faire correctiues be pleas'd.
                  For here, he doth not feare, who can apply.
                  If there be any, that will sit so nigh
                  Vnto the streame, to looke what it doth run,
                  They shall find things, they'ld thinke, or wish, were done;
                  They are so naturall follies, but so showne,
                  As euen the doers may see, and yet not owne.
               
               
                  
                     Act I.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     FACE, SVBTLE, DOL Common.
                     
                        BEleeu't, I will.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Thy worst. I fart at thee.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Ha' you your wits? Why gentlemen! for loue—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sirrah, I'll strip you—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What to doe? lick sigs
                        Out at my—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Rogue, rogue, out of all your sleights.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Nay, looke yee! Soueraigne, Generall, are you mad-men?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O, let the wild sheepe loose. Ile gumme your silkes
                        With good strong water, an'you come.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Will you haue
                        The neighbours heare you? Will you betray all?
                        Harke, I heare some body.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sirrah—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I shall marre
                        All that the taylor has made, if you approch.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        You most notorious whelpe, you insolent slaue.
                        Dare you doe this?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes faith, yes faith.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why! who
                        Am I, my mungrill? Who am I?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I'll tell you,
                        Since you know not your selfe—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Speake lower, rogue.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes. You were once (time's not long past) the good,
                        Honest, plaine, liuery-three-pound-thrum; that kept
                        Your masters worships house, here, in the friers,
                        For the vacations—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Will you be so lowd?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Since, by my meanes, translated suburb-Captayne.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        By your meanes, Doctor dog?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Within mans memorie,
                        All this, I speake of.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why, I pray you, haue I
                        Beene countenanc'd by you? or you, by me?
                        Doe but collect, sir, where I met you first.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I doe not heare well.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Not of this, I thinke it.
                        
                        But I shall put you in mind, sir, at pie-corner.
                        
                        Taking your meale of steeme in, from cookes stalls,
                        Where, like the father of hunger, you did walke
                        Piteously costiue, with your pinch'd-horne-nose,
                        And your complexion, of the romane wash,
                        Stuck full of black, and melancholique wormes,
                        Like poulder-cornes, shot, at th'artillerie-yard.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I wish, you could aduance your voice, a little.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        When you went pinn'd vp, in the seuerall rags,
                        Yo'had rak'd, and pick'd from dung-hills, before day,
                        Your feet in mouldie slippers, for your kibes,
                        A felt of rugg, and a thin thredden cloake,
                        That scarce would couer your no-buttocks—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        So, sir!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        When all your alchemy, and your algebra,
                        Your mineralls, vegetalls, and animalls,
                        Your coniuring, cosning, and your dosen of trades,
                        Could not relieue your corps, with so much linnen
                        Would make you tinder, but to see a fire;
                        I ga'you count'nance, credit for your coales,
                        Your stills, your glasses, your materialls,
                        Built you a fornace, drew you customers,
                        Aduanc'd all your black arts; lent you, beside,
                        A house to practise in—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Your masters house?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Where you haue studied the more thriuing skill
                        Of bawdrie, since.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, in your masters house.
                        You, and the rats, here, kept possession.
                        Make it not strange. I know, yo' were one, could keepe
                        The buttry-hatch still lock'd, and saue the chippings,
                        Sell the dole-beere to aqua-vitae-men,
                        The which, together with your christ-masse vailes,
                        At post and paire, your letting out of counters,
                        Made you a pretty stock, some twentie markes,
                        And gaue you credit, to conuerse with cob-webs,
                        Here, since your mistris death hath broke vp house.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        You might talke softlier, raskall.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No, you scarabe,
                        I'll thunder you, in peeces. I will teach you
                        How to beware, to tempt a furie againe
                        That carries tempest in his hand, and voice.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        The place has made you valiant.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No, your clothes.
                        Thou vermine, haue I tane thee, out of dung,
                        So poore, so wretched, when no liuing thing
                        Would keepe thee companie, but a spider, or worse?
                        Rais'd thee from broomes, and dust, and watring pots?
                        
                           Sublim'd thee, and exalted thee, and fix'd thee
                        I' the third region, call'd our state of grace?
                        
                        
                        
                        Wrought thee to ſpirit, to quinteſſence, with paines
                        Would twiſe haue won me the philoſophers worke?
                        
                        Put thee in words, and faſhion? made thee fit
                        For more then ordinarie fellowſhips?
                        Giu'n thee thy othes, thy quarrelling dimenſions?
                        Thy rules, to cheat at horſe-race, cock-pit, cardes,
                        Dice, or what euer gallant tincture, elſe?
                        Made thee a ſecond, in mine owne great art?
                        And haue I this for thanke? Doe you rebell?
                        Doe you flie out, i' the proiection?
                        
                        Would you be gone, now?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Gentlemen, what meane you?
                        Will you marre all?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Slaue, thou hadſt had no name —
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Will you vn-doe your ſelues, with ciuill warre?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Neuer beene knowne, paſt equi clibanum,
                        
                        The heat of horſe-dung, vnder ground, in cellars,
                        Or an ale-houſe, darker then deafe IOHN's: beene loſt
                        To all mankind, but laundreſſes, and tapſters,
                        Had not I beene.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Do'you know who heares you, Soueraigne?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sirrah—
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Nay, Generall, I thought you were ciuill—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I ſhall turne deſperate, if you grow thus lowd.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And hang thy ſelfe, I care not.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Hang thee, colliar,
                        And all thy pots, and pans, in picture I will,
                        Since thou haſt mou'd me. — 
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        (O, this'll ore-throw all.)
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Write thee vp bawd, in Paules; haue all thy tricks
                        Of coſning with a hollow cole, duſt, ſcrapings,
                        Searching for things loſt, with a ſiue, and ſheeres,
                        Erecting figures, in your rowes of houſes,
                        
                        And taking in of ſhaddowes, with a glaſſe,
                        Told in red letters: And a face, cut for thee,
                        Worſe then GAMALIEL RATSEY'S.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Are you ſound?
                        Ha' you your ſenſes, maſters?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I will haue
                        A booke, but barely reckoning thy impoſtures,
                        Shall proue a true philoſophers ſtone, to printers.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Away, you trencher-raskall.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Out you dog-leach,
                        The vomit of all priſons—
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Will you be
                        Your owne deſtructions, gentlemen?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Still ſpew'd out
                        For lying too heauy o'the basket.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Cheater.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Bawd.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Cow-herd.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Coniurer.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Cut-purſe.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Witch.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        O me!
                        We are ruin'd! loſt! Ha'you no more regard
                        To your reputations? Where's your iudgement? S'light,
                        Haue yet, ſome care of me, o'your republique—
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Away this brach. I'll bring thee, rogue, within
                        The statute of ſorcerie, triceſimo tertio.
                        
                        Or HARRY the eight: I, and (perhaps) thy necke
                        Within a nooze, for laundring gold, and barbing it.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        You'll bring your head within a cocks-combe, will you?
                        And you, ſir, with your menſtrue, gather it vp.
                        S'death, you abominable paire of ſtinkards,
                        Leaue off your barking, and grow one againe,
                        Or, by the light that ſhines, I'll cut your throats.
                        Shee catcheth out Face his ſword: and breakes Subtles glaſſe.
                        I'll not be made a prey vnto the marſhall,
                        
                        For ne're a ſnarling dog-bolt o'you both.
                        Ha' you together coſſen'd all this while,
                        And all the world, and ſhall it now be ſaid
                        Yo' haue made moſt courteous ſhift, to coſen your ſelues?
                        You will accuſe him? You will bring him in
                        Within the ſtatute? Who ſhall take your word?
                        A whore-ſonne, vpſtart, apocryphall captayne,
                        Whom not a puritane, in black-friers, will truſt
                        So much, as for a feather! And you too,
                        Will giue the cauſe, forſooth? You will inſult,
                        And claime a primacie, in the diuiſions?
                        You muſt be chiefe? as if you, onely, had
                        The poulder to proiect with? and the worke
                        Were not begun out of equalitie?
                        The venter tripartite? All things in common?
                        Without prioritie? S'death, you perpetuall curres,
                        Fall to your couples againe, and coſſen kindly,
                        And heartily, and louingly, as you ſhould,
                        And looſe not the begining of a terme,
                        
                        Or, by this hand, I ſhall grow factious too,
                        And, take my part, and quit you.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'T is his fault,
                        He euer murmures, and obiects his paines,
                        And ſayes, the weight of all lyes vpon him.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, but they are not equall.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Why, if your part exceed to day, I hope
                        Ours may, to morrow, match it.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I, they may.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        May, murmuring maſtiffe? I, and doe. Death on me!
                        Helpe me to thrattell him.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        DOROTHEE, miſtris DOROTHEE,
                        O'ds preciuos, I'll doe anything. What doe you meane?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Becauſe o'your fermentation, and cibation?
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Not I, by heauen—
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Your Sol, and Luna—helpe me.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Would I were hang'd then. I'll conforme my ſelfe.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Will you, ſir, doe ſo then, and quickly: ſweare.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What ſhould I ſweare?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        To leaue your faction, ſir.
                        And labour, kindly, in the commune worke.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Let me not breath, if I meant ought, beſide.
                        I onely vs'd thoſe ſpeeches, as a ſpurre
                        To him.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        I hope we need no ſpurres, ſir. Doe we?
                     
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Slid, proue to day, who shall sharke best.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Agreed.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Yes, and worke close, and friendly.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        'Slight, the knot
                        Shall grow the stronger, for this breach, with me.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Why so, my good babounes! Shall we goe make
                        A sort of sober, sciruy, precise neighbours,
                        (That scarse haue smil'd twise, sin' the king came in)
                        A feast of laughter, at our follies? raskalls,
                        Would runne themselues from breath, to see me ride,
                        Or you t'haue but a hole, to thrust your heads in,
                        For which you should pay eare-rent? No, agree.
                        And may Don Prouost ride a feasting, long,
                        In his old veluet ierken, and stayn'd scarfes,
                        (My noble Soueraigne, and worthy Generall)
                        Ere we contribute a new crewell garter
                        To his most worsted worship.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Royall DOL!
                        Spoken like CLARIDIANA, and thy selfe!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        For which, at supper, thou shalt sit in triumph,
                        And not be stil'd DOL Common, but DOL Proper,
                        DOL Singular: the longest cut, at night,
                        Shall draw thee for his DOL Particular.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Who's that? one rings. To the windo',
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Pray heau'n,
                        The master doe not trouble vs, this quarter.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        O, feare not him. While there dyes one, a weeke,
                        O'the plague, hee's safe, from thinking toward London.
                        
                        Beside, hee's busie at his hop-yards, now:
                        I had a letter from him. If he doe,
                        Hee'll send such word, for ayring o' the house
                        As you shall haue sufficient time, to quit it:
                        Though we breake vp a fortnight, 'tis no matter.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Who is it, DOL?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        A fine yong quodling.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        O,
                        My Lawyers clarke, I lighted on, last night,
                        In Hol'bourne, at the dagger. He would haue
                        (I told you of him) a familiar,
                        To rifle with, at horses, and winne cups.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        O, let him in.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Stay. Who shall doo't?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Get you
                        Your robes on. I will meet him, as going out.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        And what shall I doe?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Not be seene, away.
                        Seeme you very reseru'd.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Inough.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        God b'w'you, sir.
                        I pray you, let him know that I was here.
                        His name is DAPPER. I would gladly haue staid, but—
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act I. Scene II.
                     DAPPER, FACE, SVBTLE.
                     
                        CAptaine, I am here.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Who's that? He's come, I think, Doctor.
                        Good faith, sir, I was going away.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        In truth,
                        I'am very sorry, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        But I thought
                        Sure, I should meet you.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I, I'am very glad.
                        I'had a sciruy writ, or two, to make,
                        And I had lent my watch last night, to one
                        That dines, to day, at the shrieffs: and so was rob'd
                        Of my passe-time. Is this the cunning-man?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        This is his worship.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Is he a Doctor?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        And ha'you broke with him, Captain?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        And how?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Faith, he do's make the matter, sir, so daintie,
                        I know not what to say—
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Not so, good Captaine.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Would I were fairely rid on't, beleeue me.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Nay, now you grieue me, sir. Why should you wish so?
                        I dare assure you. I'll not be vngratefull.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I cannot thinke you will, sir. But the law
                        Is such a thing— And then, he sayes, Reade's matter
                        Falling so lately—
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        
                           Reade? He was an asse,
                        And dealt, sir, with a foole.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        It was a clarke, sir.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        A clarke?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nay, heare me, sir, you know the law
                        Better, I thinke—
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I should, sir, and the danger.
                        You know I shew'd the statute to you?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        You did so.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        And will I tell, then? By this hand, of flesh,
                        Would it might neuer wright good court-hand, more,
                        If I discouer. What doe you thinke of me,
                        That I am a Chiause?
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What's that?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        The Turke was, here—
                        As one would say, doe you thinke I am a Turke?
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I'll tell the Doctor so.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Doe, good sweet Captaine.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Come, noble Doctor, 'pray thee, let's preuaile,
                        This is the gentleman, and he is no Chiause.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Captaine, I haue return'd you all my answere.
                        I would doe much, sir, for your loue— But this
                        I neither may, nor can.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Tut, doe not say so.
                        You deale, now, with a noble fellow, Doctor,
                        One that will thanke you, richly, and h'is no Chiause:
                        
                        Let that, sir, moue you.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Pray you, forbeare—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        He has
                        Foure angels, here—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        You doe me wrong, good sir.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Doctor, wherein? To tempt you, with these spirits?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        To tempt my art, and loue, sir, to my perill.
                        'Fore heau'n, I scarse can thinke you are my friend,
                        
                        
                        That ſo would draw me to apparant danger.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I draw you? A horſe draw you, and a halter,
                        You, and your flies together—
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Nay, good Captayne.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        That know no difference of men.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Good wordes, ſir.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good deeds, ſir, Doctor dogs-meate. 'Slight I bring you
                        No cheating CLIM-o' the-CLOVGHS, or CLARIBELS,
                        That looke as bigge as fiue-and-fiftie, and fluſh,
                        
                        And ſpit out ſecrets, like hot cuſtard—
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Captayne.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nor any melancholike vnder-ſcribe,
                        Shall tell the Vicar: but, a ſpeciall gentle,
                        That is the heire to fortie markes, a yeere,
                        Conſorts with the ſmall poets of the time,
                        Is the ſole hope of his old grand-mother,
                        That knowes the law, and writes you ſixe faire hands,
                        Is a fine clarke, and has his cyphring perfect,
                        Will take his oath, o'the greeke XENOPHON,
                        If need be, in his pocket: and can court
                        His miſtris, out of OVID.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Nay, deare Captayne.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Did you not tell me, ſo?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Yes, but I'ld ha' you
                        Vſe maſter Doctor, with ſome more reſpect.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Hang him proud ſtagge, with his broad veluet head.
                        But, for your ſake, I'ld choake, ere I would change
                        An article of breath, with ſuch a puck-fiſt—
                        Come let's begone.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Pray you, le'me ſpeake with you.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        His worſhip calls you, Captayne.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I am ſorry,
                        I e're imbarqu'd my ſelfe, in ſuch a buſineſſe.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Nay, good ſir. He did call you.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Will he take, then?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Firſt, heare me—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Not a ſyllable, 'leſſe you take.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Pray ye', ſir—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Vpon no termes, but an aſſumpſit.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Your humor muſt be law.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why now, ſir, talke.
                        Now, I dare heare you with mine honour. Speake.
                        So may this gentleman too.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why, ſir—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        No whiſpring.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        'Fore heau'n, you doe not apprehend the loſſe
                        You doe you ſelfe, in this.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Wherein? For what?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Mary, to be ſo'importunate for one,
                        That, when he has it, will vn-doe you all:
                        Hee'll winne vp all the money i'the towne.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes. And blow vp gamſter, after gamſter,
                        As they doe crackers, in a puppit-play.
                        If I doe giue him a familiar,
                        
                        Giue you him all you play for; neuer ſet him:
                        For he will haue it.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Y'are miſtaken, Doctor.
                        Why, he do's aske one but for cups, and horſes,
                        A rifling flye: none o'your great familiars.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Yes, Captayne, I would haue it, for all games.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I told you ſo.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Slight, that's a new buſineſſe!
                        I vnderſtood you, a tame bird, to flie
                        Twiſe in a terme, or ſo; on friday-nights,
                        When you had left the office: for a nagge,
                        Of fortie, or fiftie ſhillings.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I, 'tis true, ſir,
                        But I doe thinke, now, I ſhall leaue the law,
                        And therefore—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why, this changes quite the caſe!
                        Do'you thinke, that I dare moue him?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        If you pleaſe, ſir,
                        All's one to him, I ſee.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What! for that money?
                        I cannot with my conſcience. Nor ſhould you
                        Make the request, me thinkes.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        No, ſir, I meane
                        To adde conſideration.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why, then, ſir,
                        I'll trie. Say, that it were for all games, Doctor?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I ſay, then, not a mouth ſhall eate for him
                        At any ordinarie, but o'the ſcore,
                        That is a gaming mouth, conceiue me.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Indeed!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Hee'll draw you all the treaſure of the realme,
                        If it be ſet him.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Speake you this from art?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I, ſir, and reaſon too: the ground of art.
                        H'is o'the onely beſt complexion,
                        The queene of Fairy loues.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What! is he!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Peace.
                        Hee'll ouer-heare you. Sir, ſhould ſhee but ſee him—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Do not you tell him.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Will he win at cards too?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        The ſpirits of dead HOLLAND, liuing ISAAC,
                        You'ld ſweare, were in him: ſuch a vigorous luck
                        As cannot be reſiſted. 'Slight hee'll put
                        Sixe o'your gallants, to a cloke, indeed.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        A ſtrange ſucceſſe, that ſome man ſhall be borne too!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        He heares you, man—
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Sir, Ile not be ingratefull.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Faith, I haue a confidence in his good nature:
                        You heare, he ſayes, he will not be ingratefull.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why, as you pleaſe, my venture followes yours.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Troth, doe it, Doctor. Thinke him truſtie, and make him.
                        He may make vs both happy in an houre:
                        Win ſome fiue thouſand pound, and ſend vs two on't.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Beleeue it, and I will, ſir.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And you ſhall, ſir.
                        You haue heard all?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        No, what was't? nothing, I ſir.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nothing?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        A little, ſir.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Well, a rare ſtarre
                        Raign'd, at your birth.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        At mine, ſir? no.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        The Doctor
                        Sweares that you are—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Nay, Captaine, yo'll tell all, now.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Allyed to the queene of Faerie.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Who? that I am?
                        Beleeue it, no ſuch matter—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, and that
                        Yo'were borne with a caule o'your head.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Who ſaies ſo?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Come.
                        You know it well inough, though you diſſemble it.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I-fac, I doe not. You are miſtaken.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        How!
                        
                        Sweare by your fac? and in a thing so knowne
                        Vnto the Doctor? How shall we, sir, trust you
                        I'the other matter? Can we euer thinke,
                        When you haue wonne fiue, or sixe thousand pound,
                        You'll send vs shares in't, by this rate?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        By IOVE, sir,
                        I'll winne ten thousand pound, and send you halfe.
                        I-fac's no oath.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No, no, he did but iest.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Goe too. Goe, thanke the Doctor. He's your friend
                        To take it so.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I thanke his worship.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        So?
                        Another angell.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Must I?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Must you? Slight,
                        What else is thankes? will you be triuiall? Doctor,
                        When must he come, for his familiar?
                        
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Shall I not ha'it with me?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O, good sir!
                        There must a world of ceremonies passe,
                        You must be bath'd, and fumigated, first;
                        Besides, the Queene of Faerie do's not rise,
                        Till it be noone.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Not, if she daunc'd, to night.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And she must blesse it.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Did you neuer see
                        Her royall Grace, yet?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Whom?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Your aunt of Faerie?
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Not, since she kist him, in the cradle, Captayne,
                        I can resolue you that.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Well, see her Grace,
                        What ere it cost you, for a thing that I know!
                        It will be somewhat hard to compasse: but,
                        How euer, see her. You are made, beleeue it,
                        If you can see her. Her Grace is a lone woman,
                        And very rich, and if she take a phant'sye,
                        She will doe strange things. See her, at any hand.
                        'Slid, she may hap to leaue you all she has!
                        It is the Doctors feare.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        How will't be done, then?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Let me alone, take you no thought. Doe you
                        But say to me, Captayne, I'll see her Grace.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        One knocks without.
                        Captain, I'll see her Grace.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Inough.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Who's there?
                        Anone. (Conduct him forth, by the backe way)
                        Sir, against one a clock, prepare your selfe.
                        Till when you must be fasting; onely, take
                        Three drops of vinegar, in, at your nose;
                        Two at your mouth; and one, at either eare;
                        Then, bath your fingers endes; and wash your eyes;
                        To sharpen your fiue senses; and, cry hum,
                        Thrise; and then buz, as often; and then, come.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Can you remember this?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I warrant you.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Well, then, away. 'Tis, but your bestowing
                        Some twenty nobles, 'mong her Graces seruants;
                        And, put on a cleane shirt▪ You doe not know
                        What grace her Grace may doe you in cleane linnen.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act I. Scene III.
                     SVBTLE, DRVGGER, FACE.
                     
                        COme in (Good wiues, I pray you forbeare me, now.
                        Troth I can doe you no good, till after-noone)
                        What is your name, say you, ABEL DRVGGER?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        A seller of tabacco?
                        
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        'Vmh.
                        Free of the Grocers?
                        
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        I, and't please you.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Well—
                        Your businesse, ABEL?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        This, and't please your worship,
                        I'am a yong beginner, and am building
                        Of a new shop, and't like your worship; iust,
                        At corner of a street: (Here's the plot on't.)
                        And I would know, by art, sir, of your worship,
                        Which way I should make my dore, by necromancie.
                        
                        And, where my shelues. And, which should be for boxes.
                        And, which for pots. I would be glad to thriue, sir.
                        And, I was wish'd to your worship, by a gentleman,
                        One Captaine FACE, that say's you know mens planets,
                        And their good angels, and their bad.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I doe,
                        If I doe see 'hem—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What! my honest ABEL?
                        Thou art well met, here!
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Troth, sir, I was speaking,
                        Iust, as your worship came here, of your worship.
                        I pray you, speake for me to master Doctor.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        He shall doe any thing. Doctor, doe you heare?
                        This is my friend, ABEL, an honest fellow,
                        He lets me haue good tabacco, and he do's not
                        Sophisticate it, with sack-lees, or oyle,
                        Nor washes it in muscadell, and graines,
                        Nor buries it, in grauell, vnder ground,
                        Wrap'd vp in greasie leather, or piss'd clouts:
                        But keeps it in fine lilly-pots, that open'd,
                        Smell like conserue of roses, or french beanes.
                        He has his maple block, his siluer tongs,
                        
                           Winchester pipes, and fire of iuniper.
                        A neate, spruce-honest-fellow, and no gold-smith.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        H'is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Alreadie, sir, ha' you found it? Lo'thee ABEL!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And, in right way to'ward riches—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        This summer,
                        He will be of the clothing of his companie:
                        And, next spring, call'd to the scarlet. Spend what he can.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What, and so little beard?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Sir, you must thinke,
                        He may haue a receipt, to make haire come.
                        But hee'll be wise, preserue his youth, and fine for't:
                        His fortune lookes for him, another way.
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Slid, Doctor, how canſt thou know this ſo ſoone?
                        I'am amus'd, at that!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        By a rule, Captaine,
                        In metapoſcopie, which I doe worke by,
                        A certaine ſtarre i'the fore-head, which you ſee not.
                        Your cheſt-nut, or your oliue-colour'd face
                        Do's neuer faile: and your long eare doth promiſe.
                        I knew't, by certaine ſpots too, in his teeth,
                        And on the naile of his mercurial finger.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Which finger's that?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        His little finger. Looke.
                        Yo'were borne vpon a wenſday?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, indeed, ſir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        The thumbe, in chiromantie, we giue VENVS;
                        The fore-finger to IOVE; the midſt, to SATVRNE;
                        The ring to SOL; the leaſt, to MERCVRIE:
                        Who was the lord, ſir, of his horoſcope,
                        
                        His houſe of life being Libra, which fore-ſhew'd,
                        He ſhould be a merchant, and ſhould trade with ballance.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why, this is ſtrange! Is't not, honeſt NAB?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        There is a ſhip now, comming from Ormus,
                        
                        That ſhall yeeld him, ſuch a commoditie
                        Of drugs— This is the weſt, and this the ſouth?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, ſir;
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And thoſe are your two ſides?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        I, ſir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Make me your dore, then ſouth; your broad ſide, weſt:
                        And, on the eaſt-ſide of your ſhop, aloft,
                        Write Mathlai, Tarmiel, and Baraborat;
                        Vpon the north-part, Rael, Velel, Thiel.
                        
                        They are the names of thoſe Mercurial ſpirits,
                        That doe fright flyes from boxes.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, ſir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And
                        Beneath your threſhold, bury me a load-ſtone
                        To draw in gallants, that weare ſpurres: The reſt,
                        They'll ſeeme to follow.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        That's a ſecret NAB!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And, on your ſtall, a puppet, with a vice,
                        And a court-fucus, to call city-dames.
                        You ſhall deale much, with mineralls.
                        
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Sir, I haue,
                        At home, alreadie—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I, I know, you'haue arſnike,
                        
                        
                           Vitriol, ſal-tartre, argaile, alkaly,
                        
                        
                           Cinoper: I know all. This fellow, Captaine,
                        Will come, in time, to be a great diſtiller,
                        And giue a ſay (I will not ſay directly,
                        But very faire) at the phioſophers ſtone.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why, how now, ABEL! Is this true?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Good Captaine,
                        What muſt I giue?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nay, Ile not counſell thee.
                        Thou hearſt, what wealth (he ſayes, ſpend what thou canſt)
                        Th'art like to come too.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        I would gi'him a crowne.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        A crowne! 'nd toward ſuch a fortune? Hart,
                        Thou ſhalt rather gi'him thy ſhop. No gold about thee?
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, I haue a portague, I ha' kept this halfe yeere.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Out on thee, NAB, S'light, there was ſuch an offer—
                        'Shalt keepe't no longer, I'll gi'it him for thee?
                        Doctor, NAB prayes your worſhip, to drinke this: and ſweares
                        He will appeare more gratefull, as your skill
                        Do's raiſe him in the world.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        I would intreat
                        Another fauour of his worſhip.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What is't, NAB?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        But, to looke ouer, ſir, my almanack,
                        
                        And croſſe out my ill-dayes, that I may neither
                        Bargaine, nor truſt vpon them.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        That he ſhall, NAB.
                        Leaue it, it ſhall be done, 'gainſt after-noone.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And a direction for his ſhelues.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Now, NAB?
                        Art thou well pleas'd, NAB?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Thanke, ſir, both your worſhips.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Away.
                        Why, now, you ſmoky perſecuter of nature!
                        Now, doe you ſee, that ſome-thing's to be done,
                        Beſide your beech-coale, and your cor'ſiue waters,
                        Your croſſe-lets, crucibles, and cucurbites?
                        You muſt haue ſtuffe, brought home to you, to worke on?
                        And, yet, you thinke, I am at no expence,
                        In ſearching out theſe veines, then following 'hem,
                        Then trying 'hem out. 'Fore god, my intelligence
                        Coſts me more money, then my ſhare oft comes too,
                        In theſe rare workes.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        You're pleaſant, ſir. How now?
                     
                  
                  
                     Act I. Scene IIII.
FACE, DOL, SVBTLE.
                     
                     
                        WHat ſay's, my daintie DOLKIN?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Yonder fiſh-wife
                        Will not away. And there's your gianteſſe,
                        The bawd of Lambeth.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Hart, I cannot ſpeake with 'hem.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Not, afore night, I haue told 'hem, in a voice,
                        Thorough the trunke, like one of your familiars.
                        
                        But I haue ſpied ſir EPICVRE MAMMON‐
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Where?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Comming along, at far end of the lane,
                        Slow of his feet, but earneſt of his tongue,
                        To one, that's with him.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        FACE, goe you, and ſhift,
                        DOL, you muſt preſently make readie, too—
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Why, what's the matter?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O, I did looke for him
                        With the ſunnes riſing: 'Maruaile, he could ſleepe!
                        This is the day, I am to perfect for him
                        The magiſterium, our great worke, the ſtone;
                        
                        And yeeld it, made, into his hands: of which,
                        He has, this month, talk'd, as he were poſſeſs;d.
                        And, now, hee's dealing peeces on't, away.
                        
                        Me thinkes, I see him, entring ordinaries,
                        Dispensing for the poxe; and plaguy-houses,
                        Reaching his dose; walking more-fields for lepers;
                        And offring citizens-wiues pomander-bracelets,
                        As his preseruatiue, made of the elixir;
                        Searching the spittle, to make old bawdes yong;
                        And the high-waies, for beggars, to make rich:
                        I see no end of his labours. He will make
                        Nature asham'd, of her long sleepe: when art,
                        Who's but a step-dame, shall doe more, then shee,
                        In her best loue to man-kind, euer could.
                        If his dreame last, hee'll turne the age, to gold.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act II.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     MAMMON, SVRLY.
                     
                        COme on, sir. Now, you set your foot on shore
                        In nouo orbe; Here's the rich Peru:
                        And there within, sir, are the golden mines,
                        Great SALOMON'S Ophir! He was sayling to't,
                        Three yeeres, but we haue reach'd it in ten months.
                        This is the day, wherein, to all my friends,
                        I will pronounce the happy word, be rich.
                        
                        This day, you shall be spectatissimi.
                        
                        You shall no more deale with the hollow die,
                        Or the fraile card. No more be at charge of keeping
                        The liuery-punke, for the yong heire, that must
                        Seale, at all houres, in his shirt. No more
                        If he denie, ha' him beaten to't, as he is
                        That brings him the commoditie. No more
                        Shall thirst of satten, or the couetous hunger
                        Of veluet entrailes, for a rude-spun cloke,
                        To be displaid at Madame AVGVSTA'S, make
                        The sonnes of sword, and hazzard fall before
                        The golden calfe, and on their knees, whole nights,
                        Commit idolatrie with wine, and trumpets:
                        Or goe a feasting, after drum and ensigne.
                        No more of this. You shall start vp yong Vice-royes,
                        And haue your punques, and punquettees, my SVRLY.
                        And vnto thee, I speake it first, be rich.
                           
                              Within Sir.
                        
                        Where is my SVBTLE, there? Within hough?
                        Hee'll come to you, by and by.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        That's his fire-drake,
                        His lungs, his Zephyrus, he that puffes his coales,
                        Till he firke nature vp, in her owne center.
                        
                        You are not faithfull, sir. This night, I'll change
                        All, that is mettall, in thy house, to gold.
                        And, early in the morning, will I send
                        To all the plumbers, and the pewterers,
                        And buy their tin, and lead vp: and to Lothbury,
                        For all the copper.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        What, and turne that too?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Yes, and I'll purchase Deuonshire, and Cornwaile,
                        And make them perfect Indies! You admire now?
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        No faith.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        But when you see th'effects of the great med'cine!
                        Of which one part proiected on a hundred
                        Of Mercurie, or Venus, or the Moone,
                        Shall turne it, to as many of the Sunne;
                        Nay, to a thousand, so ad infinitum:
                        
                        You will beleeue me.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Yes, when I see't, I will.
                        But, if my eyes doe cossen me so (and I
                        Giuing 'hem no occasion) sure, I'll haue
                        A whore, shall pisse 'hem out, next day.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Ha! Why?
                        Doe you thinke, I fable with you? I assure you,
                        He that has once the flower of the sunne,
                        The perfect ruby, which we call elixir,
                        Not onely can doe that; but by it's vertue,
                        Can confer honour, loue, respect, long life,
                        Giue safetie, valure: yea, and victorie,
                        To whom he will. In eight, and twentie dayes,
                        I'll make an old man, of fourescore, a childe.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        No doubt, hee's that alreadie.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Nay, I meane,
                        Restore his yeeres, renew him, like an eagle,
                        To the fifth age; make him get sonnes, and daughters,
                        Yong giants; as our Philosophers haue done
                        (The antient Patriarkes afore the floud)
                        But taking, once a weeke, on a kniues point,
                        The quantitie of a graine of mustard, of it:
                        Become stout MARSES, and beget yong CVPIDS.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        The decay'd Vestall's of Pickt-hatch would thanke you,
                        That keepe the fire a-liue, there.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        'Tis the secret
                        Of nature, naturiz'd 'gainst all infections,
                        Cures all diseases, comming of all causes,
                        A month's griefe, in a day; a yeeres, in twelue:
                        And, of what age soeuer, in a month.
                        Past all the doses, of your drugging Doctors.
                        I'll vndertake, withall, to fright the plague
                        Out o'the kingdome, in three months.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        And I'll
                        Be bound, the players shall sing your praises, then,
                        Without their poets.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Sir, I'll doo't. Meane time,
                        I'll giue away so much, vnto my man,
                        
                        
                        Shall ſerue th'whole citie, with preſeruatiue,
                        Weekely, each houſe his doſe, and at the rate—
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        As he that built the water-worke, do's with water?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        You are incredulous.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Faith, I haue a humor,
                        I would not willingly be gull'd. Your ſtone
                        
                        Cannot tranſmute me.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        PERTINAX, SVRLY,
                        Will you beleeue antiquitie? recordes?
                        I'll ſhew you a booke, where MOSES, and his ſiſter, 
                        And SALAMON haue written, of the art;
                        I, and a treatiſe penn'd by ADAM.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        O'the Philoſophers ſtone, and in high-Dutch.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Did ADAM write, ſir, in high-Dutch?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        He did:
                        Which proues it was the primitiue tongue.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        What paper?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        On cedar board.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        O that, indeed (they ſay)
                        Will laſt 'gainſt wormes.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        'Tis like your Iriſhwood,
                        'Gainſt cob-webs. I haue a peece of IASONS fleece, too,
                        Which was no other, then a booke of alchemie,
                        
                        Writ in large ſheepe-skin, a good fat ram-vellam.
                        Such was PYTHAGORA'S thigh, PANDORA's tub;
                        And, all that fable of MEDEAS charmes,
                        The manner of our worke: The Bulls, our fornace,
                        Still breathing fire; our argent-viue, the Dragon:
                        The Dragons teeth, mercury ſublimate,
                        That keepes the whiteneſſe, hardneſſe, and the biting;
                        And they are gather'd, into IASON's helme,
                        (Th'alembeke) and then ſow'd in MARS his field,
                        And, thence, ſublim'd ſo often, till they are fix'd.
                        Both this, th'Heſperian garden, CADMVS ſtorie,
                        IOVE's ſhower, the boone of MIDAS, ARGVS eyes,
                        BOCCACE his Demogorgon, thouſands more,
                        All abſtract riddles of our ſtone. How now?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene II.
                     MAMMON, FACE, SVRLY.
                     
                        DOe wee ſucceed? Is our day come? and hold's it?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        The euening will ſet red, vpon you, ſir;
                        You haue colour for it, crimſon: the red ferment
                        
                        Has done his office. Three houres hence, prepare you
                        To ſee proiection.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        PERTINAX, my SVRLY,
                        Againe,  I ſay to thee, aloud, be rich.
                        
                        This day, thou ſhalt haue ingots: and to morrow,
                        Giue lords th'affront. Is it, my ZEPHYRVS, right?
                        Bluſhes the bolts-head?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Like a wench with child, ſir,
                        
                        
                        That were, but now, diſcouer'd to her maſter.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Excellent wittie Lungs! My onely care is,
                        Where to get ſtuffe, inough now, to proiect on,
                        This towne will not halfe ſerue me.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        No, ſir? Buy
                        The couering of o' churches.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        That's true.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes.
                        Let 'hem ſtand bare, as doe their auditorie.
                        Or cap 'hem, new, with ſhingles.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        No, good thatch:
                        Thatch will lie light vpo' the rafters, Lungs.
                        
                        
                           Lungs, I will manumit thee, from the fornace;
                        I will reſtore thee thy complexion, Puffe,
                        
                        Loſt in the embers; and repaire this braine,
                        Hurt wi' the fume o' the mettalls.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I haue blowne, ſir,
                        Hard, for your woſhip; throwne by many a coale,
                        When 'twas not beech; weigh'd thoſe I put in, iuſt,
                        To keepe your heat, ſtill euen; Theſe bleard-eyes
                        Haue wak'd, to reade y our ſeuerall colours, ſir,
                        Of the pale citron, the greene lyon, the crow,
                        
                        The peacocks taile, the plumed ſwan.
                        
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        And, laſtly,
                        Thou haſt deſcryed the flower, the ſanguis agni?
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Where's maſter?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        At's praiers, ſir, he,
                        Good man, hee's doing his deuotions,
                        For the ſucceſſe.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        
                           Lungs, I will ſet a period,
                        To all thy labours: Thou ſhalt be the maſter
                        Of my ſeraglia.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        But doe you heare?
                        I'll geld you, Lungs.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        For I doe meane
                        To haue a liſt of wiues, and concubines,
                        Equall with SALOMON; who had the ſtone
                        Alike, with me: and I will make me, a back
                        With the elixir, that ſhall be as tough
                        As HERCVLES, to encounter fiftie a night.
                        Th'art ſure, thou ſaw'ſt it bloud?
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Both bloud, and ſpirit, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I will haue all my beds, blowne vp; not ſtuft:
                        Downe is too hard. And then, mine oual roome,
                        Fill'd with ſuch pictures, as TIBERIVS tooke
                        From ELEPHANTIS: and dull ARETINE
                        But coldly imitated. Then, my glaſſes,
                        Cut in more ſubtill angles, to diſperſe,
                        And multiply the figures, as I walke
                        Naked betweene my ſuccubae. My miſts
                        I'le haue of perfume, vapor'd 'bout the roome,
                        To looſe our ſelues in; and my baths, like pits
                        To fall into: from whence, we will come forth,
                        And rowle vs drie in goſſamour, and roſes.
                        (Is it arriu'd at ruby?) — Where I ſpie
                        A wealthy citizen, or rich lawyer,
                        
                        Haue a sublim'd pure wife, vnto that fellow
                        I'll send a thousand pound, to be my cuckold.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And I shall carry it?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        No. I'll ha' no bawds,
                        But fathers, and mothers. They will doe it best.
                        Best of all others. And, my flatterers
                        Shall be the pure, and grauest of Diuines,
                        That I can get for money. My mere fooles,
                        Eloquent burgesses, and then my poets
                        The same that writ so subtly of the fart,
                        Whom I will entertaine, still, for that subiect.
                        The few, that would giue out themselues, to be
                        Court, and towne-stallions, and, each where, belye
                        Ladies, who are knowne most innocent, for them;
                        Those will I begge, to make me eunuchs of:
                        And they shall fan me with ten estrich tailes
                        A piece, made in a plume, to gather wind.
                        We will be braue, Puffe, now we ha' the med'cine.
                        
                        My meat, shall all come in, in Indian shells,
                        Dishes of agate, set in gold, and studded,
                        With emeralds, saphyres, hiacynths, and rubies.
                        The tongues of carpes, dormise, and camels heeles,
                        Boil'd i'the spirit of SOL, and dissolu'd pearle,
                        (APICIVS diet, 'gainst the epilepsie)
                        And I will eate these broaths, with spoones of amber,
                        Headed with diamant, and carbuncle.
                        My foot-boy shall eate phesants, caluerd salmons,
                        Knots, godwits, lamprey's: I my selfe will haue
                        The beards of barbels, seru'd, in stead of sallades;
                        Oild mushromes; and the swelling vnctuous paps
                        Of a fat pregnant sow, newly cut off,
                        Drest with an exquisite, and poynant sauce;
                        For which, Ile say vnto my cooke, there's gold,
                        Goe forth, and be a knight.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir, I'll goe looke
                        A little, how it heightens.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Doe. My shirts
                        I'll haue of taffata-sarsnet, soft, and light
                        As cob-webs; and for all my other rayment
                        It shall be such, as might prouoke the Persian;
                        Were he to teach the world riot, a new.
                        My gloues of fishes, and birds-skins, perfum'd
                        With gummes of paradise, and easterne aire—
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        And do'you thinke to haue the stone, with this?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        No, I doe thinke, t'haue all this, with the stone.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Why, I haue heard, he must be homo frugi,
                        A pious, holy, and religious man,
                        One free from mortall sinne, a very virgin.
                     
                     
                        
                        MAM.
                        That makes it, sir, he is so. But I buy it.
                        My venter brings it me. He, honest wretch,
                        A notable, superstitious, good soule,
                        Has worne his knees bare, and his slippers bald,
                        With prayer, and fasting for it: and, sir, let him
                        Do'it alone, for me, still. Here he comes,
                        Not a prophane word, afore him: 'Tis poyson.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene III.
                     MAMMON, SVBTLE, SVRLY, FACE.
                     
                        GOod morrow, father.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Gentle sonne, good morrow,
                        And, to your friend, there. What is he, is with you?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        An heretique, that I did bring along,
                        In hope, sir, to conuert him.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Sonne, I doubt
                        Yo'are couetous, that thus you meet your time
                        I'the iust point: preuent your day, at morning.
                        This argues something, worthy of a feare
                        Of importune, and carnall appetite.
                        Take heed, you doe not cause the blessing leaue you,
                        With your vngouern'd hast. I should be sorry,
                        To see my labours, now, e'ene at perfection,
                        Got by long watching, and large patience,
                        Not prosper, where my loue, and zeale hath plac'd 'hem.
                        Which (heauen I call to witnesse, with your selfe,
                        To whom, I haue pour'd my thoughts) in all my ends,
                        Haue look'd no way, but vnto publique good,
                        To pious vses, and deere charitie,
                        No growne a prodigie with men. Wherein
                        If you, my sonne, should now preuaricate,
                        And, to your owne particular lusts, employ
                        So great, and catholique a blisse: be sure,
                        A curse will follow, yea, and ouertake
                        Your subtle, and most secret wayes.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I know, sir,
                        You shall not need to feare me. I but come,
                        To ha'you confute this gentleman.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Who is,
                        Indeed, sir, somewhat caustiue of beliefe
                        Toward your stone: would not be gull'd.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Well, sonne,
                        All that I can conuince him in, is this,
                        The worke is done: Bright SOL is in his robe.
                        
                        We haue a med'cine of the triple Soule,
                        The glorified spirit. Thankes be to heauen,
                        And make vs worthy of it. Ulen spiegel.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Anone, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Looke well to the register,
                        
                        
                        And let your heat, ſtill, leſſen by degrees,
                        To the Aludels.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, ſir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Did you looke
                        O'the Bolts-head yet?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Which on D. ſir?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I,
                        What's the complexion?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Whitiſh.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Infuſe vinegar,
                        To draw his volatile ſubſtance, and his tincture:
                        And let the water in Glaſſe E. be feltred,
                        
                        And put into the Gripes egge. Lute him well;
                        And leaue him clos'd in balneo.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I will, ſir.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        What a braue language here is? next to canting?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I'haue another worke;  you neuer ſaw, ſonne,
                        That, three dayes ſince, paſt the Philoſophers wheele,
                        
                        In the lent heat of Athanor; and's become
                        
                           Sulphur o'nature.
                        
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        But 'tis for me?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What need you?
                        You haue inough, in that is, perfect.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        O, but —
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why, this is couetiſe!
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        No, I aſſure you,
                        I ſhall employ it all, in pious vſes,
                        Founding of colledges, and grammar ſchooles,
                        Marrying yong virgins, building hoſpitalls,
                        And now, and then, a church.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How now?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir, pleaſe you,
                        Shall I not change the feltre?
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Mary, yes.
                        And bring me the complexion of Glaſſe B.
                        
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Ha' you another?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, ſonne, were I aſſur'd
                        Your pietie were firme, we would not want
                        The meanes to glorifie it. But I hope the beſt:
                        I meane to tinct C. in ſand-heat, to morrow,
                        And giue him imhibition.
                        
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Of white oile?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No, ſir, of red. F. is come ouer the helme too,
                        I thanke my Maker, in S. MARIES bath,
                        
                        And ſhewes lac Virginis. Bleſſed be heauen.
                        I ſent you of his faeces there, calcin'd.
                        
                        Out of that calx, I' ha' wonne the ſalt of MERCVRY.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        By powring on your rectified water?
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, and reuerberating in Athanor.
                        
                        How now? What colour ſaies it?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        The ground black, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        That's you crowes-head?
                        
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Your cocks-comb's, is't not?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No, 'tis not perfect, would it were the crow.
                        
                        That worke wants ſome-thing.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        (O, I look'd for this.
                        The hay is a pitching.)
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Are you ſure, you loos'd 'hem
                        I' their owne menſtrue?
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, ſir, and then married 'hem,
                        And put 'hem in a Bolts-head, nipp'd to digeſtion,
                        
                        According as you bad me; when I ſet
                        The liquor of MARS to circulation,
                        
                        In the ſame heat.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        The proceſſe, then, was right.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, by the token, ſir, the Retort brake,
                        And what was ſau'd, was put into the Pellicane,
                        
                        
                        
                        And ſign'd with HERMES ſeale.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I thinke 'twas ſo.
                        We ſhould haue a new amalgama.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        (O, this ferret
                        Is ranke as any pole-cat.)
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        But I care not.
                        Let him e'ene die; we haue enough beſide,
                        In embrion. 
                           H ha's his white ſhirt on?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, ſir,
                        Hee's ripe for inceration: He ſtands warme,
                        In his aſh-fire. I would not, you ſhould let
                        Any die now, if I might counſell, ſir,
                        For lucks ſake to the reſt. It is not good.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        He ſaies right.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        I, are you bolted?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nay, I know't, ſir,
                        I'haue ſeene th'ill fortune. What is ſome three ounces
                        Of freſh materialls?
                        
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Is't no more?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        No more, ſir,
                        Of gold, t'amalgame, with ſome ſixe of Mercurie.
                        
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Away, here's money. What will ſerue?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Aske him, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        How much?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Giue him nine pound: you may gi'him ten.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Yes, twentie, and be coſſend, doe.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        There 'tis.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        This needs not. But that you will haue it, ſo,
                        To ſee concluſions of all. For two
                        Of our inferiour workes, are at fixation.
                        
                        A third is in aſcenſion. Goe your waies.
                        Ha' you ſet the oile of Luna in kemia?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, ſir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And the philoſopers vinegar?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        We ſhall haue a ſallad.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        When doe you make proiection?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Sonne, be no haſtie, I exalt our med'cine,
                        
                        By hanging him in balneo vaporoſo;
                        And giuing him ſolution; then congeale him;
                        And then diſſolue him; then againe congeale  him;
                        For looke, how oft I iterate the worke,
                        So many times, I adde vnto his vertue.
                        As, if at firſt, one ounce conuert a hundred,
                        After his ſecond looſe, hee'll turne a thouſand;
                        His third ſolution, ten; his fourth, a hundred.
                        After his fifth, a thouſand thouſand ounces
                        Of any imperfect mettall, into pure
                        Siluer, or gold, in all examinations,
                        As good, as any of the naturall mine.
                        Get you your ſtuffe here, againſt after-noone,
                        Your braſſe, your pewter, and your andirons.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Not thoſe of iron:
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes. You may bring them, too.
                        Wee'll change all mettall's.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        I beleeue you, in that.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Then I may ſend my ſpits?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, and your racks.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        And dripping-pans, and pot-hangers, and hookes?
                        Shall he not?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        If he pleaſe.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        To be an aſſe.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How, ſir!
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        This gent'man, you muſt beare withall.
                        I told you, he had no faith.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        And little hope, ſir,
                        
                        But, much lesse charitie, should I gull my selfe.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why, what haue you obseru'd, sir, in our art,
                        Seemes so impossible?
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        But your whole worke, no more.
                        That you should hatch gold in a fornace, sir,
                        As they doe egges, in Egypt!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Sir, doe you
                        Beleeue that egges are hatch'd so?
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        If I should?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why, I thinke that the greater miracle.
                        No egge, but differs from a chicken, more,
                        Then mettalls in themselues.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        That cannot be.
                        The egg's ordain'd by nature, to that end:
                        And is a chicken in potentia.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        The same we say of lead, and other mettalls,
                        Which would be gold, if they had time.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        And that
                        Our art doth furder.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I, for 'twere absurd
                        To thinke that nature, in the earth, bred gold
                        Perfect, i' the instant. Something went before.
                        There must be remote matter.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        I, what is that?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Mary, we say—
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I, now it heats: stand Father.
                        Pound him to dust—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        It is, of the one part,
                        A humide exhalation, which we call
                        
                           Materia liquida, or the vnctuous water;
                        On th'other part, a certaine crasse, and viscous
                        Portion of earth; both which, concorporate,
                        Doe make the elementarie matter of gold:
                        Which is not, yet, propria materia,
                        But commune to all mettalls, and all stones.
                        For, where it is forsaken of that moysture,
                        And hath more drynesse, it becomes a stone;
                        Where it retaines more of the humid fatnesse,
                        It turnes to sulphur, or to quick-siluer:
                        
                        Who are the parents of all other mettalls.
                        Nor can this remote matter, sodainly,
                        Progresse so from extreme, vnto extreme,
                        As to grow gold, and leape ore all the meanes.
                        Nature doth, first, beget th'imperfect; then
                        Proceedes shee to the perfect. Of that ayrie,
                        And oily water, mercury is engendred;
                        
                           Sulphure o'the fat, and earthy part: the one
                        (Which is the last) supplying the place of male,
                        The other of the female, in all mettalls.
                        Some doe beleeue hermaphrodeitie,
                        That both doe act, and suffer. But, these two
                        Make the rest ductile, malleable, extensiue.
                        And, euen in gold, they are; for we doe find
                        Seedes of them, by our fire, and gold in them:
                        
                        And can produce the species of each mettall
                        More perfect thence, then nature doth in earth.
                        Beside, who doth not see, in daily practice,
                        Art can beget bees, hornets, beetles, waspes,
                        Out of the carcasses, and dung of creatures;
                        Yea, scorpions, of an herbe, being ritely plac'd:
                        And these are liuing creatures, far more perfect,
                        And excellent, then mettalls.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Well said, father!
                        Nay, if he take you in hand, sir, with an argument,
                        Hee'll bray you in a morter.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        'Pray you, sir, stay.
                        Rather, then I'll be brai'd, sir, I'll beleeue,
                        That Alchemie is a pretty kind of game,
                        Somewhat like tricks o' the cards, to cheat a man,
                        With charming.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Sir?
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        What else are all your termes,
                        Whereon no one o'your writers grees with other?
                        Of your elixir, your lac virginis,
                        Your stone, your med'cine, and your chrysosperme,
                        Your sal, your sulphur, and your mercurie,
                        Your oyle of height, your tree of life, your bloud,
                        Your marchesite, your tutie, your magnesia,
                        Your toade, your crow, your dragon, and your panthar,
                        Your sunne, your moone, your firmament, your adrop,
                        Your lato, azoch, zernich, chibrit, heautarit,
                        And then, your red man, and your white woman,
                        With all your broths, your menstrues, and materialls,
                        Of pisse, and egge-shells, womens termes, mans bloud,
                        Haire o'the head, burnt clouts, chalke, merds, and clay,
                        Poulder of bones, scalings of iron, glasse,
                        And worlds of other strange ingredients,
                        Would burst a man to name?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And all these, nam'd,
                        Intending but one thing: which art our writers
                        Vs'd to obscure their art.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Sir, so I told him,
                        Because the simple idiot should not learne it,
                        And make it vulgar.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Was not all the knowledge
                        Of the Egyptians writ in mystick symboles?
                        
                        Speake not the Scriptures, oft, in parables?
                        
                        Are not the choisest fables of the Poets,
                        That were the fountaines, and first springs of wisedome,
                        Wrapt in perplexed allegories?
                        
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I vrg'd that,
                        And clear'd to him, that SISIPHVS was damn'd
                        To roule the ceaslesse stone, onely, because
                        Dol is seene.
                        He would haue made ours common. Who is this?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        God's precious—What doe you meane? Goe in, good lady,
                        Let me intreat you. Where's this varlet?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        You very knaue! doe you vse me, thus?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Wherein, sir?
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Goe in, and ſee, you traitor. Goe.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Who is it, ſir?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Nothing, ſir. Nothing.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        What's the matter? good, ſir!
                        I haue not ſeene you thus diſtemp'red. Who is't?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        All arts haue ſtill had, ſir, their aduerſaries,
                        But ours the moſt ignorant. What now?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Twas not m;y fault, ſir, ſhee would ſpeake with you.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Would ſhe, ſir? Follow me.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Stay, Lungs.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I dare not, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        How! 'Pray thee ſtay?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        She's mad, ſir, and ſent hether—
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Stay man, what is ſhee?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        A lords ſiſter, ſir.
                        (Hee'll be mad too. 
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I warrant thee.) Why ſent hether?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir, to be cur'd.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why, raskall!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Loe you. Here, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        'Fore-god, a BRADAMANTE, a braue piece.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Hart, this is a bawdy-houſe! I'll be burnt elſe.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        O, by this light, no. Doe not wrong him. H'is
                        Too ſcrulous, that way. It is his vice.
                        No, h'is a rare phyſitian, doe him right.
                        An excellent Paracelſian! and has done
                        Strange cures with minerall phyſicke. He deales all
                        With ſpirits, he. He will not heare a word
                        Of GALEN, or his tedious recipe's.
                        
                        How now, Lungs!
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Softly, ſir, ſpeake ſoftly. I meant
                        To ha' told your worſhip all. This muſt not heare.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        No, he will not be gull'd; let him alone.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Y'are very right, ſir, ſhee is a moſt rare ſchollar;
                        And is gone mad, with ſtudying BRAVGHTONS workes.
                        If you but name a word, touching the Hebrew,
                        
                        Shee falls into her fit, and will diſcourſe
                        So learnedly of genealogies,
                        
                        As you would runne mad, too, to heare her, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        How might one doe t'haue conference with her, Lungs?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        O, diuers haue runne mad vpon the conference.
                        I doe not know, ſir: I am ſent in haſt,
                        To fetch a violl.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Be not gull'd, ſir MAMMON.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Wherein? 'Pray yee, be patient.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Yes, as you are.
                        And truſt confederate knaues, and bawdes, and whores.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        You are too foule, beleeue it. Come, here, Ulen.
                        
                        One word.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I dare not, in good faith.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Stay, knaue.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        H'is extreme angrie, that you ſaw her, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Drinke that. What is ſhee, when ſhee's out of her fit?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        O, the moſt affableſt creature, ſir! ſo merry!
                        So pleaſant! ſhee'll mount you vp, like quick-siluer,
                        
                        
                           Ouer the helme; and circulate, like oyle,
                        
                        A very vegetall: diſcourſe of ſtate,
                        
                        Of mathematiques, bawdry, any thing—
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Is ſhee no way acceſſible? no meanes,
                        
                        
                        No trick, to giue a man a taſt of her — wit —
                        Or ſo? — Ulen.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I'll come to you againe, ſir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        SVRLY, I did not thinke, one o' your breeding
                        Would traduce perſonages of worth.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Sir EPICVRE,
                        Your friend to vſe: yet ſtill, loth to be gull'd.
                        I doe not like your philoſophicall bawdes.
                        Their ſtone is lecherie inough, to pay for,
                        Without this bait.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        'Hart, you abuſe your ſelfe.
                        I know the lady, and her friends, and meanes,
                        The originall of this diſaſter. Her brother
                        H'as told me all.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        And yet, you n'ere ſaw her
                        Till now?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        O, yes, but I forgot. I haue (beleeue it)
                        One o' the trecherou'ſt memories, I doe thinke,
                        Of all mankind.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What call you her, brother?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        My lord—
                        He wi' not haue his name knowne, now I thinke on 't.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        A very trecherous memorie!
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        O' my faith—
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Tut, if you ha' it not about you, paſſe it,
                        Till we meet next.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Nay, by this hand, 't is true.
                        Hee's one I honour, and my noble friend,
                        And I reſpect his houſe.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Hart! can it be,
                        That a graue ſir, a rich, that has no need,
                        A wife ſir, too, at other times, ſhould thus
                        With his owne oathes, and arguments, make hard meanes
                        To gull himſelfe? And, this be your elixir,
                        
                        Your lapis mineralis, and your lunarie,
                        
                        Giue me your honeſt trick, yet, at primero,
                        
                        Or gleeke; and take your lutum ſapientis,
                        
                        Your menſtruum ſimplex: I'll haue gold, before you,
                        And, with leſſe danger of the quick-ſiluer;
                        Or the hot ſulphur.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Here's one from Captain FACE, ſir,
                        Deſires you meet him i' the Temple-church,
                        Some halfe houre hence, and vpon earneſt buſineſſe.
                        SIr, if you pleaſe to quit vs, now; and come,
                        Againe, within two houres: you ſhall haue
                        My maſter buſie examining o' the workes;
                        and I will ſteale you in, vnto the partie,
                        That you may ſee her conuerſe. Sir, ſhall I ſay,
                        You'll meet the Captaines worſhip?
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Sir, I will.
                        But, by attorney, and to a ſecond purpoſe.
                        Now, I am ſure, it is a bawdy-houſe;
                        I'll ſweare it, were the Marſhall here, to thanke me:
                        The naming this Commander, doth confirme it.
                        
                           Don FACE! Why, h' is the moſt autentique dealer
                        I' theſe commodities! The Superintendent
                        
                        To all, the queinter traffiquers, in towne.
                        
                        He is their Visiter, and do's appoint
                        Who lyes with whom; and at what houre; what price;
                        Which gowne; and in what smock; what fall; what tyre.
                        Him, will I proue, by a third person, to find
                        The subtilties of this darke labyrinth:
                        
                        Which, if I doe discouer, deare sir MAMMON,
                        You'll giue your poore friend leaue, though no Philosopher,
                        To laugh: for you that are, 'tis thought, shall weepe.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir. He do's pray, you'll not forget.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        I will not, sir.
                        Sir EPICVRE, I shall leaue you?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I follow you, streight.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        But doe so, good sir, to auoid suspicion.
                        This gent'man has a par'lous head.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        But wilt thou, Ulen,
                        Be constant to thy promise?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        As my life, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        And wilt thou insinuate what I am? and praise me?
                        And say I am a noble fellow?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        O, what else, sir?
                        And, that you'll make her royall; with the stone,
                        An Empresse; and your selfe king of Bantam.
                        
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Wilt thou doe this?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Will I, sir?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        
                           Lungs, my Lungs!
                        
                        I loue thee.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Send your stuffe, sir, that my master
                        May busie himselfe, about proiection.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Th'hast witch'd me, rogue: Take, goe.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Your iack, & all, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Thou art a villaine—I will send my iack;
                        And the weights too. Slaue, I could bite thine eare.
                        Away, thou dost not care for me.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Not I, sir?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Come, I was borne to make thee, my good weasell;
                        Set thee on a bench: and, ha' thee twirle a chaine
                        With the best lords vermine, of'hem all.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Away, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        A Count, nay, a Count-palatine—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good sir, goe.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Shall not aduance thee, better: no, nor faster.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene IIII.
                     SVBTLE, FACE, DOL.
                     
                        HAs he bit? Has he bit?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And swallow'd too, my SVBTLE.
                        I ha' giu'n him line, and now he playes, I faith.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And shall we twitch him?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Thorough both the gills.
                        A wench is a rare bait, with which a man
                        No sooner's taken, but he straight firkes mad.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        DOL, my lord WHA'TS'HVMS sister, you must now
                        Beare your selfe statelich.
                        
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        O, let me alone.
                        I'll not forget my race, I warrant you.
                        I'll keepe my distance, laugh, and talke aloud;
                        Haue all the tricks of a proud sciruy ladie,
                        And be as rude'as her woman.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Well said, Sanguine.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        SVB.
                        But will he send his andirons?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        His iack too;
                        And's iron shooing-horne: I ha' spoke to him. Well,
                        I must not loose my wary gamster, yonder.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O Monsieur Caution, that will not be gull'd?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I, if I can strike a fine hooke into him, now,
                        The Temple-church, there I haue cast mine angle.
                        Well, pray for me. I'll about it.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        One knocke.
                        What, more gudgeons!
                        DOL, scout, scout; stay FACE, you must goe to the dore:
                        'Pray god, it be my Anabaptist. Who is't, DOL?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        I know him not. He lookes like a gold-end-man.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Gods so! 'tis he, he said he would send. What call you him?
                        The sanctified Elder, that should deale
                        For MAMMONS iack, and andirons! Let him in.
                        Stay, helpe me of, first, with my gowne. Away
                        Ma-dame, to your with-drawing chamber. Now,
                        In a new tune, new gesture, but old language.
                        This fellow is sent, from one negotiates with me
                        About the stone, too; for the holy Brethren
                        
                        Of Amsterdam, the exil'd Saints: that hope
                        To raise their discipline, by it. I must vse him
                        In some strange fashion, now, to make him admire me.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act II. Scene V.
                     SVBTLE, FACE, ANANIAS.
                     
                        WHere is my drudge?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Take away the recipient,
                        And rectifie your menstrue, from the phlegma.
                        
                        Then powre it, o'the Sol, in the cucurbite,
                        And let'hem macerate, together.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, sir.
                        And saue the ground?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No. Terra damnata
                        
                        Must not haue entrance, in the worke. Who are you?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        A faithfull Brother, if it please you.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What's that?
                        A Lullianist? a Ripley? Filius artis?
                        
                        Can you sublime, and dulcefie? calcine?
                        
                        Know you the sapor pontick? sapor slipstick?
                        
                        Or, what is homogene, or heterogene?
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I vnderstand no heathen language, truely.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        
                           Heathen, you KNIPPER-DOLING? Is Ars sacra,
                        Or Chrysopoeia, or Spagirica,
                        Or the pamphysick, or panarchick knowledge,
                        A heathen language?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        
                           Heathen Greeke, I take it.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How? heathen Greeke?
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        All's heathen, but the Hebrew.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Sirah, my varlet, stand you forth, and speake to him
                        Like a Philosopher: Answere, i'the language.
                        
                        
                        Name the vexations, and the martyrizations
                        Of mettalls, in the worke.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir, Putrefaction,
                        
                        
                           Solution, Ablution, Sublimation,
                        
                        
                           Cohobations, Calcination, Ceration, and
                        
                           Fixation.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        This is heathen Greeke, to you, now?
                        And when comes Viuification?
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        After Mortification.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What's Cohobation?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'T is the powring on
                        Your Aqua Regis, and then drawing him off,
                        To the trine circle of the ſeuen ſpheares.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What's the proper paſſion of mettalls?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        
                           Malleation.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What's your vltimum ſupplicium auri?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        
                           Antimonium.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        This's heathen Greeke, to you? And, what's your Mercury?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        A very fugitiue, he will be gone, ſir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How know you him?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        By his viſcoſitie,
                        
                        His oleoſitie, and his ſuſcitabilitie.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How doe you ſublime him?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        With the calce of egge-ſhels,
                        White marble, talck.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Your magiſterium, now?
                        What's that?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Shifting, ſir, your elements,
                        Drie into cold, cold into moiſt, moiſt into hot, hot into drie.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        This's heathen Greeke to you, ſtill?
                        Your lapis philoſophicus?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Tis a ſtone, and not
                        A ſtone; a ſpirit, a ſoule, and a body:
                        Which, if you doe diſſolue, it is diſſolu'd,
                        
                        If you coagulate, it is coagulated,
                        
                        If you make it to flye, it flyeth.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Inough.
                        This's heathen Greeke, to you? What are you, ſir?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Pleaſe you, a ſeruant of the exil'd Brethren,
                        
                        That deale with widdowes, and with orphanes goods;
                        And make it a iuſt account, vnto the Saints:
                        A Deacon.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O, you are ſent from maſter WHOLSOME,
                        Your teacher?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        From TRIBVLATION WHOLSOME,
                        Our very zealous Paſtor.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Good. I haue
                        Some orphanes goods to come here.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Of what kind, ſir?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Pewter, and braſſe, andirons, and kitchin ware,
                        Mettalls, that we muſt vſe our med'cine on:
                        Wherein the Brethren may haue a penn'orth.
                        For readie money.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Were the orphanes parents
                        
                           Sincere profeſſors?
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why do you aske?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Becauſe
                        We then are to deale iuſtly, and giue (in truth)
                        Their vtomoſt valew.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        "Slid, you'ld coſſen, elſe,
                        And, if their parents were not of the faithfull?
                        
                        I will not truſt you, now I thinke on't,
                        Till I ha' talk'd with your Pastor. Ha' you brought money
                        To buy more coales?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        No, ſurely.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No? How ſo?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        The Brethren bid me ſay vnto you, ſir.
                        
                        Surely, they will not venter any more,
                        Till they may ſee >proiection.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Yo'haue had,
                        For the inſtruments, as bricks, and lome, and glaſſes,
                        Alreadie thirtie pound; and, for materialls,
                        
                        They ſay, ſome ninetie more: And, they haue heard, ſince,
                        That oe, at Heidelberg, made it, of an egge,
                        And a ſmall paper of pin-duſt.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What's your name?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        My name is ANANIAS.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Out, the varlet
                        That coſſend the Apostles! Hence, away,
                        Flee Miſchiefe; had your holy Conſiſtorie
                        
                        No name to ſend me, of another ſound;
                        Then wicked ANANIAS? Send your Elders,
                        
                        Hither, to make atonement for you, quickly.
                        And gi'me ſatisfaction; or out-goes
                        The fire: and downe th'alembekes, and the fornace.
                        
                            Piger Henricus, or what not. Thou wretch,
                        Both Sericon, and Bufo, ſhall be loſt,
                        Tell 'hem. All hope of rooting out the Biſhops,
                        
                        Or th' Antichriſtian Hierarchie ſhall periſh,
                        If they ſtay threeſcore minutes. The Aqueitie,
                        
                        
                           Terrestie, and Sulphureitie
                        
                        Shall runne together againe, an all be annull'd
                        Thou wicked ANANIAS. This will fetch 'hem,
                        And make 'hem haſt towards their gulling more.
                        A man muſt deale like a rough nurſe, and fright
                        Thoſe, that are froward, to an appetite.
                     
                  
                  
                     Act II. Scene VI.
                     FACE, SVBTLE, DRVGGER.
                     
                        H'Is buſie with his ſpirits, but wee'll vpon him.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How now! What mates? What Bairards ha' wee here?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I told you, he would be furious. Sir, here's NAB,
                        Has brought yo' another old piece of gold, to looke on:
                        (We muſt  appeaſe him. Giue it me) and prayes you,
                        You would deuiſe (what is it NAB?)
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        A ſigne, ſir.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I, a good lucky one, a thriuing ſigne, Doctor.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I was deuiſing now.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        ('Slight, doe not ſay ſo,
                        He will repent he ga' you any more.)
                        What ſay you to his conſtellation, Doctor?
                        The Ballance?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Not, that way is ſtale, and common.
                        A townes-man, borne in Taurus, giues the bull
                        Or the bulls-head: in Aries, the ram.
                        A poor deuice. No, I will haue nis name
                        
                        Form'd in some mystick character; whose radij,
                        Striking the senses of the passers by,
                        Shall, by a vertuall influence, breed affections,
                        That may result vpon the partie ownes it:
                        As thus—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        NAB!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        He first shall haue a bell, that's ABEL;
                        And, by it, standing one, whose name is DEE,
                        In a rugg gowne; there's D. and Rug, that's DRVG:
                        And, right anenst him, a Dog snarling Er;
                        There's DRVGGER, ABEL DRVGGER. That's his signe.
                        And here's now mysterie, and hieroglyphick!
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        ABEL, thou art made.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Sir, I doe thanke his worship.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sixe o'thy legs more, will not doe it, NAB.
                        He has brought you a pipe of tabacco, Doctor.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, sir:
                        I haue another thing, I would impart—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Out with it, NAB.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Sir, there is lodg'd, hard by me,
                        A rich yong widdow—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good! a bona roba?
                        
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        But nineteene, at the most.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Very good, ABEL.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Mary, sh'is not in fashion, yet; shee weares
                        A hood: but 't stands a cop.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        No matter, ABEL.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        And, I doe, now and then giue her a fucus—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What! dost thou deale, NAB?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I did tell you, Captaine.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        And physick too sometime, sir: for which shee trusts me
                        With all her mind. Shee's come vp here, of purpose
                        To learne the fashion.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good (his match too!) on, NAB.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        And shee do's strangely long to know her fortune.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Gods lid, NAB, Send her to the Doctor, hether.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, I haue spoke to her of his worship, alreadie:
                        But shee's afraid, it will be blowne abroad
                        And hurt her marriage.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Hurt it? 'Tis the way
                        To heale it, if 'twere hurt; to make it more
                        Follow'd, and sought: NAB, thou shalt tell her this.
                        Shee'll be more knowne, more talk'd of, and your widdowes
                        Are ne'er of any price till they be famous;
                        Their honour is their multitude of sutors:
                        Send her, it may be thy good fortune. What?
                        Thou dost not know.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        No, sir, shee'll neuer marry
                        Vnder a knight. Her brother has made a vow.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What, and dost thou despaire, my little NAB,
                        Knowing, what the Doctor has set downe for thee,
                        And, seeing so many, o'the citie, dub'd?
                        One glasse o'thy water, with a Madame, I know,
                        Will haue it done,
                     
                     
                        NAB.
                        What's her brother? a knight?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        No, sir, a gentleman, newly warme in 'his land, sir,
                        Scarse cold in his one and twentie; that do's gouerne
                        His sister, here: and is a man himselfe
                        
                        Of some three thousand a yeere, and is come vp
                        To learne to quarrell, and to liue by his wits,
                        And will goe downe againe, and dye i' the countrey.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        How! to quarrell?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, sir, to carry quarrells,
                        As gallants doe, and manage 'hem, by line.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Slid, NAB! The Doctor is the onely man
                        In Christendome for him. He has made a table,
                        With Mathematicall demonstrations,
                        Touching the Art of quarrells. He will giue him
                        An instrument to quarrell by. Goe, bring 'hem, both:
                        Him, and his sister. And, for thee, with her
                        The Doctor happ'ly may perswade. Goe to.
                        'Shalt giue his worship, a new damaske suite
                        Vpon the premisses.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O, good Captaine.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        He shall,
                        He is the honestest fellow, Doctor. Stay not,
                        No offers, bring the damaske, and the parties.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        I'll trie my power, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And thy will too, NAB.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        'Tis good tabacco this! What is't an ounce?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        He'll send you a pound, Doctor.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O, no.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        He will do't.
                        It is the gooddest soule. ABEL, about it.
                        (Thou shalt know more anone. Away, be gone.)
                        A miserable rogue, and liues with cheese,
                        And has the wormes. That was the cause indeed
                        Why he came now. He dealt with me, in priuate,
                        To get a med'cine for'hem.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And shall, sir. This workes.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        A wife, a wife, for one on'vs, my deare SVBTLE:
                        Wee'll eene draw lots, and he, that failes, shall haue
                        The more in goods, the other has in taile.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Rather the lesse. For shee may be so light
                        Shee may want graines.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I, or be such a burden,
                        A man would scarse endure her, for the whole.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Faith, best let's see her first, and then determine.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Content. But DOL must ha' no breath on't.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Mum.
                        Away, you to your SVRLY yonder, catch him.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Pray god, I ha' not stai'd too long.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I feare it.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act III.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     TRIBVLATION, ANANIAS.
                     
                        THese chastisements are common to the Saints,
                        And such rebukes we of the Separation
                        
                        Must beare, with willing shoulders, as the trialls
                        Sent forth, to tempt our frailties.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        In pure zeale,
                        I doe not like the man: He is a heathen.
                        
                        
                        And ſpeakes the language of Canaan, truely.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        I thinke him a prophane perſon, indeed.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        He beares
                        The viſible marke of the Beast, in his fore-head.
                        And for his Stone, it is a worke of darkneſſe,
                        And, with Philiſophie, blinds the eyes of man.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Good Brother, we muſt bend vnto all meanes,
                        That may giue furtherance, to the holy cauſe.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Which his cannot: The ſanctified cauſe
                        
                        Should haue a ſanctified courſe.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Not alwaies neceſſary.
                        The children of perdition are oft-times,
                        Made inſtruments euen of the greateſt workes.
                        Beſide, we ſhould giue ſomewhat to mans nature,
                        The place he liues in, ſtill about the fire,
                        And fume of mettalls, that intoxicate
                        The braine of man, and make him prone to paſſion.
                        Where haue you greater Atheiſts, then your Cookes?
                        Or more prophane, or cholerick then your Glaſſe-men?
                        More Antichriſtian, then your Bell-founders?
                        What makes the Deuill ſo deuilliſh, I would aske you,
                        
                           Sathan, our common enemie, but his being
                        Perpetually about the fire, and boyling
                        
                           Brimſtone, and arſnike? We muſt giue, I ſay,
                        Vnto the motiues, and the ſtirrers vp
                        Of humours in the bloud. It may be ſo.
                        When as the worke is done, the ſtone is made,
                        This heate of his may turne into a zeale,
                        And ſtand vp for the beauteous diſcipline,
                        
                        Againſt the menſtruous cloth, and ragg of Rome.
                        
                        We muſt await his calling, and the comming
                        Of the good ſpirit. You did fault, t'vpbraid him
                        With the Brethrens bleſſing of Heidelberg, waighing
                        What need we haue, to haſten on the worke,
                        For the reſtoring of the ſilenc'd Saints,
                        
                        Which ne'er will be, but by the Philoſophers ſtone.
                        
                        And, ſo a learned Elder, one of Scotland,
                        
                        Aſſur'd me; Aurum potabile being
                        The onely med'cine, for the ciuill Magiſtrate,
                        
                        T'incline him to a feeling of the cauſe:
                        And muſt be daily vs'd, in the diſeaſe.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I haue not edified more, truely, by man;
                        Not, ſince the beautifull light, firſt, ſhone on me:
                        And I am ſad, my zeale hath ſo offended.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Let vs call on him, then.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        The motion's good,
                        And of the ſpirit; I will knock firſt: Peace be within.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Act III. Scene II.
                     SVBTLE, TRIBVLATION, ANANIAS.
                     
                        O, Are you come? 'Twas time. Your threeſcore minutes
                        Were at the laſt thred, you ſee; and downe had gone
                        
                           Furnus acediae, Turris circulatorius:
                        
                        
                           Lembeke, Bolts-head, Retort, and Pellicane
                        
                        Had all beene cinders. Wicked ANANIAS!
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Sir, be appeaſed, he is come to humble
                        Himſelfe in ſpirit, and to aske your patience,
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        SVB.
                        And, then, the turning of this Lawyers pewter
                        To plate, at Christ-masse—
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        
                           Christ-tide, I pray you.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yet, ANANIAS?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I haue done.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Or changing
                        His parcell guilt, to massie gold. You cannot
                        But raise you friends. With all, to be of power
                        To pay an armie, in the field, to buy
                        The king of France, out of his realmes; or Spaine;
                        
                        Out of his Indies: What can you not doe,
                        Against lords spirituall, or temporall,
                        That shall oppone you?
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Verily, 'tis true.
                        We may be temporall lords, our selues, I take it.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        You may be any thing, and leaue off to make
                        Long-winded exercises: or suck vp,
                        Your ha, and hum, in a tune. I not denie,
                        But such as are not graced, in a state,
                        May, for their ends, be aduerse in religion,
                        And get a tune, to call the flock together:
                        For (to say sooth) a tune do's much, with women,
                        And other phlegmatick people, it is your bell.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Bells are prophane: a tune may be religious.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No warning with you? Then, farewell my patience.
                        'Slight, it shall downe: I will not be thus tortur'd.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        I pray you, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        All shall perish. I haue spoke it.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Let me find grace, sir, in your eyes; the man
                        He stands corrected: neither did his zeale
                        (But as your selfe) allow a tune, some-where.
                        Which, now, being to'ard the stone, we shall not need.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No, nor your holy vizard, to winne widdowes
                        To giue you legacies; or make zealous wiues
                        To rob their husbands, for the common cause:
                        Nor take the start of bonds, broke but one day,
                        And say, they were forfeited, by prouidence.
                        
                        Nor shall you need, ore-night to eate huge meales,
                        To celebrate your next daies fast the better:
                        The whilst the Brethren, and the Sisters, humbled,
                        Abate the stiffenesse of the flesh. Nor cast
                        Before your hungrie hearers, scrupulous bones,
                        As whether a Christian may hawke, or hunt;
                        Or whether, Matrons, of the holy assembly,
                        May lay their haire out, or weare doublets:
                        Or haue that idoll Starch, about their linnen.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        It is, indeed, an idoll.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Mind him not, sir.
                        I doe command thee, spirit (of zeale, but trouble)
                        To peace within him. Pray you, sir, goe on.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Nor shall you need to libell 'gainst the Prelates,
                        
                        And shorten so your eares, against the hearing
                        Of the next wire-drawne grace. Nor, of necessitie,
                        Raile against playes, to please the Alderman,
                        Whose daily custard you deuoure. Nor lie
                        With zealous rage, till you are hoarse. Not one
                        Of these so singular arts. Nor call your selues,
                        By names of TRIBVLATION, PERSECVTION,
                        RESTRAINT, LONG-PATIENCE, and such like, affected
                        By the whole family, or wood of you,
                        Onely for glorie, and to catch the eare
                        Of the Disciple.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Truely, sir, they are
                        Wayes, that the godly Brethren haue inuente
                              •
                           
                        
                        For propagation of the glorious cause,
                        As very notable meanes, and whereby, also,
                        Themselues grow soone, and profitably famous.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O, but the stone, all's idle to'it! nothing!
                        The art of Angels, Natures miracle,
                        The diuine secret, that doth flye in clouds,
                        From east to west: and whose tradition
                        Is not from men, but spirits.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I hate Traditions:
                        I do not trust them—
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Peace.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        They are Popish, all.
                        I will not peace. I will not—
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        ANANIAS.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Please the prophane, to grieue the godly: I may not.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Well, ANANIAS, thou shalt ouer-come.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        It is an ignorant zeale, that haunts him, sir.
                        But truely, else, a very faithfull Brother,
                        A botcher: and a man, by reuelation,
                        That hath a competent knowledge of the truth.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Has he a competent summe, there, i' the bagg,
                        To buy the goods, within? I am made guardian,
                        And must, for charitie, and conscience sake,
                        Now, see the most be made, for my poore orphane:
                        Though I desire the Brethren, too, good gayners.
                        There, they are, within. When you haue view'd, & bought'hem,
                        And tane the inuentorie of what they are,
                        They are readie for proiection; there's no more
                        To doe: cast on the med'cine, so much siluer
                        As there is tinne there, so much gold as brasse,
                        I'll gi'it you in, by waight.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        But how long time,
                        Sir, must the Saints expect, yet?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Let me see,
                        How's the moone, now? Eight, nine, ten dayes hence
                        He will be siluer potate; then, three dayes,
                        Before he citronise: some fifteene dayes,
                        The Magisterium will be perfected.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        About the second day, of the third weeke,
                        
                        In the ninth month?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, my good ANANIAS.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        What will the orphanes goods arise to, thinke you?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Some hundred markes; as much as fill'd three carres,
                        Vnladed now: you'll make sixe millions of 'hem.
                        But I must ha' more coales laid in.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        How!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Another load,
                        And then we ha' finish'd. We must now encrease
                        Our fire to ignis ardens, we are past
                        Fimus equinus, Balnei, Cineris,
                        And all those lenter heats. If the holy purse
                        Should, with this draught, fall low, and that the Saints
                        
                        Doe need a present summe, I haue trick
                        To melt the pewter, you 
                              ••
                           all buy now, instantly,
                        And, with a tincture, 
                              〈◊〉
                            you as good Dutch dollers,
                        As any are in Holland.
                        
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Can you so?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I, and shall bide the third examination.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        It will be ioyfull tidings to the Brethren.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        But you must carry it, secret.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        I, but stay,
                        This act of coyning, is it lawfull?
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Lawfull?
                        We know no Magistrate. Or, if we did,
                        This's forraine coyne.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        It is no coyning, sir.
                        It is but casting.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Ha? you distinguish well.
                        Casting of money may be lawfull.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        'Tis, sir.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Truely, I take it so.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        There is no scruple,
                        Sir, to be made of it; beleeue ANANIAS:
                        This case of conscience he is studied in.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        I'll make a question of it, to the Brethren.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        The Brethren shall approue it lawfull, doubt not.
                        Where shall't be done?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        For that wee'll talke, anone.
                        Knock without.
                        There's some to speake with me. Goe in, I pray you,
                        And view the parcells. That's the inuentorie.
                        I'll come to you straight. Who is it? FACE! Appeare.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act III. Scene III.
                     SVBTLE, FACE, DOL.
                     
                        HOw now? Good prise?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good poxe! Yond' caustiue cheater
                        Neuer came on.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How then?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I ha' walk'd the round,
                        Till now, and no such thing.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And ha' you quit him?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Quit him? and hell would quit him too, he were happy.
                        'Slight would you haue me stalke like a mill-iade.
                        All day, for one, that will not yeeld vs graines?
                        I know him of old.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O, but to ha' gull'd him,
                        Had beene a maistry.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Let him goe, black Boy,
                        And turne thee, that some fresh newes may possesse thee.
                        
                        A noble Count, a Don of Spaine (my deare
                        Delicious compeere, and my partie-bawd)
                        Who is come hether, priuate, for his conscience,
                        And brought munition with him, sixe great slopps,
                        Bigger then three Dutch hoighs, beside round trunkes,
                        Furnish'd with pistolets, and pieces of eight,
                        Will straight be here, my rogue, to haue thy bath
                        (That is the colour,) and to make his battry
                        Vpon our DOL, our Castle, our cinque-Port,
                        Our Douer pire, our what thou wilt. Where is shee?
                        Shee must prepare perfumes, delicate linnen,
                        The bath in chiefe, a banquet, and her wit,
                        For shee must milke his Epididimis.
                        
                        Where is the Doxie?
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I'll send her to thee:
                        And but dispatch my brace of little IOHN LEYDENS,
                        And come againe my selfe.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Are they within then?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Numbring the summe.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        How much?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        A hundred marks, Boy.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why, this's a lucky day! Ten pounds of MAMMON!
                        Three o' my clarke! A portague o' my grocer!
                        This o' the Brethren! beside reuersions,
                        And states, to come i' the widdow, and my Count!
                        
                        My share, to day, will not be bought for fortie—
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        What?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Pounds, daintie DOROTHEE, art thou so neere?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Yes, say lord Generall, how fares our campe?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        As, with the few, that had entrench'd themselues
                        Safe, by their discipline, against a world, DOL:
                        And laugh'd, within those trenches, and grew fat
                        With thinking on the booties, DOL, brought in
                        Daily, by their small parties. This deare houre,
                        A doughtie Don is taken, with my DOL;
                        And thou maist make his ransome, what thou wilt,
                        My Dousabell: He shall be brought here, fetter'd
                        With thy faire lookes, before he see's thee; and throwne
                        In a downe-bed, as darke as any dungeon;
                        Where thou shalt keepe him waking, with thy drum;
                        Thy drum, my DOL; thy drum; till he be tame
                        As the poore black-birds were i' the great frost,
                        Or bees are with a bason: and so hiue him
                        I' the swan-skin couerlid, and cambrick sheets,
                        Till he worke honey, and waxe, my little Gods-guift.
                        
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        What is he, Generall?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        An Adalantado,
                        A Grande, girle. Was not my DAPPER here, yet?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        No.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nor my DRVGGER?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Neither.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        A poxe on 'hem.
                        They are so long a furnishing! Such stinkards
                        Would not be seene, vpon these festiuall dayes.
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
                        And gallants, yet. Here's a yong gentleman,
                        Is borne to nothing, fortie markes a yeere,
                        Which I count nothing. H'is to be initiated,
                        And haue a flye o'the Doctor. He will winne you
                        By vnresistable lucke, within this fortnight,
                        Inough to buy a baronie. They will set him
                        Vpmost, at the Groome-porters, all the Christmasse!
                        
                        And, for the whole yeere through, at euerie place,
                        Where there is play, present him with the chaire;
                        The best attendance, the best drinke, sometimes
                        Two glasses of canarie, and pay nothing;
                        The purest linnen, and the sharpest knife,
                        The partrich next his trencher: and, somewhere,
                        The daintie bed, in priuate, with the daintie.
                        You shall ha' your ordinaries bid for him,
                        As play-houses for a poet; and the master
                        Pray him, aloud, to name what dish he affects,
                        Which must be butterd shrimps: and those that drinke
                        To no mouth else, will drinke to his, as being
                        The goodly, president mouth of all the boord.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Doe you not gull one?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Od's my life! Do you thinke it?
                        You shall haue a cast commander, (can but get
                        In credit with a glouer, or a spurrier,
                        For some two paire, of eithers ware, afore-hand)
                        Will, by most swift posts, dealing with him,
                        Arriue at competent meanes, to keepe himselfe,
                        His punke, and naked boy, in excellent fashion.
                        And be admir'd for't.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Will the Doctor teach this?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        He will doe more, sir, when your land is gone,
                        (As men of spirit hate to keepe earth long(
                        In a vacation, when small monie is stirring,
                        And ordinaries suspended till the tearme,
                        Hee'll shew a perspectiue, where on one side
                        You shall behold the faces, and the persons
                        Of all sufficient yong heires, in towne,
                        VVhose bonds are currant for commoditie;
                        On th'other side, the marchants formes, and others,
                        (That, without helpe of any second broker,
                        (VVho would expect a share) will trust such parcels:
                        In the third square, the verie street, and signe
                        VVhere the commoditie dwels, and do's but wait
                        To be deliuer'd, be it pepper, sope,
                        Hops, or tabacco, oat-meale, woad, or cheeses.
                        All which you may so handle, to enioy,
                        To your owne vse, and neuer stand oblig'd.
                     
                     
                        
                        KAS.
                        I'faith! Is he such a fellow?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why, NAB here knowes him.
                        And then for making matches, for rich widdowes,
                        Yong gentlewomen, heyres, the fortunat'st man!
                        Hee's sent too, farre, and neere, all ouer England,
                        To haue his counsell, and to know their fortunes.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Gods will, my suster shall see him.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I'll tell you, sir,
                        What he did tell me of NAB. It's a strange thing!
                        (By the way you must eate no cheese, NAB, it breeds melancholy:
                        And that same melancholy breeds wormes) but passe it,
                        He told me, honest NAB, here, was ne'er at tauerne,
                        But once in's life!
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Truth, and no more I was not.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And, then he was so sick—
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Could he tell you that, too?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        How should I know it?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        In troth we had beene a shooting,
                        And had a piece of fat ram-mutton, to supper,
                        That lay so heauy o' my stomack—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And he has no head
                        To beare any wine; for, what with the noise o' the fiddlers,
                        And care of his shop, for he dares keepe no seruants—
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        My head did so ake—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        As he was faine to be brought home,
                        The Doctor told me. And then, a good old woman—
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        (Yes faith, shee dwells in Sea-coale-lane) did cure me,
                        With sodden ale, and pellitorie o' the wall:
                        Cost me but two pence. I had another sicknesse,
                        Was worse then that.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I, that was with the griefe
                        Thou took'st for being sess'd at eighteene pence,
                        For the water-worke.
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        In truth, and it was like
                        T'haue cost me almost my life.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Thy haire went off?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Yes, sir, 'twas done for spight.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nay, so sayes the Doctor.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Pray thee, tabacco-Boy, goe fetch my suster,
                        I'll see this learned Boy, before I goe:
                        And so shall shee.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir, he is busie now:
                        But, if you haue a sister to fetch hether,
                        Perhaps, your owne paines may command her sooner;
                        And he, by that time, will be free.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        I goe.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        DRVGGER, shee's thine: the damaske. (SVBTLE, and I
                        Must wrastle for her.) Come on, master DAPPER.
                        You see, how I turne clients, here, away,
                        To giue your cause dispatch. Ha'you perform'd
                        The ceremonies were inioyn'd you?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Yes, o' the vinegar,
                        And the cleane shirt.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Tis well: that shirt may doe you
                        More worship then you thinke. Your aunt's a fire
                        But that shee will not shew it, t'haue a sight on you.
                        Ha'you prouided for her Graces seruants?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Yes, here are sixe-score EDWARD shillings.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        And an old HARRY'S soueraigne.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Very good.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        And three IAMES shillings, and an ELIZABETH groat,
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Act IIII. 
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     FACE, MAMMON, DOL.
                     
                        O, Sir, yo'are come i' the onely, finest time—
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Where's master?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Now preparing for proiection, sir.
                        Your stuffe will b' all chang'd shortly.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Into gold?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        To gold, and siluer, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Siluer, I care not for.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, sir, a little to giue beggars.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Where's the lady?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        At hand, here. I ha' told her such braue things, o' you,
                        Touching your bountie and your noble spirit—
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Hast thou?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        As shee is almost in her fit to see you.
                        But, good sir, no diuinitie i' your conference,
                        For feare of putting her in rage—
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I warrant thee.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sixe men will not hold her downe. And, then
                        If the old man should heare, or see you—
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Feare not.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        The very house, sir, would runne mad. You know it
                        How scrupulous he is, and violent,
                        'Gainst the least act of sinne. Physick, or Mathematiques,
                        
                           Poetrie, State, or Bawdry (as I told you)
                        Shee will endure, and neuer startle: But
                        No word of controuersie.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I am school'd, good Ule
                                 •
                              .
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And you must praise her house, remember that,
                        And her nobilitie.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Let me, alone:
                        No Herald, no nor Antiquarie, Lungs,
                        Shall doe it better. Goe.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why, this is yet
                        A kind of moderne happinesse, to haue
                        DOL Common for a great lady.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Now, EPICVRE,
                        Heighten thy selfe, talke to her, all in gold;
                        Raine her as many showers, as IOVE did drops
                        Vnto his DANAE: Shew the God a miser,
                        Compar'd with MAMMON. What? the stone will do't.
                        Shee shall feele gold, tast gold, heare gold, sleepe gold:
                        Nay, we will concumbere gold. I will be puissant,
                        And mightie in my talke to her! Here shee comes.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        To him, DOL, suckle him. This is the noble knight,
                        I told your ladiship—
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Madame, with your pardon,
                        I kisse your vesture.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Sir, I were vn-ciuill
                        If I would suffer that, my lip to you, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I hope, my lord your brother be in health, lady?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        My lord, my brother is, though I no ladie, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        (Well said my Guiny-bird.)
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Right noble madame—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        (O, we shall haue most fierce idolatrie!)
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        'Tis your prerogatiue.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Rather your courtesie.
                     
                     
                        
                        MAM.
                        Were there nought else t'inlarge your vertues, to me,
                        These answeres speake your breeding, and your bloud▪
                        
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Bloud we boast none, sir, a poore Baron's daughter.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Poore! and gat you? Prophane not. Had your father
                        Slept all the happy remnant of his life
                        After that act, lyen but there still, and panted,
                        H' had done inough, to make himselfe, his issue,
                        And his posteritie noble.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Sir, although
                        We may be said to want the guilt, and trappings,
                        The dresse of honor; yet we striue to keepe
                        The seedes, and the materialls.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I doe see
                        The old ingredient, vertue, was not lost,
                        Nor the drug money, vs'd to make your compound.
                        There is a strange nobilitie, i' your eye,
                        This lip, that chin! Me thinks you doe resemble
                        One o' the Austriack princes.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Very like,
                        Her father was an Irish costar-monger.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        The house of Valois, iust, had such a nose.
                        And such a fore-head, yet, the Medici
                        
                        Of Florence boast.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Troth, and I haue beene lik'ned
                        To all these Princes.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I'll be sworne, I heard it.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I know not how! it is not any one,
                        But ee'n the very choise of all their features.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I'll in, and laugh.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        A certaine touch, or aire,
                        That sparkles a diuinitie, beyond
                        An earthly beautie!
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        O, you play the courtier.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Good lady, gi' me leaue—
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        In faith, I may not,
                        To mock me, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        To burne i' this sweet flame:
                        The Phoenix neuer knew a nobler death.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Nay, now you court the courtier: and destroy
                        What you would build. This art, sir, i' your words,
                        Calls your whole faith in question.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        By my soule—
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Nay, oathes are made o' the same aire, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Nature
                        Neuer bestow'd vpon mortalitie,
                        A more vnblam'd, a more harmonious feature:
                        Shee play'd the step-dame in all faces, else.
                        Sweet madame, le' me be particular—
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Particular, sir? I pray you, know your distance.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        In no ill sense, sweet lady, but to aske
                        How your faire graces passe the houres? I see
                        Yo'are lodg'd, here, i' the house of a rare man,
                        An excellent Artist: but, what's that to you?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Yes, sir. I studie here the mathematiques,
                        And distillation.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        O, I crie your pardon.
                        H' is a diuine instructer! can extract
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene II.
                     FACE, SVBTLE, KASTRIL, DAME PLIANT.
                     
                        DOst thou not laugh?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes. Are they gone?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        All's cleare.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        The widdow is come.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And your quarrelling disciple?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I must to my Captaine-ship againe, then.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Stay, bring 'hem in, first.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        So I meant. What is shee?
                        A Bony-bell?
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I know not.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Wee'll draw lots,
                        You'll stand to that?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What else?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        O, for a suite,
                        To fall now, like a cortine: flap.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        To th'dore, man.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        You'll ha' the first kisse, 'cause I am not readie.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, and perhaps hit you through both the nostrils.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Who would you speak with?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Wher's the Captaine?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Gone, sir,
                        About some businesse.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Gone?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Hee'll returne straight.
                        But master Doctor, his Lieutenant, is here.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Come neere, my worshipfull Boy, my terrae Fili,
                        That is, my Boy of land; make thy approches:
                        Welcome, I know thy lusts, and thy desires,
                        And I will serue, and satisfie 'hem. Beginne,
                        Charge me from thence, or thence, or in this line;
                        Here is my center: Ground thy quarrell.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        You lie.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How, child of wrath, and anger! the loud lie?
                        For what, my sodaine Boy?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Nay, that looke you too,
                        I am afore-hand.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        O, this's no true Grammar,
                        And as ill Logick! You must render causes, child,
                        Your first, and second Intentions, know your canons,
                        And your diuisions, moodes, degrees, and differences,
                        Your praedicaments, substance, and accident,
                        
                           Series externe, and interne, with their causes
                        
                        Efficient, materiall, formall, finall,
                        And ha' your elements perfect—
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        What is this!
                        The angrie tongue he talkes in?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        That false precept,
                        Of being afore-hand, has deceiu'd a number;
                        And made 'hem enter quarrells, often-times,
                        Before they were aware: and, afterward,
                        Against their wills.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        How must I doe then, sir?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I crie this lady mercy. Shee should, first,
                        Haue beene saluted. I doe call you lady,
                        Because you are to be one, ere't be long,
                        He kisses her.
                        My soft, and buxome widdow.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Is shee, i-faith?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, or my art is an egregious lyar.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        How know you?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        By inspection, on her fore-head,
                        
                        He kisses her againe.
                        And subtiltie of her lip, which must be tasted
                        Often, to make a iudgement. 'Slight, shee melts
                        Like a Myrobalane! Here is, yet, a line
                        In riuo frontis, tells me, he is no knight.
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        What is he then, sir?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Let me see your hand.
                        O, your linea Fortunae makes it plaine;
                        And stella, here, in monte Veneris:
                        
                        But, most of all, iunctura annularis.
                        
                        He is a souldier, or a man of art, lady:
                        But shall haue some great honour, shortly.
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        Brother,
                        Hee's a rare man, beleeue me!
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Hold your peace.
                        Here comes the tother rare man. 'Saue you Captaine.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good master KASTRIL. Is this your sister?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        I, sir.
                        Please you to kusse her, and be proud to know her?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I shall be proud to know you, ladie.
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        Brother,
                        He calls me ladie, too.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        I, peace. I heard it.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        The Count is come.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Where is he?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        At the dore.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why, you must entertaine him.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What'll you doe
                        With these the while?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why, haue 'hem vp, and shew 'hem
                        Some fustian booke, or the darke glasse.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Fore god,
                        Shee is a delicate dab-chick! I must haue her.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Must you? I, if your fortune will, you must.
                        Come sir, the Captaine will come to vs presently.
                        I'll ha' you to my chamber of demonstrations,
                        Where I'll shew you both the Grammar, and Logick,
                        And Rhetorick of quarrelling; my whole method,
                        Drawne out in tables: and my instrument,
                        That ha
                              •
                           h the seuerall scale vpon't, shall make you
                        Able to quarrell, at a strawes breadth, by Moone-light.
                        And, lady, I'll haue you looke in a glasse,
                        Some halfe an houre, but to cleare your eye-sight,
                        Against you see your fortune: which is greater,
                        Then I may iudge vpon the sodaine, trust me.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene III.
                     FACE, SVBTLE, SVRLY.
                     
                        WHere are you, Doctor?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I'll come to you presently▪
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I will ha' this same widdow, now I ha' seene her,
                        On any composition.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        What doe you say?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Ha' you dispos'd of them?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I ha' sent 'hem vp.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        SVBTLE, in troth, I needs must haue this widdow.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Is that the matter?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nay, but heare me.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Goe to,
                        If you rebell once, DOL shall know it all.
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
                        And scrub'd, and fub'd, deare Don, before you goe.
                        You shall, in faith, my sciruie babioun Don:
                        Be curried, claw'd, and flaw'd, and taw'd, indeed.
                        I will the heartilier goe about it now,
                        And make the widdow a punke, so much the sooner,
                        To be reueng'd on this impetuous FACE:
                        The quickly doing of it is the grace.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene IIII.
                     FACE, KASTRIL, DA. PLIANT, SVBTLE, SVRLY.
                     
                        COme ladie: I knew, the Doctor would not leaue,
                        Till he had found the very nick of her fortune.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        To be a Countesse, say you? A Spanish Countesse, sir.
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        Why? is that better then an English Countesse?
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Better? 'Slight, make you that a question, ladie?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Nay, shee is a foole, Captaine, you must pardon her.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Aske from your courtier, to your innes of court-man,
                        To your mere millaner: they will tell you all,
                        Your Spanish iennet is the best horse. Your Spanish
                        
                        Stoupe is the best garbe. Your Spanish beard
                        Is the best cut. Your Spanish ruffes are the best
                        Weare. Your Spanish Pauin the best daunce.
                        Your Spanish titillation in a gloue
                        The best perfume. And, for your Spanish pike,
                        And Spanish blade, let your poore Captaine speake.
                        Here comes the Doctor.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        My most honor'd ladie,
                        (For so I am now to stile you, hauing found
                        By this my scheme, you are to vnder-goe
                        An honorable fortune, very shortly.)
                        What will you say now, if some—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I ha' told her all, sir.
                        And her right worshipfull brother, here, that shee shall be
                        A Countesse: doe not delay 'hem, sir. A Spanish Countesse.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Still, my scarse worshipfull Captaine, you can keepe
                        No secret. Well, since he has told you, madame,
                        Doe you forgiue him, and I doe.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Shee shall doe that, sir.
                        I'le looke to't, 'tis my charge.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Well then. Nought rests
                        But that shee fit her loue, now, to her fortune.
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        Truely, I shall neuer brooke a Spaniard.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No?
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        Neuer, sin' eighty-eight could I abide 'hem,
                        And that was some three yeere afore I was borne, in truth.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Come, you must loue him, or be miserable:
                        Choose, which you will.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        By this good rush, perswade her,
                        
                        Shee will crie straw-berries else, within this twelue-month.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Nay, shads, and mackrell, which is worse.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Indeed, sir?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Gods lid, you shall loue him, or Ile kick you.
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        Why?
                        Ile doe as you will ha' me, brother.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Doe,
                        Or by this hand, I'll maull you.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nay, good sir,
                        Be not so fierce.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No, my enraged child,
                        Shee will be rul'd. What, when shee comes to tast
                        The pleasures of a Countesse! to be courted—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And kist, and ruffled!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I, behind the hangings.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And then come 
                              •
                           orth in pomp!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And know her state!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Of keeping all th'idolaters o' the chamber
                        Barer to her, then at their prayers!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Is seru'd
                        Vpon the knee!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And has her pages, huishers,
                        Foot-men, and coaches—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Her sixe mares—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nay, eight!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        To hurry her through London, to th'Exchange,
                        
                           Bet'lem, the China-houses—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, and haue
                        The citizens gape at her, and praise her tyres!
                        And my-lords goose-turd bands, that rides with her!
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Most braue! By this hand, you are not my suster,
                        If you refuse.
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        I will not refuse, brother.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Que es esto, Sennores, que non se venga?
                        Esta tardanza me mata!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        It is the Count come!
                        The Doctor knew he would be here, by his art.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        En gallanta Madama, Don! gallantissima!
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Por tódos los dioses, la mas acabada
                        Hermosura, que he visto en mi vida!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Is't not a gallant language, that they speake?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        An admirable language! Is't not French?
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        No, Spanish, sir.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        It goes like law-French,
                        And that, they say, is the court-liest language.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        List, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        El Sol ha perdido su lumbre, con el
                        Resplandor, que tràe esta dama. Valga me dios!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        He' admires your sister.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Must not shee make curtsie?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        'Ods will, shee must goe to him, man; and kisse him!
                        It is the Spanish fashion, for the women
                        To make first court.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Tis true he tells you, sir:
                        His art knowes all.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Por que no se acùde?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        He speakes to her, I thinke?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        That he do's sir.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Por el amor de dios, que es esto, que se tàrda?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Nay, see: shee will not vnderstand him! Gull.
                        Noddy.
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        What say you brother?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Asse, my suster,
                        Goe kusse him, as the cunning man would ha' you,
                        I'll thrust a pinne i' your buttocks else.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        O, no sir.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Sennora mia, mi persona muy indigna esta
                        Alle gar à tànta Hermosura.
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
                        A peck of coales, or so, which is cold comfort, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        O my voluptuous mind! I am iustly punish'd.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And so am I, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Cast from all my hopes—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nay, certainties, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        By mine owne base affections.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Subtle seemes come to himselfe.
                        O, the curst fruits of vice, and lust!
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Good father,
                        It was my sinne. Forgiue it.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Hangs my roofe
                        Ouer vs still, and will not fall, Ô iustice,
                        Vpon vs, for this wicked man!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Nay, looke, sir,
                        You grieue him, now, with staying in his sight:
                        Good sir, the noble man will come too, and take you,
                        And that may breed a tragoedie.
                        
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I'll goe.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I, and repent at home, sir. It may be,
                        For some good penance, you may ha'it, yet,
                        A hundred pound to the boxe at Bet'lem—
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        For the restoring such as ha' their wits.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I'll do't.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Ile send one to you to receiue it.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Doe.
                        Is no proiection left?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        All flowne, or stinks, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Will nought be sau'd, that's good for med'cine, thinkst thou?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I cannot tell, sir. There will be, perhaps,
                        Something, about the scraping of the shardes,
                        Will cure the itch: though not your itch of mind, sir.
                        It shall be sau'd for you, and sent home. Good sir,
                        This way: for feare the lord should meet you.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        FACE.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Is he gone?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, and as heauily
                        As all the gold he hop'd for, were in his bloud.
                        Let vs be light, though.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I, as balls, and bound
                        And hit our heads against the roofe for ioy:
                        There's so much of our care now cast away.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Now to our Don.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, your yong widdow, by this time
                        Is made a Countesse, FACE: Sh' has beene in trauaile
                        Of a yong heire for you.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Off with your case,
                        And greet her kindly, as a bride-groome should,
                        After these common hazards.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Very well, sir.
                        Will you goe fetch Don DIEGO off, the while?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And fetch him ouer too, if you'll be pleas'd, sir:
                        Would DOL were in her place, to pick his pockets now.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Why, you can doe it as well, if you would set to't.
                        I pray you proue your vertue.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        For your sake, sir.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act IIII. Scene VI.
                     SVRLY, DA. PLIANT, SVBTLE, FACE.
                     
                        LAdy, you see into what hands, you are falne;
                        Mongst what a nest of villaines! and how neere
                        Your honor was t'haue catch'd a certaine clap
                        (Through your credulitie) had I but beene
                        So punctually forward, as place, time,
                        And other circumstance would ha' made a man:
                        For yo'are a handsome woman: would yo' were wise, too.
                        I am a gentleman, come here disguis'd,
                        Onely to find the knaueries of this Citadell,
                        And where I might haue wrong'd your honor, and haue not,
                        I claime some interest in your loue. You are,
                        They say, a widdow, rich: and I am a batcheler,
                        Worth nought: Your fortunes may make me a man,
                        As mine ha' preseru'd you a woman. Thinke vpon it,
                        And whether, I haue deseru'd you, or no.
                     
                     
                        PLI.
                        I will, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And for these houshold-rogues, let me alone,
                        To treat with them.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How doth my noble DIEGO?
                        And my deare madame, Countesse? Hath the Count
                        
                        Beene courteous, lady? liberall? and open?
                        
                           Donzell, me thinkes you looke melancholike,
                        After your coitum, and scuruy! True-ly,
                        I doe not like the dulnesse of your eye:
                        It hath a heauy cast, 'tis vpsee Dutch,
                        And say's you are a lumpish whore-master.
                        He falls to picking of them.
                        Be lighter, I will make your pockets so.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Will you, Don bawd, and pick-purse? How now? Reele you?
                        Stand vp sir, you shall find since I am so heauy,
                        I'll gi' you equall weight.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Helpe, murder!
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        No, sir.
                        There's no such thing intended. A good cart,
                        And a cleane whip shall ease you of that feare.
                        I am the Spanish Don, that should be cossened,
                        Doe you see? cossened? Where's your Captayne FACE?
                        That parcell-broker, and whole-bawd, all raskall.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        How, SVRLY!
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        O, make your approach, good Captaine.
                        I'haue found, from whence your copper rings, and spoones
                        Come, now, wherewith you cheate abroad in tauernes.
                        'Twas here, you learn'd t'anoint your boot with brimstone,
                        Then rub mens gold on't, for a kind of touch,
                        And say 'twas naught, when you had chang'd the colour,
                        That you might ha't for nothing? And this Doctor,
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
                        FAC.
                        I know not, NAB: thou shalt, if I can helpe it.
                        HIERONYMO'S old cloake, ruffe, and hat will serue,
                        Subtle hath whisperd with him this while.
                        Ile tell thee more, when thou bringst 'hem.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Sir, I know
                        The Spaniard hates the Brethren, and hath spies
                        Vpon their actions: and that this was one
                        I make no scruple. But the holy Synode
                        
                        Haue beene in prayer, and meditation, for it.
                        And 'tis reueal'd no lesse, to them, then me,
                        That casting of money is most lawfull.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        True.
                        But here, I cannot doe it; if the house
                        Should chance to be suspected, all would out,
                        And we be lock'd vp, in the tower, for euer,
                        To make gold there (for th'state) neuer come out:
                        And, then, are you defeated.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I will tell
                        This to the Elders, and the weaker Brethren,
                        That the whole companie of the Separation
                        
                        May ioyne in humble prayer againe.
                     
                     
                        (SVB.
                        And fasting.)
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Yea, for some fitter place. The peace of mind
                        Rest with these walls.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Thanks, courteous ANANIAS.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What did he come for?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        About casting dollers,
                        Presently, out of hand. And so, I told him,
                        A Spanish minister came here to spie,
                        Against the faithfull—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I conceiue. Come SVBTLE,
                        Thou art so downe vpon the least disaster!
                        How wouldst tho' ha' done, if I had not helpt thee out?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I thanke thee FACE, for the angrie Boy, i-faith.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Who would ha' lookt, it should ha' beene that raskall?
                        SVRLY? He had dy'd his beard, and all. Well, sir,
                        Here's damaske come, to make you a suit.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Where's DRVGGER?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        He is gone to borrow me a Spanish habite,
                        Ile be the Count, now.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        But where's the widdow?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Within, with my lords sister: Madame DOL
                        Is entertayning her.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        By your fauour, FACE,
                        Now shee is honest, I will stand againe.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        You will not offer it?
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Why?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Stand to your word,
                        Or—here comes
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        She knowes—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yo'are tyrannous still.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Strict for my right. How now, DOL? Hast'told her,
                        The Spanish Count will come?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Yes, but another is come,
                        You little look'd for!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Who's that?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Your master:
                        The master of the house.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        How, DOL!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Shee lies.
                        This is some trick. Come, leaue your quiblins, DOROTHEE.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Looke out, and see.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Art thou in earnest?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        'Slight,
                        Fortie o' the neighbours are about him, talking.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Tis he, by this good day.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        'Twill proue ill day,
                        For some on vs.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        We are vndone, and taken.
                     
                     
                        
                        DOL.
                        Lost, I'am afraid.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        You said he would not come,
                        While there dyed one a weeke, within the liberties.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        No: 'twas within the walls.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Was't so? Cry' you mercy:
                        I thought the liberties. What shall we doe now, FACE?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Be silent: not a word, if he call, or knock.
                        I'll into mine old shape againe, and meet him,
                        Of IEREMIE, the butler. I' the meane time,
                        Doe you two pack vp all the goods, and purchase,
                        That we can carry i'the two trunkes. I'll keepe him
                        Off for to day, if I cannot longer: and then
                        At night, Ile ship you both away to Ratcliffe,
                        Where wee'll meet to morrow, and there wee'll share.
                        Let MAMMON'S brasse, and pewter keepe the cellar:
                        Wee'll haue another time for that. But, DOL,
                        'Pray thee, goe heate a little water, quickly,
                        SVBTLE must shaue me. All my Captaines beard
                        Must off, to make me appeare smooth IEREMIE.
                        You'll do't?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, Ile shaue you, as well as I can.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And not cut my throte, but trim me?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        You shall see, sir.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act V.
                  
                     
                        Scene I.
                     LOVE-WIT, NEIGHBOVRS.
                     
                        HAs there beene such resort, say you?
                     
                     
                        NEI. 1.
                        Daily, sir.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 2.
                        And nightly, too.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 3.
                        I, some as braue as lords.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 4.
                        Ladies, and gentlewomen.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 5.
                        Citizens wiues.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 1.
                        And knights.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 6.
                        In coches.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 2.
                        Yes, & oyster-women.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 1.
                        Beside other gallāts.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 3.
                        Sailors wiues.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 4.
                        
                           Tabacco-men.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 5.
                        Another Pimlico!
                        
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        What should my knaue aduance,
                        To draw this companie? He hung out no banners
                        Of a strange Calfe, with fiue legs, to be seene?
                        Or a huge Lobster, with sixe clawes?
                     
                     
                        NEI. 6.
                        No, sir.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 3.
                        We had gone in then, sir.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        He has no guift
                        Of teaching i'the nose, that ere I knew of!
                        You saw no Bills set vp, that promis'd cure
                        Of agues, or the tooth-ach?
                     
                     
                        NEI. 2.
                        No such thing, sir.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Nor heard a drum strooke, for Babiouns, or Puppets?
                     
                     
                        NEI. 5.
                        Neither, sir.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        What deuice should he bring forth now!
                        I loue a teeming wit, as I loue my nourishment.
                        'Pray god he ha' not kept such open house,
                        That he hath sold my hangings, and my bedding:
                        I left him nothing else. If he haue eate 'hem,
                        A plague o' the moath, say I. Sure he has got
                        Some bawdy pictures, to call all this ging;
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
                        SVR.
                        Should be to day pronounc'd, to all your friends.
                        And where be your andirons now? and your brasse pots?
                        That should ha' beene golden flaggons, and great wedges?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Let me but breath. What! They ha' shut their dores,
                        Mammon and Surly knock.
                        Methinks!
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        I, now, 'tis holy-day with them.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Rogues,
                        Coseners, impostors, bawds.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What meane you, sir?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        To enter if we can.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Another mans house?
                        Here is the owner, sir. Turne you to him,
                        And speake your businesse.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Are you, sir, the owner?
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        And are those knaues, within, your cheaters?
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        What knaues? what cheaters?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        SVBTLE, and his Lungs.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        The gentleman is distracted, sir! No lungs,
                        Nor lights ha' beene seene here these three weekes, sir,
                        Within these dores, vpon my word!
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Your word,
                        Groome arrogant?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, sir, I am the house-keeper,
                        And know the keyes ha' not beene out o' my hands.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        This's a new FACE?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        You doe mistake the house, sir!
                        What signe was't at?
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        You raskall! This is one
                        O' the confederacie. Come, let's get officers,
                        And force the dore.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        'Pray you stay, gentlemen.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        No, sir, wee'll come with warrant.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        I, and then,
                        We shall ha' your dores open.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        What meanes this?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I cannot tell, sir!
                     
                     
                        NEI. 1.
                        These are two o'the gallants,
                        That we doe thinke we saw.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Two o' the fooles?
                        You talke as idly as they. Good faith, sir,
                        I thinke the Moone has cras'd 'hem all! (O me,
                        The angrie Boy come too? Hee'll make a noyse,
                        And nere away till he haue betray'd vs all.)
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Kastrill knocks.
                        What rogues, bawds, slaues, you'll open the dore anone,
                        Punque, cocatrice, my suster. By this light
                        I'll fetch the marshall to you. You are a whore,
                        To keepe your castle—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Who would you speake with, sir?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        The bawdy Doctor, and the cosening Captaine,
                        And PVS my suster.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        This is something, sure!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Vpon my trust, the dores were neuer open, sir.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        I haue heard all their tricks, told me twice ouer,
                        By the fat knight, and the leane gentleman.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Here comes another.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        ANANIAS too?
                        And his Pastor?
                        
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        The dores are shut against vs.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        They beat too, at the dore.
                        Come forth, you seed of sulphure, sonnes of fire,
                        Your stench, it is broke forth: abomination
                        Is in the house.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        I, my suster's there.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        The place,
                        It is become a cage of vncleane birds.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Yes, I will fetch the scauenger, and the constable.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        You shall doe well.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Wee'll ioyne, to weede them out.
                     
                     
                        
                        KAS.
                        You will not come then? punque, deuice, my suster!
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Call her not sister. Shee is a harlot, verily.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        I'll raise the street.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Good gentlemen, a word.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        
                           Sathan, auoid, and hinder not our zeale.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        The world's turn'd Bet'lem.
                        
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        These are all broke loose,
                        Out of S. KATHER'NES, where they vse to keepe,
                        The better sort of mad-folkes.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 1.
                        All these persons
                        We saw goe in, and out, here.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 2.
                        Yes, indeed, sir.
                     
                     
                        NEI. 3.
                        These were the parties.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Peace, you drunkards. Sir,
                        I wonder at it! Please you, to giue me leaue
                        To touch the dore, I'll trie, an'the lock be chang'd.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        It mazes me!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Good faith, sir, I beleeue,
                        There's no such thing. 'Tis all deceptio visus.
                        
                        Would I could get him away.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Dapper cryes out within.
                        Master Captayne, master Doctor.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Who's that?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        (Our clark within, that I forgot!) I know not, sir.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        For gods sake, when wil her Grace be at leisure?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Ha!
                        Illusions, some spirit o'the aire: (his gag is melted,
                        And now he sets out the throte.)
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I am almost stiffled—
                     
                     
                        (FAC.
                        Would you were altogether.)
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        'Tis i'the house.
                        Ha! List.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Beleeue it, sir, i' the aire!
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Peace, you—
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Mine aunts Grace do's not vse me well.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        You foole,
                        Peace, you'll marre all.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Or you will else, you rogue.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        O, is it so? Then you conuerse with spirits!
                        Come sir. No more o'your tricks, good IEREMIE,
                        The truth, the shortest way.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Dismisse this rabble, sir.
                        What shall I doe? I am catch'd.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Good neighbours,
                        I thanke you all. You may depart. Come sir,
                        You know that I am an indulgent master:
                        And therefore, conceale nothing. What's your med'cine,
                        To draw so many seuerall sorts of wild-fowle?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir, you were wont to affect mirth, and wit:
                        (But here's no place to talke on't i'the street.)
                        Giue me but leaue, to make the best of my fortune,
                        And onely pardon me th'abuse of your house:
                        It's all I begge. I'll helpe you to a widdow,
                        In recompence, that you shall gi' me thankes for,
                        Will make you seuen yeeres yonger, and a rich one.
                        'Tis but your putting on a Spanish cloake,
                        I haue her within. You need not feare the house,
                        It was not visited.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        But by me, who came
                        Sooner then you expected.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        It is true, sir.
                        'Pray you forgiue me.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Well: let's see your widdow.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Act V. Scene IIII.
                     SVBTLE, DAPPER, FACE, DOL.
                     
                        HOw! ha' you eaten your gag?
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Yes faith, it crumbled
                        Away i' my mouth.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        You ha' spoil'd all then.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        No,
                        I hope my aunt of Faery will forgiue me.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Your aunt's a gracious lady: but in troth
                        You were to blame.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        The fume did ouer-come me,
                        And I did do't to stay my stomack. 'Pray you
                        So satisfie her Grace. Here comes the Captaine.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        How now! Is his mouth downe?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I! he has spoken!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        (A poxe, I heard him, and you too.) Hee's vn-done, then.
                        (I haue beene faine to say, the house is haunted
                        With spirits, to keepe churle back.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And hast thou done it?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sure, for this night.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Why, then triumph, and sing
                        Of FACE so famous, the precious king
                        Of present wits.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Did you not heare the coyle,
                        About the dore?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, and I dwindled with it.)
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Shew him his aunt, and let him be dispatch'd:
                        I'll send her to you.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Well sir, your aunt her Grace,
                        Will giue you audience presently, on my sute,
                        And the Captaines word, that you did not eate your gag,
                        In any contempt of her Highnesse.
                        
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Not I, in troth, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Dol like the Queene of Faery.
                        Here shee is come. Downe o'your knees, and wriggle:
                        Shee has a stately presence. Good. Yet neerer,
                        And bid, God saue you.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Madame.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And your aunt.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        And my most gracious aunt, god saue your Grace.
                        
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Nephew, we thought to haue beene angrie with you:
                        But that sweet face of yours, hath turn'd the tide,
                        And made it flow with ioy, that eb'd of loue.
                        Arise, and touch our veluet gowne.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        The skirts,
                        And kisse 'hem. So.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Let me now stroke that head,
                        Much, nephew, shalt thou win; much shalt thou spend;
                        Much shalt thou giue away: much shalt thou lend.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        (I, much, indeed.) Why doe you not thanke her Grace?
                        
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I cannot speake, for ioy.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        See, the kind wretch!
                        Your Graces kins-man right.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Giue me the Bird.
                        
                        Here is your Fly in a purse, about your neck, cosen,
                        Weare it, and feed it, about this day seu' night,
                        On your right wrist—
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Open a veine, with a pinne,
                        And let it suck but once a weeke: till then,
                        You must not looke on't.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        No. And, kins-man,
                        Beare your selfe worthy of the bloud you come on.
                     
                     
                        
                        SVB.
                        Her grace would ha'you eate no more Wool-sack pies,
                        Nor Dagger frume'ty.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Nor breake his fast,
                        In heauen, and hell.
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Shee's with you euery where!
                        Nor play with Costar-mongers, at mum-chance, tray-trip.
                        
                        
                           God make you rich, (when as your aunt has done it:) but keepe
                        The gallant'st company, and the best games—
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        Yes, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        
                           Gleeke and primero: and what you get, be true to vs.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        By this hand, I will.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        You may bring's a thousand pound,
                        Before to morrow night, (if but three thousand,
                        Be stirring) an' you will.
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I sweare, I will then.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Your Ply will learne you all games.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Ha' you done there?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Your grace will command him no more duties?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        No:
                        But come, and see me often. I may chance
                        To leaue him three or foure hundred chests of treasure,
                        And some twelue thousand acres of Faerie land:
                        If he game well, and comely, with good gamesters.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        There's a kind aunt! kisse her departing part.
                        But you must sell you fortie marke a yeare, now:
                     
                     
                        DAP.
                        I, sir, I meane.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Or, gi't away: pox on't.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I'le gi't mine aunt. Ile goe and fetch the writings.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        'Tis well, away.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Where's SVBTLE?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Here. What newes?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        DRVGGER is at the doore, goe take his suite,
                        And bid him fetch a Parson, presently:
                        Say, he shall marrie the widdow. Thou shalt spend
                        A hundred pound by the seruice! Now, queene DOL,
                        Ha' you pack'd vp all?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        And how doe you like
                        The lady PLYANT?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        A good dull innocent.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Here's your HIERONIMO'S cloake, and hat.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Giue mee 'hem.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        And the ruffe too?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, I'll come to you presently.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Now, he is gone about his proiect, DOL,
                        I told you of, for the widow.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        'Tis direct
                        Against our articles.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Well, wee'll fit him, wench.
                        Hast thou gull'd her of her iewels, or her bracelets?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        No, but I will do't.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Soone at night, my DOLLY,
                        When we are shipt, and all our goods aboord,
                        East-ward for Ratcliffe; we will turne our course
                        To Brainford, westward, if thou'saist the word:
                        And take our leaues of this ore-weaning raskall,
                        This peremtorie FACE.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Content, I'am weary of him.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Tho 'hast cause, when the slaue will runne a wiuing, DOL,
                        Against the instrument, that was drawne betweene vs.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        I'll plucke his bird as bare as I can.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, tell her,
                        She must by any meanes, addresse some present
                        To th' cunning man; make him amends, for wronging
                        His art with her suspition; send a ring;
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
                        Or chaine of pearle; shee will be tortur'd else
                        Extremely in her sleepe, say: and ha' strange things
                        Come to her. Wilt thou?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        My fine flitter-mouse,
                        My bird o' the night; wee'll tickle it at the pigeons,
                        When we haue all, and may vn-lock the trunkes,
                        They kisse.
                        And say, this's mine, and thine, and thine, and mine—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What now, a billing?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes, a little exalted
                        In the good passage of our stock-affaires.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        DRVGGER has brought his Parson, take him in, SVBTLE,
                        And send NAB back againe, to wash his face.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        I will: and shaue himselfe?
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        If you can get him.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        You are hot vpon it, FACE, what ere it is!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        A trick, that DOL shall spend ten pound a month by.
                        Is he gone?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        The Chaplaine waits you i' the hall, sir.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        I'll goe bestow him.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Hee'll now marry her, instantly.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        He cannot, yet, he is not readie. Deare DOL,
                        Cosen her of all thou canst. To deceiue him
                        Is no deceipt, but iustice, that would breake
                        Such an inextricable tye as ours was.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Let me alone to fit him.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Come, my venturers,
                        You ha' pack'd vp all? Where be the trunkes? Bring forth.
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Here.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Let's see 'hem. Where's the money?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Here,
                        In this.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        MAMMONS ten pound: eight score before.
                        The Brethrens money, this. DRVGGERS, and DAPPERS.
                        What paper's that?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        The iewell of the waiting maides,
                        That stole it from her lady, to know certaine—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        If shee should haue precedence of her mistris?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        What boxe is that?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        The fish-wiues rings, I thinke:
                        And th'ale-wiues single money. Is't not DOL?
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Yes: and the whistle, that the saylors wife
                        Brought you, to know, and her husband were with WARD.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Wee'll wet it to morrow: and our siluer-beakers,
                        And tauerne cups. Where be the French petti-coats,
                        And girdles, and hangers?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Here, i' the trunke,
                        And the bolts of lawne.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Is DRVGGERS damaske, there?
                        And the tabacco?
                        
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Yes.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Giue me the keyes.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Why you the keyes!
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        No matter, DOL: because
                        We shall not open 'hem, before he comes.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        'Tis true, you shall not open them, indeed:
                        Nor haue 'hem forth. Doe you see? Not forth, DOL.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        No!
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        No, my smock-rampant. The right is, my master
                        Knowes all, has pardon'd me, and he will keepe 'hem,
                        Doctor, 'tis true (you looke) for all your figures:
                        I sent for him, indeed. Wherefore, good partners,
                        Both hee, and shee, be satisfied: for, here
                        
                        Determines the indenture tripartite,
                        Twixt SVBTLE, DOL, and FACE. All I can doe
                        Is to helpe you ouer the wall, o' the back-side;
                        Or lend you a sheet, to saue your veluet gowne, DOL.
                        Here will be officers, presently; bethinke you,
                        Of some course sodainely to scape the dock:
                        Some knock.
                        For thether you'll come else. Harke you, thunder.
                     
                     
                        SYB.
                        You are a precious fiend!
                     
                     
                        OFF.
                        Open the dore.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        DOL, I am sorry for thee i-faith. But hearst thou?
                        It shall goe hard, but I will place thee some-where:
                        Thou shalt ha' my letter to mistris AMO.
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Hang you—
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Or madame Caesarean.
                        
                     
                     
                        DOL.
                        Poxe vpon you, rogue,
                        Would I had but time to beat thee.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        SVBTLE,
                        Let's know where you set vp next; I'll send you
                        A customer, now and then, for old acquaintance:
                        What new course ha'you?
                     
                     
                        SVB.
                        Rogue, I'll hang my selfe:
                        That I may walke a greater diuell, then thou,
                        And haunt thee i' the flock-bed, and the buttery.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Act V. Scene V.
                     LOVE-WIT, OFFICERS, MAMMON, SVRLY, FACE, KASTRIL, ANANIAS, TRIBVLATION, DRVGGER, DA. PLIANT.
                     
                        WHat doe you meane, my masters?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Open your dore,
                        Cheaters, bawds, coniurers.
                     
                     
                        OFF.
                        Or wee'll breake it open.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        What warrant haue you?
                     
                     
                        OFF.
                        Warrant inough, sir, doubt not:
                        If you'll not open it.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Is there an officer, there?
                     
                     
                        OFF.
                        Yes, two, or three for fayling.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Haue but patience,
                        And I will open it straight.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Sir, ha' you done?
                        Is it a marriage? perfect?
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Yes, my braine.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Off with your ruffe, and cloake then, be your selfe, sir.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        Downe with the dore.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        'Slight, ding it open.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Hold.
                        Hold gentlemen, what meanes this violence?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Where is this Colliar?
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        And my Captaine FACE?
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        These day-Owles.
                     
                     
                        SVR.
                        That are birding in mens purses.
                     
                     
                        MAM.
                        Madame Suppository.
                        
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        
                           Doxey, my sister.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Locusts
                        Of the foule pit.
                     
                     
                        TRI.
                        Profane as BEL, and the Dragon.
                        
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        Worse then the Grasse-hoppers, or the Lice of Egypt.
                        
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Good gentlemen, heare me. Are you officers,
                        And cannot stay this violence?
                     
                     
                        OFF.
                        Keepe the peace.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Gentlemen, what is the matter? Whom doe you seeke?
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
                        TRI.
                        Be patient ANANIAS.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I am strong,
                        And will stand vp, well girt, against an host,
                        That threaten GAD in exile.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        I shall send you
                        To Amsterdam, to your cellar.
                     
                     
                        ANA.
                        I will pray there,
                        Against thy house: may dogs defile thy walls,
                        And waspes, and hornets breed beneath thy roofe,
                        This seat of false-hood, and this caue of cos'nage.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Another too?
                     
                     
                        DRV.
                        Not I sir, I am no Brother.
                        
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Drueger enters, and he beats him away.
                        Away you HARRY NICHOLAS, doe you talke?
                     
                     
                        
                           To the Parson.
                         
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        No, this was ABEL DRVGGER. Good sir, goe,
                        And satisfie him; tell him, all is done:
                        He stay'd too long a washing of his face.
                        The Doctor, he shall heare of him at Westchester;
                        And of the Captayne, tell him at Yarmouth: or
                        Some good port-towne else, lying for a winde.
                        If you get off the angrie Child, now, sir—
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        To his sister.
                        Come on, you yew, you haue match'd most sweetly, ha' you not?
                        Did not I say, I would neuer ha' you tupt
                        But by a dub'd Boy, to make you a lady-Tom?
                        
                        'Slight, you are a mammet! O, I could touse you, now.
                        Death, mun' you marry with a poxe?
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        You lie, Boy;
                        As sound as you: and I am afore-hand with you.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Anone?
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Come, will you quarrell? I will feize you, sirrah.
                        Why doe you not buckle to your tooles?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Gods light!
                        This is a fine old Boy, as ere I saw!
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        What, doe you change your copy, now? Proceed,
                        Here stands my doue: stoupe at her, if you dare.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        'Slight I must loue him! I cannot choose, i-faith!
                        And I should be hang'd for't. Suster, I protest,
                        I honor thee, for this match.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        O, doe you so, sir?
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        Yes, and thou canst take tabacco, and drinke, old Boy,
                        I'll giue her fiue hundred pound more, to her marriage,
                        Then her owne state.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Fill a pipe-full, IEREMIE.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        Yes, but goe in, and take it, sir.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        We will.
                        I will be rul'd by thee in any thing, IEREMIE.
                     
                     
                        KAS.
                        'Slight, thou art not hide-bound! thou art a Iouy' Boy!
                        Come let's in, I pray thee, and take our whiffes.
                     
                     
                        LOV.
                        Whiffe in with your sister, brother Boy. That master
                        That had receiu'd such happinesse by a seruant,
                        In such a widdow, and with so much wealth,
                        Were very vngratefull, if he would not be
                        A little indulgent to that seruants wit,
                        And helpe his fortune, though with some small straine
                        Of his owne candor. Therefore, gentlemen,
                        And kind Spectators, if I haue out-stript
                        
                        An old mans grauitie, or strict canon, thinke
                        What a yong wife, and a good braine may doe:
                        Stretch ages truth sometimes, and crack it too.
                        Speake for thy selfe, knaue.
                     
                     
                        FAC.
                        So I will, sir. Gentlemen,
                        My part a little fell in this last Scene,
                        Yet 'twas decorum. And though I am cleane
                        Got off, from SVBTLE, SVRLY, MAMMON, DOL,
                        Hot ANANIAS, DAPPER, DRVGGER, all
                        With whom I traded; yet I put my selfe
                        On you, that are my countrey: and this pelfe,
                        Which I haue got, if you doe quit me, rests
                        To feast you often, and inuite new ghests.
                     
                  
                  THE END.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  This Comoedie vvas first acted, in the yeere 1610.
                  By the Kings Maiesties SERVANTS.
                  The principall Comoedians were,

                        RIC. BVRBADGE.
                        IOH. LOWIN.
                        HEN. CONDEL.
                        ALEX. COOKE.
                        ROB. ARMIN.
                        IOH. HEMINGS.
                        WILL. OSTLER.
                        IOH. VNDERWOOD.
                        NIC. TOOLY.
                        WILL. EGLESTONE.
                     
                  
                  With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  CATILINE HIS CONSPIRACY. A Tragoedie. Acted in the yeere 1611. By the Kings MAIESTIES Seruants.
                  The Author B. I.
                  
                     HORAT.
                     —His non plebecula gaudet:
                     Verum equitis quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , iam migrauit ab aure voluptas
                     Omnis, ad incertos oculos, & gaudia vana.
                  
                  LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.
                  M. DC. XVI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE GREAT EXAMPLE OF HONOR, AND VERTVE, THE MOST NOBLE William, EARLE OF PEMBROKE, LORD CHAMBERLAINE, &c.
                  
                     
                        MY LORD,
                     
                  
                  
                     IN so thick, and darke an ignorance, as now almost couers the age, I craue leaue to stand neare your light: and, by that, to bee read. Posteritie may pay your benefit the honor, & thanks: when it shall know, that you dare, in these 
                        •
                     ig-giuen times, to countenance a legitimate Poeme. I must call it so, against all noise of opinion: from whose crude, and ayrie reports, I appeale, to that great and singular faculty of iudgement in your Lordship, able to vindicate truth from error. It is the first (of this race) that euer I dedicated to any person, and had I not thought it the best, it should haue beene taught a lesse ambition. Now, it approcheth your censure cheerefully, and with the same assurance, that innocency would appeare before a magistrate.
                  
                     
                        Your Lo. most faithfull honorer, BEN. IONSON.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Persons of the Play.
                  
                     SYLLA'S GHOST.
                     CATILINE.
                     LENTVLVS.
                     CETHEGVS.
                     CVRIVS.
                     AVTRONIVS.
                     VARGVNTEIVS.
                     LONGINVS.
                     LECCA.
                     FVLVIVS.
                     BESTIA.
                     GABINIVS.
                     STATILIVS.
                     CEPARIVS.
                     CORNELIVS.
                     VOLTVRTIVS.
                     AVRELIA.
                     FVLVIA.
                     SEMPRONIA.
                     GALLA.
                     CICERO.
                     ANTONIVS.
                     CATO.
                     CATVLVS.
                     CRASSVS.
                     CAESAR.
                     QV. CICERO.
                     SYLLANVS.
                     FLACCVS.
                     POMTINIVS.
                     SANGA.
                     SENATORS.
                     ALLOBROGES.
                     PETREIVS.
                     SOVLDIERS.
                     PORTER.
                     LICTORS.
                     SERVANTS.
                     PAO
                           •
                        S.
                     CHORVS.
                  
                  
                     THE SCENE ROME.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  CATILINE. Act I.
                  SYLLA'S Ghost.
                  
                  
                     DO'st thou not feele me, Rome? not yet? Is night
                  So heauy on thee, and my weight so light?
                  Can SYLLA'S Ghost arise within thy walls,
                  Lesse threatning, then an earth-quake, the quick falls
                  Of thee, and thine? shake not the frighted heads
                  Of thy steepe towers? or shrinke to their first beds?
                  Or, as their ruine the large Tyber fills,
                  Make that swell vp, and drowne thy seuen proud hills?
                  What sleepe is this doth seize thee, so like death,
                  And is not it? Wake, feele her, in my breath:
                  Behold, I come, sent from the Stygian sound,
                  As a dire vapor, that had cleft the ground,
                  T'ingender with the night, and blast the day;
                  Or like a pestilence, that should display
                  Discouers Catiline in his study.
                  Infection through the world: which, thus, I doe.
                  PLVTO be at thy councells; and into
                  Thy darker bosome enter SYLLA'S spirit:
                  All, that was mine, and bad, thy brest inherit.
                  Alas, how weake is that, for CATILINE!
                  Did I but say (vaine voice!) all that was mine?
                  All, that the GRACCHI, CINNA, MARIVS would;
                  What now, had I a body againe, I could,
                  
                  Comming from hell; what Fiends would wish should be;
                  And HANNIBAL could not haue wish'd to see:
                  Thinke thou, and practice. Let the long-hid seeds
                  Of treason, in thee, now shoot forth in deeds,
                  Ranker then horror; and thy former facts
                  Not fall in mention, but to vrge new acts:
                  Conscience of them prouoke thee on to more.
                  Be still thy incests, murders, rapes before
                  Thy sense; thy forcing first a Vestall nunne;
                  Thy parricide, late, on thine owne onely sonne,
                  After his mother; to make emptie way
                  For thy last wicked nuptialls; worse, then they,
                  That blaze that act of thy incestuous life,
                  Which got thee, at once, a daughter, and a wife.
                  I leaue the slaughters that thou didst for me,
                  Of Senators; for which, I hid for thee
                  Thy murder of thy brother, (being so brib'd)
                  And writ him in the list of my proscrib'd
                  After thy fact, to saue thy little shame:
                  Thy incest, with thy sister, I not name.
                  These are too light. Fate will haue thee pursue
                  Deedes, after which, no mischiefe can be new;
                  The ruine of thy countrey: thou wert built
                  For such a worke, and borne for no lesse guilt.
                  What though defeated once th'hast beene, and knowne,
                  Tempt it againe: That is thy act, or none.
                  What all the seuerall ills, that visite earth,
                  (Brought forth by night, with a sinister birth)
                  Plagues, famine, fire could not reach vnto,
                  The sword, nor surfets; let thy furie doe:
                  Make all past, present, future ill thine owne;
                  And conquer all example, in thy one.
                  Nor let thy thought find any vacant time
                  To hate an old, but still a fresher crime
                  Drowne the remembrance: let not mischiefe cease,
                  But, while it is in punishing, encrease.
                  Conscience, and care die in thee; and be free
                  Not heau'n it selfe from thy impietie:
                  Let night grow blacker with thy plots; and day,
                  At shewing but thy head forth, start away
                  From this halfe-spheare: and leaue Romes blinded walls
                  T'embrace lusts, hatreds, slaughters, funeralls,
                  And not recouer sight, till their owne flames
                  Doe light them to their ruines. All the names
                  
                  Of thy confederates, too, be no lesse great
                  In hell, then here: that, when we would repeat
                  Our strengths in muster, we may name you all,
                  And Furies, vpon you, for Furies, call.
                  Whilst, what you doe, may strike them into feares,
                  Or make them grieue, and wish your mischiefe theirs.
                  CATILINE.
                  IT is decree'd. Nor shall thy Fate, Ô Rome,
                  Resist my vow. Though hills were set on hills,
                  And seas met seas, to guard thee; I would through:
                  I, plough vp rocks, steepe as the Alpes, in dust;
                  And laue the Tyrrhene waters, into clouds;
                  But I would reach thy head, thy head, proud citie.
                  The ills, that I haue done, cannot be safe
                  But by attempting greater; and I feele
                  A spirit, within me, chides my sluggish hands,
                  And sayes, they haue beene innocent too long.
                  Was I a man, bred great, as Rome her selfe?
                  One, form'd for all her honors, all her glories?
                  Equall to all her titles? that could stand
                  Close vp, with ATLAS; and sustaine her name
                  As strong, as he doth heau'n? And, was I,
                  Of all her brood, mark'd out for the repulse
                  By her no voice, when I stood Candidate,
                  To be commander in the Pontick warre?
                  I will, hereafter, call her step-dame, euer.
                  If shee can loose her nature, I can loose
                  My pietie
                        •
                      and in her stony entrailes
                  Dig me a seate: where, I will liue againe,
                  The labour of her wombe, and be a burden,
                  Weight
                        •
                     er then all the prodigies, and monsters,
                  That shee hath teem'd with, since shee first knew MARS.
                  CATILINE, AVRELIA.
                  WHo's there?
                  
                     AVR.
                     'Tis I.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     AVRELIA?
                  
                  
                     AVR.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Appeare,
                     And breake, like day, my beautie, to this circle:
                     Vpbraid thy Phoebus, that he is so long
                     In mounting to that point, which should giue thee
                     Thy proper splendor. Wherefore frownes my sweet?
                     He kisseth them.
                     Haue 
                           •
                         too long beene absent from these lips, 
                     This cheeke, these eyes? What is my trespasse? speake.
                  
                  
                     AVR.
                     It seemes, you know, that can accuse your selfe.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, CATILINE.
                  
                     IT is, me thinks, a morning, full of fate!
                     It riseth slowly, as her sollen carre
                     Had all the weights of sleepe, and death hung at it!
                     Shee is not rosy-finger'd, but swolne black!
                     Her face is like a water, turn'd to bloud,
                     And her sick head is bound about with clouds,
                     As if shee threatned night, ere noone of day!
                     It does not looke, as it would haue a haile,
                     Or health, wish'd in it, as on other mornes.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Why, all the fitter, LENTVLVS: our comming
                     Is not for salutation, we haue businesse.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Said nobly, braue CETHEGVS. Where's AVTRONIVS?
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Is he not come?
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Not here.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Nor VARGVNTEIVS?
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Neither.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     A fire in their beds, and bosomes,
                     That so will serue their sloth, rather then vertue.
                     They are no Romanes, and at such high need
                     As now.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Both they, LONGINVS, LECCA, CVRIVS,
                     FVLVIVS, GABINIVS, gaue me word, last night,
                     By LVC'IVS BESTIA, they would all be here,
                     And early.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Yes? As you, had I not call'd you.
                     Come, we all sleepe, and are meere dormice; flies,
                     A little lesse then dead: more dulnesse hangs
                     On vs, then on the morne. W'are spirit-bound,
                     In ribs of ice; our whole blouds are one stone;
                     And honor cannot thaw vs; nor our wants:
                     Though they burne, hot a feuers, to our states.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     I muse they would be tardy, at an houre
                     Of so great purpose.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     If the gods had call'd
                     Them, to a purpose, they would iust haue come
                     With the same tortoyse speed! that are thus slow
                     To such an action, which the gods will enuy:
                     As asking no lesse meanes, then all their powers
                     Conioyn'd, t'effect. I would haue seene Rome burn't,
                     By this time; and her ashes in an vrne:
                     The kingdome of the Senate, rent a-sunder;
                     And the degenerate, talking gowne runne frighted,
                     Out of the aire of Italie.
                     
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Spirit of men!
                     Thou, heart of our great enterprise! how much
                     I loue these voices in thee!
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     O, the dayes
                     Of SYLLA'S sway, when the free sword tooke leaue
                     To act all that it would!
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     And was familiar
                     With entrailes, as our Augures!
                     
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Sonnes kild fathers,
                     
                     Brothers their brothers.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     And had price, and praise.
                     All hate had licence giuen it: all rage raines.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Slaughter bestrid the streets, and stretch'd himselfe
                     To seeme more huge; whilst to his stayned thighes
                     The gore he drew flow'd vp: and carryed downe
                     Whole heaps of limmes, and bodies, through his arch.
                     No age was spar'd, no sexe.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Nay, no degree.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Not infants, in the porch of life were free.
                     The sick, the old, that could but hope a day
                     Longer, by natures bountie, not let stay.
                     Virgins, and widdowes, matrons, pregnant wiues,
                     All dyed.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     'Twas crime enough, that they had liues.
                     To strike but onely those, that could doe hurt,
                     Was dull, and poore. Some fell to make the number,
                     As some the prey.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     The rugged CHARON fainted,
                     And ask'd a nauy, rather then a boate,
                     To ferry ouer the sad world that came:
                     The mawes, and dens of beasts could not receiue
                     The bodies, that those soules were frighted from;
                     And e'en the graues were sild with men, yet liuing,
                     Whose flight, and feare had mix'd them, with the dead.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     And this shall be againe, and more, and more,
                     Now LENTVLVS, the third CORNELIVS,
                     Is to stand vp in Rome.
                     
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Nay, vrge not that
                     Is so vncertaine.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     How!
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     I meane, not clear'd.
                     And, therefore, not to be reflected on.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     The SYBILL'S leaues vncertayne? or the comments
                     Of our graue, deepe, diuining men not cleare?
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     All prophecies, you know, suffer the torture.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     But this, already, hath confess'd, without.
                     And so beene weigh'd, examin'd, and compar'd,
                     As 't were malicious ignorance in him,
                     Would faint in the beliefe.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Doe you beleeue it?
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Doe I loue LENTVLVS? or pray to see it?
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     The Augures all are constant, I am meant.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     They'had lost their science else.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     They count from CINNA.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     And SYLLA next, and so make you the third;
                     All that can say the sunne is ris'n, must thinke it.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Men marke me more, of late, as I come forth!
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Why, what can they doe lesse? CINNA, and SYLLA
                     Are set, and gone: and we must turne our eyes
                     On him that is, and shines. Noble CETHEGVS,
                     But view him with me, here! He lookes, already,
                     As if he shooke a scepter, o're the Senate,
                     And the aw'd purple dropt their rods, and axes!
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     The dangers, the repulses, iudgements, wants:
                     Which how long will you beare, most valiant spirits?
                     Were we not better to fall, once, with vertue,
                     Then draw a wretched, and dishonor'd breath,
                     To loose with shame, when these mens pride will laugh?
                     I call the faith of gods, and men to question,
                     The power is in our hands; our bodies able;
                     Our mindes as strong; o'th' contrary, in them,
                     All things growne aged, with their wealth, and yeeres:
                     There wants, but onely to beginne the businesse,
                     The issue is certaine.
                  
                  
                     CET. LON.
                     On, let vs goe on.
                  
                  
                     CVR. BES.
                     Goe on, braue SERGIVS.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     It doth strike my soule,
                     (And, who can scape the stroke, that hath a soule,
                     Or, but the smallest aire of man within him?
                     To see them swell with treasure; which they powre
                     Out i' their riots, eating, drinking, building,
                     I, i' the sea! planing of hills with valleyes;
                     And raysing vallies aboue hills! whilst we
                     Haue not, to giue our bodies necessaries.
                     They ha' their change of houses, mannors, lordships;
                     We scarce a fire, or poore houshold Lar!
                     
                     They buy rare Atticke statues, Tyrian hangings,
                     
                        Ephesian pictures, and Corinthian plate,
                     
                        Attalicke garments, and now, new-found gemmes,
                     Since POMPEY went for Asia, which they purchase
                     At price of prouinces! The riuer Phasis
                     
                     Cannot affoord 'hem fowle; nor Lucrine lake
                     Oysters enow: Circei, too, is search'd
                     To please the witty gluttony of a meale!
                     Their ancient habitations they neglect,
                     And set vp new; then, if the eccho like not
                     In such a roome, they pluck downe those, build newer,
                     Alter them too: and, by all frantick wayes,
                     Vexe their wild wealth, as they molest the people,
                     From whom they force it! yet, they cannot tame,
                     Or ouer-come their riches! Not, by making
                     Bathes, orchards, fish-pooles! letting in of seas
                     Here! and, then there, forcing 'hem out againe,
                     With mountaynous heaps, for which the earth hath lost
                     Most of her ribs, as entrailes! being now
                     Wounded no lesse for marble, then for gold.
                     We, all this while, like calme, benum'd Spectators,
                     Sit, till our seates doe cracke; and doe not heare
                     The thundring ruines: whilst, at home, our wants,
                     Abroad, our debts doe vrge vs; our states daily
                     
                     Bending to bad, our hopes to worse: and, what
                     Is left, but to be crush'd? Wake, wake braue friends,
                     And meet the libertie you oft haue wish'd for.
                     Behold, renowne, riches, and glory court you.
                     Fortune holds out these to you, as rewards.
                     Me thinkes (though I were dumbe) th'affaire it selfe
                     The opportunity, your needs, and dangers,
                     With the braue spoile the warre brings, should inuite you.
                     Vse me your generall, or souldier: neither,
                     My minde, nor body shall be wanting to you.
                     And, being Consul, I not doubt t'effect,
                     All that you wish, if trust not flatter me,
                     And you'd not rather still be slaues, then free.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Free, free.
                  
                  
                     LON.
                     'Tis freedom.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Freedom we all stand for.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Why, these are noble voyces! Nothing wants then,
                     But that we take a solemne sacrament,
                     To strengthen our designe.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     And so to act it.
                     Differring hurts, where powers are so prepar'd.
                  
                  
                     AVT.
                     Yet, ere we enter into open act,
                     (With fauour) 'twere no losse, if 't might be enquir'd,
                     What the condition of these armes would be?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     I, and the meanes, to carry vs through?
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     How, friends!
                     Thinke you, that I would bid you, graspe the winde?
                     Or call you to th'embracing of a cloud?
                     Put your knowne valures on so deare a businesse,
                     And haue no other second then the danger,
                     Nor other gyrlond then the losse? Become
                     Your owne assurances. And, for the meanes,
                     Consider, first, the starke securitie
                     The common wealth is in now; the whole Senate
                     
                     Sleepy, and dreaming no such violent blow;
                     Their forces all abroad; of which the greatest,
                     That might annoy vs most, is fardest off,
                     In Asia, vnder POMPEY: those, neare hand,
                     Commanded, by our friends; one army' in Spaine,
                     By CNEVS PISO; th'other in Mauritania,
                     By NVCERINVS; both which I haue firme,
                     And fast vnto our plot. My selfe, then, standing
                     Now to be Consul; with my hop'd Colleague
                     CAIVS ANTONIVS; one, no lesse engag'd
                     By'his wants then we: and, whom I'haue power to melt,
                     And cast in any mould. Beside, some others
                     That will not yet be nam'd, (both sure, and great ones)
                     Who, when the time comes, shall declare themselues,
                     Strong, for our party: so, that no resistance
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        Her round about? Or, are they none,
                        Except shee first become her owne?
                        O wretchednesse of greatest states,
                        To be obnoxious to these fates:
                        That cannot keepe, what they doe gaine;
                        And what they raise so ill sustaine!
                        
                           Rome, now, is Mistris of the whole
                        World, sea, and land, to either pole;
                        And euen that fortune will destroy
                        The power that made it: shee doth ioy
                        So much in plentie, wealth, and ease,
                        As, now, th'excesse is her disease.
                        Shee builds in gold; and, to the starres;
                        As, if shee threatned heau'n with warres:
                        And seekes for hell, in quarries deepe,
                        Giuing the fiends, that there doe keepe,
                        A hope of day. Her women weare
                        The spoiles of nations, in an eare,
                        Chang'd for the treasure of a shell;
                        And, in their loose attires, doe swell
                        More light then sailes, when all windes play:
                        Yet, are the men more loose then they!
                        More kemb'd, and bath'd, and rub'd, and trim'd,
                        More sleek'd, more soft, and slacker limm'd;
                        As prostitute: so much, that kinde
                        May seeke it selfe there, and not finde.
                        They eate on beds of silke, and gold;
                        At yuorie tables; or, wood sold
                        Dearer then it: and, leauing plate,
                        Doe drinke in stone of higher rate.
                        They hunt all grounds; and draw all seas;
                        Foule euery brooke, and bush; to please
                        Their wanton tasts: and, in request
                        Haue new, and rare things; not the best!
                        Hence comes that wild, and vast expence,
                        That hath enforc'd Romes vertue, thence,
                        Which simple pouerty first made:
                        And, now, ambition doth inuade
                        Her state, with eating auarice,
                        Riot, and euery other vice.
                        Decrees are bought, and lawes are sold,
                        Honors, and offices for gold;
                        The peoples voyces: and the free
                        Tongues, in the Senate, bribed bee.
                        
                        Such ruine of her manners Rome
                        
                        Doth suffer now, as shee's become
                        (Without the gods it soone gaine-say)
                        Both her owne spoiler, and owne prey.
                        So, Asia, 'art thou cru'lly euen
                        With vs, for all the blowes thee giuen;
                        When we, whose vertue conquer'd thee,
                        Thus, by thy vices, ruin'd bee.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Act II.
                  FVLVIA, GALLA, SERVANT.
                  THose roomes doe smell extremely. Bring my glasse,
                  And table hither. GALLA.
                  
                     GAL.
                     Madame.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Looke
                     Within, i' my blew cabinet, for the pearle
                     I'had sent me last, and bring it.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     That from CLODIVS?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     From CAIVS CAESAR. You'are for CLODIVS, still.
                     Or CVRIVS. Sirrha, if QVINTVS CVRIVS come,
                     I am not in fit moode; I keepe my chamber:
                     Giue warning so, without.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Is this it? madame.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Yes, helpe to hang it in mine eare.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Beleeue me,
                     It is a rich one, madame.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     I hope so:
                     It should not be worne there else. Make an end,
                     And binde my haire vp.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     As 'twas yesterday?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     No, nor the t'other day. When knew you me
                     Appeare, two dayes together, in one dressing?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Will you ha't i'the globe, or spire?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     How thou wilt;
                     Any way, so thou wilt doe it, good impertinence.
                     Thy company, if I slept not very well
                     A nights, would make me, an errant foole, with questions.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Alas, madame—
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Nay, gentle halfe o' the dialogue, ceas
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     I doe it, indeed, but for your exercise,
                     As your physitian bids me.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     How! Do's he bid you
                     To anger me for exercise?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Not to anger you,
                     But stirre your bloud a little: There's difference
                     Betweene luke-warme, and boyling, madame.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     IOVE!
                     Shee meanes to cooke me, I thinke? Pray you, ha' done.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     I meane to dresse you, madame.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     O, my IVNO,
                     Be friend to me! Offring at wit, too? Why, GALLA!
                     Where hast thou been?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Why? madam!
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     What hast thou done
                     With thy poore innocent selfe?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Wherefore? sweet madame!
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Thus to come forth, so sodainely, a wit-worme?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     It pleases you to flout one. I did dreame
                     Of lady SEMPRONIA—
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     O, the wonder is out.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     That has no pedigree, no house, no coate,
                     No ensignes of a family?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     He'has vertue.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Hang vertue, where there is no bloud: 'tis vice,
                     And, in him, sawcinesse. Why should he presume
                     To be more learned, or more eloquent,
                     Then the nobilitie? or boast any qualitie
                     Worthy a noble man, himselfe not noble?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     'Twas vertue onely, at first, made all men noble.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     I yeeld you, it might, at first, in Romes poore age;
                     When both her Kings, and Consuls held the plough,
                     Or garden'd well: But, now, we ha' no need,
                     To digge, or loose our sweat for't. We haue wealth,
                     Fortune and ease, and then their stock, to spend on,
                     Of name, for vertue; which will beare vs out
                     'Gainst all new commers: and can neuer faile vs,
                     While the succession stayes. And, we must glorifie,
                     A mushrome? one of yesterday? a fine speaker?
                     'Cause he has suck'd at Athens? and aduance him,
                     To our owne losse? No, FVLVIA. There are they
                     Can speake greeke too, if need were. CAESAR, and I,
                     Haue sate vpon him; so hath CRASSVS, too:
                     And others. We haue all decreed his rest,
                     For rising farder.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Excellent rare lady!
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     SEMPRONIA, you are beholden to my woman, here.
                     Shee do's admire you.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     O good GALLA, how dost thou?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     The better, for your learned ladiship.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Is this grey poulder, a good dentifrice?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     You see I vse it.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     I haue one is whiter.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     It may be so.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Yet this smells well.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     And clenses
                     Very well, madame, and resists the crudities.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     FVLVIA, I pray thee, who comes to thee, now?
                     Which of our great Patricians?
                     
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Faith, I keepe
                     No catalogue of'hem. Sometimes I haue one,
                     Sometimes another, as the toy takes their blouds.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Thou hast them all. Faith, when was QVINTVS CVRIVS,
                     Thy speciall seruant, here?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     My speciall seruant?
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Yes, thy idolater, I call him.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     He may be yours,
                     If you doe like him.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     How!
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     He comes, not, here,
                     I haue forbid him, hence.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     VENVS forbid!
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Why?
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Your so constant louer.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     So much the rather.
                     I would haue change. So would you too, I am sure.
                     And now, you may haue him.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Hee's fresh yet, FVLVIA:
                     Beware, how you doe tempt me.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Faith, for me,
                     He' is somewhat too fresh, indeed. The salt is gone,
                     That gaue him season. His good gifts are done.
                     
                     He do's not yeeld the crop that he was wont.
                     And, for the act, I can haue secret fellowes,
                     With backs worth ten of him, and shall please me
                     (Now that the land is fled) a myriade better.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     And those one may command.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     'Tis true: these Lordings,
                     Your noble Faunes, they are so imperious, saucy.
                     Rude, and as boistrous as Centaures, leaping
                     A lady, at first sight.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     And must be borne
                     Both with, and out, they thinke.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Tut, Ile obserue
                     None of 'hem all: nor humour 'hem a iot
                     Longer, then they come laden in the hand,
                     And say, here's t'one, for th'tother.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Do's CAESAR giue well?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     They shall all giue, and pay well, that come here,
                     If they will haue it: and that iewells, pearle,
                     Plate, or round summes, to buy these. I'am not taken
                     With a cob-swan, or a high-mounting bull,
                     As foolish LEDA, and EVROPA were,
                     But the bright gold, with DANAE. For such price,
                     I would endure, a rough, harsh IVPITER,
                     Or ten such thundring gamsters: and refraine
                     To laugh at 'hem, till they are gone, with my much suffring.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Th'art a most happy wench, that thus canst make
                     Vse of thy youth, and freshnesse, in the season:
                     And hast it, to make vse of.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     (Which is the happinesse.)
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     I am, now, faine to giue to them, and keepe
                     Musique, and a continuall table, to inuite'hem;
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     (Yes, and they study your kitchin, more then you)
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Eate my selfe out with vsury, and my lord, too,
                     And all my officers, and friends beside,
                     To procure moneyes, for the needfull charge
                     I must be at, to haue'hem: and, yet, scarce
                     Can I atchieue'hem, so.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Why, that's because
                     You affect yong faces onely, and smooth chinnes,
                  
                  
                     SEMPRONIA.
                     If youl'd loue beards, and bristles,
                     (One with another, as others doe) or wrinkles—
                     Who's that? Looke GALLA.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     'Tis the party, madame.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     What party? Has he no name?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     'Tis QVINTVS CVRIVS.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Did I not bid'hem, say, I kept my chamber?
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     Why, so they doe.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Ile leaue you, FVLVIA.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Nay, good SEMPRONIA, stay.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     In faith, I will not.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     By IVNO, I would not see him.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Ile not hinder you.
                  
                  
                     GAL.
                     You know, he will not be kept out, madame.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     No,
                     Nor shall not, carefull GALLA, by my meanes.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     As I doe liue, SEMPRONIA —
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     What needs this?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Goe, say, I am a-sleepe, and ill at ease.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     So do's the Senate, too, know, you can beare.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     By all the gods, that Senate will smart deepe
                     For your vpbraidings. I should be right sorry
                     To haue the meanes so to be veng'd on you,
                     (At least, the will) as I shall shortly on them.
                     But, goe you on still; fare you well, deare lady:
                     You could not still be faire'vnlesse you were proud.
                     You will repent these moodes, and ere't be long, too.
                     I shall ha' you come about, againe.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Doe you thinke so?
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Yes, and I know so.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     By what augurie?
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     By the faire entrailes of the matrons chests,
                     Gold, pearle, and iewells, here in Rome, which FVLVIA
                     Will then (but late) say that shee might haue shar'd:
                     And, grieuing, misse.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Tut, all your promis'd mountaynes,
                     And seas, I am so stalely acquainted with—
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     But, when you see the vniuersall floud
                     Runne by your coffers; that my lords, the Senators,
                     Are sold for slaues, their wiues for bond-women,
                     Their houses, and fine gardens giuen away,
                     And all their goods, vnder the speare, at out cry,
                     And you haue none of this; but are still FVLVIA,
                     Or perhaps lesse, while you are thinking of it:
                     You will aduise then, Coynesse, with your cushion.
                     And looke o' your fingers; say, how you were wish'd;
                     And so, he left you.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Call him againe, GALLA:
                     This is not vsuall! something hangs on this
                     That I must winne out of him.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     How now, melt you?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Come, you will laugh, now, at my easinesse!
                     But, 'tis no miracle: Doues, they say, will bill,
                     After their pecking, and their murmuring.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Yes,
                     And then 'tis kindly. I would haue my loue
                     Angrie, sometimes, to sweeten off the rest
                     Of her behauiour.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     You doe see, I studie
                     How I may please you, then. But you thinke, CVRIVS,
                     'Tis couetise hath wrought me: if you loue me,
                     Change that vnkinde conceipt.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     By my lou'd soule,
                     I loue thee, like to it; and 'tis my studie,
                     More then mine owne reuenge, to make thee happy.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     And 'tis that iust reuenge doth make me happy
                     To heare you prosequute: and which, indeed,
                     Hath wonne me, to you, more, then all the hope
                     Of what can else be promis'd. I loue valour
                     Better, then any lady loues her face,
                     Or dressing: then my selfe do's. Let me grow
                     Still, where I doe embrace. But, what good meanes
                     
                     Ha'you t'effect it? Shall I know your proiect?
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Thou shalt, if thou'lt be gracious.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     As I can be.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     And wilt thou kisse me, then?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     As close as shells
                     Of cockles meet.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     And print 'hem deepe?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Quite through
                     Our subtle lips.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     And often?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     I will sow 'hem,
                     Faster, then you can reape. What is your plot?
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Why, now my FVLVIA lookes, like her bright name!
                     And is her selfe!
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Nay, answere me, your plot:
                     I pray thee tell me, QVINTVS.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     I, these sounds
                     Shee kisses and flatters him along still.
                     Become a mistris. Here is harmonie!
                     When you are harsh, I see, the way to bend you
                     Is not with violence, but seruice. Cruell,
                     A lady is a fire: gentle, a light.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Will you not tell me, what I aske you?
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     All,
                     That I can thinke, sweet loue, or my brest holds,
                     Ile poure into thee.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     What is your designe, then?
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Ile tell thee; CATILINE shall now be Consull:
                     
                     But, you will heare more, shortly.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Nay, deare loue—
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Ile speake it, in thine armes, let vs goe in.
                     
                        Rome will be sack'd, her wealth will be our prize;
                     By publique ruine, priuate spirits must rise.
                     CHORVS.
                     GReat father MARS, and greater IOVE,
                     By whose high auspice, Rome hath stood
                     So long; and, first, was built in blood
                     Of your great nephew, that then stroue
                     Not with his brother, but your rites:
                     Be present to her now, as then,
                     And let not proud, and factious men
                     Against your wills oppose their mights.
                     Our Consuls, now, are to be made;
                     O, put it in the publique voice
                     To make a free, and worthy choice:
                     Excluding such as would inuade
                     The common wealth. Let whom we name
                     Haue wisedome, fore-sight, fortitude,
                     Be more with faith, then face endu'd,
                     And studie conscience, aboue fame.
                     Such, as not seeke to get the start
                     In state, by power, parts, or bribes,
                     Ambition's bawdes: but moue the tribes
                     
                     By vertue, modestie, desart.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     Our need made thee our Consul, and thy vertue.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     CATO, you will vn-doe him, with your praise.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     CAESAR will hurt himselfe, with his owne enuie▪
                     
                  
                  
                     CHOR.
                     The voice of CATO is the voice of Rome.
                     
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     The voice of Rome is the consent of heauen!
                     And that hath plac'd thee, CICERO, at the helme,
                     Where thou must render, now, thy selfe a man,
                     And master of thy art. Each petty hand
                     Can steere a ship becalm'd; but he that will
                     Gouerne, and carry her to her ends, must know
                     His tides, his currents; how to shift his sailes;
                     What shee will beare in foule, what in faire weathers;
                     Where her springs are, her leakes; and how to stop 'hem;
                     What sands, what shelues, what rocks doe threaten her;
                     The forces, and the natures of all winds,
                     Gusts, stormes, and tempests; when her keele ploughs hell,
                     And deck knocks heauen: then, to manage her,
                     Becomes the name, and office of a pilot.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Which I'le performe, with all the diligence,
                     And fortitude I haue; not for my yeere,
                     But for my life; except my life be lesse,
                     And that my yeere conclude it: if it must,
                     Your will, lou'd gods. This heart shall yet employ
                     A day, an houre is left me, so, for Rome,
                     As it shall spring a life, out of my death,
                     To shine, for euer glorious in my facts.
                     The vicious count their yeeres, vertuous their acts.
                  
                  
                     CHOR.
                     Most noble Consul! Let vs wait him home.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Most popular Consul he is growne, me thinks!
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     How the rout cling to him!
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     And CATO leads 'hem!
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     You, his colleague, ANTONIVS, are not look't on.
                  
                  
                     ANT.
                     Not I, nor doe I care.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     He enioyes rest,
                     And ease, the while. Let th'others spirit toile,
                     And wake it out, that was inspir'd for turmoile.
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     If all reports be true, yet, CAIVS CAESAR,
                     The time hath need of such a watch, and spirit.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Reports? Doe you beleeue 'hem CATVLVS,
                     Why, he do's make, and breed'hem for the people;
                     T'endeare his seruice to 'hem. Doe you not tast
                     An art, that is so common? Popular men,
                     They must create strange monsters, and then quell'hem;
                     To make their artes seeme something. Would you haue
                     Such an HERCVLEAN actor in the scene,
                     And not his HYDRA? They must sweat no lesse
                     
                     To fit their properties, then t'expresse their parts.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     Treasons, and guiltie men are made in states
                     Too oft, to dignifie the magistrates.
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     Those states be wretched, that are forc'd to buy
                     Their rulers fame, with their owne infamy.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     We therefore, should prouide that ours doe not.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     That will ANTONIVS make his care.
                  
                  
                     ANT.
                     I shall.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     And watch the watcher.
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     Here comes CATILINE.
                     How do's he brooke his late repulse?
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     I know not.
                     But hardly sure.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     LONGINVS, too, did stand?
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     At first: but he gaue way vnto his friend.
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     Who's that come? LENTVLVS?
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Yes. He is againe
                     Taken into the Senate.
                     
                  
                  
                     ANT.
                     And made Praetor.
                     
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     I know't. He had my suffrage, next the Consuls;
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     True, you were there, Prince of the Senate, then.
                     CATILINE, ANTONIVS, CATVLVS, CAESAR, CRASSVS, LONGINVS, LENTVLVS.
                     HAile noblest Romanes. The most worthy Consul,
                     I gratulate your honor.
                  
                  
                     ANT.
                     I could wish
                     It had beene happier, by your fellowship,
                     Most noble SERGIVS, had it pleas'd the people.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     It did not please the gods; who'instruct the people:
                     And their vnquestion'd pleasures must be seru'd.
                     They know what's fitter for vs, then our selues;
                     And 'twere impietie, to thinke against them.
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     You beare it rightly, LVCIVS; and, it glads me,
                     To find your thoughts so euen.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     I shall still
                     Studie to make them such to Rome, and heauen.
                     (I would with-draw with you, a little, IVLIVS.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Ile come home to you: CRASSVS would not ha' you
                     To speake to him, 'fore QVINTVS CATVLVS.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     I apprehend you.) No, when they shall iudge
                     Honors conuenient for me, I shall haue 'hem,
                     With a full hand: I know it. In meane time,
                     They are no lesse part of the common-wealth,
                     That doe obey, then those, that doe command.
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     O, let me kisse your fore-head, LVCIVS.
                     How are you wrong'd!
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     By whom?
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     Publike report.
                     That giues you out, to stomack your repulse;
                     And brooke it deadly.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     Sir, shee brookes not me.
                     Beleeue me rather, and your selfe, now, of me:
                     It is a kinde of slander, to trust rumour.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     And some small flatterie of the Senate more,
                     Will make him to forget.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     You wrong me, LVCIVS.
                  
                  
                     LON.
                     He will not need these spurres.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     The action needs'hem.
                     These things, when they proceed not, they goe backward.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Let vs consult then.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Let vs, first, take armes.
                     They that denie vs iust things, now, will giue
                     All that we aske; if once they see our swords.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Our obiects must be sought with wounds, not words.
                     CICERO, FVLVIA.
                     IS there a heauen? and gods? and can it be
                     They should so slowly heare, so slowly see!
                     Hath IOVE no thunder? or is IOVE become
                     Stupide as thou art? Ô neere-wretched Rome,
                     When both thy Senate, and thy gods doe sleepe,
                     And neither thine, nor their owne states doe keepe!
                     What will awake thee, heauen? what can excite
                     Thine anger, if this practice be too light?
                     His former drifts partake of former times,
                     But this last plot was onely CATILINES.
                     O, that it were his last. But he, before
                     Hath safely done so much, hee'll still dare more.
                     Ambition, like a torrent, ne're lookes back;
                     And is a swelling, and the last affection
                     A high minde can put off: being both a rebell
                     Vnto the soule, and reason, and enforceth
                     All lawes, all conscience, treades vpon religion,
                     And offereth violence to natures selfe.
                     But, here, is that transcends it! A black purpose
                     To confound nature: and to ruine that,
                     Which neuer age, nor mankinde can repaire!
                     Sit downe, good lady; CICERO is lost
                     In this your fable: for, to thinke it true
                     Tempteth my reason. It so farre exceedes
                     All insolent fictions of the tragick scene!
                     
                     The common-wealth, yet panting, vnder-neath
                     The stripes, and wounds of a late ciuill warre,
                     Gasping for life, and scarce restor'd to hope;
                     To seeke t'oppresse her, with new crueltie,
                     And vtterly extinguish her long name,
                     With so prodigious, and vnheard-of fiercenesse!
                     What sinke of monsters, wretches of lost minds,
                     Mad after change, and desp'rate in their states,
                     Wearied, and gall'd with their necessities,
                     
                     (For all this I allow them) durst haue thought it?
                     Would not the barbarous deeds haue beene beleeu'd,
                     Of MARIVS, and SYLLA, by our children,
                     Without this fact had rise forth greater, for them?
                     All, that they did, was pietie, to this!
                     They, yet, but murdred kinsfolke, brothers, parents,
                     Rauish'd the virgins, and, perhaps, some matrons;
                     They left the citie standing, and the temples:
                     The gods, and maiestie of Rome were safe yet!
                     These purpose to fire it, to dispoile them,
                     (Beyond the other euils) and lay wast
                     The farre-triumphed world: for, vnto whom
                     
                        Rome is too little, what can be inough?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     'Tis true, my lord, I had the same discourse.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     And, then, to take a horride sacrament
                     In humane bloud, for execution
                     Of this their dire designe; which might be call'd
                     The height of wickednesse: but that, that was higher,
                     For which they did it!
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     I assure your lordship,
                     The extreme horror of it almost turn'd me
                     To aire, when first I heard it; I was all
                     A vapor, when 'twas told me: and I long'd
                     To vent it any where. 'Twas such a secret,
                     I thought, it would haue burnt me vp.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Good FVLVIA,
                     Feare not your act; and lesse repent you of it.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     I doe not, my good lord. I know to whom
                     I haue vtter'd it.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     You haue discharg'd it, safely.
                     Should Rome, for whom you haue done the happy seruice,
                     Turne most ingrate; yet were your vertue paid
                     In conscience of the fact: so much good deedes
                     Reward themselues.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     My lord, I did it not
                     To any other aime, but for it selfe.
                     To no ambition.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     You haue learn'd the difference
                     Of doing office to the publike weale,
                     And priuate friendship: and haue shewne it, lady.
                     Be still your selfe. I haue sent for QVINTVS CVRIVS,
                     And (for your vertuous sake) if I can winne him,
                     Yet, to the common-wealth; he shall be safe too.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Ile vnder-take, my lord, he shall be won.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Pray you, ioyne with me, then: and helpe to worke him.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     I see your nature's right; you shall no more
                     Be mention'd with them: I will call you mine,
                     And trouble this good shame, no farder. Stand
                     Firme for your countrey; and become a man
                     Honor'd, and lou'd. It were a noble life,
                     To be found dead, embracing her. Know you,
                     What thankes, what titles, what rewards the Senate
                     
                     Will heape vpon you, certaine, for your seruice?
                     Let not a desperate action more engage you,
                     Then safetie should: and wicked friendship force
                     What honestie, and vertue cannot worke.
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     He tells you right, sweet friend: 'Tis sauing counsaile.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Most noble Consul, I am yours, and hers;
                     I meane my countries: you' haue form'd me new.
                     Inspiring me, with what I should be, truely.
                     And I intreat, my faith may not seeme cheaper
                     For springing out of penitence.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Good CVRIVS,
                     It shall be dearer rather, and because
                     Il'd make it such, heare, how I trust you more.
                     Keepe still your former face: and mixe againe
                     With these lost spirits. Runne all their mazes with 'hem:
                     For such are treasons. Find their windings out,
                     And subtle turnings, watch their snaky wayes,
                     Through brakes, and hedges, into woods of darkenesse,
                     Where they are faine to creepe vpon their brests
                     In paths ne're trod by men, but wolues, and panthers.
                     Learne, beside CATILINE, LENTVLVS, and those,
                     Whose names I haue; what new ones they draw in;
                     Who else are likely; what those great ones are,
                     They doe not name; what wayes they meane to take;
                     And whither their hopes point: to warre, or ruine,
                     By some surprize. Explore all their intents,
                     And what you finde may profit the republique,
                     Acquaint me with it, either, by your selfe,
                     Or this your vertuous friend, on whom I lay
                     The care of vrging you. Ile see, that Rome
                     
                     Shall proue a thankefull, and a bounteous mother:
                     Be secret as the night.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     And constant, sir.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     I doe not doubt it. Though the time cut off
                     All vowes. The dignitie of truth is lost,
                     With much protesting. Who is there! This way,
                     Lest you be seene, and met. And when you come,
                     He whispers with him.
                     Be this your token, to this fellow. Light 'hem.
                     O Rome, in what a sicknesse art thou fall'n!
                     How dangerous, and deadly! when thy head
                     
                     Is drown'd in sleepe, and all thy body feu'ry!
                     No noise, no pulling, no vexation wakes thee,
                     Thy lethargie is such: or if, by chance,
                     Thou heau'st thy eye-lids vp, thou dost forget
                     Sooner, then thou wert told, thy proper danger.
                     I did vn-reuerendly, to blame the gods,
                     Who wake for thee, though thou snore to thy selfe.
                     Is it not strange, thou should'st be so diseas'd,
                     And so secure? But more, that the first symptomes
                     Of such a maladie, should not rise out
                     From any worthy member, but a base
                     And common strumpet, worthlesse to be nam'd
                     A haire, or part of thee? Thinke, thinke, hereafter,
                     What thy needes were, when thou must vse such meanes:
                     And lay it to thy brest, how much the gods
                     Vpbraid thy foule neglect of them; by making
                     So vile a thing, the author of thy safetie.
                     They could haue wrought by nobler wayes: haue strooke
                     Thy foes with forked lightning; or ramm'd thunder;
                     Throwne hills vpon 'hem, in the act; haue sent
                     Death, like a dampe, to all their families;
                     Or caus'd their consciences to burst 'hem. But,
                     When they will shew thee what thou art, and make
                     A scornefull difference 'twixt their power, and thee,
                     They helpe thee by such aides, as geese, and harlots.
                     How now? What answer? Is he come?
                  
                  
                     LIC.
                     Your brother,
                     Will streight be here; and your colleague ANTONIVS
                     Said, coldly, he would follow me.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     I, that
                     Troubles me somewhat, and is worth my feare.
                     He is a man, 'gainst whom I must prouide,
                     That (as hee'll doe no good) he doe no harme.
                     He, though he be not of the plot, will like it,
                     And wish it should proceed: for, vnto men,
                     Prest with their wants, all change is euer welcome.
                     I must with offices, and patience win him;
                     Make him, by art, that which he is not borne,
                     A friend vnto the publique; and bestow
                     The prouince on him; which is by the Senate
                     
                     Decreed to me: that benefit will bind him.
                     'Tis well, if some men will doe well, for price:
                     So few are vertuous, when the reward's away.
                     Nor must I be vnmindfull of my priuate;
                     For which I haue call'd my brother, and the tribunes,
                     My kins-folke, and my clients to be neere me:
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     With the old needie troops, that follow'd SYLLA:
                     And all doe but expect, when we will giue
                     The blow at home. Behold this siluer eagle,
                     'Twas MARIVS standard, in the Cimbrian warre,
                     Fatall to Rome; and, as our augures tell me,
                     Shall still be so: for which one ominous cause,
                     I'haue kept it safe, and done it sacred rites,
                     As to a god-head, in a chappell built
                     Of purpose to it. Pledge then all your hands,
                     To follow it, with vowes of death, and ruine,
                     Strooke silently, and home. So waters speake
                     When they runne deepest. Now's the time, this yeere,
                     The twenti'th, from the firing of the Capitol,
                     As fatall too, to Rome, by all predictions:
                     And, in which, honor'd LENTVLVS must rise
                     A king, if he pursue it.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     If he doe not,
                     He is not worthy the great destinie.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     It is too great for me, but what the gods,
                     And their great loues decree me, I must not
                     Seeme carelesse of.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     No, nor we enuious.
                     We haue enough beside, all Gallia, Belgia,
                     
                        Greece, Spaine, and Africke.
                     
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     I, and Asia too,
                     Now POMPEY is returning.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Noblest Romanes,
                     Me thinkes our lookes, are not so quicke and high,
                     As they were wont.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     No? whose is not?
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     We haue
                     No anger in our eyes, no storme, no lightning:
                     Our hate is spent, and fum'd away in vapor,
                     Before our hands be' at worke. I can accuse
                     Not any one, but all of slacknesse.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Yes,
                     And be your selfe such, while you doe it.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Ha?
                     'Tis sharply answer'd, CAIVS.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Truly, truly.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Come, let vs each one know his part to doe,
                     And then be accus'd. Leaue these vntimely quarrells.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     I would there were more Romes then one, to ruine.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     More Romes? More worlds.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Nay, then, more gods, and natures,
                     If they tooke part.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     When shall the time be, first?
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     I thinke the Saturnalls.
                     
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     'Twill be too long.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     They are not now farre off, 'tis not a month.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     A weeke, a day, an houre is too farre off,
                     Now, were the fittest time.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     We ha' not laid
                     All things so safe, and readie.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     While we'are laying,
                     We shall all lye; and grow to earth. Would I
                     Were nothing in it, if not now. These things
                     They should be done, e're thought.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Nay, now your reason
                     Forsakes you, CAIVS. Thinke, but what commodity
                     
                     That time will minister; the cities custome
                     Of being, then, in mirth, and feast—
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Loos'd whole
                     In pleasure and securitie—
                  
                  
                     AVT.
                     Each house
                     Resolu'd in freedome—
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Euery slaue a master—
                  
                  
                     LON.
                     And they too no meane aides—
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Made from their hope
                     Of libertie—
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Or hate vnto their lords.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     'Tis sure, there cannot be a time found out
                     More apt, and naturall.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Nay, good CETHEGVS,
                     Why doe your passions, now, disturbe our hopes?
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Why doe your hopes delude your certainties?
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     You must lend him his way. Thinke, for the order,
                     And processe of it.
                  
                  
                     LON.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     I like not fire:
                     'Twill too much wast my citie.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Were it embers,
                     There will be wealth enough, rak't out of them,
                     To spring a new. It must be fire, or nothing.
                  
                  
                     LON.
                     What else should fright, or terrifie 'hem?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     True.
                     In that confusion, must be the chiefe slaughter.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Then we shall kill 'hem brauest.
                  
                  
                     CEP.
                     And in heaps.
                  
                  
                     AVT.
                     Strew sacrifices.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     Make the earth an altar.
                  
                  
                     LON.
                     And Rome the fire.
                  
                  
                     LEC.
                     'Twill be a noble night.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     And worth all SY
                           •
                        LA'S dayes.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     When husbands, wiues,
                     Grandfires, and nephewes, seruants, and their lords,
                     Virgins, and priests, the infant, and the nurse
                     Goe all to hell, together, in a fleet.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     I would haue you, LONGINVS, and STATILIVS,
                     To take the charge o' the firing, which must be,
                     At a signe giuen with a trumpet, done
                     In twelue chiefe places of the citie, at once.
                     The flaxe, and sulphure, are alreadie laid
                     In, at CETHEGVS house. So are the weapons.
                     GABINIVS, you, with other force, shall stop
                     The pipes, and conduits: and kill those that come
                     For water.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     What shall I doe?
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     All will haue
                     Employment, feare not: Ply the execution.
                  
                  
                     CVR.
                     For that, trust me, and CETHEGVS.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     I will be
                     At hand, with the armie, to meet those that scape.
                     And LENTVLVS, begirt you POMPEY'S house,
                     To seize his sonnes aliue: for they are they
                     Must make our peace with him. All else cut off,
                     As TARQVINE did the poppy heads: or mowers
                     A field of thistles; or else, vp, as ploughes
                     Doe barren lands; and strike together flints,
                     And clods; th'vngratefull Senate, and the people:
                     Till no rage, gone before or comming after,
                     May weigh with yours, though horror leapt her selfe
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     So much his lord in mischiefe? when all these,
                     Shall, like the brethren sprung of dragons teeth,
                     Ruine each other; and he fall amongst 'hem:
                     With CRASSVS, POMPEY, or who else appeares,
                     But like, or neere a great one. May my braine
                     
                        
                           •
                        esolue to water, and my bloud turne phlegme,
                     My hands drop off, vnworthy of my sword,
                     And that b'inspired, of it selfe, to rip
                     My brest, for my lost entraills; when I leaue
                     A soule, that will not serue: and who will, are
                     The same with slaues, such clay I dare not feare.
                     The cruelty, I meane to act, I wish
                     Should be call'd mine, and tarry in my name;
                     Whil'st, after-ages doe toile out themselues,
                     In thinking for the like, but doe it lesse:
                     And, were the power of all the fiends let loose,
                     With fate to boot, it should be, still, example.
                     When, what the Gaule, or Moore could not effect,
                     Nor emulous Carthage, with their length of spight,
                     Shall be the worke of one, and that my night.
                     CICERO, FVLVIA, QVINTVS.
                     I Thanke your vigilance. Where's my brother, QVINTVS?
                     Call all my seruants vp. Tell noble CVRIVS,
                     And say it to your selfe, you are my sauers;
                     But that's too little for you, you are Romes:
                     
                     What could I then, hope lesse? O brother! now,
                     The engines I told you of, are working;
                     The machine 'gin's to moue. Where are your weapons?
                     Arme all my house-hold presently. And charge
                     The porter, he let no man in, till day.
                  
                  
                     QVI.
                     Not clients, and your friends?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     They weare those names,
                     That come to murther me. Yet send for CATO,
                     And QVINTVS CATVLVS; those I dare trust:
                     And FLACCVS, and POMTINIVS, the Praetors,
                     By the backe way.
                  
                  
                     QVI.
                     Take care, good brother MARCVS,
                     Your feares be not form'd greater, then they should;
                     And make your friends grieue, while your enemies laugh.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     'Tis brothers counsell, and worth thankes. But doe
                     As I intreat you. I prouide, not feare.
                     Was CAESAR there, say you?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     CVRIVS sayes, he met him,
                     Comming from thence.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     O, so. And, had you a counsell
                     Of ladies too? Who was your speaker, madame?
                  
                  
                     FVL.
                     Shee that would be, had there beene fortie more;
                     
                     SEMPRONIA, who had both her greeke, and figures;
                     And euer and anone, would aske vs, if
                     The witty Consul could haue mended that?
                     Or Orator CICERO could haue said it better?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Shee's my gentle enemy. Would CETHEGVS
                     Had no more danger in him. But, my guards
                     Are you, great powers; and th'vnbated strengths
                     Of a firme conscience, which shall arme each step
                     Tane for the state: and teach me slacke no pace
                     For feare of malice. How now, brother?
                  
                  
                     QVI.
                     CATO,
                     And QVINTVS CATVLVS were comming to you,
                     And CRASSVS with 'hem. I haue let 'hem in,
                     By th' garden.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What would CRASSVS haue?
                  
                  
                     QVI.
                     I heare
                     Some whispering 'bout the gate; and making doubt,
                     Whether it be not yet too early, or no?
                     But I doe thinke, they are your friends, and clients,
                     Are fearefull to disturbe you.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     You will change
                     To 'another thought anone. Ha' you giu'n the porter
                     The charge, I will'd you?
                  
                  
                     QVI.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     With-draw, and hearken.
                     VARGVNTEIVS, CORNELIVS, PORTER, CICERO, CATO, CATVLVS, CRASSVS.
                     THe dore's not open, yet.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     You'were best to knocke.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     Let them stand close, then: And, when we are in,
                     Rush after vs.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     But where's CETHEGVS?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     He
                     Has left it, since he might not do't his way.
                  
                  
                     POR.
                     Who's there?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     A friend, or more.
                  
                  
                     POR.
                     I may not let
                     Any man in, till day.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     No? why?
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     Thy reason?
                  
                  
                     POR.
                     I am commanded so.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     By whom?
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     I hope
                     We are not discouer'd.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     Yes, by reuelation.
                     Pray thee, good slaue, who has commanded thee?
                  
                  
                     POR.
                     He that may best, the Consul.
                     
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     We are his friends.
                  
                  
                     POR.
                     All's one.
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     Best giue your name.
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     Do'st thou heare, fellow?
                     I haue some instant businesse with the Consul.
                     
                     My name is VARGVNTEIVS.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Cicero speakes to them from aboue.
                     True, he knowes it;
                     And for what friendly office you are sent.
                     CORNELIVS, too, is there?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     We are betraid.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     And desperate CETHEGVS, is he not?
                  
                  
                     VAR.
                     Speake you, he knowes my voyce.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What say you to't?
                  
                  
                     COR.
                     You are deceiu'd, sir.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     No, 'tis you are so;
                     Poore, misse-led men. Your states are yet worth pitty,
                     If you would heare, and change your sauage minds.
                     Leaue to be mad; forsake your purposes
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  CATO, CATVLVS, CICERO, ALLOBROGES.
                  DOe; vrge thine anger, still: good heauen, and iust.
                  Tell guiltie men, what powers are aboue them.
                  In such a confidence of wickednesse,
                  'Twas time, they should know something fit to feare.
                  
                     CATV.
                     I neuer saw a morne morefull of horror.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     To CATILINE, and his: But, to iust men,
                     Though heauen should speake, with all his wrath at once,
                     That, with his breath, the hinges of the world
                     Did cracke, we should stand vpright, and vnfear'd.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Why, so we doe, good CATO. Who be these?
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     Ambassadors, from the ALLOBROGES,
                     I take 'hem, by their habits.
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     I, these men
                     Seeme of another race; let's sue to these,
                     There's hope of iustice, with their fortitude.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Friends of the Senate, and of Rome, to day
                     We pray you to forbeare vs: on the morrow
                     What sute you haue, let vs, by FABIVS SANGA,
                     (Whose patronage your state doth vse) but know it,
                     And, on the Consul's word, you shall receiue
                     Dispatch, or else an answere, worth your patience.
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     We could not hope for more, most worthy Consul.
                     
                     This magistrate hath strooke an awe into me,
                     And, by his sweetnesse, wonne a more reguard
                     Vnto his place, then all the boystrous moodes
                     That ignorant greatnesse practiseth, to fill
                     The large, vnfit authoritie it weares.
                     How easie is a noble spirit discern'd
                     From harsh, and sulphurous matter, that flies out
                     In contumelies, makes a noyse, and stinkes!
                     May we find good, and great men: that know how
                     To stoupe to wants, and meete necessities,
                     And will not turne from any equall suites.
                     Such men, they doe not succour more the cause,
                     They vnder-take, with fauour, and successe;
                     Then, by it, their owne iudgements they doe raise,
                     In turning iust mens needs, into their praise.
                  
                  THE SENATE.
                  
                     PRAE.
                     Roome for the Consuls. Fathers, take your places.
                     Here, in the house of IVPITER, the STAYER,
                     By edict from the Consul, MARCVS TVLLIVS.
                     You'are met, a frequent Senate. Heare him speake.
                  
                  
                     
                     CIC.
                     What may be happy, and auspicious still
                     
                        To Rome, and hers. Honor'd, and conscript Fathers,
                     If I were silent, and that all the dangers
                     Threatning the state, and you, were yet so hid
                     In night, or darkenesse thicker in their brests,
                     That are the blacke contriuers; so, that no
                     Beame of the light could pierce hem: yet the voyce
                     Of heau'n, this morning, hath spoke loud inough,
                     T'instruct you with a feeling of the horror;
                     And wake you from a sleepe, as starke, as death.
                     I haue, of late, spoke often in this Senate,
                     Touching this argument, but still haue wanted
                     Either your eares, or faith: so'incredible
                     Their plots haue seem'd, or I so vaine, to make
                     These things for mine owne glorie, and false greatnesse,
                     As hath beene giuen out. But be it so.
                     When they breake forth, and shall declare themselues,
                     By their too foule effects, then, then, the enuy
                     Of my iust cares will find another name.
                     For me, I am but one: and this poore life,
                     So lately aim'd at, not an houre yet since,
                     They cannot with more eagernesse pursue,
                     Then I with gladnesse would lay downe, and loose,
                     To buy Romes peace, if that would purchase it.
                     But when I see, they'ld make it but the step
                     To more, and greater; vnto yours, Romes, all:
                     I would with those preserue it, or then fall.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     I, I, let you alone, cunning artificer!
                     See, how his gorget 'peeres aboue his gowne;
                     To tell the people, in what danger he was.
                     It was absurdly done of VARGVNTEIVS,
                     To name himselfe, before he was got in.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     It matters not, so they denie it all:
                     And can but carry the lye constantly.
                     Will CATILINE be here?
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     I'haue sent for him.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     And ha' you bid him to be confident?
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     To that his owne necessitie will prompt him.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     Seeme to beleeue nothing at all, that CICERO
                     Relates vs.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     It will mad him.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     O, and helpe
                     The other partie. Who is that? his brother?
                     Quintus Cicero brings in the Tribunes, and guards.
                     What new intelligence ha's he brought him now? 
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Some cautions from his wife, how to behaue him.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Place some of them without, and some bring in.
                     Thanke their kind loues. It is a comfort yet,
                     That all depart not from their countries cause.
                  
                  
                     
                     CAES.
                     How now, what meanes this muster? Consul, ANTONIVS?
                  
                  
                     ANT.
                     I doe not know, aske my colleague, hee'll tell you.
                     There is some reason in state, that I must yeeld to;
                     And I haue promis'd him: Indeed he has bought it,
                     With giuing me the Prouince.
                     
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     I professe,
                     It grieues me, Fathers, that I am compell'd
                     To draw these armes, and aides for your defence;
                     And, more, against a citizen of Rome,
                     Borne here amongst you, a Patrician,
                     A man, I must confesse, of no meane house,
                     Nor no small vertue, if he had employ'd
                     Those excellent gifts of fortune, and of nature,
                     Vnto the good, not ruine of the state.
                     But, being bred in's fathers needy fortunes,
                     Brought vp in's sisters prostitution,
                     Confirm'd in ciuill slaughter, entring first
                     The common-wealth, with murder of the gentrie;
                     Since, both by studie, and custome, conuersant
                     With all licentiousnesse: what could be hop'd
                     In such a field of riot, but a course
                     Extreme pernicious? Though, I must protest,
                     I found his mischiefs, sooner, with mine eyes,
                     Then with my thought; and with these hands of mine,
                     Before they touch'd, at my suspicion.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     What are his mischiefs, Consul? you declame
                     Against his manners, and corrupt your owne:
                     No wiseman should, for hate of guiltie men,
                     Loose his owne innocence.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     The noble CAESAR
                     Speakes god-like truth. But, when he heares, I can
                     Conuince him, by his manners, of his mischiefs,
                     He might be silent: and not cast away
                     His sentences in vaine, where they scarce looke
                     Toward his subiect.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Here he comes himselfe.
                     Catiline sits downe, and Cato vises, from him.
                     If he be worthy any good mans voyce,
                     That good man sit downe by him: CATO will not.
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     If CATO leaue him, I'le not keepe aside.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     What face is this, the Senate here puts on,
                     Against me, Fathers! Giue my modestie
                     Leaue, to demand the cause of so much strangenesse.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     It is reported here, you are the head
                     To a strange faction, LVCIVS.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     I, and will
                     Be prou'd against him.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     Let it be. Why, Consul,
                     If in the common-wealth, there be two bodies,
                     One leane, weake, rotten, and that hath a head;
                     The other strong, and healthfull, but hath none:
                     
                     If I doe giue it one, doe I offend?
                     Restore your selues, vnto your temper, Fathers;
                     And, without perturbation, heare me speake.
                     Remember who I am, and of what place,
                     What petty fellow this is, that opposes;
                     One, that hath exercis'd his eloquence,
                     Still to the bane of the nobilitie:
                     A boasting, insolent tongue-man.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Peace, leud traytor,
                     Or wash thy mouth. He is an honest man
                     And loues his countrey, would thou didst so, too.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     CATO, you are too zealous for him.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     No;
                     Thou art too impudent.
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     CATILINE, be silent.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     Nay then, I easily feare, my iust defence
                     Will come too late, to so much preiudice.
                  
                  
                     (CAES.
                     Will he sit downe?)
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     Yet, let the world forsake me,
                     My innocence must not.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Thou innocent?
                     So are the Furies.
                     
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Yes, and Ate, too.
                     Dost thou not blush, pernicious. CATILINE?
                     Or, hath the palenesse of thy guilt drunke vp
                     Thy bloud, and drawne thy veines, as drie of that,
                     As is thy heart of truth, thy brest of vertue?
                     Whither at length wilt thou abuse our patience?
                     Still shall thy furie mocke vs? To what licence
                     Dares thy vnbridled boldnesse runne it selfe?
                     Doe all the nightly guards, kept on the palace,
                     The cities watches, with the peoples feares,
                     The concourse of all good men, this so strong
                     And fortified seate here of the Senate,
                     The present lookes vpon thee, strike thee nothing?
                     Do'st thou not feele thy counsells all laid open?
                     And see thy wild conspiracie bound in
                     With each mans knowledge? which of all this order
                     Canst thou thinke ignorant (if they'll but vtter
                     Their conscience to the right) of what thou didst
                     Last night, what on the former, where thou wert,
                     Whom thou didst call together, what your plots were?
                     O age, and manners! This the Consul sees,
                     The Senate vnderstands, yet this man liues!
                     Liues? I, and comes here into counsell with vs;
                     Partakes the publique cares: and with his eye
                     Markes, and points out each man of vs to slaughter.
                     And we, good men, doe satisfie the state,
                     If we can shunne but this mans sword, and madnesse.
                     There was that vertue, once, in Rome, when good men
                     Would, with more sharpe coërcion, haue restrain'd
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     A wicked citizen, then the deadliest foe.
                     We haue that law still, CATILINE, for thee;
                     An act as graue, as sharpe: The state's not wanting,
                     Nor the authoritie of this Senate; we,
                     We, that are Consuls, onely faile our selues.
                     This twentie dayes, the edge of that decree
                     We haue let dull, and rust; kept it shut vp,
                     As in a sheath, which drawne should take thy head.
                     Yet still thou liu'st: and liu'st not to lay by
                     Thy wicked confidence, but to confirme it.
                     I could desire, Fathers, to be found
                     Still mercifull, to seeme, in these maine perills
                     Grasping the state, a man remisse, and slacke;
                     But then, I should condemne my selfe of sloth,
                     And trecherie. Their campe's in Italie,
                     Pitch'd in the iawes, here, of Hetruria;
                     Their numbers daily increasing, and their generall
                     Within our walls: nay, in our counsell! plotting
                     Hourely some fatall mischiefe to the publique.
                     If, CATILINE, I should command thee, now,
                     Here, to be taken, kill'd; I make iust doubt,
                     Whether all good men would not thinke it done
                     Rather too late, then any man too cruell.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Except he were of the same meale, and batch.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     But that, which ought to haue been done long since,
                     I will, and (for good reason) yet forbeare.
                     Then will I take thee, when no man is found
                     So lost, so wicked, nay so like thy selfe,
                     But shall professe, 'tis done of need, and right.
                     While there is one, that dares defend thee, liue;
                     Thou shalt haue leaue; but so, as now thou liu'st:
                     Watch'd at a hand, besieged, and opprest
                     From working least commotion to the state.
                     I haue those eyes, and eares, shall still keepe guard,
                     And spiall on thee, as they haue euer done,
                     And thou not feele it. What, then, canst thou hope?
                     If neither night can, with her darknesse, hide
                     Thy wicked meetings; nor a priuate house
                     Can, in her walls, contayne the guiltie whispers
                     Of thy conspiracie: if all breake out,
                     All be discouered, change thy mind at last,
                     And loose thy thoughts of ruine flame, and slaughter.
                     Remember, how I told, here, to the Senate,
                     That such a day, thy Lictor, CAIVS MANLIVS,
                     Would be in armes. Was I deceiued, CATILINE?
                     
                     Or in the fact, or in the time? the houre?
                     I told too, in this Senate, that thy purpose
                     Was, on the fifth (the kalends of Nouember)
                     T'haue slaughter'd this whole order: which my caution
                     Made many leaue the citie. Canst thou here
                     Denie, but this thy blacke designe was hindred,
                     That very day, by me? thy selfe clos'd in
                     Within my strengths, so that thou could'st not moue
                     Against a publique reed? when thou wert heard
                     To say, vpon the parting of the rest,
                     Thou would'st content thee, with the murder of vs,
                     That did remaine. Had'st thou not hope, beside,
                     By a surprize, by night, to take Praeneste?
                     
                     Where when thou cam'st, did'st thou not find the place
                     Made good against thee, with my aides, my watches?
                     My garrisons fortified it. Thou do'st nothing, SERGIVS,
                     Thou canst endeauour nothing, nay not thinke,
                     But I both see, and heare it; and am with thee,
                     By, and before, about, and in thee, too.
                     Call but to mind thy last nights businesse. Come,
                     Ile vse no circumstance: at LECCA'S house,
                     The shop, and mint of your conspiracie,
                     Among your sword-men, where so many associates
                     Both of thy mischiefe, and thy madnesse, met.
                     Dar'st thou denie this? wherefore art thou silent?
                     Speake, and this shall conuince thee: Here they are,
                     I see 'hem, in this Senate, that were with thee.
                     O, you immortall gods! in what clime are we?
                     What region doe we liue in? in what ayre?
                     What common-wealth, or state is this we haue?
                     Here, here, amongst vs, our owne number, Fathers,
                     In this most holy counsell of the world,
                     They are, that seeke the spoyle of me, of you,
                     Of ours, of all; what I can name's too narrow:
                     Follow the sunne, and find not their ambition.
                     These I behold, being Consul; nay, I aske
                     Their counsells of the state, as from good Patriots:
                     
                     Whom it were fit the axe should hew in pieces,
                     I not so much as wound, yet, with my voyce.
                     Thou wast, last night, with LECCA, CATILINE,
                     Your shares, of Italie, you there diuided;
                     Appointed who, and whither, each should goe;
                     What men should stay behind, in Rome, were chosen;
                     Your offices set downe; the parts mark'd out,
                     And places of the citie, for the fire;
                     
                     Thy selfe (thou' affirmd'st) wast readie to depart,
                     Onely, a little let there was, that stay'd thee,
                     That I yet liu'd. Vpon the word, stept forth
                     Three of thy crew, to rid thee of that care;
                     Two vnder-tooke this morning, before day,
                     To kill me in my bed. All this I knew,
                     Your conuent scarce dismiss'd, arm'd all my seruants,
                     Call'd both my brother, and friends, shut out your clients,
                     You sent to visite me; whose names I told
                     To some there, of good place, before they came.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Yes, I, and QVINTVS CATVLVS can affirme it.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     He's lost, and gone. His spirits haue forsooke him.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     If this be so, why, CATILINE, do'st thou stay?
                     Goe, where thou mean'st. The ports are open; forth.
                     The campe abroad wants thee, their chiefe, too long.
                     Lead with thee all thy troupes out. Purge the citie.
                     Draw drie that noysome, and pernicious sinke,
                     Which left, behind thee, would infect the world.
                     Thou wilt free me of all my feares, at once,
                     To see a wall betweene vs. Do'st thou stop
                     To doe that now, commanded; which before,
                     Of thine owne choice, thou'rt prone to? Goe. The Consul
                     
                     Bids thee, an enemie, to depart the citie.
                     Whither, thou'lt aske? to exile? I not bid
                     Thee that. But aske my counsell, I perswade it.
                     What is there, here, in Rome, that can delight thee?
                     Where not a soule, without thine owne foule knot,
                     But feares, and hates thee. What domesticke note
                     Of priuate filthinesse, but is burnt in
                     Into thy life? What close, and secret shame,
                     But is growne one, with thy knowne infamy?
                     What lust was euer absent from thine eyes?
                     What leud fact from thy hands? what wickednesse
                     From thy whole body? where's that youth drawne in
                     Within thy nets, or catch'd vp with thy baits,
                     Before whose rage, thou hast not borne a sword,
                     And to whose lusts thou hast not 'held a torch?
                     Thy latter nuptialls I let passe in silence;
                     Where sinnes incredible on sinnes were heap't:
                     Which I not name, lest, in a ciuill state,
                     So monstrous facts should either appeare to be,
                     Or not to be reueng'd. Thy fortunes, too,
                     I glance not a
                           •
                        , which hang but till next Ides.
                     
                     I come to that which is more knowne, more publike;
                     The life, and safetie of vs all, by thee
                     
                     Threatned, and sought. Stood'st thou not in the field,
                     When LEPIDVS, and TVLLVS were our Consuls,
                     Vpon the day of choice, arm'd, and with forces,
                     To take their liues, and our chiefe citizens?
                     When, not thy feare, nor conscience chang'd thy mind,
                     But the meere fortune of the common-wealth
                     With-stood thy actiue malice? Speake but right.
                     How often hast thou made attempt on me?
                     How many of thy assaults haue I declin'd
                     With shifting but my body (as wee'ld say)
                     Wrested thy dagger from thy hand, how oft?
                     How often hath it falne, or slip't by chance?
                     Yet, can thy side not want it: which, how vow'd,
                     Or with what rites, 'tis sacred of thee, I know not,
                     That still thou mak'st it a necessitie,
                     To fixe it in the body of a Consul.
                     
                     But let me loose this way, and speake to thee,
                     Not as one mou'd with hatred, which I ought,
                     But pitty, of which none is owing thee.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     No more then vnto TANTALVS, or TITYVS.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Thou cam'st, e're-while, into this Senate. Who
                     Of such a frequency, so many friends,
                     And kindred thou hast here, saluted thee?
                     Were not the seates made bare, vpon thy entrance?
                     Riss'not the consular men? and left their places,
                     So soone as thou sat'st downe? and fled thy side,
                     Like to a plague, or ruine? knowing, how oft
                     They had beene, by thee, mark'd out for the shambles?
                     How dost thou beare this? Surely, if my slaues
                     At home fear'd me, with halfe th'affright, and horror,
                     That, here, thy fellow-citizens doe thee,
                     I should soone quit my house, and thinke it need too.
                     Yet thou dar'st tarry here? Goe forth, at last;
                     Condemne thy selfe to flight, and solitude.
                     Discharge the common-wealth, of her deepe feare.
                     Goe; into banishment, if thou wait'st the word.
                     Why do'st thou looke? They all consent vnto it.
                     Do'st thou expect th'authoritie of their voyces,
                     Whose silent wills condemne thee? While they sit,
                     They approue it; while they suffer it, they decree it;
                     And while they'are silent to it, they proclaime it.
                     Proue thou there honest, Ile endure the enuie.
                     But there's no thought, thou should'st be euer he,
                     Whom either shame should call from filthinesse,
                     Terror from danger, or discourse from furie.
                     
                     Goe; I intreat thee: yet, why doe I so?
                     When I alreadie know, they'are sent afore,
                     That tarry for thee'in armes, and doe expect thee
                     On th'AVRELIAN way. I know the day
                     Set downe, 'twixt thee, and MANLIVS; vnto whom
                     The siluer eagle too is sent, before:
                     Which I doe hope shall proue, to thee as banefull,
                     As thou conceiu'st it to the common-wealth.
                     But, may this wise, and sacred Senate say,
                     What mean'st thou MARCVS TVLLIVS? If thou know'st
                     That CATILINE be look'd for, to be chiefe
                     Of an intestine warre; that he'is the author
                     Of such a wickednesse; the caller out
                     Of men of marke in mischiefe, to an action
                     Of so much horror; Prince of such a treason;
                     Why do'st thou send him forth? why let him scape?
                     This is, to giue him libertie, and power:
                     Rather, thou should'st lay hold vpon him, send him
                     To deseru'd death, and a iust punishment.
                     To these so holy voices, thus I answere.
                     If I did thinke it timely, Gonscript Fathers,
                     To punish him with death, I would not giue
                     The Fencer vse of one short houre, to breath;
                     But when there are in this graue order, some,
                     Who, with soft censures, still doe nource his hopes;
                     Some, that with not beleeuing, haue confirm'd
                     His designes more, and whose authoritie
                     The weaker, as the worst men, too, haue follow'd:
                     I would now send him, where they all should see
                     Cleere, as the light, his heart shine; where no man
                     Could be so wickedly, or fondly stupide,
                     But should cry out, he saw, touch'd, felt, and grasp't it.
                     Then, when he hath runne out himselfe; led forth
                     His desp'rate partie with him; blowne together
                     Aides of all kindes, both shipwrack'd mindes and fortunes:
                     Not onely the growne euill, that now is sprung,
                     And sprouted forth, would be pluck'd vp, and weeded;
                     But the stocke, roote, and seed of all the mischiefes,
                     Choking the common-wealth. Where, should we take,
                     Of such a swarme of traytors, onely him,
                     Our cares, and feares might seeme a while relieu'd,
                     But the maine perill would bide still enclos'd
                     Deepe, in the veines, and bowells of the state.
                     As humane bodies, labouring with feuers,
                     While they are tost with heate, if they doe take
                     
                     Cold water, seeme for that short space much eas'd,
                     But afterward, are ten times more afflicted.
                     Wherefore, I say, let all this wicked crew
                     Depart, diuide themselues from good men, gather
                     Their forces to one head; as I said oft,
                     Let'hem be seuer'd from vs with a wall;
                     Let'hem leaue off attempts, vpon the Consul,
                     In his owne house; to circle in the Praetor;
                     To girt the court with weapons; to prepare
                     Fire, and balls, swords, torches, sulphure, brands:
                     In short, let it be writ in each mans fore-head
                     What thoughts he beares the publike. I here promise,
                     
                        Fathers Conscript, to you, and to my selfe,
                     That diligence in vs Consuls, for my honor'd
                     Colleague, abroad, and for my selfe, at home;
                     So great authoritie in you; so much
                     Vertue, in these, the gentlemen of Rome;
                     Whom I could scarce restraine to day, in zeale,
                     From seeking out the parricide, to slaughter;
                     So much consent in all good men, and minds,
                     As, on the going out of this one CATILINE,
                     All shall be cleere, made plaine, oppress'd, reueng'd.
                     And, with this omen, goe, pernicious plague,
                     Out of the citie, to the wish'd destruction
                     Of thee, and those, that, to the ruine of her,
                     Haue tane that bloudie, and black sacrament.
                     Thou IVPITER, whom we doe call the STAYER,
                     Both of this citie, and this empire, wilt
                     (With the same auspice thou didst raise it first)
                     Driue from thy altars, and all other temples,
                     And buildings of this citie; from our walls;
                     Liues, states, and fortunes of our citizens;
                     This fiend, this furie, with his complices.
                     And all the'offence of good men (these knowne traytors
                     Vnto their countrey, theeues of Italie,
                     Ioyn'd in so damn'd a league of mischiefe) thou
                     Wilt with perpetuall plagues, aliue, and dead,
                     Punish for Rome, and saue her innocent head.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     If an oration, or high language, Fathers,
                     Could make me guiltie, here is one, hath done it:
                     H' has stroue to emulate this mornings thunder,
                     With his prodigious rhetoricke. But I hope,
                     This Senate is more graue, then to giue credit
                     Rashly to all he vomits, 'gainst a man
                     Of your owne order, a Patrician;
                     
                     And one, whose ancestors haue more deseru'd
                     Of Rome, then this mans eloquence could vtter,
                     Turn'd the best way: as still, it is the worst.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     His eloquence hath more deseru'd to day,
                     Speaking thy ill, then all thy ancestors
                     Did, in their good: and, that the state will find,
                     Which he hath sau'd.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     How, he? were I that enemie,
                     That he would make me: Il'd not wish the state
                     More wretched, then to need his preseruation.
                     What doe you make him, CATO, such a HERCVLES?
                     An ATLAS? A poore petty in-mate!
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Traytor.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     He saue the state? A burgesse sonne of Arpinum.
                     
                     The gods would rather twentie Romes should perish,
                     Then haue that contumely stucke vpon 'hem,
                     That he should share with them, in the preseruing
                     A shed, or signe-post.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Peace, thou prodigie.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     They would be forc'd themselues, againe, and lost
                     In the first, rude, and indigested heape;
                     Ere such a wretched name, as CICERO,
                     Should found with theirs.
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     Away, thou impudent head.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     Doe you all backe him? are you silent too?
                     Well, I will leaue you, Fathers; I will goe.
                     He turns sudainly on Cicero.
                     But—my fine daintie speaker—
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What now, Furie?
                     
                     Wilt thou assault me here?
                  
                  
                     (CHO.
                     Helpe, aide the Consul.)
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     See, Fathers, laugh you not? who threatned him?
                     In vaine thou do'st conceiue, ambitious orator,
                     Hope of so braue a death, as by this hand.
                  
                  
                     (CATO.
                     Out, of the court, with the pernicious traytor.)
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     There is no title, that this flattering Senate,
                     Nor honor, the base multitude can giue thee,
                     Shall make thee worthy CATILINES anger.
                  
                  
                     (CATO.
                     Stop,
                     Stop that portentous mouth.)
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     Or, when it shall,
                     Ile looke thee dead.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Will none restraine the monster?
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     Parricide.
                  
                  
                     QVI.
                     Butcher, traytor, leaue the Senate.
                     
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     I'am gone, to banishment, to please you, Fathers.
                     
                     Thrust head-long forth?
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Still, do'st thou murmure, monster?
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     Since, I am thus put out, and made a—
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What?
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     Not guiltier then thou art.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     I will not burne
                     Without my funerall pile.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     What saies the fiend?
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     I will haue matter, timber.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Sing out scrich-owle.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     It shall be in—
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     Speake thy imperfect thoughts.
                  
                  
                     CATI.
                     The common fire, rather then mine owne.
                     For fall I will with all, ere fall alone.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     H'is lost, there is no hope of him.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Vnlesse
                     He presently take armes; and giue a blow,
                     
                     Before the Consuls forces can be leui'd.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     See, that the common-wealth receiue no losse.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Commit the care thereof vnto the Consuls.
                     
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     'Tis time.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     And need.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Thankes to this frequent Senate.
                     
                     But what decree they, vnto CVRIVS,
                     And FVLVIA?
                  
                  
                     CATV.
                     What the Consul shall thinke meete.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     They must receiue reward, though 't be not knowne;
                     Lest when a state needs ministers, they ha' none.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Yet, MARCVS TVLLIVS, doe not I beleeue,
                     But CRASSVS, and this CAESAR here ring hollow.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     And would appeare so, if that we durst proue 'hem.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Why dare we not? What honest act is that,
                     The Roman Senate should not dare, and doe?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Not an vnprofitable, dangerous act,
                     To stirre too many serpents vp at once.
                     CAESAR, and CRASSVS, if they be ill men,
                     Are mightie ones; and, we must so prouide,
                     That, while we take one head, from this foule Hydra,
                     There spring not twentie more.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     I' proue your counsell.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     They shall be watch'd, and look'd too. Till they doe
                     Declare themselues, I will not put 'hem out
                     By any question. There they stand. Ile make
                     My selfe no enemies, nor the state no traytors.
                  
                  CATILINE, LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, CVRIVS, GABINIVS, LONGINVS, STATILIVS.
                  FAlse to our selues? All our designes discouer'd
                  To this state-cat?
                  
                     CET.
                     I, had I had my way,
                     He' had mew'd in flames, at home, not i' the Senate:
                     I' had sing'd his furres, by this time.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Well, there's, now,
                     No time of calling backe, or standing still.
                     Friends, be your selues; keepe the same Roman hearts,
                     And readie minds, you' had yester-night. Prepare
                     To execute, what we resolu'd. And let not
                     Labour, or danger, or discouerie fright you.
                     Ile to the armie: you (the while) mature
                     Things, here, at home. Draw to you any aides,
                     That you thinke fit, of men of all conditions,
                     Or any fortunes, that may helpe a warre.
                     Ile bleede a life, or winne an empire for you.
                     Within these few dayes, looke to see my ensignes,
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     All may beginne a warre, but few can end it.
                     The Senate haue decreed, that my colleague
                     Shall leade their armie, against CATILINE,
                     And haue declar'd both him, and MANLIVS traytors.
                     METELLVS CELER hath alreadie giuen
                     Part of their troops defeate. Honors are promis'd
                     To all, will quit 'hem; and rewards propos'd
                     Euen to slaues, that can detect their courses.
                     Here, in the citie, I haue by the Praetors,
                     And Tribunes, plac'd my guards, and watches so,
                     That not a foote can treade, a breath can whisper,
                     But I haue knowledge. And be sure, the Senate,
                     And people of Rome, of their accustom'd greatnesse,
                     Will sharply, and seuerely vindicate,
                     Not onely any fact, but any practice,
                     Or purpose, 'gainst the state. Therefore, my lords,
                     Consult of your owne wayes, and thinke which hand
                     Is best to take. You, now, are present suters
                     For some redresse of wrongs; Ile vnder-take
                     Not onely that shall be assur'd you: but
                     What grace, or priuiledge else, Senate, or people,
                     Can cast vpon you, worthy such a seruice,
                     As you haue now the way, and meanes, to doe 'hem,
                     If but your wills consent, with my designes.
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     We couet nothing more, most worthy Consul.
                     
                     And how so e're haue beene tempted lately,
                     To a defection, that not makes vs guiltie:
                     We are not yet so wretched in our fortunes,
                     Nor in our wills so lost, as to abandon
                     A friendship, prodigally, of that price,
                     As is the Senate, and the people of Romes,
                     For hopes, that doe precipitate themselues.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     You then are wise, and honest. Doe but this, then:
                     (When shall you speake with LENTVLVS, and the rest?
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     We are to meete anone, at BRVTVS house.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Who? DECIVS BRVTVS? He is not in Rome.
                     
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     O, but his wife SEMPRONIA.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     You instruct me,
                     Shee is a chiefe.) Well, faile not you to meete 'hem,
                     And to expresse the best affection
                     You can put on, to all that they intend.
                     Like it, applaud it, giue the common-wealth,
                     And Senate lost to 'hem. Promise any aides
                     By armes, or counsell. What they can desire,
                     I would haue you preuent. Onely, say this,
                     You'haue had dispatch, in priuate, by the Consul,
                     
                     Of your affaires, and for the many feares
                     The state's now in, you are will'd by him, this euening,
                     To depart Rome: which you, by all sought meanes,
                     Will doe, of reason to decline suspicion.
                     Now, for the more authoritie of the businesse
                     They' haue trusted to you, and to giue it credit
                     With your owne state, at home, you would desire
                     Their letters to your Senate, and your people,
                     Which shewne, you durst engage both life, and honor,
                     The rest should euery way answere their hopes.
                     Those had, pretend sodaine departure, you,
                     And, as you giue me notice, at what port
                     You will goe out, Ile ha' you intercepted,
                     And all the letters taken with you: So
                     As you shall be redeem'd in all opinions,
                     And they conuicted of their manifest treason.
                     Ill deedes are well turn'd backe, vpon their authors:
                     And 'gainst an iniurer, the reuenge is iust.
                     This must be done, now.
                  
                  
                     ALL:
                     Chearefully, and firmely.
                     We'are they, would rather hast to vndertake it,
                     Then stay, to say so.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     With that confidence, goe:
                     Make your selues happy, while you make Rome so.
                     By SANGA, let me haue notice from you.
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     Yes.
                  
                  SEMPRONIA, LENTVLVS, CETHEGVS, GABINIVS, STATILIVS, LONGINVS, VOLTVRTIVS, ALLOBROGES.
                  WHen come these creatures, the Ambassadors?
                  I would faine see 'hem. Are they any schollers?
                  
                     LEN.
                     I think not, madame.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Ha' they no greeke?
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     No surely.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Fie, what doe I here, wayting on 'hem then?
                     If they be nothing but meere states-men.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Yes,
                     Your ladiship shall obserue their grauitie,
                     And their reseruednesse, their many cautions,
                     Fitting their persons.
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     I doe wonder much,
                     That states, and common-wealths employ not women,
                     To be Ambassadors, sometimes! we should
                     Doe as good publike seruice, and could make
                     As honorable spies (for so THVCIDIDES
                     Calls all Ambassadors.) Are they come, CETHEGVS?
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Doe you aske me? Am I your scout, or baud?
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     O, CAIVS, it is no such businesse.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     No?
                     What do's a woman at it then?
                  
                  
                     SEM.
                     Good sir,
                     There are of vs can be as exquisite traytors,
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     By seuerall messengers: who no doubt will come,
                     Without sense, or suspicion. Prodigall men
                     Feele not their owne stocke wasting. When I haue 'hem,
                     Ile place those guards, vpon 'hem, that they start not,
                  
                  
                     SAN.
                     But what 'll you doe with SEMPRONIA?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     A states anger
                     Should not take knowledge eyther of fooles, or women.
                     I do not know whether my ioy or care
                     Ought to be greater; that I haue discouer'd
                     So foule a treason: or must vndergoe
                     The enuie of so many great mens fate.
                     But, happen what there can, I will be iust,
                     My fortune may forsake me, not my vertue:
                     That shall goe with me, and before me, still,
                     And glad me, doing well, though I heare ill.
                  
                  PRAETORS, ALLOBROGES, VOLTVRTIVS.
                  
                     FLA.
                     Stand, who goes there?
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     We are th' ALLOBROGES
                     And friends of Rome.
                     
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     If you be so, then yeeld
                     Your selues vnto the Praetors, who in name
                     Of the whole Senate, and the people of Rome,
                     Yet, till you cleare your selues, charge you of practise
                     Against the State.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     Die friends, and be not taken.
                  
                  
                     FLA.
                     What voyce is that? Downe with 'hem all.
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     We yeeld.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     What's he stands out? Kill him there.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     Hold, hold, hold.
                     I yeeld vpon conditions.
                  
                  
                     FLA.
                     We giue none
                     To traytors, strike him downe.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     My name's VOLTVRTIVS
                     I know POMTINIVS.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     But he knowes not you,
                     While you stand out vpon these trayterous termes.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     I'le yeeld vpon the safety of my life.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     If it be forfeyted, we cannot saue it.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     Promise to doe your best. I 'am not so guilty,
                     As many others, I can name; and will:
                     If you will grant me fauour.
                  
                  
                     POM
                     All we can
                     Is to deliuer you to the Consul. Take him,
                     And thanke the gods, that thus haue saued Rome.
                     
                     CHORVS.
                     NOw, do our eares, before our eyes,
                     Like men in mists,
                     Discouer, who'ld the state surprise,
                     And who resists?
                     And, as these clouds doe yeeld to light,
                     Now, do we see,
                     Our thoughts of things, how they did fight,
                     Which seem'd t' agree?
                     
                     Of what strange pieces are we made,
                     Who nothing know;
                     But, as new ayres our eares inuade,
                     Still censure so?
                     That now doe hope, and now doe feare,
                     And now enuy;
                     And then doe hate, and then loue deare,
                     But know not, why:
                     Or, if we doe, it is so late,
                     As our best mood,
                     Though true, is then thought out of date,
                     And emptie of good.
                     How haue we chang'd, and come about
                     In euery doome,
                     Since wicked CATILINE went out,
                     And quitted Rome?
                     
                     One while, we thought him innocent;
                     And, then, w' accus'd
                     The Consul, for his malice spent;
                     And power abus'd.
                     Since, that we heare, he is in armes,
                     We thinke not so:
                     Yet charge the Consul, with our harmes,
                     That let him goe.
                     So, in our censure of the state,
                     We still doe wander;
                     And make the carefull magistrate
                     The marke of slander.
                     What age is this, where honest men,
                     Plac'd at the helme,
                     A sea of some foule mouth, or pen,
                     Shall ouer-whelme?
                     And call their diligence, deceipt;
                     Their vertue, vice;
                     Their watchfulnesse, but lying in wait;
                     And bloud, the price.
                     O, let vs plucke this euill seede
                     Out of our spirits;
                     And giue, to euery noble deede,
                     The name it merits.
                     Lest we seeme falne (if this endures)
                     Into those times,
                     To loue disease: and brooke the cures
                     Worse, then the crimes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     I would faine helpe these wretched men.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     You cannot.
                     Who would saue them, that haue betraid themselues?
                     CICERO, QVINTVS, CATO.
                     I Will not be wrought to it, brother QVINTVS.
                     There's no mans priuate enmitie shall make
                     Me violate the dignitie of another.
                     If there were proofe 'gainst CAESAR, or who euer,
                     To speake him guiltie, I would so declare him.
                     But QVINTVS CATVLVS, and PISO both,
                     Shall know, the Consul will not, for their grudge,
                     Haue any man accus'd, or named falsly.
                  
                  
                     QVI.
                     Not falsly: but if any circumstance,
                     By the ALLOBROGES, or from VOLTVRTIVS,
                     Would carry it.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     That shall not be sought by me.
                     If it reueale it selfe, I would not spare
                     You, brother, if it pointed at you, trust me.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Good MARCVS TVLLIVS (which is more, then great)
                     Thou had'st thy education, with the gods.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Send LENTVLVS forth, and bring away the rest.
                     This office, I am sorry, sir, to doe you.
                  
                  THE SENATE.
                  WHat may be happy still, and fortunate,
                  To Rome, and to this Senate: Please you, Fathers,
                  To breake these letters, and to view them round.
                  If that be not found in them, which I feare,
                  I, yet, intreate, at such a time, as this,
                  My diligence be not contemn'd. Ha' you brought
                  The weapons hither, from CETHEGVS house?
                  
                     PRAE.
                     They are without.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Be readie, with VOLTVRTIVS,
                     To bring him, when the Senate calls; and see
                     None of the rest, conferre together. Fathers,
                     What doe you reade? Is it yet worth your care,
                     If not your feare, what you find practis'd there?
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     It hath a face of horror!
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     I'am amaz'd!
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     Looke there.
                  
                  
                     SYL.
                     Gods! Can such men draw cōmon aire?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Although the greatnesse of the mischiefe, Fathers,
                     Hath often made my faith small, in this Senate,
                     Yet
                           •
                         since my casting CATILINE out (for now
                     I doe not feare the enuy of the word,
                     Vnlesse the deed be rather to be fear'd,
                     That he went hence aliue; when those I meant
                     Should follow him, did not) I haue spent both dayes,
                     And nights, in watching, what their fury' and rage
                     
                     Was bent on, that so staid, against my thought:
                     And that I might but take 'hem in that light,
                     Where, when you met their treason, with your eyes,
                     Your minds, at length, would thinke for your owne safetie.
                     And, now, 'tis done. There are their hands, and seales.
                     Their persons, too, are safe, thankes to the gods.
                     Bring in VOLTVRTIVS, and the' ALLOBROGES.
                     These be the men, were trusted with their letters.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     
                        Fathers, beleeue me, I knew nothing: I
                     Was trauailing for Gallia, and am sorry—
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Quake not, VOLTVRTIVS, speake the truth, and hope
                     Well of this Senate, on the Consuls word.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     Then, I knew all. But truely I was drawne in
                     But t'other day.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Say, what thou know'st, and feare not.
                     Thou hast the Senate
                              •
                           
                         faith, and Consuls word,
                     He answeres with feare and interruptions.
                     To fortifie thee. 
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     I was sent with letters—
                     And had a message too—from LENTVLVS—
                     To CATILINE—that he should vse all aides—
                     Seruants, or others—and come with his armie,
                     Assoone, vnto the citie as he could—
                     For they were readie, and but staid for him—
                     To intercept those, that should flee the fire—
                     These men (the ALLOBROGES) did heare it too.
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     Yes, Fathers, and they tooke an oath, to vs.
                     Besides their letters, that we should be free;
                     And vrg'd vs, for some present aide of horse.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     The weapons and armes are brought forth.
                     Nay, here be other testimonies, Fathers,
                     CETHEGVS armourie.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     What, not all these?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Here's not the hundred part. Call in the Fencer,
                     That we may know the armes to all these weapons.
                     Come, my braue sword-player, to what actiue vse,
                     Was all this steele prouided?
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Had you ask'd
                     In SYLLA's dayes, it had beene to cut throats;
                     But, now, it was to looke on, only: I lou'd
                     To see good blades, and feele their edge, and points.
                     To put a helme vpon a blocke, and cleaue it,
                     And, now and then, to stab an armour through.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Know you that paper? That will stab you through.
                     Is it your hand? Hold, saue the pieces. Traytor,
                     Hath thy guilt wak'd thy furie?
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     I did write,
                     I know not what; nor care not: That foole LENTVLVS
                     Did dictate, and I t'other foole, did signe it.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Bring in STATILIVS: Do's he know his hand too?
                     And LENTVLVS. Reach him that letter.
                  
                  
                     STA.
                     I
                     Confesse it all.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Know you that seale yet, PVBLIVS?
                  
                  
                     
                     LEN.
                     Yes, it is mine.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Whose image is that, on it?
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     My grand-fathers.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What, that renowm'd good man,
                     That did so only' embrace his countrey
                           •
                        , and lou'd
                     His fellow citizens! Was not his picture,
                     Though mute, of power to call thee from a fact,
                     So foule—
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     As what, impetuous CICERO?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     As thou art, for I doe not know what's fouler.
                     Looke vpon these. Doe not these faces argue
                     Thy guilt, and impudence?
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     What are these to me?
                     I know 'hem not.
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     No PVBLIVS? we were with you,
                     At BRVTVS house.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     Last night.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     What did you there?
                     Who sent for you?
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     Your selfe did. We had letters
                     From you, CETHEOVS, this STATILIVS here,
                     GABINIVS CIMBER, all, but from LONGINVS,
                     Who would not write, because he was to come
                     Shortly, in person, after vs (he said)
                     To take the charge o'the horse, which we should leuy.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     And he is fled, to CATILINE, I heare.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Spies? spies?
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     You told vs too, o'the SIBYLLS bookes,
                     And how you were to be a king, this yeere,
                     The twentieth, from the burning of the Capitoll.
                     
                     That three CORNELII were to raigne, in Rome,
                     Of which you were the last: and prais'd CETHEGVS,
                     And the great spirits, were with you, in the action.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     These are your honorable Ambassadors,
                     My soueraigne lord.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Peace, that too bold CETHEGVS.
                  
                  
                     ALL.
                     Besides GABINIVS, your agent, nam'd
                     AVTRONIVS, SERVIVS SVLLA, VARGVNTEIVS,
                     And diuers others.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     I had letters from you,
                     To CATILINE, and a message, which I'haue told
                     Vnto the Senate, truely, word for word:
                     For which, I hope, they will be gracious to me.
                     I was drawne in, by that same wicked CIMBER,
                     And thought no hurt at all.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     VOLTVRTIVS, peace.
                     Where is thy visor, or thy voyce, now, LENTVLVS?
                     Art thou confounded? Wherefore speak'st thou not?
                     Is all so cleere, so plaine, so manifest,
                     That both thy eloquence, and impudence,
                     And thy ill nature, too, haue left thee, at once?
                     Take him aside. There's yet one more, GABINIVS,
                     The enginer of all. Shew him that paper,
                     If he doe know it?
                  
                  
                     GAB.
                     I know nothing.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     No?
                  
                  
                     GAB.
                     No. Neyther will I know.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Impudent head!
                     Sticke it into his throate; were I the Consul,
                     Il'd make thee eate the mischiefe, thou hast vented.
                  
                  
                     
                     GAB.
                     Is there a law for't, CATO?
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Do'st thou aske
                     After a law, that would'st haue broke all lawes,
                     Of nature, manhood, conscience, and religion?
                  
                  
                     GAB.
                     Yes, I may aske for't.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     No, pernicious CIMBER.
                     Th'inquiring after good, do's not belong
                     Vnto a wicked person.
                  
                  
                     GAB.
                     I but CATO
                     Do's nothing, but by law.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     Take him aside.
                     There's proofe enough, though he confesse not.
                  
                  
                     GAB.
                     Stay,
                     I will confesse. All's true, your spies haue told you.
                     Make much of 'hem.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     Yes, and reward 'hem well,
                     For feare you get no more such. See, they doe not
                     Die in a ditch, and stinke, now you ha' done with 'hem;
                     Or beg, o' the bridges, here in Rome, whose arches
                     Their actiue industrie hath sau'd.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     See, Fathers,
                     What mindes, and spirits these are, that, being conuicted
                     Of such a treason, and by such a cloud
                     Of witnesses, dare yet retayne their boldnesse?
                     What would their rage haue done, if they had conquer'd?
                     I thought, when I had thrust out CATILINE,
                     Neither the state, nor I, should need t'haue fear'd
                     LENTVLVS sleepe here, or LONGINVS fat,
                     Or this CETHEGVS rashnesse; it was he,
                     I onely watch'd, while he was in our walls,
                     As one, that had the braine, the hand, the heart.
                     But now, we find the contrary! Where was there
                     A people grieu'd, or a state discontent,
                     Able to make, or helpe a warre 'gainst Rome,
                     But these, th' ALLOBROGES, and those they found?
                     Whom had not the iust gods beene pleas'd to make
                     More friends vnto our safety, then their owne,
                     As it then seem'd, neglecting these mens offers,
                     Where had we beene? or where the common-wealth?
                     When their great Chiefe had beene call'd home? this man,
                     Their absolute king (whose noble grand-father,
                     Arm'd in pursuit of the seditious GRACCHVS,
                     Tooke a braue wound, for deare defence of that,
                     Which he would spoile) had gather'd all his aides
                     Of ruffians, slaues, and other slaughter-men?
                     Giuen vs vp for murder, to CETHEGVS?
                     The' other ranke of citizens, to GABINIVS?
                     The citie, to be fir'd by CASSIVS?
                     And Italie, nay the world, to be laid wast
                     By cursed CATILINE, and his complices?
                     Lay but the thought of it, before you, Fathers,
                     Thinke but with me you saw this glorious citie,
                     
                     The light of all the earth, tower of all nations,
                     Sodainely falling in one flame. Imagine,
                     You view'd your countrey buried with the heapes
                     Of slaughter'd citizens, that had no graue;
                     This LENTVLVS here, raigning, (as he dreamp't)
                     And those his purple Senate; CATILINE come
                     With his fierce armie; and the cryes of matrons,
                     The flight of children, and the rape of virgins,
                     Shriekes of the liuing, with the dying grones
                     On euery side t'inuade your sense; vntill
                     The bloud of Rome, were mixed with her ashes!
                     This was the spectacle these fiends intended
                     To please their malice.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     I, and it would
                     Haue beene a braue one, Consul. But your part
                     Had not then beene so long, as now it is:
                     I should haue quite defeated your oration;
                     And slit that fine rhetoricall pipe of yours,
                     I'the first Scene.
                     
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Insolent monster!
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Fathers,
                     Is it your pleasures, they shall be committed
                     Vnto some safe, but a free custodie,
                     Vntill the Senate can determine farder?
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     It pleaseth well.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Then, MARCVS CRASSVS,
                     Take you charge of GABINIVS: send him home
                     Vnto your house. You CAESAR, of STATILIVS.
                     CETHEGVS shall be sent to CORNIFICIVS;
                     And LENTVLVS, to PVBLIVS LENTVLVS SPINTHER,
                     Who now is Aedile.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     It were best, the Praetors
                     
                     Carryed 'hem to their houses, and deliuered 'hem.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Let it be so. Take 'hem from hence.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     But, first,
                     Let LENTVLVS put off his Praetor-ship.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     I doe resigne it here vnto the Senate.
                     
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     So, now, there's no offence done to religion.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     CAESAR, 'twas piously, and timely vrg'd.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What doe you decree to th' ALLOBROGES?
                     That were the lights to this discouery?
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     A free grant, from the state, of all their suites.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     And a reward, out of the publike treasure.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     I, and the title of honest men, to crowne 'hem.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What to VOLTVRTIVS?
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Life, and fauour's well.
                  
                  
                     VOL.
                     I aske no more.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Yes, yes, some money, thou need'st it.
                     'Twill keepe thee honest: want made thee a knaue.
                  
                  
                     SYL.
                     Let FLACCVS, and POMTINIVS, the Praetors,
                     Haue publike thankes, and QVINTVS FABIVS SANGA,
                     For their good seruice.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     They deserue it all.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     But what doe we decree vnto the Consul,
                     
                     Whose vertue, counsell, watchfulnesse, and wisedome,
                     Hath free'd the common-wealth, and without tumult,
                     Slaughter, or bloud, or scarce raysing a force,
                     Rescud vs all out of the iawes of fate?
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     We owe our liues vnto him, and our fortunes.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Our wiues, our children, parents, and our gods.
                  
                  
                     SYL.
                     We all are saued, by his fortitude.
                  
                  
                     CATO.
                     The common-wealth owes him a ciuicke gyrland.
                     He is the onely father of his countrey.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Let there be publike prayer, to all the gods,
                     Made in that name, for him.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     And in these words.
                     For that he hath, by his vigilance, preseru'd
                     
                        Rome from the flame, the Senate from the sword,
                     And all her citizens from massacre.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     How are my labours more then paid, graue Fathers,
                     In these great titles, and decreed honors!
                     Such, as to me, first, of the ciuill robe,
                     Of any man, since Rome was Rome, haue hap'ned;
                     And from this frequent Senate: which more glads me,
                     That I now see, yo'haue sense of your owne safety.
                     If those good dayes come no lesse gratefull to vs,
                     Wherein we are preseru'd from some great danger,
                     Then those, wherein w'are borne, and brought, to light,
                     Because the gladnesse of our safetie is certaine,
                     But the condition of our birth not so;
                     And that we are sau'd with pleasure, but are borne
                     Without the sense of ioy: why should not, then,
                     This day, to vs, and all posteritie
                     Of ours, be had in equall fame, and honor,
                     With that, when ROMVLVS first rear'd these walls,
                     When so much more is saued, then he built?
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     It ought.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     Let it be added to our Fasti.
                     
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What tumult's that?
                  
                  
                     FLA.
                     Here's one TARQVINIVS taken,
                     Going to CATILINE; and sayes he was sent
                     By MARCVS CRASSVS: whom he names, to be
                     Guiltie of the conspiracy.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Some lying varlet.
                     Take him away, to prison.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     Bring him in,
                     And let me see him.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     He is not worth it, CRASSVS.
                     Keepe him vp close, and hungrie, till he tell,
                     By whose pernicious counsell, he durst slander
                     So great, and good a citizen.
                  
                  
                     (CRA.
                     By yours
                     I feare, 'twill proue.)
                  
                  
                     SYL.
                     Some o' the traytors, sure,
                     To giue their action the more credit, bid him
                     Name you, or any man.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     I know my selfe,
                     By all the tracts, and courses of this businesse,
                     
                     CRASSVS is noble, iust, and loues his countrey.
                  
                  
                     FLA.
                     Here is a libell too, accusing CAESAR,
                     From LVCIVS VECTIVS, and confirm'd by CVRIVS.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Away with all, throw it out o' the court.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     A tricke on me, too?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     It is some mens malice.
                     I said to CVRIVS, I did not beleeue him.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Was not that CVRIVS your spie, that had
                     Reward decreed vnto him, the last Senate,
                     With FVLVIA, vpon your priuate motion?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Yes.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     But, he has not that reward, yet?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     No.
                     Let not this trouble you, CAESAR, none beleeues it.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     It shall not, if that he haue no reward.
                     But if he haue, sure I shall thinke my selfe
                     Very vntimely, and vnsafely honest,
                     Where such, as he is, may haue pay t'accuse me.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     You shall haue no wrong done you, noble CAESAR,
                     But all contentment.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     
                        Consul, I am silent.
                  
                  
                     CATILINE.
                     The Armie.
                     I Neuer yet knew, Souldiers, that, in fight,
                     Words added vertue vnto valiant men;
                     Or, that a generalls oration made
                     An armie fall, or stand: but how much prowesse
                     Habituall, or naturall each mans brest
                     Was owner of, so much in act it shew'd.
                     Whom neither glory' or danger can excite,
                     'Tis vaine t'attempt with speech: for the minds feare
                     Keepes all braue sounds from entring at that eare.
                     I, yet, would warne you some few things, my friends,
                     And giue you reason of my present counsailes.
                     You know, no lesse then I, what state, what point
                     Our affaires stand in; and you all haue heard,
                     What a calamitous misery the sloth,
                     And sleepinesse of LENTVLVS, hath pluck'd
                     Both on himselfe, and vs: how, whilst our aides
                     There, in the citie-look'd for, are defeated,
                     Our entrance into Gallia, too, is stopt.
                     Two armies wait vs: one from Rome, the other
                     From the Gaule-Prouinces. And, where we are,
                     (Although I most desire it) the great want
                     Of corne, and victuall, forbids longer stay.
                     So that, of need, we must remoue, but whither
                     The sword must both direct, and cut the passage.
                     I onely, therefore, wish you, when you strike,
                     To haue your valours, and your soules, about you;
                     
                     And thinke, you carrie in your labouring hands
                     The things you seeke, glorie, and libertie,
                     Your countrie, which you want now, with the Fates,
                     That are to be instructed, by our swords.
                     If we can giue the blow, all will be safe to vs.
                     We shall not want prouision, nor supplies.
                     The colonies, and free townes will lye open.
                     Where, if we yeeld to feare, expect no place,
                     Nor friend, to shelter those, whom their owne fortune,
                     And ill vs'd armes haue left without protection.
                     You might haue liu'd in seruitude, or exile,
                     Or safe at Rome, depending on the great ones;
                     But that you thought those things vnfit for men.
                     And, in that thought, you then were valiant.
                     For no man euer yet chang'd peace for warre,
                     But he, that meant to conquer. Hold that purpose.
                     There's more necessitie, you should be such,
                     In fighting for your selues, then they for others.
                     Hee's base, that trusts his feet, whose hands are arm'd.
                     Me thinkes, I see Death, and the Furies, waiting
                     What we will doe; and all the heauen' at leisure
                     For the great spectacle. Draw, then, your swords:
                     And, if our destinie enuie our vertue
                     The honor of the day, yet let vs care
                     To sell our selues, at such a price, as may
                     Vn-doe the world, to buy vs; and make Fate,
                     While shee tempts ours, feare her owne estate.
                  
                  THE SENATE.
                  
                     SEN.
                     What meanes this hastie calling of the Senate?
                     
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     We shall know straight. Wait, till the Consul speakes.
                  
                  
                     POM.
                     
                        Fathers Conscript, bethinke you of your safeties,
                     And what to doe, with these conspirators;
                     Some of their clients, their free'd men, and slaues
                     'Ginne to make head: there is one of LENTVLVS bawds
                     Runnes vp and downe the shops, through euery street,
                     With money to corrupt, the poore artificers,
                     And needie tradesmen, to their aide. CETHEGVS
                     Hath sent, too, to his seruants; who are many,
                     Chosen, and exercis'd in bold attemptings,
                     That forth-with they should arme themselues, and proue
                     His rescue: All will be in instant vproare,
                     If you preuent it not, with present counsailes.
                     We haue done what we can, to meet the furie,
                     
                     And will doe more. Be you good to your selues.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?
                     SYLLANVS, you are Consul next design'd.
                     Your sentence, of these men.
                  
                  
                     SYL.
                     'Tis short, and this.
                     Since they haue sought to blot the name of Rome,
                     Out of the world; and raze this glorious empire
                     With her owne hands, and armes, turn'd on her selfe:
                     I thinke it fit they die. And, could my breath
                     Now, execute 'hem, they should not enioy
                     An article of time, or eye of light,
                     Longer, to poyson this our common ayre.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     I thinke so too.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     And I.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     And I.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     And I.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Your sentence, CAIVS CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     Conscript Fathers,
                     In great affaires, and doubtfull, it behooues
                     Men, that are ask'd their sentence, to be free
                     From either hate, or loue, anger, or pittie:
                     For, where the least of these doehinder, there
                     The mind not easily discernes the truth.
                     I speake this to you, in the name of Rome,
                     For whom you stand; and to the present cause:
                     That this foule fact of LENTVLVS, and the rest,
                     Weigh not more with you, then your dignitie;
                     And you be more indulgent to your passion,
                     Then to your honor. If there could be found
                     A paine, or punishment, equall to their crimes,
                     I would deuise, and helpe: but, if the greatnesse
                     Of what they ha' done, exceed all mans inuention,
                     I thinke it fit, to stay, where our lawes doe.
                     Poore pettie states may alter, vpon humour,
                     Where, if they' offend with anger, few doe know it,
                     Because they are obscure; their fame, and fortune
                     Is equall, and the same. But they, that are
                     Head of the world, and liue in that seene height,
                     All mankind knowes their actions. So wee see,
                     The greater fortune hath the lesser licence.
                     They must nor fauour, hate, and least be angrie:
                     For what with others is call'd anger, there,
                     Is crueltie, and pride. I know SYLLANVS,
                     Who spoke before me, a iust, valiant man,
                     A louer of the state, and one that would not,
                     In such a businesse, vse or grace, or hatred;
                     I know, too, well, his manners, and modestie:
                     Nor doe I thinke his sentence cruell (for
                     'Gainst such delinquents, what can be too bloudie?)
                     But that it is abhorring from our state;
                     
                     Since to a citizen of Rome, offending,
                     Our lawes giue exile, and not death. Why then
                     Decrees he that? 'Twere vaine to thinke, for feare;
                     When, by the diligence of so worthy a Consul,
                     All is made safe, and certaine. Is't for punishment?
                     Why, death's the end of euills, and a rest,
                     Rather then torment: It dissolues all griefes.
                     And beyond that, is neither care, nor ioy.
                     You heare, my sentence would not haue 'hem die.
                     How then? set free, and increase CATILINES armie?
                     So will they, being but banish'd. No, graue Fathers,
                     I iudge 'hem, first, to haue their states confiscate,
                     Then, that their persons remaine prisoners
                     I' the free townes, farre off from Rome, and seuer'd:
                     Where they might neither haue relation,
                     Hereafter, to the Senate, or the people.
                     Or, if they had, those townes, then to be mulcted,
                     As enemies to the state, that had their guard.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     'Tis good, and honorable, CAESAR, hath vtterd.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     
                        Fathers, I see your faces, and your eyes
                     All bent on me, to note of these two censures,
                     Which I incline to. Either of them are graue,
                     And answering the dignitie of the speakers,
                     The greatnesse of th'affaire, and both seuere.
                     One vrgeth death: and he may well remember
                     This state hath punish'd wicked citizens so.
                     The other bonds: and those perpetuall, which
                     He thinkes found out for the more singular plague.
                     Decree, which you shall please. You haue a Consul,
                     Not readier to obey, then to defend,
                     What euer you shall act, for the republique;
                     And meet with willing shoulders any burden,
                     Or any fortune, with an euen face,
                     Though it were death: which to a valiant man
                     Can neuer happen foule, nor to a Consul
                     
                     Be immature, or to a wise man wretched.
                  
                  
                     SYL.
                     
                        Fathers, I spake, but as I thought: the needes
                     O' th'common-wealth requir'd.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Excuse it not.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     CATO, speake you your sentence.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     This it is.
                     You here dispute, on kinds of punishment,
                     And stand consulting, what you should decree
                     'Gainst those, of whom, you rather should beware,
                     This mischiefe is not like those common facts,
                     Which, when they are done, the lawes may prosequute.
                     But this, if you prouide not, ere it happen,
                     
                     When it is happen'd, will not wait your iudgement.
                     Good CAIVS CAESAR, here, hath very well,
                     And subtilly discours'd of life, and death,
                     As if he thought those things, a prettie fable,
                     That are deliuer'd vs of hell, and furies,
                     Or of the diuers way, that ill men goe
                     From good, to filthy, darke, and vgly places.
                     And therefore, he would haue these liue; and long too;
                     But farre from Rome, and in the small free townes,
                     Lest, here, they might haue rescue: As if men,
                     Fit for such acts, were only in the citie,
                     And not throughout all Italie? or, that boldnesse
                     Could not doe more, where it found least resistance?
                     'Tis a vaine counsaile, if he thinke them dangerous.
                     Which, if he doe not, but that he alone,
                     In so great feare of all men, stand vn-frighted,
                     He giues me cause, and you, more to feare him.
                     I am plaine, Fathers. Here you looke about,
                     One at another, doubting what to doe;
                     With faces, as you trusted to the gods,
                     That still haue sau'd you; and they can do't: But,
                     They are not wishings, or base womanish prayers,
                     Can draw their aides; but vigilance, counsell, action:
                     Which they will be ashamed to forsake.
                     'Tis sloth they hate, and cowardise. Here, you haue
                     The traytors in your houses, yet, you stand,
                     Fearing what to doe with 'hem; Let 'hem loose,
                     And send 'hem hence with armes, too; that your mercie
                     May turne your miserie, as soone as't can.
                     O, but they, are great men, and haue offended,
                     But, through ambition. We would spare their honor:
                     I, if themselues had spar'd it, or their fame,
                     Or modestie, or either god, or man:
                     Then I would spare 'hem. But, as things now stand,
                     
                        Fathers, to spare these men, were to commit
                     A greater wickednesse, then you would reuenge.
                     If there had beene but time, and place, for you,
                     To haue repair'd this fault, you should haue made it;
                     It should haue beene your punishment, to'haue felt
                     Your tardie error: but necessitie,
                     Now, bids me say, let 'hem not liue an houre,
                     If you meane Rome should liue a day. I haue done.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     CATO hath spoken like an oracle.
                  
                  
                     CRA.
                     Let it be so decreed.
                  
                  
                     SEN.
                     We are all fearefull.
                  
                  
                     SYL.
                     And had beene base, had not his vertue rais'd vs.
                  
                  
                     
                     SEN.
                     Goe forth, most worthy Consul, wee'll assist you.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     I'am not yet chang'd in my sentence, Fathers.
                     
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     No matter. What be those?
                  
                  
                     SER.
                     Letters, for CAESAR.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     From whom? let 'hem be read, in open Senate;
                     
                        Fathers, they come from the conspirators.
                     I craue to haue 'hem read, for the republique.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     CATO, reade you it. 'Tis a loue-letter,
                     From your deare sister, to me: though you hate me.
                     Doe not discouer it.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     Hold thee, drunkard. Consul.
                     
                     Goe forth, and confidently.
                  
                  
                     CAES.
                     You'll repent
                     This rashnesse, CICERO.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     CAESAR shall repent it.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Hold friends.
                  
                  
                     PRAE.
                     Hee's scarce a friend vnto the publike.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     No violence. CAESAR, be safe. Leade on:
                     Where are the publike executioners?
                     Bid 'hem wait on vs. On, to SPINTHERS house.
                     Bring LENTVLVS forth. Here, you, the sad reuengers
                     Of capitall crimes, against the publike, take
                     This man vnto your iustice: strangle him.
                  
                  
                     LEN.
                     Thou do'st well, Consul. 'Twas a cast at dice,
                     In FORTVNES hand, not long since, that thy selfe
                     Should'st haue heard these, or other words as fatall.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Leade on, to QVINTVS CORNIFICIVS house.
                     Bring forth CETHEGVS. Take him to the due
                     Death, that he hath deseru'd: and let it be
                     Said, He was once.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     A beast, or, what is worse,
                     A slaue, CETHEGVS. Let that be the name
                     For all that's base, hereafter: That would let
                     This worme pronounce on him; and not haue trampled
                     His body into— Ha! Art thou not mou'd?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Iustice is neuer angrie: Take him hence.
                  
                  
                     CET.
                     O, the whore FORTVNE! and her bawds the Fates!
                     
                     That put these tricks on men, which knew the way
                     To death by' a sword. Strangle me, I may sleepe:
                     I shall grow angrie with the gods, else.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Leade
                     To CAIVS, CAESAR, for STATILIVS.
                     Bring him, and rude GABINIVS, out. Here, take 'hem
                     To your cold hands, and let 'hem feele death from you.
                  
                  
                     GAB.
                     I thanke you, you doe me a pleasure.
                  
                  
                     STA.
                     And me too.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     So, MARCVS TVLLIVS, thou maist now stand vp,
                     And call it happy Rome, thou being Consul.
                     
                     Great parent of thy countrie, goe, and let
                     The old men of the citie, ere they die,
                     Kisse thee; the matrons dwell about thy necke;
                     The youths, and maides, lay vp, 'gainst they are old,
                     What kind of man thou wert, to tell their nephewes,
                     
                     When, such a yeere, they reade, within our Fasti,
                     Thy Consul-ship. Who's this? PETREIVS?
                  
                  
                     CIC▪
                     
                     Welcome,
                     Welcome, renowned souldier. What's the newes?
                     This face can bring no ill with't, vnto Rome.
                     
                     How do's the worthy Consul, my colleague?
                  
                  
                     PET.
                     As well as victorie can make him, sir.
                     He greets the Fathers, and to me hath trusted
                     The sad relation of the ciuill strife;
                     For, in such warre, the conquest still is black.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Shall we with-draw into the house of Concord?
                     
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     No, happy Consul, here; let all eares take
                     The benefit of this tale. If he had voyce,
                     To spread vnto the poles, and strike it through
                     The center, to the Antipodes; It would aske it.
                  
                  
                     PET.
                     The streights, and needs of CATILINE being such,
                     As he must fight with one of the two armies,
                     That then had neere enclos'd him; It pleas'd Fate,
                     To make vs th'obiect of his desperate choise,
                     Wherein the danger almost paiz'd the honor:
                     And as he riss', the day grew black with him;
                     And Fate descended neerer to the earth,
                     As if shee meant, to hide the name of things,
                     Vnder her wings, and make the world her quarrie.
                     At this we rous'd, lest one small minutes stay
                     Had left it to be' enquir'd, what Rome was.
                     And (as we ought) arm'd in the confidence
                     Of our great cause, in forme of battaile, stood.
                     Whilst CATILINE came on, not with the face
                     Of any man, but of a publique ruine:
                     His count'nance was a ciuill warre it selfe.
                     And all his host had standing in their lookes,
                     The palenesse of the death, that was to come.
                     Yet cryed they out like vultures, and vrg'd on,
                     As if they would precipitate our fates.
                     Nor staid we longer for 'hem; But himselfe
                     Strooke the first stroke: And, with it, fled a life.
                     Which cut, it seem'd, a narrow necke of land,
                     Had broke betweene two mightie seas; and either
                     Flow'd into other; for so did the slaughter:
                     And whirl'd about, as when two violent tides
                     Meet, and not yeeld. The Furies stood, on hills,
                     Circling the place, and trembled to see men
                     Doe more, then they: whilst pietie left the field,
                     Grieu'd for that side, that, in so bad a cause,
                     They knew not, what a crime their valour was.
                     
                     The sunne stood still, and was, behind the cloud
                     The battaile made, seene sweating, to driue vp
                     His frighted horse, whom still the noyse droue backward.
                     And now had fierce ENYO, like a flame,
                     Consum'd all it could reach, and then it selfe;
                     Had not the fortune of the common-wealth
                     Come PALLAS-like, to euery Roman thought.
                     Which CATILINE seeing, and that now his troops
                     Couer'd that earth, they' had fought on, with their trunkes,
                     Ambitious of great fame, to crowne his ill,
                     Collected all his furie, and ran in
                     (Arm'd with a glorie, high as his despaire)
                     Into our battaile, like a Lybian lyon,
                     Vpon his hunters, scornefull of our weapons,
                     Carelesse of wounds, plucking downe liues about him,
                     Till he had circled in himselfe with death:
                     Then fell he too, t'embrace it where it lay.
                     And as, in that rebellion 'gainst the gods,
                     MINERVA holding forth MEDVSA'S head,
                     One of the gyant brethren felt himselfe
                     Grow marble at the killing sight, and now,
                     Almost made stone, began t'inquire, what flint,
                     What rocke it was, that crept through all his limmes,
                     And, ere he could thinke more, was that he fear'd;
                     So CATILINE, at the sight of Rome in vs,
                     Became his tombe: yet did his looke retayne
                     Some of his fiercenesse, and his hands still mou'd,
                     As if he labour'd, yet, to graspe the state,
                     With those rebellious parts.
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     A braue bad death.
                     Had this beene honest now, and for his countrey,
                     As 'twas against it, who had ere fallen greater?
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Honor'd PETREIVS, Rome, not I, must thanke you.
                     How modestly has he spoken of himselfe!
                  
                  
                     CAT.
                     He did the more.
                  
                  
                     CIC.
                     Thanks to the immortall gods,
                     
                        Romans, I now am paid for all my labours,
                     My watchings, and my dangers. Here conclude
                     Your praises, triumphs, honors, and rewards,
                     Decreed to me: only the memorie
                     Of this glad day, if I may know it liue
                     Within your thoughts, shall much affect my conscience,
                     Which I must alwayes studie before fame.
                     Though both be good, the latter yet is worst,
                     And euer is ill got, without the first.
                  
                  THE END.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  This Tragoedie was first Acted, in the yeere 1611.
                  By the KINGS Maiesties SERVANTS.
                  The principall Tragoedians were.

                        RIC. BVRBADGE.
                        ALEX. COOKE.
                        IOH. LOWIN.
                        WIL. OSTLER.
                        RIC. ROBINSON.
                        IOH. HEMINGS.
                        HEN. CONDEL.
                        IOH. VNDERWOOD.
                        NIC. TOOLY.
                        WIL. EGLESTONE.
                     
                  
                  With the allowance of the Master of REVELLS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  EPIGRAMMES. I. BOOKE.
                  The Author B. I.
                  LONDON,
                  M. DC. XVI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE GREAT EXAMPLE OF HONOR AND VERTVE, THE MOST NOBLE WILLIAM, EARLE OF PEMBROKE, L. CHAMBERLAYNE, &c.
                  
                     
                        MY LORD. While you cannot change your merit, I dare not change your title: It was that made it, and not I. Vnder which name, I here offer to your Lo: the ripest of my studies, my Epigrammes; which, though they carry danger in the sound, doe not therefore seeke your shelter: For, when I made them, I had nothing in my conscience, to expressing of which I did need a cypher. But, if I be falne into those times, wherein, for the likenesse of vice, and facts, euery one thinks anothers ill deeds obiected to him; and that in their ignorant and guiltie mouthes, the common voyce is (for their securitie) Beware the Poet, confessing, therein, so much loue to their diseases, as they would rather make a partie for them, then be either rid, or told of them: I must expect, at your Lo: hand, the protection of truth, and

libertie, while you are constant to your owne goodnesse. In thankes whereof, I returne you the honor of leading forth so many good, and great names (as my verses mention on the better part) to their remembrance with posteritie. Amongst whom, if I haue praysed, vnfortunately, any one, that doth not deserue; or, if all answere not, in all numbers, the pictures I haue made of them: I hope it will be forgiuen me, that they are no ill pieces, though they be not like the persons. But I foresee a neerer fate to my booke, then this: that the vices therein will be own'd before the vertues (though, there, I haue auoyded all particulars, as I haue done names) and that some will be so readie to discredit me, as they will haue the impudence to belye themselues. For, if I meant them not, it is so. Nor, can I hope otherwise. For, why should they remit any thing of their riot, their pride, their selfe-loue, and other inherent graces, to consider truth or vertue; but, with the trade of the world, lend their long eares against men they loue not: and hold their deare Mountebanke, or Iester, in farre better condition, then all the studie, or studiers of humanitie? For such, I would rather know them by their visards, still, then they should publish their faces, at their perill, in my Theater, where CATO, if he liu'd, might enter without scandall.
                  
                     
                        Your Lo: most faithfull honorer, BEN. IONSON.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  EPIGRAMMES.
                  
                     I. TO THE READER.
                     PRay thee, take care, that tak'st my booke in hand,
                     To reade it well: that is, to vnderstand.
                  
                  
                     II. TO MY BOOKE.
                     IT will be look'd for, booke, when some but see
                     Thy title, Epigrammes, and nam'd of mee,
                     Thou should'st be bold, licentious, full of gall,
                     Wormewood, and sulphure, sharpe, and tooth'd withall;
                     Become a petulant thing, hurle inke, and wit,
                     As mad-men stones: not caring whom they hit.
                     Deceiue their malice, who could wish it so.
                     And by thy wiser temper, let men know
                     Thou art not couetous of least selfe fame,
                     Made from the hazard of anothers shame:
                     Much lesse with lewd, prophane, and beastly phrase,
                     To catch the worlds loose laughter, or vaine gaze.
                     He that departs with his owne honesty
                     For vulgar praise, doth it too dearely buy.
                  
                  
                     III. TO MY BOOKE-SELLER.
                     THou, that mak'st gaine thy end, and wisely well,
                     Call'st a booke good, or bad, as it doth sell,
                     Vse mine so, too: I giue thee leaue. But craue
                     For the lucks sake, it thus much fauour haue.
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     By that one spell he liues, eates, drinkes, arrayes
                     Himselfe: his whole reuennue is, god payes.
                     The quarter day is come; the hostesse sayes,
                     Shee must haue money: he returnes, god payes.
                     The taylor brings a suite home; he it 'ssayes,
                     Lookes o're the bill, likes it: and say's, god payes.
                     He steales to ordinaries; there he playes
                     At dice his borrow'd money: which, god payes.
                     Then takes vp fresh commoditie, for dayes;
                     Signes to new bond, forfeits: and cryes, god payes.
                     That lost, he keepes his chamber, reades Essayes,
                     Takes physick, teares the papers: still god payes.
                     Or else by water goes, and so to playes;
                     Calls for his stoole, adornes the stage: god payes.
                     To euery cause he meets, this voyce he brayes:
                     His onely answere is to all, god payes.
                     Not his poore cocatrice but he betrayes
                     Thus: and for his letcherie, scores, god payes.
                     But see! th'old baud hath seru'd him in his trim,
                     Lent him a pockie whore. Shee hath paid him.
                  
                  
                     XIII. TO DOCTOR EMPIRICK▪
                     
                     WHen men a dangerous disease did scape,
                     Of old, they gaue a cock to AESCVLAPE;
                     Let me giue two: that doubly am got free,
                     From my diseases danger, and from thee.
                  
                  
                     XIIII. TO WILLIAM CAMDEN▪
                     
                     CAMDEN, most reuerend head, to whom I owe
                     All that I am in arts, all that I know.
                     (How nothing's that?) to whom my countrey owes
                     The great renowne, and name wherewith shee goes.
                     Then thee the age sees not that thing more graue,
                     More high, more holy, that shee more would craue.
                     What name, what skill, what faith hast thou in things!
                     What sight in searching the most antique springs!
                     What weight, and what authoritie in thy speech!
                     Man scarse can make that doubt, but thou canst teach.
                     Pardon free truth, and let thy modestie,
                     Which conquers all, be once ouer-come by thee.
                     
                     Many of thine this better could, then I,
                     But for their powers, accept my pietie.
                  
                  
                     XV. ON COVRT-WORME.
                     ALL men are wormes: But this no man. In silke
                     'Twas brought to court first wrapt, and white as milke;
                     Where, afterwards, it grew a butter-flye:
                     Which was a cater-piller. So t'will dye.
                  
                  
                     XVI. TO BRAYNE-HARDIE.
                     HARDIE, thy braine is valiant, 'tis confest,
                     Thou more; that with it euery day, dar'st iest
                     Thy selfe into fresh braules: when, call'd vpon,
                     Scarse thy weekes swearing brings thee of, of one.
                     So, in short time, th'art in arrerage growne
                     Some hundred quarrells, yet dost thou fight none;
                     Nor need'st thou: for those few, by oath releast,
                     Make good what thou dar'st doe in all the rest.
                     Keepe thy selfe there, and thinke thy valure right,
                     He that dares damne himselfe, dares more then fight.
                  
                  
                     XVII. TO THE LEARNED CRITICK.
                     MAy others feare, flie, and traduce thy name,
                     As guiltie men doe magistrates: glad I,
                     That wish my poemes a legitimate fame,
                     Charge them, for crowne, to thy sole censure hye.
                     And, but a sprigge of bayes, giuen by thee,
                     Shall out-liue gyrlands, stolne from the chast tree.
                  
                  
                     XVIII. TO MY MEERE ENGLISH CENSVRER.
                     TO thee, my way in Epigrammes seemes new,
                     When both it is the old way, and the true.
                     Thou saist, that cannot be: for thou hast seene
                     DAVIS, and WEEVER, and the best haue beene,
                     And mine come nothing like. I hope so. Yet,
                     As theirs did with thee, mine might credit get:
                     
                     If thou'ldst but vse thy faith, as thou didst then,
                     When thou wert wont t'admire, not censure men.
                     Pr'y thee beleeue still, and not iudge so fast,
                     Thy faith is all the knowledge that thou hast.
                  
                  
                     XIX. ON SIR COD THE PERFVMED.
                     THat COD can get no widdow, yet a knight,
                     I sent the cause: Hee wooes with an ill sprite.
                  
                  
                     XX. TO THE SAME SIR COD.
                     TH'expence in odours is a most vaine sinne,
                     Except thou could'st, Sir COD, weare them within.
                  
                  
                     XXI. ON REFORMED GAM'STER.
                     LOrd, how is GAM'STER chang'd! his haire close cut!
                     His neck fenc'd round with ruffe! his eyes halfe shut!
                     His clothes two fashions of, and poore! his sword
                     Forbidd' his side! and nothing, but the word
                     Quick in his lips! who hath this wonder wrought?
                     The late'tane bastinado. So I thought.
                     What seuerall wayes men to their calling haue!
                     The bodies stripes, I see, the soule may saue.
                  
                  
                     XXII. ON MY FIRST DAVGHTER.
                     HEre lyes to each her parents ruth,
                     MARY, the daughter of their youth:
                     Yet, all heauens gifts, being heauens due,
                     It makes the father, lesse, to rue.
                     At sixe moneths end, shee parted hence
                     With safetie of her innocence;
                     Whose soule heauens Queene, (whose name shee beares)
                     In comfort of her mothers teares,
                     Hath plac'd amongst her virgin-traine:
                     Where, while that seuer'd doth remaine,
                     This graue partakes the fleshly birth.
                     Which couer lightly, gentle earth.
                  
                  
                     
                     XXIII. TO IOHN DONNE.
                     DONNE, the delight of PHOEBVS, and each Muse,
                     Who, to thy one, all other braines refuse;
                     Whose euery worke, of thy most earely wit,
                     Came forth example, and remaines so, yet:
                     Longer a knowing, then most wits doe liue.
                     And which no affection praise enough can giue!
                     To it, thy language, letters, arts, best life,
                     Which might with halfe mankind maintayne a strife.
                     All which I meant to praise, and, yet, I would;
                     But leaue, because I cannot as I should!
                  
                  
                     XXIIII. TO THE PARLIAMENT.
                     THere's reason good, that you good lawes should make
                           •
                        
                     
                     Mens manners ne're were viler, for your sake.
                  
                  
                     XXV. ON SIR VOLVPTVOVS BEAST.
                     WHile BEAST instructs his faire, and innocent wife,
                     In the past pleasures of his sensuall life,
                     Telling the motions of each petticote,
                     And how his GANIMEDE mou'd, and how his goate,
                     And now, her (hourely) her owne cucqueane makes,
                     In varied shapes, which for his lust shee takes:
                     What doth he else, but say, leaue to be cha
                           •
                        t,
                     Iust wife, and, to change me, make womans hast.
                  
                  
                     XXVI. ON THE SAME BEAST.
                     THen his cha
                           •
                        t wife, though BEAST now know no more,
                     He'adulters still: his thoughts lye with a whore.
                  
                  
                     XXVII. ON SIR IOHN ROE.
                     IN place of scutcheons, that should decke thy herse,
                     Take better ornaments, my teares, and verse.
                     
                     If any sword could saue from Fates, ROE'S could;
                     If any Muse out-liue their spight, his can;
                     If any friends teares could restore, his would;
                     If any pious life ere lifted man
                     To heauen; his hath: O happy state! wherein
                     Wee, sad for him, may glorie, and not sinne.
                  
                  
                     XXVIII. ON DON SVRLY.
                     DON SVRLY, to aspire the glorious name
                     Of a great man, and to be thought the same,
                     Makes serious vse of all great trade he knowes.
                     He speakes to men with a Rhinocerotes nose,
                     Which hee thinkes great; and so reades verses, too:
                     And, that is done, as he saw great men doe.
                     H' has tympanies of businesse, in his face,
                     And, can forget mens names, with a great grace.
                     He will both argue, and discourse in oathes,
                     Both which are great. And laugh at ill made clothes;
                     That's greater, yet: to crie his owne vp neate.
                     He doth, at meales, alone, his pheasant eate.
                     Which is maine greatnesse. And, at his still boord,
                     He drinkes to no man: that's, too, like a lord.
                     He keepes anothers wife, which is a spice
                     Of solemne greatnesse. And he dares, at dice,
                     Blaspheme god, greatly. Or some poore hinde beat,
                     That breathes in his dogs way: and this is great.
                     Nay more, for greatnesse sake, he will be one
                     May heare my Epigrammes, but like of none.
                     SVRLY, vse other arts, these only can
                     Stile thee a most great foole, but no great man.
                  
                  
                     XXIX. TO SIR ANNVAL TILTER.
                     TILTER, the most may'admire thee, though not I:
                     And thou, right guiltlesse, may'st plead to it, why?
                     For thy late sharpe deuice. I say 'tis fit
                     All braines, at times of triumph, should runne wit.
                     For then, our water-conduits doe runne wine;
                     But that's put in, thou'lt say. Why, so is thine.
                  
                  
                     
                     XXX. TO PERSON GVILTIE.
                     GVILTIE, be wise; and though thou know'st the crimes
                     Be thine, I taxe, yet doe not owne my rimes:
                     'Twere madnesse in thee, to betray thy fame,
                     And person to the world; ere I thy name.
                  
                  
                     XXXI. ON BANCK THE VSVRER.
                     BANCK feeles no lamenesse of his knottie gout,
                     His monyes trauaile for him, in and out:
                     And though the soundest legs goe euery day,
                     He toyles to be at hell, as soone as they.
                  
                  
                     XXXII. ON SIR IOHN ROE.
                     WHat two braue perills of the priuate sword
                     Could not effect, not all the furies doe,
                     That selfe-diuided Belgia did afford;
                     What not the enuie of the seas reach'd too,
                     The cold of Mosco, and fat Irish ayre,
                     His often change of clime (though not of mind)
                     What could not worke; at home in his repaire
                     Was his blest fate, but our hard lot to find.
                     Which shewes, where euer death doth please t'appeare,
                     Seas, serenes, swords, shot, sicknesse, all are there.
                  
                  
                     XXXIII. TO THE SAME.
                     ILe not offend thee with a vaine teare more,
                     Glad-mention'd ROE: thou art but gone before,
                     Whither the world must follow. And I, now,
                     Breathe to expect my when, and make my how.
                     Which if most gracious heauen grant like thine,
                     Who wets my graue, can be no friend of mine.
                  
                  
                     XXXIIII. OF DEATH.
                     HE that feares death, or mournes it, in the iust,
                     Shewes of the resurrection little trust.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     The children, that he keepes, GILES sweares are none
                     Of his begetting. And so sweares his IONE.
                     In all affections shee concurreth still.
                     If, now, with man and wife, to will, and nill
                     The selfe-same things, a note of concord be:
                     I know no couple better can agree!
                  
                  
                     XLIII. TO ROBERT EARLE OF SALISBVRIE.
                     WHat need hast thou of me? or of my Muse?
                     
                     Whose actions so themselues doe celebrate?
                     Which should thy countries loue to speake refuse,
                     Her foes enough would fame thee in their hate.
                     'Tofore, great men were glad of Poets: Now,
                     I, not the worst, am couetous of thee.
                     Yet dare not, to my thought, lest hope allow
                     Of adding to thy fame; thine may to me,
                     When in my booke, men reade but CECILL'S name,
                     And what I write thereof find farre, and free
                     From seruile flatterie (common Poets shame)
                     As thou stand'st cleere of the necessitie.
                  
                  
                     XLIIII. ON CHVFFE, BANCKS THE VSVRER'S KINSMAN.
                     CHVFFE, lately rich in name, in chattels, goods,
                     And rich in issue to inherit all,
                     Ere blacks were bought for his owne funerall,
                     Saw all his race approch the blacker floods:
                     He meant they thither should make swift repaire,
                     When he made him executor, might be heire.
                  
                  
                     XLV. ON MY FIRST SONNE.
                     FArewell, thou child of my right hand, and ioy;
                     My sinne was too much hope of thee, lou'd boy,
                     Seuen yeeres tho'wert lent to me, and I thee pay,
                     Exacted by thy fate, on the iust day.
                     O, could I loose all father, now. For why
                     Will man lament the state he should enuie?
                     To haue so soone scap'd worlds, and fleshes rage,
                     And, if no other miserie, yet age?
                     
                     Rest in soft peace, and, ask'd, say here doth lye
                     BEN. IONSON his best piece of poetrie.
                     
                     For whose sake, hence-forth, all his vowes be such,
                     As what loues may neuer like too much.
                  
                  
                     XLVI. TO SIR LVCKLESSE WOO-ALL.
                     IS this the Sir, who, some wast wife to winne,
                     A knight-hood bought, to goe a wooing in?
                     'Tis LVCKLESSE he, that tooke vp one on band
                     To pay at's day of marriage. By my hand
                     The knight-wright's cheated then: Hee'll neuer pay.
                     Yes, now he weares his knight-hood euery day.
                  
                  
                     XLVII. TO THE SAME.
                     SIr LVCKLESSE, troth, for lucks sake passe by one:
                     Hee that wooes euery widdow, will get none.
                  
                  
                     XLVIII. ON MVNGRIL ESQVIRE.
                     HIs bought armes MVNG' not lik'd; for his first day
                     Of bearing them in field, he threw'hem away:
                     And hath no honor lost our Due'llists say.
                  
                  
                     XLIX. TO PLAY-WRIGHT.
                     PLAY-WRIGHT me reades, and still my verses damnes,
                     He sayes, I want the tongue of Epigrammes;
                     I haue no salt: no bawdrie he doth meane.
                     For wittie, in his language, is obscene.
                     PLAY-WRIGHT, I loath to haue thy manners knowne
                     In my chast booke: professe them in thine owne.
                  
                  
                     L. TO SIR COD.
                     LEaue COD, tabacco-like, burnt gummes to take,
                     Or fumie clysters, thy moist lungs to bake:
                     
                        Arsenike would thee fit for societie make.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     
                     LVIII. TO GROOME IDEOT.
                     IDEOT, last night, I pray'd thee but forbeare
                     To reade my verses; now I must to heare:
                     For offring, with thy smiles, my wit to grace,
                     Thy ignorance still laughs in the wrong place.
                     And so my sharpnesse thou no lesse dis-ioynts,
                     Then thou did'st late my sense, loosing my points.
                     So haue I seene at CHRIST-masse sports one lost,
                     And, hood-wink'd, for a man, embrace a post.
                  
                  
                     LIX. ON SPIES.
                     SPIES, you are lights in state, but of base stuffe,
                     Who, when you'haue burnt your selues downe to the snuffe,
                     Stinke, and are throwne away. End faire enough.
                  
                  
                     LX. TO WILLIAM LORD MOVNTEAGLE.
                     LOe, what my countrey should haue done (haue rais'd
                     An obeliske, or columne to thy name,
                     Or, if shee would but modestly haue prais'd
                     Thy fact, in brasse or marble writ the same)
                     I, that am glad of thy great chance, here doo!
                     And proud, my worke shall out-last common deeds,
                     Durst thinke it great, and worthy wonder too,
                     But thine, for which I doo't, so much exceeds!
                     My countries parents I haue many knowne;
                     But sauer of my countrey thee alone.
                  
                  
                     LXI. TO FOOLE, OR KNAVE.
                     THy praise, or dispraise is to me alike,
                     One doth not stroke me, nor the other strike.
                  
                  
                     LXII. TO FINE LADY WOVLD-BEE.
                     FIne MADAME WOVLD-BEE, wherefore should you feare,
                     That loue to make so well, a child to beare?
                     
                     The world reputes you barren: but I know
                     Your 'pothecarie, and his drug sayes no.
                     Is it the paine affrights? that's soone forgot.
                     Or your complexions losse? you haue a pot,
                     That can restore that. Will it hurt your feature?
                     To make amends, yo'are thought a wholesome creature.
                     What should the cause be? Oh, you liue at court:
                     And there's both losse of time, and losse of sport
                     In a great belly. Write, then on thy wombe,
                     Of the not borne, yet buried, here's the tombe.
                  
                  
                     LXIII. TO ROBERT EARLE OF SALISBVRIE.
                     WHo can consider thy right courses run,
                     With what thy vertue on the times hath won,
                     And not thy fortune; who can cleerely see
                     The iudgement of the king so shine in thee;
                     And that thou seek'st reward of thy each act,
                     Not from the publike voyce, but priuate fact;
                     Who can behold all enuie so declin'd
                     By constant suffring of thy equall mind;
                     And can to these be silent, Salisburie,
                     Without his, thine, and all times iniurie?
                     Curst be his Muse, that could lye dumbe, or hid
                     To so true worth, though thou thy selfe forbid.
                  
                  
                     LXIIII. TO THE SAME. Vpon the accession of the Treasurer-ship to him.
                     NOt glad, like those that haue new hopes, or sutes,
                     With thy new place, bring I these early fruits
                     Of loue, and what the golden age did hold
                     A treasure, art: contemn'd in th'age of gold.
                     Nor glad as those, that old dependents bee,
                     To see thy fathers rites new laid on thee.
                     Nor glad for fashion. Nor to shew a fit
                     Of flatterie to thy titles. Nor of wit.
                     But I am glad to see that time suruiue▪
                     
                     Where merit is not sepulcher'd aliue.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     Delay is bad, doubt worse, depending worst;
                     Each best day of our life escapes vs, first.
                     Then, since we (more then many) these truths know:
                     Though life be short, let vs not make it so.
                  
                  
                     LXXI. ON COVRT-PARRAT.
                     TO plucke downe mine, POLL sets vp new wits still,
                     Still, 'tis his lucke to praise me 'gainst his will.
                  
                  
                     LXXII. TO COVRT-LING.
                     I Grieue not, COVRTLING, thou art started vp
                     A chamber-critick, and dost dine, and sup
                     At MADAMES table, where thou mak'st all wit
                     Goe high, or low, as thou wilt value it.
                     'Tis not thy iudgement breeds the preiudice,
                     Thy person only, COVRTLING, is the vice.
                  
                  
                     LXXIII. TO FINE GRAND.
                     WHat is't, fine GRAND, makes thee my friendship flye,
                     Or take an Epigramme so fearefully:
                     As't were a challenge, or a borrowers letter?
                     The world must know your greatnesse is my debter.
                     
                        In-primis, GRAND, you owe me for a iest;
                     I lent you, on meere acquaintance, at a feast.
                     
                        Item, a tale or two, some fortnight after;
                     That yet maintaynes you, and your house in laughter.
                     
                        Item, the babylonian song you sing;
                     
                        Item, a faire greeke poesie for a ring:
                     With which a learned Madame you belye.
                     
                        Item, a charme surrounding fearefully,
                     Your partie-per-pale picture, one halfe drawne
                     In solemne cypres, the other cob-web-lawne.
                     
                        Item, a gulling imprese for you, at tilt.
                     
                        Item, your mistris anagram, i' your hilt.
                     
                        Item, your owne, sew'd in your mistris smock.
                     
                        Item, an epitaph on my lords cock,
                     In most vile verses, and cost me more paine,
                     Then had I made 'hem good, to fit your vaine.
                     
                     Fortie things more, deare GRAND, which you know true,
                     For which, or pay me quickly', or Ile pay you.
                  
                  
                     LXXIIII. TO THOMAS LORD CHANCELOR.
                     WHil'st thy weigh'd iudgements, EGERTON, I heare,
                     And know thee, then, a iudge, not of one yeare;
                     Whil'st I behold thee liue with purest hands;
                     That no affection in thy voyce commands;
                     That still th'art present to the better cause;
                     And no lesse wise, then skilfull in the lawes;
                     Whil'st thou art certaine to thy words, once gone,
                     As is thy conscience, which is alwayes one:
                     The Virgin, long-since fled from earth, I see,
                     T'our times return'd, hath made her heauen in thee.
                  
                  
                     LXXV. ON LIPPE, THE TEACHER.
                     I Cannot thinke there's that antipathy
                     'Twixt puritanes, and players, as some cry;
                     Though LIPPE, at PAVLS, ranne from his text away,
                     T'inueigh 'gainst playes: what did he then but play?
                  
                  
                     LXXVI. ON LVCY COVNTESSE OF BEDFORD.
                     THis morning, timely rapt with holy fire,
                     I thought to forme vnto my zealous Muse,
                     What kinde of creature I could most desire,
                     To honor, serue, and loue; as Poets vse.
                     I meant to make her faire, and free, and wise,
                     Of greatest bloud, and yet more good then great;
                     I meant the day-starre should not brighter rise,
                     Nor lend like influence from his lucent seat.
                     I meant shee should be curteous, facile, sweet,
                     Hating that solemne vice of greatnesse, pride;
                     I meant each softest vertue, there should meet,
                     Fit in that softer bosome to reside.
                     Onely a learned, and a manly soule
                     I purpos'd her; that should, with euen powers,
                     The rock, the spindle, and the sheeres controule
                     Of destinie, and spin her owne free houres.
                     
                     Such when I meant to faine, and wish'd to see,
                     My Muse bad, Bedford write, and that was shee.
                  
                  
                     LXXVII. TO ONE THAT DESIRED ME NOT TO NAME HIM.
                     BE safe, nor feare thy selfe so good a fame,
                     That, any way, my booke should speake thy name:
                     For, if thou shame, ranck'd with my friends, to goe,
                     I'am more asham'd to haue thee thought my foe.
                  
                  
                     LXXVIII. TO HORNET.
                     HORNET, thou hast thy wife drest, for the stall,
                     To draw thee custome: but her selfe gets all.
                  
                  
                     LXXIX. TO ELIZABETH COVNTESSE OF RVTLAND.
                     THat Poets are far rarer births then kings,
                     Your noblest father prou'd: like whom, before,
                     Or then, or since, about our Muses springs,
                     Came not that soule exhausted so their store.
                     Hence was it, that the destinies decreed
                     (Saue that most masculine issue of his braine)
                     No male vnto him: who could so exceed
                     
                        Nature, they thought, in all, that he would faine.
                     At which, shee happily displeas'd, made you:
                     On whom, if he were liuing now, to looke,
                     He should those rare, and absolute numbers view,
                     As he would burne, or better farre his booke.
                  
                  
                     LXXX. OF LIFE, AND DEATH.
                     THe ports of death are sinnes; of life, good deeds:
                     Through which, our merit leads vs to our meeds.
                     How wilfull blind is he then, that would stray,
                     And hath it, in his powers, to make his way!
                     This world deaths region is, the other lifes:
                     And here, it should be one of our first strifes,
                     
                     So to front death, as men might iudge vs past it.
                     For good men but see death, the wicked tast it.
                  
                  
                     LXXXI. TO PROVLE THE PLAGIARY.
                     FOrbeare to tempt me, PROVLE, I will not show
                     A line vnto thee, till the world it know;
                     Or that I'haue by two good sufficient men,
                     To be the wealthy witnesse of my pen:
                     For all thou hear'st, thou swear'st thy selfe didst doo.
                     Thy wit liues by it, PROVLE, and belly too.
                     Which, if thou leaue not soone (though I am loth)
                     I must a libell make, and cosen both.
                  
                  
                     LXXXII. ON CASHIERD CAPT. SVRLY.
                     SVRLY'S old whore in her new silkes doth swim:
                     He cast, yet keeps her well! No, shee keeps him.
                  
                  
                     LXXXIII. TO A FRIEND.
                     TO put out the word, whore, thou do'st me woo,
                     Throughout my booke. 'Troth put out woman too.
                  
                  
                     LXXXIIII. TO LVCY COVNTESSE OF BEDFORD.
                     MADAME, I told you late how I repented,
                     I ask'd a lord a buck, and he denyed me;
                     And, ere I could aske you, I was preuented:
                     For your most noble offer had supply'd me.
                     Straight went I home; and there most like a Poet,
                     I fancied to my selfe, what wine, what wit
                     I would haue spent: how euery Muse should know it,
                     And PHOEBVS-selfe should be at eating it.
                     O Madame, if your grant did thus transferre mee,
                     Make it your gift. See whither that will beare mee.
                  
                  
                     LXXXV. TO SIR HENRY GOODYERE.
                     GOODYERE, I'am glad, and gratefull to report,
                     My selfe a witnesse of thy few dayes sport:
                     
                     Where I both learn'd, why wise-men hawking follow,
                     And why that bird was sacred to APOLLO,
                     Shee doth instruct men by her gallant flight,
                     That they to knowledge so should toure vpright,
                     And neuer stoupe, but to strike ignorance:
                     Which if they misse, they yet should re-aduance
                     To former height, and there in circle tarrie,
                     Till they be sure to make the foole their quarrie.
                     Now, in whose pleasures I haue this discerned,
                     What would his serious actions me haue learned?
                  
                  
                     LXXXVI. TO THE SAME.
                     WHen I would know thee GOODYERE, my thought lookes
                     Vpon thy wel-made choise of friends, and bookes;
                     Then doe I loue thee, and behold thy ends
                     In making thy friends bookes, and thy bookes friends:
                     Now, I must giue thy life, and deed, the voice
                     Attending such a studie, such a choice.
                     Where, though't be loue, that to thy praise doth moue
                     It was a knowledge, that begat that loue.
                  
                  
                     LXXXVII. ON CAPTAINE HAZARD THE CHEATER.
                     TOuch'd with the sinne of false play, in his punque,
                     HAZARD a month forsware his; and grew drunke,
                     Each night, to drowne his cares: But when the gaine
                     Of what shee had wrought came in, and wak'd his braine,
                     Vpon th'accompt, hers grew the quicker trade.
                     Since when, hee's sober againe, and all play's made.
                  
                  
                     LXXXVIII. ON ENGLISH MOVNSIEVR.
                     WOuld you beleeue, when you this MOVNSIEVR see,
                     That his whole body should speake french, not he?
                     That so much skarfe of France, and hat, and fether,
                     And shooe, and tye, and garter should come hether,
                     And land on one, whose face durst neuer bee
                     Toward the sea, farther then halfe-way tree?
                     That he, vntrauell'd, should be french so much,
                     As french-men in his companie, should seeme dutch?
                     
                     
                     Or had his father, when he did him get,
                     The french disease, with which he labours yet?
                     Or hung some MOVNSIEVRS picture on the wall,
                     By which his damme conceiu'd him clothes and all?
                     Or is it some french statue? No: 'T doth moue,
                     And stoupe, and cringe. O then, it needs must proue
                     The new french-taylors motion, monthly made,
                     Daily to turne in PAVLS, and helpe the trade.
                  
                  
                     LXXXIX. TO EDWARD ALLEN.
                     IF Rome so great, and in her wisest age,
                     Fear'd not to boast the glories of her stage,
                     As skilfull ROSCIVS, and graue AESOPE, men,
                     Yet crown'd with honors, as with riches, then;
                     Who had no lesse a trumpet of their name,
                     Then CICERO, whose euery breath was fame:
                     How can so great example dye in mee,
                     That, ALLEN, I should pause to publish thee?
                     Who both their graces in thy selfe hast more
                     Out-stript, then they did all that went before:
                     And present worth in all dost so contract,
                     As others speake, but onely thou dost act.
                     Weare this renowne. 'Tis iust, that who did giue
                     So many Poets life, by one should liue.
                  
                  
                     XC. ON MILL. MY LADIES WOMAN.
                     WHen MILL first came to court, the vnprositing foole,
                     Vnworthy such a mistris, such a schoole,
                     Was dull, and long, ere shee would goe to man:
                     At last, ease, appetite, and example wan
                     The nicer thing to tast her ladies page;
                     And, finding good securitie in his age,
                     Went on: and prouing him still, day by day,
                     Discern'd no difference of his yeeres, or play.
                     Not though that haire grew browne, which once was amber,
                     And he growne youth, was call'd to his ladies chamber,
                     Still MILL continu'd: Nay, his face growing worse,
                     And he remou'd to gent'man of the horse,
                     MILL was the same. Since, both his body and face
                     Blowne vp; and he (too'vnwieldie for that place)
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     Willing to expiate the fault in thee,
                     Wherewith, against thy bloud, they'offenders bee.
                  
                  
                     XCIIII. TO LVCY, COVNTESSE OF BEDFORD, WITH Mr. DONNES SATYRES.
                     LVCY, you brightnesse of our spheare, who are
                     Life of the Muses day, their morning-starre!
                     If workes (not th'authors) their owne grace should looke,
                     Whose poemes would not wish to be your booke?
                     But these, desir'd by you, the makers ends
                     Crowne with their owne. Rare poemes aske rare friends.
                     Yet, Satyres, since the most of mankind bee
                     Their vn-auoided subiect, fewest see:
                     For none ere tooke that pleasure in sinnes sense,
                     But, when they heard it tax'd, tooke more offence.
                     They, then, that liuing where the matter is bred,
                     Dare for these poemes, yet, both aske, and read,
                     And like them too; must needfully, though few,
                     Be of the best: and 'mongst those, best are you.
                     LVCY, you brightnesse of our spheare, who are
                     The Muses euening, as their morning-starre.
                  
                  
                     XCV. TO SIR HENRIE SAVILE.
                     IF, my religion safe, I durst embrace
                     That stranger doctrine of PYTHAGORAS,
                     I should beleeue, the soule of TACITVS
                     In thee, most weighty SAVILE, liu'd to vs:
                     So hast thou rendred him in all his bounds,
                     And all his numbers, both of sense, and sounds.
                     But when I read that speciall piece, restor'd,
                     Where NERO falls, and GALBA is ador'd,
                     To thine owne proper I ascribe then more;
                     And gratulate the breach, I grieu'd before:
                     Which Fate (it seemes) caus'd in the historie,
                     Onely to boast thy merit in supply.
                     O, would'st thou adde like hand, to all the rest!
                     Or, better worke! were thy glad countrey blest,
                     To haue her storie wouen in thy thred;
                     MINERVAES loome was neuer richer spred.
                     
                     For who can master those great parts like thee,
                     That liu'st from hope, from feare, from faction free;
                     That hast thy brest so cleere of present crimes,
                     Thou need'st not shrinke at voyce of after-times;
                     Whose knowledge claymeth at the helme to stand;
                     But, wisely, thrusts not forth a forward hand,
                     No more then SALVST in the Romane state!
                     As, then, his cause, his glorie emulate.
                     Although to write be lesser then to doo,
                     It is the next deed, and a great one too.
                     We need a man that knowes the seuerall graces
                     Of historie, and how to apt their places;
                     Where breuitie, where splendor, and where height,
                     Where sweetnesse is requir'd, and where weight;
                     We need a man, can speake of the intents,
                     The councells, actions, orders, and euents
                     Of state, and censure them: we need his pen
                     Can write the things, the causes, and the men.
                     But most we need his faith (and all haue you)
                     That dares nor write things false, nor hide things true.
                  
                  
                     XCVI. TO IOHN DONNE.
                     WHo shall doubt, DONNE, where I a Poet bee,
                     When I dare send my Epigrammes to thee?
                     That so alone canst iudge, so'alone dost make:
                     And, in thy censures, euenly, dost take
                     As free simplicitie, to dis-auow,
                     As thou hast best authoritie, t'allow.
                     Reade all I send: and, if I find but one
                     Mark'd by thy hand, and with the better stone,
                     My title's seal'd. Those that for claps doe write,
                     Let pui'nees, porters, players praise delight,
                     And, till they burst, their backs, like asses load:
                     A man should seeke great glorie, and not broad.
                  
                  
                     XCVII. ON THE NEW MOTION.
                     SEe you yond' Motion? Not the old Fa-ding,
                     Nor Captayne POD, nor yet the Eltham-thing;
                     But one more rare, and in the case so new:
                     His cloke with orient veluet quite lin'd through,
                     
                     His rosie tyes and garters so ore-blowne,
                     By his each glorious parcell to be knowne!
                     He wont was to encounter me, aloud,
                     Where ere he met me; now hee's dumbe, or proud.
                     Know you the cause? H'has neither land, nor lease,
                     Nor baudie stock, that trauells for encrease,
                     Nor office in the towne, nor place in court,
                     Nor'bout the beares, nor noyse to make lords sport.
                     He is no fauourites fauourite, no deare trust
                     Of any Madames, hath neadd squires, and must.
                     Nor did the king of Denmarke him salute,
                     When he was here. Nor hath he got a sute,
                     Since he was gone, more then the one he weares.
                     Nor are the Queenes most honor'd maides by th'eares
                     About his forme. What then so swells each lim?
                     Onely his clothes haue ouer-leauen'd him.
                  
                  
                     XCVIII. TO SIR THOMAS ROE.
                     THou hast begun well, ROE, which stand well too,
                     And I know nothing more thou hast to doo.
                     He that is round within himselfe, and streight,
                     Need seeke no other strength, no other height;
                     Fortune vpon him breakes her selfe, if ill,
                     And what would hurt his vertue makes it still.
                     That thou at once, then, nobly maist defend
                     With thine owne course the iudgement of thy friend,
                     Be alwayes to thy gather'd selfe the same:
                     And studie conscience, more then thou would'st fame.
                     Though both be good, the latter yet is worst,
                     And euer is ill got without the first.
                  
                  
                     XCIX. TO THE SAME.
                     THat thou hast kept thy loue, encreast thy will,
                     Better'd thy trust to letters; that thy skill;
                     Hast taught thy selfe worthy thy pen to tread,
                     And that to write things worthy to be read:
                     How much of great example wert thou, ROE,
                     If time to facts, as vnto men would owe?
                     But much it now auailes, what's done, of whom:
                     The selfe-same deeds, as diuersly they come,
                     
                     From place, or fortune, are made high, or low,
                     And euen the praisers iudgement suffers so.
                     Well, though thy name lesse then our great ones bee,
                     Thy fact is more: let truth encourage thee.
                  
                  
                     C. ON PLAY-WRIGHT.
                     PLAY-WRIGHT, by chance, hearing some toyes I'had writ,
                     Cry'd to my face, they were th'elixir of wit:
                     And I must now beleeue him: for, to day,
                     Fiue of my iests, then stolne, past him a play.
                  
                  
                     CI. INVITING A FRIEND TO SVPPER.
                     TO night, graue sir, both my poore house, and I
                     Doe equally desire your companie:
                     Not that we thinke vs worthy such a ghest,
                     But that your worth will dignifie our feast,
                     With those that come; whose grace may make that seeme
                     Something, which, else, could hope for no esteeme.
                     It is the faire acceptance, Sir, creates
                     The entertaynment perfect: not the cates.
                     Yet shall you haue, to rectifie your palate,
                     An oliue, capers, or some better sallade
                     Vshring the mutton; with a short-leg'd hen,
                     If we can get her, full of egs, and then,
                     Limons, and wine for sauce: to these, a coney
                     Is not to be despair'd of, for our money;
                     And, though fowle, now, be scarce, yet there are clarkes,
                     The skie not falling, thinke we may haue larkes.
                     Ile tell you of more, and lye, so you will come:
                     Of partrich, pheasant, wood-cock, of which some
                     May yet be there; and godwit, if we can:
                     Knat, raile, and ruffe too. How so ere, my man
                     Shall reade a piece of VIRGIL, TACITVS,
                     LIVIE, or of some better booke to vs,
                     Of which wee'll speake our minds, amidst our meate;
                     And Ile professe no verses to repeate:
                     To this, if ought appeare, which I know not of,
                     That will the pastrie, not my paper, show of.
                     Digestiue cheese, and fruit there sure will bee;
                     But that, which most doth take my Muse, and mee,
                     
                     Is a pure cup of rich Canary-wine,
                     Which is the Mermaids, now, but shall be mine:
                     Of which had HORACE, or ANACREON tasted,
                     Their liues, as doe their lines, till now had lasted.
                     
                        Tabacco, Nectar, or the Thespian spring,
                     Are all but LVTHERS beere, to this I sing.
                     Of this we will sup free, but moderately,
                     And we will haue no Pooly', or Parrot by;
                     Nor shall our cups make any guiltie men:
                     But, at our parting, we will be, as when
                     We innocently met. No simple word,
                     That shall be vtter'd at our mirthfull boord,
                     Shall make vs sad next morning: or affright
                     The libertie, that wee'll enioy to night.
                  
                  
                     CII. TO WILLIAM EARLE OF PEMBROKE.
                     I Doe but name thee PEMBROKE, and I find
                     It is an Epigramme, on all man-kind;
                     Against the bad, but of, and to be good:
                     Both which are ask'd, to haue thee vnderstood.
                     Nor could the age haue mist thee, in this strife
                     Of vice, and vertue; wherein all great life
                     Almost, is exercis'd: and scarse one knowes,
                     To which, yet, of the sides himselfe he owes.
                     They follow vertue, for reward, to day;
                     To morrow vice, if shee giue better pay:
                     And are so good, and bad, iust at a price,
                     As nothing else discernes the vertue' or vice.
                     But thou, whose noblêsse keeps one stature still,
                     And one true posture, though besieg'd with ill
                     Of what ambition, faction, pride can raise;
                     Whose life, eu'n they, that enuie it, must praise;
                     That art so reuerenc'd, as thy comming in,
                     But in the view, doth interrupt their sinne;
                     Thou must draw more: and they, that hope to see
                     The common-wealth still safe, must studie thee.
                  
                  
                     CIII. TO MARY LADY WROTH.
                     HOw well, faire crowne of your faire sexe, might hee,
                     That but the twi-light of your sprite did see,
                     
                     And noted for what flesh such soules were fram'd,
                     Know you to be a SYDNEY, though vn-nam'd?
                     And, being nam'd, how little doth that name
                     Need any Muses praise to giue it fame?
                     Which is, it selfe, the imprese of the great,
                     And glorie of them all, but to repeate!
                     Forgiue me then, if mine but say you are
                     A SYDNEY: but in that extend as farre
                     As lowdest praisers, who perhaps would find
                     For euery part a character assign'd.
                     My praise is plaine, and where so ere profest,
                     Becomes none more then you, who need it least.
                  
                  
                     CIIII. TO SVSAN COVNTESSE OF MONTGOMERY.
                     WEre they that nam'd you, prophets? Did they see,
                     Euen in the dew of grace, what you would bee?
                     Or did our times require it, to behold
                     A new SVSANNA, equall to that old?
                     Or, because some scarce thinke that storie true,
                     To make those faithfull, did the Fates send you?
                     And to your Scene lent no lesse dignitie
                     Of birth, of match, of forme, of chastitie?
                     Or, more then borne for the comparison
                     Of former age, or glorie of our one,
                     Were you aduanced, past those times, to be
                     The light, and marke vnto posteritie?
                     Iudge they, that can: Here I haue rais'd to show
                     A picture, which the world for yours must know,
                     And like it too; if they looke equally:
                     If not, 'tis fit for you, some should enuy.
                  
                  
                     CV. TO MARY LADY WROTH.
                     MADAME, had all antiquitie beene lost,
                     All historie seal'd vp, and fables crost;
                     That we had left vs, nor by time, nor place,
                     Least mention of a Nymph, a Muse, a Grace,
                     But euen their names were to be made a-new,
                     Who could not but create them all, from you?
                     He, that but saw you weare the wheaten hat,
                     Would call you more then CERES, if not that:
                     
                     And, drest in shepheards tyre, who would not say:
                     You were the bright OENONE, FLORA, or May?
                     
                     If dancing, all would cry th'Idalian Queene,
                     Were leading forth the Graces on the greene:
                     And, armed to the chase, so bare her bow
                     DIANA'alone, so hit, and hunted so.
                     There's none so dull, that for your stile would aske,
                     That saw you put on PALLAS plumed caske:
                     Or, keeping your due state, that would not cry,
                     There IVNO sate, and yet no Peacock by.
                     So are you Natures Index, and restore,
                     I'your selfe, all treasure lost of th'age before.
                  
                  
                     CVI. TO SIR EDWARD HERBERT.
                     IF men get name, for some one vertue: Then,
                     What man art thou, that art so many men,
                     All-vertuous HERBERT! on whose euery part
                     
                        Truth might spend all her voyce, Fame all her art.
                     Whether thy learning they would take, or wit,
                     Or valour, or thy iudgement seasoning it,
                     Thy standing vpright to thy selfe, thy ends
                     Like straight, thy pietie to God, and friends:
                     Their latter praise would still the greatest bee,
                     And yet, they, all together, lesse then thee.
                  
                  
                     CVII. TO CAPTAYNE HVNGRY.
                     DOe what you come for, Captayne, with your newes;
                     That's, sit, and eate: doe not my eares abuse.
                     I oft looke on false coyne, to know't from true:
                     Not that I loue it, more, then I will you.
                     Tell the grosse Dutch those grosser tales of yours,
                     How great you were with their two Emperours;
                     And yet are with their Princes: Fill them full
                     Of your Morauian horse, Venetian bull.
                     Tell them, what parts yo'haue tane, whence run away,
                     What States yo'haue gull'd, and which yet keepes yo'in pay.
                     Giue them your seruices, and embassies
                     In Ireland, Holland, Sweden, pompous lies,
                     In Hungary, and Poland, Turkie too;
                     What at Ligorne, Rome, Florence you did doe:
                     
                     And, in some yeere, all these together heap'd,
                     For which there must more sea, and land be leap'd,
                     If but to be beleeu'd you haue the hap,
                     Then can a flea at twise skip i'the Map.
                     Giue your yong States-men, (that first make you drunke▪
                     
                     And then lye with you, closer, then a punque,
                     For newes) your Ville-royes, and Silleries,
                     
                        I
                              •
                           nin's, your Nuncio's, and your Tu
                              •
                           lleries,
                     Your Arch-Dukes Agents, and your Beringhams,
                     That are your wordes of credit. Keepe your Names
                     Of Hannow, Shieter-huissen, Popenheim,
                     
                        Hans-spiegle, Rotteinberg, and Boutersh
                              •
                           im,
                     For your next meale: this you are sure of. Why
                     Will you part with them, here, vnthriftely?
                     Nay, now you puffe, tuske, and draw vp your chin,
                     Twirle the poore chaine you run a feasting in.
                     Come, be not angrie, you are HVNGRY; eate;
                     Doe what you come for, Captayne, There's your meat
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     CVIII. TO TRVE SOVLDIERS.
                     STrength of my Countrey, whilst I bring to view
                     Such as are misse-call'd Captaynes, and wrong you;
                     And your high names: I doe desire, that thence
                     Be nor put on you, nor you take offence.
                     I sweare by your true friend, my Muse, I loue
                     Your great profession; which I once, did proue:
                     And did not shame it with my actions, then,
                     No more, then I dare now doe, with my pen
                     He that not trusts me, hauing vow'd thus much,
                     But's angry for the Captayne, still: is such.
                  
                  
                     CIX. TO SIR HENRY NEVIL.
                     WHo now calls on thee, NEVIL, is a Muse,
                     That serues nor fame, nor titles; but doth chuse
                     Where vertue makes them both, and that's in thee:
                     Where all is faire, beside thy pedigree.
                     Thou art not one, seek'st miseries with hope,
                     Wrestlest with dignities, or fain'st a scope
                     Of seruice to the publique, when the end
                     Is priuate gaine, which hath long guilt to friend.
                     
                     Thou rather striu'st the matter to possesse,
                     And elements of honor, then the dresse;
                     To make thy lent life, good against the Fates:
                     
                     And first to know thine owne state, then the States.
                     To be the same in roote, thou art in height;
                     And that thy soule should giue thy flesh her weight.
                     Goe on, and doubt not, what posteritie,
                     Now I haue sung thee thus, shall iudge of thee.
                     Thy deedes, vnto thy name, will proue new wombes,
                     Whil'st others toyle for titles to their tombes.
                  
                  
                     CX. TO CLEMENT EDMONDS, ON HIS CAESARS Commentaries obserued, and translated.
                     NOt CAESARS deeds, nor all his honors wonne,
                     In these west-parts, nor when that warre was done,
                     The name of POMPEY for an enemie,
                     CATO'S to boote, Rome, and her libertie,
                     All yeelding to his fortune, nor, the while,
                     To haue engrau'd these acts, with his owne stile,
                     And that so strong and deepe, as't might be thought,
                     He wrote, with the same spirit that he fought,
                     Nor that his worke liu'd in the hands of foes,
                     Vn-argued then, and yet hath fame from those;
                     Not all these, EDMONDS, or what else put too,
                     Can so speake CAESAR, as thy labours doe.
                     For, where his person liu'd scarce, one iust age
                     And that, midst enuy, and parts; then fell by rage:
                     His deedes too dying, but in bookes (whose good
                     How few haue read! how fewer vnderstood?)
                     Thy learned hand, and true Promethean art
                     (As by a new creation) part by part,
                     In euery counsell, stratageme, designe,
                     Action, or engine, worth a note of thine,
                     T'all future time, not onely doth restore
                     His life, but makes, that he can dye no more.
                  
                  
                     CXI. TO THE SAME; ON THE SAME.
                     WHo EDMONDS, reades thy booke, and doth not see
                     What th'antique souldiers were, the moderne bee?
                     
                     Wherein thou shew'st, how much the latter are
                     Beholding, to this master of the warre;
                     And that, in action, there is nothing new,
                     More, then to varie what our elders knew:
                     Which all, but ignorant Captaynes will confesse:
                     Nor to giue CAESAR this, makes ours the lesse.
                     Yet thou, perhaps, shalt meet some tongues will grutch,
                     That to the world thou should'st reueale so much,
                     And thence, depraue thee, and thy worke. To those
                     CAESAR stands vp, as from his vrne late rose,
                     By thy great helpe: and doth proclaime by mee,
                     They murder him againe, that enuie thee.
                  
                  
                     CXII. TO A WEAKE GAMSTER IN POETRY.
                     WIth thy small stocke, why art thou ventring still,
                     At this so subtile sport: and play'st so ill?
                     Think'st thou it is meere fortune, that can win?
                     Or thy ranke setting? that thou dar'st put in
                     Thy all, at all: and what so ere I doe,
                     Art still at that, and think'st to blow me'vp too?
                     I cannot for the stage a Drama lay,
                     
                        Tragick, or Comick; but thou writ'st the play.
                     I leaue thee there, and giuing way, entend
                     An Epick poeme; thou hast the same end.
                     I modestly quit that, and thinke to write,
                     Next morne, an Ode: Thou mak'st a song ere nigh▪
                     
                     I passe to Elegies; Thou meet'st me there:
                     To Satyres; and thou dost pursue me. Where,
                     Where shall I scape thee? in an Epigramme?
                     
                     O, (thou cry'st out) that is thy proper game.
                     Troth, if it be, I pitty thy ill lucke;
                     That both for wit, and sense, so oft dost plucke,
                     And neuer art encounter'd, I confesse:
                     Nor scarce dost colour for it, which is lesse.
                     Pr'y thee, yet saue thy rest; giue ore in time:
                     There's no vexation, that can make thee prime.
                  
                  
                     CXIII. TO SIR THOMAS OVERBVRY.
                     SO PHOEBVS makes me worthy of his bayes,
                     As but to speake thee, OVERBVRY, is praise:
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     So, where thou liu'st, thou mak'st life vnderstood!
                     Where, what makes others great, doth keepe thee good!
                     I thinke, the Fate of court thy comming crau'd,
                     That the wit there, and manners might be sau'd:
                     For since, what ignorance, what pride is fled!
                     And letters, and humanitie in the stead!
                     Repent thee not of thy faire precedent,
                     Could make such men, and such a place repent:
                     Nor may'any feare, to loose of their degree,
                     Who'in such ambition can but follow thee.
                  
                  
                     CXIIII. TO Mrs. PHILIP SYDNEY.
                     I Must beleeue some miracles still bee
                     When SYDNYES name I heare, or face I see:
                     For CVPID, who (at first) tooke vaine delight,
                     In meere out-formes, vntill he lost his sight,
                     Hath chang'd his soule, and made his obiect you:
                     Where finding so much beautie met with vertue,
                     He hath not onely gain'd himselfe his eyes,
                     But, in your loue, made all his seruants wise.
                  
                  
                     CXV. ON THE TOWNES HONEST MAN.
                     YOu wonder, who this is! and, why I name
                     Him not, aloud, that boasts so good a fame:
                     Naming so many, too! But, this is one,
                     Suffers no name, but a description:
                     Being no vitious person, but the vice
                     About the towne; and knowne too, at that price.
                     A subtle thing, that doth affections win
                     By speaking well o' the company'it's in.
                     Talkes loud, and baudy, has a gather'd deale
                     Of newes, and noyse, to sow out a long meale.
                     Can come from Tripoly, leape stooles, and winke,
                     Doe all, that longs to the anarchy of drinke,
                     Except the duell. Can sing songs, and catches;
                     Giue euery one his dose of mirth: and watches
                     Whose name's vn-welcome to the present eare,
                     And him it layes on; if he be not there.
                     Tell's of him, all the tales, it selfe then makes;
                     But, if it shall be question'd, vnder-takes,
                     
                     It will deny all; and forsweare it too:
                     Not that it feares, but will not haue to doo
                     With such a one. And therein keepes it's word.
                     'Twill see it's sister naked, ere a sword.
                     At euery meale, where it doth dine, or sup,
                     The cloth's no sooner gone, but it gets vp
                     And, shifting of it's faces, doth play more
                     Parts, then th'Italian could doe, with his dore.
                     Acts old Iniquitie, and in the fit
                     Of miming, gets th'opinion of a wit.
                     Executes men in picture. By defect,
                     From friendship, is it's owne fames architect.
                     An inginer, in slanders, of all fashions,
                     That seeming prayses, are, yet accusations.
                     Describ'd, it's thus: Defin'd would you it haue?
                     Then, The townes honest Man's her errant'st knaue.
                  
                  
                     CXVI. TO SIR WILLIAM IEPHSON.
                     IEPHSON, thou man of men, to whose lou'd name
                     All gentrie, yet, owe part of their best flame!
                     So did thy vertue'enforme, thy wit sustaine
                     That age, when thou stood'st vp the master-braine:
                     Thou wert the first, mad'st merit know her strength,
                     And those that lack'd it, to suspect at length,
                     'Twas not entayl'd on title. That some word
                     Might be found out as good, and not my Lord.
                     
                     That Nature no such difference had imprest
                     In men, but euery brauest was the best:
                     That bloud not mindes, but mindes did bloud adorne:
                     And to liue great, was better, then great borne.
                     These were thy knowing arts: which who doth now
                     Vertuously practise must at least allow
                     Them in, if not, from thee; or must commit
                     A desperate soloecisme in truth and wit.
                  
                  
                     CXVII. ON GROYNE.
                     GROYNE, come of age, his state sold out of hand
                     For'his whore: GROYNE doth still occupy his land.
                  
                  
                     
                     CXVIII. ON GVT.
                     GVT eates all day, and lechers all the night,
                     So all his meate he tasteth ouer, twise:
                     And, striuing so to double his delight,
                     He makes himselfe a thorough-fare of vice.
                     Thus, in his belly, can he change a sin
                     Lust it comes out, that gluttony went in.
                  
                  
                     CXIX. TO SIR RAPH SHELTON.
                     NOt he that flies the court for want of clothes,
                     At hunting railes, hauing no guift in othes,
                     Cryes out 'gainst cocking, since he cannot bet,
                     Shuns prease, for two maine causes, poxe, and debt,
                     With me can merit more, then that good man,
                     Whose dice not doing well, to'a pulpit ran,
                     No, SHELTON, giue me thee, canst want all these,
                     But dost it out of iudgement, not disease;
                     Dar'st breath in any ayre; and with safe skill,
                     Till thou canst finde the best, choose the least ill.
                     That to the vulgar canst thy selfe apply,
                     Treading a better path, not contrary;
                     And, in their errors maze, thine owne way know:
                     Which is to liue to conscience, not to show.
                     He, that, but liuing halfe his age, dyes such;
                     Makes, the whole longer, then 'twas giuen him, much.
                  
                  
                     CXX. EPITAPH ON S. P. A CHILD OF Q. EL. CHAPPEL.
                     WEepe with me all you that read
                     This little storie:
                     And know, for whom a teare you shed,
                     
                        Death's selfe is sorry.
                     'Twas a child, that so did thriue
                     In grace, and feature,
                     As Heauen and Nature seem'd to striue
                     Which own'd the creature.
                     
                     Yeeres he numbred scarse thirteene
                     When Fates turn'd cruell,
                     Yet three fill'd Zodiackes had he beene
                     The stages iewell;
                     And did act (what now we mone)
                     Old men so duely,
                     As, sooth, the Parcae thought him one,
                     He plai'd so truely.
                     So, by error, to his fate
                     They all consented;
                     But viewing him since (alas, too late)
                     They haue repented.
                     And haue sought (to giue new birth)
                     In bathes to steepe him;
                     But, being so much too good for earth,
                     Heauen vowes to keepe him.
                  
                  
                     CXXI. TO BENIAMIN RVDYERD.
                     RVDYERD, as lesser dames, to great ones vse,
                     My lighter comes, to kisse thy learned Muse;
                     Whose better studies while shee emulates,
                     Shee learnes to know long difference of their states.
                     Yet is the office not to be despis'd,
                     If onely loue should make the action pris'd:
                     Nor he, for friendship, to be thought vnfit,
                     That striues, his manners should procede his wit.
                  
                  
                     CXXII. TO THE SAME.
                     IF I would wish, for truth, and not for show,
                     The aged SATVRNE'S age, and rites to know;
                     If I would striue to bring backe times, and trie
                     The world's pure gold, and wise simplicitie;
                     If I would vertue set, as shee was yong,
                     And heare her speake with one, and her first tongue;
                     If holiest friend-ship, naked to the touch,
                     I would restore, and keepe it euer such;
                     I need no other arts, but studie thee:
                     Who prou'st, all these were, and againe may bee.
                  
                  
                     
                     CXXIII. TO THE SAME.
                     WRiting thy selfe, or iudging others writ,
                     I know not which th'hast most, candor, or wit:
                     But both th'hast so, as who affects the state
                     Of the best writer, and iudge, should emulate.
                  
                  
                     CXXIIII. EPITAPH ON ELIZABETH, L. H.
                     WOuld'st thou heare, what man can say
                     In a little? Reader, stay.
                     Vnder-neath this stone doth lye
                     As much beautie, as could dye:
                     Which in life did harbour giue
                     To more vertue, then doth liue.
                     If, at all, shee had a fault,
                     Leaue it buryed in this vault.
                     One name was ELIZABETH,
                     Th'other let it sleepe with death:
                     Fitter, where it dyed, to tell,
                     Then that it liu'd at all. Farewell.
                  
                  
                     CXXV. TO SIR WILLIAM VVEDALE.
                     VV'DALE, thou piece of the first times, a man
                     Made for what Nature could, or Vertue can;
                     Both whose dimensions, lost, the world might finde
                     Restored in thy body, and thy minde!
                     Who sees a soule, in such a body set,
                     Might loue the treasure for the cabinet.
                     But I, no child, no foole, respect the kinde,
                     The full, the flowing graces there enshrin'd;
                     Which (would the world not mis-call't flatterie)
                     I could adore, almost t'idolatrie.
                  
                  
                     CXXVI. TO HIS LADY, THEN Mrs. CARY.
                     REtyr'd, with purpose your faire worth to praise,
                     'Mongst Hampton shades, and PHOEBVS groue of bayes,
                     
                     I pluck'd a branch; the iealous god did frowne,
                     And bad me lay th'vsurped laurell downe:
                     Said I wrong'd him, and (which was more) his loue.
                     I answer'd, DAPHNE now no paine can proue.
                     PHOEBVS replyed. Bold head, it is not shee:
                     CARY my loue is, DAPHNE but my tree.
                  
                  
                     CXXVII. TO ESME, LORD 'AVBIGNY.
                     IS there a hope, that Man would thankefull bee,
                     If I should faile, in gratitude, to thee
                     To whom I am so bound, lou'd AVBIGNY?
                     No, I doe, therefore, call Posteritie
                     
                     Into the debt; and reckon on her head,
                     How full of want, how swallow'd vp, how dead
                     I, and this Muse had beene, if thou hadst not
                     Lent timely succours, and new life begot:
                     So, all reward, or name, that growes to mee
                     By her attempt, shall still be owing thee.
                     And, than this same, I know no abler way
                     To thanke thy benefits: which is, to pay.
                  
                  
                     CXXVIII. TO WILLIAM ROE.
                     ROE (and my ioy to name) th'art now, to goe
                     Countries, and climes, manners, and men to know,
                     T'extract, and choose the best of all these knowne,
                     And those to turne to bloud, and make thine owne:
                     May windes as soft as breath of kissing friends,
                     Attend thee hence; and there, may all thy ends,
                     As the beginnings here, proue purely sweet,
                     And perfect in a circle alwayes meet.
                     So, when we, blest with thy returne, shall see
                     Thy selfe, with thy first thoughts, brought home by thee,
                     We each to other may this voyce enspire;
                     This is that good AENEAS, past through fire,
                     Through seas, stormes, tempests: and imbarqu'd for hell,
                     Came backe vntouch'd. This man hath trauail'd well.
                  
                  
                     
                     CXXIX. TO MIME.
                     THat, not a paire of friends each other see,
                     But the first question is, when one saw thee?
                     That there's no iourney set, or thought vpon,
                     To Braynford, Hackney, Bow, but thou mak'st one;
                     That scarse the Towne designeth any feast
                     To which thou'rt not a weeke, bespoke a guest;
                     That still th'art made the suppers flagge, the drum,
                     The very call, to make all others come:
                     Think'st thou, MIME, this is great? or, that they striue
                     Whose noyse shall keepe thy miming most aliue,
                     Whil'st thou dost rayse some Player, from the graue,
                     Out-dance the Babion, or out-boast the Braue;
                     Or (mounted on a stoole) thy face doth hit
                     On some new gesture, that's imputed wit?
                     O, runne not proud of this. Yet, take thy due.
                     Thou dost out-zany COKELY, POD; nay, Gue:
                     And thine owne CORIAT too. But (would'st thou see)
                     Men loue thee not for this: They laugh at thee.
                  
                  
                     CXXX. TO ALPHONSO FERRABOSCO, on his Booke.
                     TO vrge, my lou'd ALPHONSO, that bold fame,
                     Of building townes, and making wilde beasts tame,
                     Which Musick had; or speake her knowne effects,
                     That shee remoueth cares, sadnesse eiects,
                     Declineth anger, perswades clemencie,
                     Doth sweeten mirth, and heighten pietie,
                     And is t'a body, often, ill inclin'd,
                     No lesse a sou'raigne cure, then to the mind;
                     T'alledge, that greatest men were not asham'd,
                     Of old, euen by her practise to be fam'd;
                     To say, indeed, shee were the soule of heauen,
                     That the eight spheare, no lesse, then planets seauen,
                     Mou'd by her order, and the ninth more high,
                     Including all, were thence call'd harmonie:
                     I, yet, had vtter'd nothing on thy part,
                     When these were but the praises of the Art.
                     But when I haue said, the proofes of all these bee
                     Shed in thy Songs; 'tis true: but short of thee.
                  
                  
                     
                     CXXXI. TO THE SAME.
                     WHen we doe giue, ALPHONSO, to the light,
                     A worke of ours, we part with our owne right;
                     For, then, all mouthes will iudge, and their owne way:
                     The learn'd haue no more priuiledge, then the lay.
                     And though we could all men, all censures heare,
                     We ought not giue them taste, we had an eare.
                     For, if the hum'rous world will talke at large,
                     They should be fooles, for me, at their owne charge.
                     Say, this, or that man they to thee preferre;
                     Euen those for whom they doe this, know they erre:
                     And would (being ask'd the truth) ashamed say,
                     They were not to be nam'd on the same day.
                     Then stand vnto thy selfe, not seeke without
                     For fame, with breath soone kindled, soone blowne out.
                  
                  
                     CXXXII. TO Mr. IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
                     IF to admire were to commend my praise
                     Might then both thee, thy worke and merit raise:
                     But, as it is (the Child of Ignorance,
                     And vtter stranger to all ayre of France)
                     How can I speake of thy great paines, but erre?
                     Since they can only iudge, that can conferre.
                     Behold! the reuerend shade of BARTAS stands
                     Before my thought, and (in thy right) commands
                     That to the world I publish, for him▪ this;
                     
                        BARTAS doth wish thy English now were his.
                     So well in that are his inuentions wrought,
                     As his will now be the translation thought,
                     Thine the originall; and France shall boast,
                     No more, those mayden glories shee hath lost.
                  
                  
                     CXXXIII. ON THE FAMOVS VOYAGE.
                     NO more let Greece her bolder fables tell
                     Of HERCVLES, or THESEVS going to hell,
                     ORPHEVS, VLYSSES: or the Latine Muse,
                     With tales of Troyes iust knight, our faiths abuse:
                     
                     We haue a SHELTON, and a HEYDEN got,
                     Had power to act, what they to faine had not.
                     All, that they boast of STYX, of ACHERON,
                     COCYTVS, PHLEGETON, our haue prou'd in one;
                     The filth, stench, noyse: saue only what was there
                     Subtly distinguish'd, was confused here.
                     Their wherry had no saile, too; ours had none:
                     And in it, two more horride knaues, then CHARON.
                     Arses were heard to croake, in stead of frogs;
                     And for one CERBERVS, the whole coast was dogs.
                     
                        Furies there wanted not: each scold was ten.
                     And, for the cryes of Ghosts, women, and men,
                     Laden with plague-sores, and their sinnes, were heard,
                     Lash'd by their consciences, to die, affeard.
                     Then let the former age, with this content her,
                     Shee brought the Poets forth, but ours th'aduenter.
                  
                  
                     THE VOYAGE IT SELFE.
                     I Sing the braue aduenture of two wights,
                     And pitty 'tis, I cannot call 'hem knights:
                     One was; and he, for brawne, and braine, right able
                     To haue beene stiled of King ARTHVRS table.
                     The other was a squire, of faire degree;
                     But, in the action, greater man then hee:
                     Who gaue, to take at his returne from Hell,
                     His three for one. Now, lordings, listen well.
                     It was the day, what time the powerfull Moone
                     
                     Makes thee poore Banck-side creature wet it'shoone,
                     In it'owne hall; when these (in worthy scorne
                     Of those, that put out moneyes, on returne
                     From Venice, Paris, or some in-land passage
                     Of sixe times to, and fro, without embassage,
                     Or him that backward went to Berwicke, or which
                     Did dance the famous Morrisse, vnto Norwich)
                     At Bread-streets Mermaid, hauing din'd, and merry,
                     Propos'd t
                           •
                         goe to Hol'borne in a wherry:
                     A harder tasque, then either his to Bristo',
                     Or his to Antwerpe. Therefore, once more, list ho'.
                     A Docke there is, that called is AVERNVS,
                     Of some Bride-well, and may, in time, concerne vs
                     All, that are readers: but, me thinkes 'tis od,
                     That all this while I haue forgot some god,
                  
                  
                     
                     Or goddesse to inuoke, to stuffe my verse;
                     And with both bombard-stile, and phrase, rehearse
                     The many perills of this Port, and how▪
                     
                     Sans'helpe of SYBIL, or a golden bough,
                     Or magick sacrifice, they past along!
                     ALCIDES, be thou succouring to my song.
                     Thou hast seene hell (some say) and know'st all nookes there,
                     Canst tell me best, how euery Furie lookes there,
                     And art a god, if Fame thee not abuses,
                     Alwayes at hand, to aide the merry Muses.
                     
                     Great Club-fist, though thy backe, and bones be sore,
                     Still, with thy former labours; yet, once more,
                     Act a braue worke, call it thy last aduentry:
                     But hold my torch, while I describe the entry
                     To this dire passage. Say, thou stop thy nose:
                     'Tis but light paines: Indeede this Dock's no rose.
                     In the first iawes appear'd that vgly monster,
                     Ycleped Mud, which, when their oares did once stirre,
                     Belch'd forth an ayre, as hot, as at the muster
                     Of all your night-tubs, when the carts doe cluster,
                     Who shall discharge first his merd-vrinous load:
                     Thorough her wombe they make their famous road,
                     Betweene two walls; where, on one side to scar men,
                     Were seene your vgly Centaures, yee call Car-men,
                     
                        Gorgonian scolds, and Harpyes: on the other
                     Hung stench, diseases, and old filth, their mother,
                     With famine, wants, and sorrowes many a dosen,
                     The least of which was to the plague a cosen.
                     But they vnfrighted passe, though many a priuie
                     Spake to'hem louder, then the oxe in LIVIE;
                     And many a sinke pour'd out her rage anenst'hem;
                     But still their valour, and their vertue fenc't 'hem,
                     And, on they went, like CASTOR braue, and POLLVX:
                     Ploughing the mayne. When, see (the worst of all lucks)
                     They met the second Prodigie, would feare a
                     Man, that had neuer heard of a Chimaera.
                     
                     One said, it was bold BRIAREVS, or the beadle,
                     (Who hath the hundred hands when he doth meddle)
                     The other thought it HYDRA, or the rock
                     Made of the trull, that cut her fathers lock:
                     But, comming neere, they found it but a liter,
                     So huge, it seem'd, they could by no meanes quite her.
                     Backe, cry'd their brace of CHARONS: they cry'd, no,
                     No going backe; on still you rogues, and row.
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     Of Hol'borne (three sergeants heads) lookes ore,
                     And stayes but till you come vnto the dore!
                     Tempt not his furie, PLVTO is away:
                     And MADAME CAESAR, great PROSERPINA,
                     Is now from home. You lose your labours quite,
                     Were you IOVE'S sonnes, or had ALCIDES might.
                     They cry'd out PVSSE. He told them he was BANKES,
                     That had, so often, shew'd 'hem merry prankes.
                     They laugh't, at his laugh-worthy fate. And past
                     The tripple head without a sop. At last,
                     Calling for RADAMANTHVS, that dwelt by,
                     A sope-boyler; and AEACVS him nigh,
                     Who kept an ale-house; with my little MINOS,
                     An ancient pur-blinde fletcher, with a high nose;
                     They tooke 'hem all to witnesse of their action:
                     And so went brauely backe, without protraction.
                     In memorie of which most liquid deed,
                     The citie since hath rais'd a Pyramide.
                     And I could wish for their eterniz'd sakes,
                     My Muse had plough'd with his, that sung A-IAX.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE FORREST.
                  
                     I. WHY I WRITE NOT OF LOVE.
                     
                        SOme act of Loue's bound to reherse,
                     I thought to binde him, in my verse:
                     Which when he felt, Away (quoth hee)
                     Can Poets hope to fetter mee?
                     It is enough, they once did get
                     MARS, and my Mother, in their net:
                     I weare not these my wings in vaine.
                     With which he fled me: and againe,
                     Into my ri'mes could ne're be got
                     By any a
                           •
                        te. Then wonder not,
                     That 
                           〈◊〉
                        , my numbers are so cold,
                     When Loue is fled, and I grow old.
                  
                  
                     II. TO PENSHVRST.
                     THou art not, PENSHVRST, built to enuious show,
                     Of touch, or marble; nor canst boast a row
                     Of polish'd pillars, or a roofe of gold:
                     Thou hast no lantherne, whereof tales are told;
                     Or stayre, or courts; but stand'st an ancient pile,
                     And these grudg'd at, art reuerenc'd the while.
                     Thou ioy'st in better markes, of soyle, of ayre,
                     Of wood, of water: therein thou art faire.
                     Thou hast thy walkes for health, as well as sport:
                     Thy Mount, to which the Dryads doe resort,
                     Where PAN, and BACCHVS their high feasts haue made,
                     Beneath the broad beech, and the chest-nut shade;
                     That taller tree, which of a nut was set,
                     At his great birth, where all the Muses met.
                     
                     There, in the writhed barke, are cut the names
                     Of many a SYLVANE, taken with his flames.
                     And thence, the ruddy Satyres oft prouoke
                     The lighter Faunes, to reach thy Ladies oke.
                     
                     Thy copp's, too, nam'd of GAMAGE, thou hast there,
                     That neuer failes to serue thee season'd deere,
                     When thou would'st feast, or exercise thy friends.
                     The lower land, that to the riuer bends,
                     Thy sheepe, thy bullocks, kine, and calues doe feed:
                     The middle grounds thy mares, and horses breed.
                     Each banke doth yeeld thee coneyes; and the topps
                     Fertile of wood, ASHORE, and SYDNEY'S copp's,
                     To crowne thy open table, doth prouide
                     The purpled pheasant, with the speckled side:
                     The painted partrich lyes in euery field,
                     And, for thy messe, is willing to be kill'd.
                     And if the high swolne Medway faile thy dish,
                     Thou hast thy ponds, that pay thee tribute fish,
                     Fat, aged carps, that runne into thy net.
                     And pikes, now weary their owne kinde to eat,
                     As loth, the second draught, or cast to stay,
                     Officiously, at first, themselues betray.
                     Bright eeles, that emulate them, and leape on land,
                     Before the fisher, or into his hand.
                     Then hath thy orchard fruit, thy garden flowers,
                     Fresh as the ayre, and new as are the houres.
                     The earely cherry, with the later plum,
                     Fig, grape, and quince, each in his time doth come:
                     The blushing apricot, and woolly peach
                     Hang on thy walls, that euery child may reach.
                     And though thy walls be of the countrey stone,
                     They'are rear'd with no mans ruine, no mans grone,
                     There's none, that dwell about them, wish them downe;
                     But all come in, the farmer, and the clowne:
                     And no one empty-handed, to salute
                     Thy lord, and lady, though they haue no sute.
                     Some bring a capon, some a rurall cake,
                     Some nuts, some apples; some that thinke they make
                     The better cheeses, bring 'hem; or else send
                     By their ripe daughters, whom they would commend
                     This way to husbands; and whose baskets beare
                     An embleme of themselues, in plum, or peare.
                     But what can this (more then expresse their loue)
                     Adde to thy fr
                           •
                        e prouisions, farre aboue
                     
                     The neede of such? whose liberall boord doth flow,
                     With all, that hospitalitie doth know!
                     Where comes no guest, but is allow'd to eate,
                     Without his feare, and of thy lords owne meate:
                     Where the same beere, and bread, and selfe-same wine,
                     That is his Lordships, shall be also mine.
                     And I not faine to sit (as some, this day,
                     At great mens tables) and yet dine away.
                     Here no man tells my cups; nor, standing by,
                     A waiter, doth my gluttony enuy:
                     But giues me what I call, and lets me eate,
                     He knowes, below, he shall finde plentie of meate,
                     Thy tables hoord not vp for the next day,
                     Nor, when I take my lodging, need I pray
                     For fire, or lights, or liuorie: all is there;
                     As if thou, then, wert mine, or I raign'd here:
                     There's nothing I can wish, for which I stay.
                     That found King IAMES, when hunting late, this way,
                     With his braue sonne, the Prince, they saw thy fires
                     Shine bright on euery harth as the desires
                     Of thy Penates had beene set on flame,
                     To entertayne them; or the countrey came,
                     With all their zeale, to warme their welcome here.
                     What (great, I will not say, but) sodayne cheare
                     Did'st thou, then, make'hem! and what praise was heap'd
                     On thy good lady, then! who, therein, reap'd
                     The iust reward of her high huswifery;
                     To haue her linnen, plate, and all things nigh,
                     When shee was farre: and not a roome, but drest,
                     As if it had expected such a guest!
                     These, PENSHVRST, are thy praise, and yet not all.
                     Thy lady's noble, fruitfull, chaste withall.
                     His children thy great lord may call his owne:
                     A fortune, in this age, but rarely knowne.
                     They are, and haue beene taught religion: Thence
                     Their gentler spirits haue suck'd innocence.
                     Each morne, and euen, they are taught to pray,
                     With the whole houshold, and may, euery day,
                     Reade, in their vertuous parents noble parts,
                     The mysteries of manners, armes, and arts.
                     Now, PENSHVRST, they that will proportion thee
                     With other edifices, when they see
                     Those proud, ambitious heaps, and nothing else,
                     May say, their lords haue built, but thy lord dwells.
                  
                  
                     
                     III. TO SIR ROBERT WROTH.
                     HOw blest art thou, canst loue the countrey, WROTH,
                     Whether by choice, or fate, or both;
                     And, though so neere the citie, and the court,
                     Art tane with neithers vice, nor sport:
                     That at great times, art no ambitious guest
                     Of Sheriffes dinner, or Maiors feast.
                     Nor com'st to view the better cloth of state;
                     The richer hangings, or crowne-plate;
                     Nor throng'st (when masquing is) to haue a sight
                     Of the short brauerie of the night;
                     To view the iewells, stuffes, the paines, the wit
                     There wasted, some not paid for yet!
                     But canst, at home, in thy securer rest,
                     Liue, with vn-bought prouision blest;
                     Free from proud porches, or their guilded roofes,
                     'Mongst loughing heards, and solide hoofes:
                     Along'st the curled woods, and painted meades,
                     Through which a serpent riuer leades
                     To some coole, courteous shade, which he calls his,
                     And makes sleepe softer then it is!
                     Or, if thou list the night in watch to breake,
                     A-bed canst heare the loud stag speake,
                     In spring, oft roused for thy masters sport,
                     Who, for it, makes thy house his court;
                     Or with thy friends; the heart of all the yeere,
                     Diuid'st, vpon the lesser Deere;
                     In autumne, at the Partrich makes a flight,
                     And giu'st thy gladder guests the sight;
                     And, in the winter, hunt'st the flying hare,
                     More for thy exercise, then fare;
                     While all, that follow, their glad eares apply
                     To the full greatnesse of the cry:
                     Or hauking at the riuer, or the bush,
                     Or shooting at the greedie thrush,
                     Thou dost with some delight the day out-weare,
                     Although the coldest of the yeere!
                     The whil'st, the seuerall seasons thou hast seene
                     Of flowrie fields, of cop'ces greene,
                     The mowed meddowes, with the fleeced sheepe,
                     And feasts, that either shearers keepe;
                     
                     The ripened eares, yet humble in their height,
                     And furrowes laden with their weight;
                     The apple-haruest, that doth longer last;
                     The hogs return'd home fat from mast;
                     The trees cut out in log; and those boughes made
                     A fire now, that lend a shade!
                     Thus PAN, and SYLVANE, hauing had their rites,
                     COMVS puts in, for new delights;
                     And fills thy open hall with mirth, and cheere,
                     As if in SATVRNES raigne it were;
                     APOLLO'S harpe, and HERMES lyre resound,
                     Nor are the Muses strangers found:
                     The rout of rurall folke come thronging in,
                     (Their rudenesse then is thought no sinne)
                     Thy noblest spouse affords them welcome grace;
                     And the great Heroes, of her race,
                     Sit mixt with losse of state, or reuerence.
                     Freedome doth with degree dispense.
                     The iolly wassall walkes the often round,
                     And in their cups, their cares are drown'd:
                     They thinke not, then, which side the cause shall leese,
                     Nor how to get the lawyer fees.
                     Such, and no other was that age, of old,
                     Which boasts t'haue had the head of gold.
                     And such since thou canst make thine owne content,
                     Striue, WROTH, to liue long innocent.
                     Let others watch in guiltie armes, and stand
                     The furie of a rash command,
                     Goe enter breaches, meet the cannons rage,
                     That they may sleepe with scarres in age.
                     And shew their feathers shot, and cullors torne,
                     And brag, that they were therefore borne.
                     Let this man sweat, and wrangle at the barre,
                     For euery price, in euery iarre,
                     And change possessions, oftner with his breath,
                     Then either money, warre, or death:
                     Let him, then hardest sires, more disinherit,
                     And each where boast it as his merit,
                     To blow vp orphanes, widdowes, and their states;
                     And thinke his power doth equall Fates.
                     
                     Let that goe heape a masse of wretched wealth,
                     Purchas'd by rapine, worse then stealth,
                     And brooding o're it sit, with broadest eyes,
                     Not doing good, scarce when he dyes.
                     
                     Let thousands more goe flatter vice, and winne,
                     By being organes to great sinne,
                     Get place, and honor, and be glad to keepe
                     The secrets, that shall breake their sleepe:
                     And, so they ride in purple, eate in plate,
                     Though poyson, thinke it a great fate.
                     But thou, my WROTH, if I can truth apply,
                     Shalt neither that, nor this enuy:
                     Thy peace is made; and, when man's state is well,
                     'Tis better, if he there can dwell.
                     God wisheth, none should wracke on a strange shelfe:
                     To him, man's dearer, then t'himselfe.
                     And, howsoeuer we may thinke things sweet,
                     He alwayes giues what he knowes meet;
                     Which who can vse is happy: Such be thou.
                     Thy morning's, and thy euening's vow
                     Be thankes to him, and earnest prayer, to finde
                     A body sound, with sounder minde;
                     To doe thy countrey seruice, thy selfe right;
                     That neither want doe thee affright,
                     Nor death; but when thy latest sand is spent,
                     Thou maist thinke life, a thing but lent.
                  
                  
                     IIII. TO THE WORLD. A farewell for a Gentle-woman, vertuous and noble.
                     FAlse world, good-night: since thou hast brought
                     That houre vpon my morne of age,
                     Hence-forth I quit thee from my thought,
                     My part is ended on thy stage.
                     Doe not once hope, that thou canst tempt
                     A spirit so resolu'd to tread
                     Vpon thy throate, and liue exempt
                     From all the nets that thou canst spread.
                     I know thy formes are studyed arts,
                     Thy subtle wayes, be narrow straits;
                     Thy curtesie but sodaine starts,
                     And what thou call'st thy gifts are baits.
                     
                     I know too, though thou strut, and paint,
                     Yet art thou both shrunke vp, and old,
                     That onely fooles make thee a saint,
                     And all thy good is to be sold.
                     I know thou whole art but a shop
                     Of toyes, and trifles, traps, and snares,
                     To take the weake, or make them stop:
                     Yet art thou falser then thy wares.
                     And, knowing this, should I yet stay,
                     Like such as blow away their liues,
                     And neuer will redeeme a day,
                     Enamor'd of their golden gyues?
                     Or, hauing scap'd, shall I returne,
                     And thrust my necke into the noose,
                     From whence, so lately, I did burne,
                     With all my powers, my selfe to loose?
                     What bird, or beast, is knowne so dull,
                     That fled his cage, or broke his chaine,
                     And tasting ayre, and freedome, wull
                     Render his head in there againe?
                     If these, who haue but sense, can shun
                     The engines, that haue them annoy'd;
                     Little, for me, had reason done,
                     If I could not thy ginnes auoyd.
                     Yes, threaten, doe. Alas I feare
                     As little, as I hope from thee:
                     I know thou canst nor shew, nor beare
                     More hatred, then thou hast to mee.
                     My tender, first, and simple yeeres
                     Thou did'st abuse, and then betray;
                     Since stird'st vp iealousies and feares,
                     When all the causes were away.
                     Then, in a soile hast planted me,
                     Where breathe the basest of thy fooles;
                     Where enuious arts professed be,
                     And pride, and ignorance the schooles,
                     Where nothing is examin'd, weigh'd,
                     But, as 'tis rumor'd, so beleeu'd:
                     Where euery freedome is betray'd,
                     And euery goodnesse tax'd, or grieu'd.
                     But, what we'are borne for, we must beare:
                     Our fraile condition it is such,
                     That, what to all may happen here,
                     If't chance to me, I must not grutch.
                     
                     Else, I my state should much mistake,
                     To harbour a diuided thought
                     From all my kinde: that, for my sake,
                     There should a miracle be wrought.
                     No, I doe know, that I was borne
                     To age, misfortune, sicknesse, griefe:
                     But I will beare these, with that scorne,
                     As shall not need thy false reliefe.
                     Nor for my peace will I goe farre,
                     As wandrers doe, that still doe rome,
                     But make my strengths, such as they are,
                     Here in my bosome, and at home.
                  
                  
                     V. Song. TO CELIA.
                     COme my CELIA, let vs proue,
                     While we may, the sports of loue;
                     Time will not be ours, for euer:
                     He, at length, our good will seuer.
                     Spend not then his guifts in vaine.
                     Sunnes, that set, may rise againe:
                     But if once we loose this light,
                     'Tis, with vs, perpetuall night.
                     Why should we deferre our ioyes?
                     Fame, and rumor are but toyes.
                     Cannot we delude the eyes
                     Of a few poore houshold spyes?
                     Or his easier eares beguile,
                     So remoued by our wile?
                     'Tis no sinne, loues fruit to steale,
                     But the sweet theft to reueale:
                     To be taken, to be seene,
                     These haue crimes accounted beene.
                  
                  
                     VI. TO THE SAME.
                     KIsse me, sweet: The warie louer
                     Can your fauours keepe, and couer,
                     When the common courting iay
                     All your bounties will betray.
                     
                     Kisse againe: no creature comes.
                     Kisse, and score vp wealthy summes
                     On my lips, thus hardly sundred,
                     While you breath. First giue a hundred,
                     Then a thousand, then another
                     Hundred, then vnto the tother
                     Adde a thousand, and so more:
                     Till you equall with the store,
                     All the grasse that Rumney yeelds,
                     Or the sands in Chelsey fields,
                     Or the drops in siluer Thames,
                     Or the starres, that guild his streames,
                     In the silent sommer-nights,
                     When youths ply their stolne delights.
                     That the curious may not know
                     How to tell'hem, as thy flow,
                     And the enuious, when they find
                     What their number is, be pin'd.
                  
                  
                     VII. Song. THAT WOMEN ARE BVT MENS SHADDOWES.
                     FOllow a shaddow, it still flies you;
                     Seeme to flye it, it will pursue:
                     So court a mistris, shee denyes you;
                     Let her alone, shee will court you.
                     Say, are not women truely, then,
                     Stil'd but the shaddowes of vs men?
                     At morne, and euen, shades are longest;
                     At noone, they are or short, or none:
                     So men at weakest, they are strongest,
                     But grant vs perfect, they're not knowne.
                     Say, are not women truely, then,
                     Stil'd but the shaddowes of vs men?
                  
                  
                     VIII. TO SICKNESSE.
                     WHy, Disease, dost thou molest
                     Ladies? and of them the best?
                     Doe not men, ynow of rites
                     To thy altars, by their nights
                     
                     Spent in surfets: and their dayes,
                     And nights too, in worser wayes?
                     Take heed, Sicknesse, what you doe,
                     I shall feare, you'll surfet too.
                     Liue not we, as, all thy stalls,
                     Spittles, pest-house, hospitalls,
                     Scarce will take our present store?
                     And this age will build no more:
                     'Pray thee, feed contented, then,
                     
                        Sicknesse; onely on vs men.
                     Or if needs thy lust will tast
                     Woman-kinde; deuoure the wast
                     Liuers, round about the towne.
                     But, forgiue me, with thy crowne
                     They maintayne the truest trade,
                     And haue more diseases made.
                     What should, yet, thy pallat please?
                     Daintinesse, and softer case,
                     Sleeked limmes, and finest blood?
                     If thy leanenesse loue such food,
                     There are those, that, for thy sake,
                     Doe enough; and who would take
                     Any paines; yea, thinke it price,
                     To become thy sacrifice.
                     That distill their husbands land
                     In decoctions; and are mann'd
                     With ten Emp'ricks, in their chamber,
                     Lying for the spirit of amber.
                     That for th'oyle of Talke, dare spend
                     More then citizens dare lend
                     Them, and all their officers.
                     That, to make all pleasure theirs,
                     Will by coach, and water goe,
                     Euery stew in towne to know;
                     Dare entayle their loues on any,
                     Bald, or blinde, or nere so many:
                     And, for thee, at common game,
                     Play away, health, wealth, and fame.
                     These, disease, will thee deserue:
                     And will, long ere thou should'st starue
                     On their beds, most prostitute,
                     Moue it, as their humblest sute,
                     In thy iustice to molest
                     None but them, and leaue the rest.
                  
                  
                     
                     IX. Song. TO CELIA.
                     DRrinke to me, onely, with thine eyes,
                     And I will pledge with mine;
                     Or leaue a kisse but in the cup,
                     And Ile not looke for wine.
                     The thirst, that from the soule doth rise,
                     Doth aske a drinke diuine:
                     But might I of IOVE'S Nectar sup,
                     I would not change for thine.
                     I sent thee, late, a rosie wreath,
                     Not so much honoring thee,
                     As giuing it a hope, that there
                     It could not withered bee.
                     But thou thereon did'st onely breath,
                     And sent'st it backe to mee:
                     Since when it growes, and smells, I sweare,
                     Not of it selfe, but thee.
                  
                  
                     X.
                     
                        ANd must I sing? what subiect shall I chuse?
                        Or whose great name in Poets heauen vse?
                        For the more countenance to my actiue Muse?
                        
                     
                     
                        HERCVLES? alas his bones are yet sore,
                        With his old earthly labours. T'exact more,
                        Of his dull god-head, were sinne. Ile implore
                     
                     
                        PHOEBVS. No? tend thy cart still. Enuious day
                        Shall not giue out, that I haue made thee stay,
                        And foundred thy hot teame, to tune my lay.
                     
                     
                        Nor will I beg of thee, Lord of the vine,
                        To raise my spirits with thy coniuring wine,
                        In the greene circle of thy Iuy twine.
                     
                     
                        PALLAS, nor thee I call on, mankinde maid,
                        That, at thy birth, mad'st the poore Smith affraid,
                        Who, with his axe, thy fathers mid-wife plaid.
                     
                     
                        
                        Goe, crampe dull MARS, light VENVS, when he snorts,
                        Or, with thy Tribade trine, inuent new sports,
                        Thou, nor thy loosenesse with my making sorts.
                     
                     
                        Let the old boy, your sonne, ply his old taske,
                        Turne the stale prologue to some painted maske,
                        His absence in my verse, is all I aske.
                     
                     
                        HERMES, the cheater, shall not mixe with vs,
                        Though he would steale his sisters PAGASVS,
                        And riffle him: or pawne his PETASVS.
                     
                     
                        Nor all the ladies of the Thespian lake,
                        (Though they were crusht into one forme) could make
                        A beautie of that merit, that should take
                     
                     
                        My Muse vp by commission: No, I bring
                        My owne true fire. Now my thought takes wing,
                        And now an Epode to deepe eares I sing.
                     
                  
                  
                     XI. EPODE.
                     NOt to know vice at all, and keepe true state,
                     Is vertue, and not Fate:
                     
                     Next, to that vertue, is to know vice well,
                     And her blacke spight expell.
                     Which to effect (since no brest is so sure,
                     Or safe, but shee'll procure
                     Some way of entrance) we must plant a guard
                     Of thoughts to watch, and ward
                     At th'eye and eare (the ports vnto the minde)
                     That no strange, or vnkinde
                     Obiect arriue there, but the heart (our spie)
                     Giue knowledge instantly,
                     To wakefull reason, our affections king:
                     Who (in th'examining)
                     Will quickly taste the treason, and commit
                     Close, the close cause of it.
                     Tis the securest policie we haue,
                     To make our sense our slaue.
                     But this true course is not embrac'd by many:
                     By many? scarse by any.
                     
                     For either our affections doe rebell,
                     Or else the sentinell
                     (That should ring larum to the heart) doth sleepe,
                     Or some great thought doth keepe
                     Backe the intelligence, and falsely sweares,
                     Th'are base, and idle feares
                     Whereof the loyall conscience so complaines.
                     Thus, by these subtle traines,
                     Doe seuerall passions inuade the minde,
                     And strike our reason blinde.
                     Of which vsurping rancke, some haue thought loue
                     The first; as proue to moue
                     Most frequent tumults, horrors, and vnrests,
                     In our enflamed brests:
                     But this doth from the cloud of error grow,
                     Which thus we ouer-blow.
                     The thing, they here call Loue, is blinde Desire,
                     Arm'd with bow, shafts, and fire;
                     Inconstant, like the sea, of whence 'tis borne,
                     Rough, swelling, like a storme:
                     With whom who sailes, rides on the surge of feare,
                     And boyles, as if he were
                     In a continuall tempest. Now, true Loue
                     No such effects doth proue;
                     That is an essence, farre more gentle, fine,
                     Pure, perfect, nay diuine▪
                     
                     It is a golden chaine let downe from heauen,
                     Whose linkes are bright, and euen.
                     That falls like sleepe on louers, and combines
                     The soft, and sweetest mindes
                     In equall knots: This beares no brands, nor darts,
                     To murther different hearts,
                     But, in a calme, and god-like vnitie,
                     Preserues communitie.
                     O, who is he, that (in this peace) enioyes
                     Th'Elixir of all ioyes?
                     A forme more fresh, then are the Eden bowers
                     And lasting, as her flowers:
                     Richer then Time, and as Time's vertue, rare.
                     Sober, as saddest care:
                     A sixed thought, an eye vn-taught to glance;
                     Who (blest with such high chance)
                     Would, at suggestion of a steepe desire,
                     Cast himselfe from the spire
                     
                     Of all his happinesse? But soft: I heare
                     Some vicious foole draw neare,
                     That cryes, we dreame, and sweares, there's no such thing,
                     As this chaste loue we sing.
                     Peace Luxurie, thou art like one of those
                     Who, being at sea, suppose,
                     Because they moue, the continent doth so:
                     No, vice, we let thee know
                     Though thy wild thoughts with sparrowes wings doe flye,
                     Turtles can chastly dye;
                     And yet (in this t'expresse our selues more cleare)
                     We doe not number, here,
                     Such spirits as are onely continent,
                     Because lust's meanes are spent:
                     Or those, who doubt the common mouth of fame,
                     And for their place, and name,
                     Cannot so safely sinne. Their chastitie
                     Is meere necessitie.
                     Nor meane we those, whom vowes and conscience
                     Haue fill'd with abstinence:
                     Though we acknowledge, who can so abstayne,
                     Makes a most blessed gayne.
                     He that for loue of goodnesse hateth ill,
                     Is more crowne-worthy still,
                     Then he, which for sinnes penaltie forbeares.
                     His heart sinnes, though he feares.
                     But we propose a person like our Doue,
                     Grac'd with a Phoenix loue;
                     A beautie of that cleere, and sparkling light,
                     Would make a day of night,
                     And turne the blackest sorrowes to bright ioyes:
                     Whose od'rous breath destroyes
                     All taste of bitternesse, and makes the ayre
                     As sweet, as shee is fayre.
                     A body so harmoniously compos'd,
                     As if Nature disclos'd
                     All her best symmetrie in that one feature!
                     O, so diuine a creature
                     Who could be false to? chiefly, when he knowes
                     How onely shee bestowes
                     The wealthy treasure of her loue on him;
                     Making his fortunes swim
                     In the full floud of her admir'd perfection?
                     What sauage, brute affection,
                     
                     Would not be fearefull to offend a dame
                     Of this excelling frame?
                     Much more a noble, and right generous mind
                     (To vertuous moods inclin'd)
                     That knowes the waight of guilt: He will refraine
                     From thoughts of such a straine.
                     And to his sense obiect this sentence euer,
                     Man may securely sinne, but safely neuer.
                  
                  
                     XII. Epistle TO ELIZABETH COVNTESSE OF RVTLAND.
                     
                        MADAME,
                     
                     WHil'st that, for which, all vertue now is sold,
                     And almost euery vice, almightie gold,
                     That which, to boote with hell, is thought worth heauen,
                     And, for it, life, conscience, yea, soules are giuen,
                     Toyles, by graue custome, vp and downe the court,
                     To euery squire, or groome, that will report
                     Well, or ill, onely, all the following yeere,
                     Iust to the waight their this dayes-presents beare;
                     While it makes huishers seruiceable men,
                     And some one apteth to be trusted, then,
                     Though neuer after; whiles it gaynes the voyce
                     Of some grand peere, whose ayre doth make reioyce
                     The foole that gaue it; who will want, and weepe,
                     When his proud patrons fauours are asleepe;
                     While thus it buyes great grace, and hunts poore fame;
                     Runs betweene man, and man; 'tweene dame, and dame;
                     Solders crackt friendship; makes loue last a day;
                     Or perhaps lesse: whil'st gold beares all this sway,
                     I, that haue none (to send you) send you verse.
                     A present, which (if elder writs reherse
                     The truth of times) was once of more esteeme,
                     Then this, our guilt, nor golden age can deeme,
                     When gold was made no weapon to cut throtes,
                     Or put to flight ASTREA, when her ingots
                     Were yet vnfound, and better plac'd in earth,
                     Then, here, to giue pride fame, and peasants birth.
                     But let this drosse carry what price it will
                     With noble ignorants, and let them still,
                     
                     Turne, vpon scorned verse, their quarter-face:
                     With you, I know, my offring will find grace.
                     For what a sinne 'gainst your great fathers spirit,
                     Were it to thinke, that you should not inherit
                     His loue vnto the Muses, when his skill
                     Almost you haue, or may haue, when you will?
                     Wherein wise Nature you a dowrie gaue,
                     Worth an estate, treble to that you haue.
                     Beautie, I know, is good, and bloud is more;
                     Riches thought most: But, Madame, thinke what store
                     The world hath seene, which all these had in trust,
                     And now lye lost in their forgotten dust.
                     It is the Muse, alone, can raise to heauen,
                     And, at her strong armes end, hold vp, and euen,
                     The soules, shee loues. Those other glorious notes,
                     Inscrib'd in touch or marble, or the cotes
                     Painted, or caru'd vpon our great-mens tombs,
                     Or in their windowes; doe but proue the wombs,
                     That bred them, graues: when they were borne, they di'd,
                     That had no Muse to make their fame abide.
                     How many equall with the Argiue Queene,
                     Haue beautie knowne, yet none so famous seene?
                     ACHILLES was not first, that valiant was,
                     Or, in an armies head, that, lockt in brasse,
                     Gaue killing strokes. There were braue men, before
                     AIAX, or IDOMEN, or all the store,
                     That HOMER brought to Troy; yet none so liue:
                     Because they lack'd the sacred pen, could giue
                     Like life vnto 'hem. Who heau'd HERCVLES
                     Vnto the starres? or the Tyndarides?
                     
                     Who placed IASONS ARGO in the skie?
                     Or set bright ARIADNES crowne so high?
                     Who made a lampe of BERENICES hayre?
                     Or lifted CASSIOPEA in her chayre?
                     But onely Poets, rapt with rage diuine?
                     And such, or my hopes faile, shall make you shine.
                     You, and that other starre, that purest light,
                     Of all LVCINA'S traine; LVCY the bright.
                     Then which, a nobler heauen it selfe knowes not.
                     Who, though shee haue a better verser got,
                     (Or Poet, in the court account) then I,
                     And, who doth me (though I not him) enuy,
                     Yet, for the timely fauours shee hath done,
                     To my lesse sanguine Muse, wherein she'hath wonne
                     
                     My gratefull soule, the subiect of her powers,
                     I haue already vs'd some happy houres,
                     To her remembrance; which when time shall bring
                     To curious light, to notes, I then shall sing,
                     Will proue old ORPHEVS act no tale to be▪
                     
                     For I shall moue stocks, stones, no lesse then he.
                     Then all, that haue but done my Muse least grace,
                     Shall thronging come, and boast the happy place
                     They hold in my strange poems, which, as yet,
                     Had not their forme touch'd by an English wit.
                     There like a rich, and golden pyramede,
                     Borne vp by statues, shall I reare your head,
                     Aboue your vnder carued ornaments,
                     And show, how, to the life, my soule presents
                     Your forme imprest there: not with tickling rimes,
                     Or common places, filch'd, that take these times,
                     But high, and noble matter, such as flies
                     From braines entranc'd, and fill'd with extasies;
                     Moodes, which the god-like SYDNEY oft did proue,
                     And your braue friend, and mine so well did loue.
                     Who wheresoere he be ........
                     The rest is lost.
                  
                  
                     XIII. Epistle. TO KATHERINE, LADY AVBIGNY:
                     'TIs growne almost a danger to speake true
                     Of any good minde, now: There are so few.
                     The bad, by number, are so fortified,
                     As what th'haue lost t'expect, they dare deride.
                     So both the prais'd, and praisers suffer: Yet,
                     For others ill, ought none their good forget.
                     I, therefore, who professe my selfe in loue
                     With euery vertue, wheresoere it moue,
                     And howsoeuer; as I am at fewd
                     With sinne and vice, though with a throne endew'd;
                     And, in this name, am giuen out dangerous
                     By arts, and practise of the vicious,
                     Such as suspect them-selues, and thinke it fit
                     For their owne cap'tall crimes, t'indite my wit;
                     I, that haue suffer'd this; and, though forsooke
                     Of Fortune, haue not alter'd yet my looke,
                     
                     Or so my selfe abandon'd, as because
                     Men are not iust, or keepe no holy lawes
                     Of nature, and societie, I should faint;
                     Or feare to draw true lines, 'cause others paint▪
                     
                     I, Madame, am become your praiser. Where,
                     If it may stand with your soft blush to heare,
                     Your selfe but told vnto your selfe, and see
                     In my character, what your features bee,
                     You will not from the paper slightly passe:
                     No lady, but, at some time, loues her glasse.
                     And this shall be no false one, but as much
                     Remou'd, as you from need to haue it such.
                     Looke then, and see your selfe. I will not say
                     Your beautie; for you see that euery day:
                     And so doe many more. All which can call
                     It perfect, proper, pure, and naturall▪
                     
                     Not taken vp o'th'doctors, but as well
                     As I, can say, and see it doth excell.
                     That askes but to be censur'd by the eyes:
                     And, in those outward formes, all fooles are wise.
                     Nor that your beautie wanted not a dower,
                     Doe I reflect. Some alderman has power,
                     Or cos'ning farmer of the customes so,
                     T'aduance his doubtfull issue, and ore-flow
                     A Princes fortune: These are gifts of chance,
                     And raise not vertue; they may vice enhance.
                     My mirror is more subtile, cleere, refin'd,
                     And takes, and giues the beauties of the mind.
                     Though it reiect not those of FORTVNE: such
                     As bloud, and match. Wherein, how more then much
                     Are you engaged to your happy fate,
                     For such a lot! that mixt you with a state
                     Of so great title, birth, but vertue most,
                     Without which, all the rest were sounds, or lost.
                     'Tis onely that can time, and chance defeat:
                     For he, that once is good, is euer great.
                     Wherewith, then, Madame, can you better pay
                     This blessing of your starres, then by that way
                     Of vertue, which you tread? what if alone?
                     Without companions? 'Tis safe to haue none.
                     In single paths, dangers with ease are watch'd:
                     Contagion in the prease is soonest catch'd.
                     This makes, that wisely you decline your life,
                     Farre from the maze of custome, error, strife,
                     
                     And keepe an euen, and vnalter'd gaite;
                     Not looking by, or backe (like those, that waite
                     Times, and occasions, to start forth, and seeme)
                     Which though the turning world may dis-esteeme,
                     Because that studies spectacles, and showes,
                     And after varyed, as fresh obiects goes,
                     Giddie with change, and therefore cannot see
                     Right, the right way: yet must your comfort bee
                     Your conscience, and not wonder, if none askes
                     For truthes complexion, where they all weare maskes.
                     Let who will follow fashions, and attyres,
                     Maintayne their liedgers forth, for forraine wyres,
                     Melt downe their husbands land, to poure away
                     On the close groome, and page, on new-yeeres day,
                     And almost, all dayes after, while they liue;
                     (They finde it both so wittie, and safe to giue.)
                     Let 'hem on poulders, oyles, and paintings, spend,
                     Till that no vsurer, nor his bawds dare lend
                     Them, or their officers: and no man know,
                     Whether it be a face they weare, or no.
                     Let 'hem waste body, and state; and after all,
                     When their owne Parasites laugh at their fall,
                     May they haue nothing left, whereof they can
                     Boast, but how oft they haue gone wrong to man:
                     And call it their braue sinne. For such there be
                     That doe sinne onely for the infamie:
                     And neuer thinke, how vice doth euery houre,
                     Eate on her clients, and some one deuoure.
                     You, Madame, yong haue learn'd to shunne these shelues,
                     Whereon the most of mankinde wracke themselues,
                     And, keeping a iust course, haue earely put
                     Into your harbor, and all passage shut
                     'Gainst stormes, or pyrats, that might charge your peace;
                     For which you worthy are the glad encrease
                     Of your blest wombe, made fruitfull from aboue,
                     To pay your lord the pledges of chast loue:
                     And raise a noble stemme, to giue the fame,
                     To CLIFTON'S bloud, that is deny'd their name.
                     Grow, grow, faire tree, and as thy branches shoote,
                     Heare, what the Muses sing about thy roote,
                     By me, their priest (if they can ought diuine)
                     Before the moones haue fill'd their tripple trine,
                     To crowne the burthen which you goe withall,
                     It shall a ripe and timely issue fall,
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     XV. TO HEAVEN.
                     GOod, and great GOD, can I not thinke of thee,
                     But it must, straight, my melancholy bee?
                     Is it interpreted in me disease,
                     That, laden with my sinnes, I seeke for ease?
                     O, be thou witnesse, that the reynes dost know,
                     And hearts of all, if I be sad for show,
                     And iudge me after: if I dare pretend
                     To ought but grace, or ayme at other end.
                     As thou art all, so be thou all to mee,
                     First, midst, and last, conuerted one, and three;
                     My faith, my hope, my loue: and in this state,
                     My iudge, my witnesse, and my aduocate.
                     Where haue I beene this while exil'd from thee?
                     And whither rap'd, now thou but stoup'st to mee?
                     Dwell, dwell here still: O, being euery-where,
                     How can I doubt to finde thee euer, here?
                     I know my state, both full of shame, and scorne,
                     Conceiu'd in sinne, and vnto labour borne,
                     Standing with feare, and must with horror fall,
                     And destin'd vnto iudgement after all.
                     I feele my griefes too, and there scarce is ground,
                     Vpon my flesh t'inflict another wound.
                     Yet dare I not complaine, or wish for death
                     With holy PAVL, lest it be thought the breath
                     Of discontent; or that these prayers bee
                     For wearinesse of life, not loue of thee.
                  
                  THE END.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  PART OF THE KINGS ENTERTAINMENT IN PASSING TO his Coronation.
                  The Author B. I.

                        MART.
                        Quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos!
                     
                  
                  LONDON, M. D C. XVI.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  At Fen-Church.
                  
                     THe Scene presented it selfe in a square and flat vpright, like to the side of a Citie: the top thereof, aboue the Vent, and Crest, adorn'd with houses, towres, and steeples, set off in prospectiue. Vpon the battlements in a great capitall letter was inscribed,

                        LONDINIVM:
                     
According to TACITVS:

                        Annal. l. 1
                           •
                        . 
                     At SVETONIVS mirâ constantiâ, medios inter hosteis Londinium perrexit, cognomento quidem Coloniae non insigne, sed copiâ Negotiatorum, & commeatu maxime celebre. Beneath that, in a lesse and different character, was written

                        CAMERA REGIA,
                     
Which title immediately after the Norman conquest it began to haue;

                        Camd. Brit. 374. and by the indulgence of succeeding Princes, hath beene hitherto continued. In the Freeze ouer the gate, it seemeth to speake this verse:

                        PAR DOMVS HAEC COELO,
                        SED MINOR EST DOMINO.
                     
Taken out of MARTIAL,

                        Lib. 8. Epig. 36. and implying, that though this citie (for the state, and magnificence) might (by Hyperbole) be said to touch the starres, and reach vp to heauen, yet was it farre inferior to the master thereof, who was his Maiestie; and in that respect vnworthy to receiue him. The highest person aduanc'd therein, was

                        MONARCHIA BRITANNICA,
                     
and fitly: applying to the aboue mentioned title of the citie, THE KINGS CHAMBER, and therefore here placed as in the proper seate of the empire: for,

                        Brit. 
                        
                           ••
                        . so the glorie and light of our kingdome M. CAMDEN, speaking of London, saith, shee is, totius Britanniae Epitome, Britannici
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Imperij sedes, Regum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Angliae Camera, tantum inter omneis eminet, quantum (vt ait ille) inter viburna Cupressus. Shee was a woman, richly attyr'd, in cloth of gold

and tissue; a rich mantle; ouer her state two crownes hanging, with pensile shields thorow them; the one lim'd with the particular coate of England, the other of Scotland: on either side also a crowne, with the like Scutchions, and peculiar coates of France, and Ireland
                     ▪ In her hand shee holds a scepter; on her head a fillet of gold, inter-wouen with palme and lawrell; her hayre bound into foure seuerall points, descending from her crownes; and in her lap a little globe, inscrib'd vpon

                        ORBIS BRITANNICVS.
                     
And beneath, the word

                        DIVISVS ABORBE.
                     
To shew, that this empire is a world diuided from the world, and alluding to that of

                        De mallij Theodor. cons. Pa
                              ••
                           
                           gyri. Eclog. 1. CLAV.

                        —Et nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
                     
And VIRG.

                        —Et penitus toto diuisos orbe Britannos.
                     
The wreathe denotes victorie and happinesse. The scepter and crownes soueraignetie. The shields the precedency of the countries, and their distinctions. At her feet was set

                        THEOSOPHIA,
                     
or diuine Wisedome, all in white, a blue mantle seeded with starres, a crowne of starres on her head. Her garments figur'd truth, innocence, and cleerenesse. Shee was alwayes looking vp; in her one hand shee sustayned a doue, in the other a serpent: the last to shew her subtiltie, the first her simplicitie; alluding to that text of Scripture,

                        Matth. 10.16. 
                     Estote ergo prudentes sicut serpentes, & simplices sicut columbae. Her word,

                        
                           Prou. 8.15.
                            PER ME REGES REGNANT.
                     
                  
                  Intimating, how by her, all kings doe gouerne, and that she is the foundation and strength of kingdomes, to which end, shee was here placed, vpon a cube, at the foot of the Monarchie, as her base and stay. Directly beneath her stood

                        
                           
                              Antiqui Genium omnium gignendurum rerū existimarunt Deum: & tam vrbib. quam hominib. vel caeteris rebus natum, Lil. Gre. Gy. in Synt. deor. 15. & Rosin. Antiq. Ro. l. 2. c. 14 GENIVS VRBIS,
                     
                  
                  A person attyr'd rich, reuerend, and antique: his haire long and white, crowned with a wreathe of Plane tree, which is said to be Arbor genialis; his mantle of purple, and buskins of that colour: He held in one hand a goblet, in the other a branch full of little twigs, to signifie increase and indulgence. His word

                        HIS ARMIS:
                     
pointing to the two that supported him, whereof the one on the right hand, was

                        BOVLEVTES.
                     
Figuring the councell of the citie, and was suted in blacke and purple; a

wreathe of 
                        Ciuica corona fit è fronde querna, quoniam cibus, victus
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            antiquissimus querc
                              •
                           us capi solitus sit, Ros. lib. 10. cap. 27. oke vpon his head; sustayning for his ensignes, on his left arme a scarlet robe, and in his right hand the 
                        Fasciculi virgarum, intra quas obligata securis erat, sit, vt ferrum in summo fasce extaret, Ros. l. 7. c. 3. Vbi notandum est, non debere precipitem, & solutam iram esse magistratus. Mora enim allata, & cunctatio, dum sensim virgae soluuntur, identidem consilium mutauit deplectendo. Quando autem vitia quaedam sunt corrigibilia, deplorata alia; casligant virgae, quod reuocari valet, immendabile secures praecidunt, Plut. Prob. Rom. 82. Fasces, as tokens of magistracie, with this inscription;

                        SERVARE CIVES.
                     
                  
                  The other on the left hand.
                  
                     POLEMIVS,
                  
                  The warlike force of the citie, in an antique coate, or armour, with a target and sword; his helme on, and crowned with lawrell, implying strength and conquest: in his hand he bore the standard of the citie, with this word,

                        EXTINGVERE ET HOSTEIS.
                     
                  
                  Expressing by those seuerall mots, connexed, that with those armes of councel and strength, the Genius was able to extinguish the kings enemies, and preserue his citizens, alluding to those verses in SENECA,

                        Extinguere hostem,
Octa. Act. 2.
                            maxima est virtus Ducis.
                        Seruare Ciues, maior est patriae, patri.
                        Vnder-neath these, in an Aback thrust out before the rest, lay
                        TAMESIS.
                     
The riuer, as running along the side of the citie; in a skin-coate made like flesh, naked, and blue. His mantle of sea-greene or water colour, thin, and bolne out like a sayle; bracelets about his wrests, of willow and sedge, a crowne of sedge and reede vpon his head, mixt with water-lillies; alluding to VIRGILS description of Tyber;

                        —Deus ipse loci,
Aen. lib. 8.
                            fluuio Tyberinus amoeno,
                        Populeas inter senior se attollere frondes
                        Visus, eum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
                        Carbasus, & crineis vmbrosa tegebat Arundo.
                     
                  
                  His beard, and hayre long, and ouer-growne. He leanes his arme vpon an earthen pot, out of which, water, with liue fishes, are seene to runne forth, and play about him. His word,

                        FLVMINA SENSERVNT IPSA.
                        A hemistich of OVIDS:

                              Amor. l. 3. el. 5. The rest of the verse being,
                        —quid esset amor
                     
                  
                  Affirming, that riuers themselues, and such inanimate creatures, haue heretofore beene made sensible of passions, and affections; and that hee now, no lesse pertooke the ioy of his maiesties gratefull approch to this citie, than any of those persons, to whom hee pointed, which were the daughters of the Genius, and sixe in number: who, in a

spreading ascent, vpon seuerall grices, helpe to beautifie both the sides, The first,

                        EVPHROSYNE,
                     
or Gladnesse: was suted in greene, a mantle of diuers colours, embroydred with all varietie of flowres: on her head a gyrland of myrtle, in her right hand a crystall cruze fill'd with wine, in the left a cup of gold: at her feet a tymbrell, harpe, and other instruments, all ensignes of gladnesse,

                        Natis in vsum laetitiae scyphis, &c.
                     
And in another place,

                        Hor. Car. 1. Ode 27.
                     
                        Nunc est 
                              •
                           ibendum, nunc pede libero
                        
                           Et Ode. 37.
                            Pulsanda Tellus, &c.
                     
Her word,

                        HAEC AEVI MIHI PRIMA DIES.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Stat Syl. 4. Epu. Domit.
                      As if this were the first houre of her life, and the minute wherein shee began to be; beholding so long coueted, and look'd for a presence. The second.
                  SEBASIS, or Veneratio, was varied in an ash-colour'd sute, and darke mantle, a vayle ouer her head of ash colour: her hands crost before her, and her eyes halfe closde. Her word,

                        MIHI SEMPER DEVS.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Virg. Ecl. 1. Implying both her office of reuerence, and the dignitie of her obiect, who being as god on earth, should neuer be lesse in her thought. The third.
                  PROTHYMIA, or Promptitude, was attyr'd in a short tuck't garment of flame-colour, wings at her backe; her haire bright, and bound vp with ribands; her brest open, virago-like; her buskins so ribanded: Shee was crowned with a chaplet of trifoly, to expresse readinesse, and opennesse euery way; in her right hand shee held a squirrell, as being the creature most full of life and quicknesse: in the left a close round censor, with the perfume sodainely to be vented forth at the sides. Her word,

                        QVA DATA PORTA.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Aene. 1. Taken from an other place in VIRGIL, where EOLVS at the command of IVNO, lets forth the winde;

                        
                           Aene. 1.
                            —ac venti velut agmine facto
                        Quâ data porta ruunt, & terras turbine perflant.
                     
                  
                  And shew'd that shee was no lesse prepar'd with promptitude, and alacritic, then the windes were, vpon the least gate that shall be opened to his high command. The fourth.
                  AGRYPNIA, or Vigilance, in yellow, a sable mantle, seeded with waking eyes, and siluer fringe: her chaplet of Heliotropium, or turnesole; in her one hand a lampe,

or cresset, in her other a bell. The lampe signified search and sight, the bell warning. The Heliotropium care; and respecting her obiect. Her word,

                        SPECVLAMVR IN OMNEIS.
                     
                  
                  Alluding to that of OVID, where he describes the office of ARGVS.

                        —Ipse procul montis sublime cacumen
                        Occupat,

                              Met. 1. vnde sedens partes speculatur in omneis.
                     
and implying the like duety of care and vigilance in her selfe. The fifth,

                        AGAPE,
                     
Or louing affection, in crimson fringed with golde, a mantle of flame-colour, her chaplet of red and white roses; in her hand a flaming heart: The flame expressed zeale, the red and white roses, a mixture of simplicity with loue: her robes freshnes and feruency. Her word,

                        NON SIC EXCVBIAE.
                     
                  
                  Out of CLAVDIAN,

                        De 4. Cons. Honor. Panegyri.
                      in following.

                        — Nec circum stantiapcila
                        Quàm tutatur amor.
                     
Inferring, that though her sister before had protested watchfulnesse, and circumspection, yet no watch or guard could be so safe to the estate, or person of a Prince, as the loue and naturall affection of his subiects: which she in the cities behalfe promised. The sixt,

                        OMOTHYMIA,
                     
Or vnanimity in blew, her roabe blew, and buskins. A chaplet of blew lillies, shewing one trueth and intirenesse of minde. In her lappe lies a sheafe of arrowes bound together, and she her selfe sittes weauing certaine small siluer twists. Her word,

                        FIRMA CONSENSVS FACIT.
                        Auxilia humilia firma,

                              Pub. Syr. M
                                    •
                                 .
                            &c.
                     
                  
                  Intimating, that euen the smallest and weakest aydes, by consent, are made strong: her selfe personating the vnanimity, or consent of soule, in all inhabitants of the city to his seruice.
                  ¶ These are all the personages, or liue figures, whereof only two were speakers (GENIVS and TAMESIS) the rest were mutes. Other dumbe complements there were, as the armes of the kingdome on the one side, with this inscription.
                  
                     HIS VIREAS.
                     With these maist thou flourish.
                  
                  On the other side the armes of the citie, with

                        HIS VINCAS.
                        With these maist thou conquer.
                     
                  
                  
                     In the centre, or midst of the Pegme, there was an Aback, or Square▪ wherein this Elogie was written:

                        MAXIMVS HIC REX EST, ET LVCE SERENIOR IPSA
                        PRINCIPE QVAE TALEM CERNIT IN VRBE DVCEM;
                        CVIVS FORTVNAM SVPERAT SIC VNICA VIRTVS,
                        VNVS VT IS RELIQVOS VINCIT VTRAQVE VIROS.
                        PRAECEPTIS ALII POPVLOS, MVLTAQVE FATIGANT
                        LEGE; SED EXEMPLO NOS RAPIT ILLE SVO.
                        CVIQVE FRVI TOTA FAS EST VXORE MARITO,
                        ET SVA FAS SIMILI PIGNORA NOSSE PATRI.
                        ECCE VBI PIGNORIBVS CIRCVMSTIPATA CORVSCIS
                        IT COMES, ET TANTO VIX MINOR ANNA VIRO.
                        HAVD METVS EST, REGEM POSTHAC NE PROXIMVS HAERES,
                        NEV SVCCESSOREM NON AMET ILLE SVVM.
                     
                  
                  This, and the whole frame, was couered with a curtaine of silke, painted like a thicke cloud, and at the approach of the K. was instantly to be drawne. The Allegorie being, that those clouds were gathered vpon the face of the Citie, through their long want of his most wished sight: but now, as at the rising of the Sunne, all mists were dispersed and fled. When sodainely, vpon silence made to the Musickes, a voyce was heard to vtter this verse;

                        
                           Claud. de laud. Stil. lib. 3.
                            Totus adest oculis, aderat qui mentibus olim,
                     
                  
                  Signifying, that he now was really obiected to their eyes, who before had beene onely, but still, present in their minds.
                  ¶ Thus farre the complementall part of the first; wherein was not onely labored the expression of state and magnificence (as proper to a triumphall Arch) but the very site, fabricke, strength, policie, dignitie, and affections of the Citie were all laid downe to life: The nature and propertie of these Deuices being, to present alwaies some one entire bodie, or figure, consisting of distinct members, and each of those expressing it selfe, in the owne actiue spheare, yet all, with that generall harmonie so connexed, and disposed, as no one little part can be missing to the illustration of the whole: where also is to be noted, that the Symboles vsed, are not, neither ought to be, simply Hieroglyphickes, Emblemes, or Impreses, but a mixed character, partaking somewhat of all, and peculiarly apted to these more magnificent Inuentions: wherein, the garments and ensignes deliuer the nature of the person, and the word the present office. Neither was it becomming, or could it stand with the dignitie of these shewes (after the most miserable and desperate shift of the Puppits) to require a Truch-man, or (with the ignorant Painter) one to write, This is a Dog; or, This is a Hare: but so to be presented, as vpon the view, they might, without cloud, or obscuritie, declare themselues to the sharpe and learned:

And for the multitude, no doubt but their grounded iudgements did gaze, said it was fine, and were satisfied.
                  
                     The speeches of Gratulation.
                     
                        GENIVS.
                        TIme, Fate, and Fortune haue at length conspir'd,
                        To giue our Age the day so much desir'd.
                        What all the minutes, houres, weekes, months, and yeares,
                        That hang in file vpon these siluer haires,
                        Could not produce, beneath the As being the first free and naturall gouernment of this Iland, after it came to ciuilitie. Britaine stroke,
                        The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman In respect they were all Conquests, and the obedience of the subiect more enforced. yoke,
                        This point of Time hath done. Now London reare
                        Thy forehead high, and on it striue to weare
                        Thy choisest gems; teach thy steepe Towres to rise
                        Higher with people: set with sparkling eyes
                        Thy spacious windowes; and in euery street,
                        Let thronging ioy, loue, and amazement meet.
                        Cleaue all the ayre with showtes, and let the cry
                        Strike through as long, and vniuersally,
                        As thunder; for, thou now art blist to see
                        That sight, for which thou didst begin to be.
                        When Rather then the Citie should want a Founder, we choose to follow the receiued storie of Brute, whether fabulous, or true, and not altogether vnwarranted in Poetrie: since it is a fauor of Antiquitie to few Cities, to let them know their first Authors. Besides, a learned Poet of our time, in a most elegant worke of his Con. Tam. & Isis, celebrating London, hath this verse of her: Aemula maternae tollens sua lumina Troiae. Here is also an ancient rite alluded to in the building of Cities, which was, to giue them their bounds with a plough, according to Virg. Aen. li. 10. In
                                    •
                                 erea Aeneas vrbem designat Aratro. And Isidore, lib. 15. cap. 2. Vrbs vocata ab orbe, quod antiquae ciuitates in orbem fiebant; vel ab vr
                                    •
                                 o parte aratri, quo muri designabantur, vnde est illud. Optauitque locum regno & concludere sulco.
                            BRVTVS plough first gaue thee infant bounds,
                        And I, thy GENIVS walk't auspicious rounds
                        In euery 
                              Primigenius sulcus dicitur, qui in condenda noua vrbe, tauro & vacca designationis causa imprimitur; Hitherto respects that of Camd. Brit. 368. speaking of this Citie, Quicunque autem condiderit, vitali genio, constructam fuisse ipsius fortuna docuit.
                            furrow; then did I forelooke,
                        And saw this day For so all happie dayes were. Plin. cap. 40. lib. 7. Nat. Hist. To which Horace alludes, lib. 1. Ode 36. Cressâ ne careat pulchra dies notâ. And the other Plin. epist. 11. lib. 6. O diem laetum, not andumque mihi candidissimo calculo. With many other in many places. Mart. lib. 8. epi. 45. lib. 9. epi. 53. lib. 10.38. lib. 11.37. Stat. lib. 4. Syl. 6. Pers. sat. 2▪ 
                              Catull. epig. 69. &c. mark't white in The Parcae, or Fates, Martianus calls them scribas ac librarias superûm; whereof Clothe is said to be the eldest, signifying in Latine Euocatio.
                            CLOTHO'S booke.
                        The seuerall Those before mentioned of the Britaine, Roman, Saxon, &c. and to this Register of the fates allude those verses of Ouid. Met. 15. — Cernes illic molimine vasto. Ex are, & solido rerum tabularia ferro: Quae neque concussum coeli, neque fulminis Iram, Nec metuunt vllas tuta atque aeterna ruinas. Inuenies illis incisae adamante perenni Fata &c.— circles, both of change and sway,
                        Within this Isle, there also figur'd lay:
                        Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
                        Was this, whose present happinesse we tast.
                        
                        Why keepe you silence daughters? What dull peace
                        Is this inhabites you? Shall office cease
                        Vpon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
                        More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME know
                        That article, wherein your flame stood still,
                        And not aspi'rd? Now heauen auert an ill
                        Of that blacke looke. Ere pause possesse your brests
                        I wish you more of plagues: "Zeale when it rests,
                        Leaues to be zeale. Vp thou tame RIVER, wake;
                        And from the liquid limbes this slumber shake:
                        Thou drown'st thy selfe in inofficious sleepe;
                        And these thy sluggish waters seeme to creepe,
                        Rather than flow. Vp, rise, and swell with pride
                        Aboue thy bankes. "Now is not euery tyde.
                     
                     
                        TAMESIS.
                        TO what vaine end should I contend to show
                        My weaker powers, when seas of pompe o'reflow
                        The cities face: and couer all the shore
                        With sands more rich than A riuer diuiding Spaine & Portugal, and by the consent of Poets sti'ld aurifer.
                            TAGVS wealthy ore?
                        When in the flood of ioy, that comes with him,
                        He drownes the world; yet makes it liue and swimme,
                        And spring with gladnesse: not my fishes heere,
                        Though they be dumbe, but doe expresse the cheere
                        Of these bright streames. No lesse may Vnderstanding Euphrosyne, Sebasis, Prothumia, &c.
                            these, and I
                        Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.
                     
                     
                        GENIVS.
                        INdeede, true gladnesse doth not alwayes speake:
                        "Ioy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weake.
                        Yet (lest the feruor of so pure a flame
                        As this my citie beares, might lose the name,
                        Without the apt euenting of her heate)
                        Know greatest IAMES (and no lesse good, than great.)
                        In the behalfe of all my vertuous sonnes,
                        Whereof my The lord Maior, who for his yeere, hath senior place of the rest, & for the day was chiefe serieant to the king. eldest there, thy pompe forerunnes,
                        (A man without my flattering, or his pride,
                        As worthy, as he's Aboue the blessing of his present office, the word had some particular allusion to his Name, which is Renet, and hath (no doubt) in time bin the contraction of Benedict.
                            blest to be thy guide)
                        In his graue name, and all his brethrens right,
                        (Who thirst to drinke the nectar of thy sight)
                        The councell, commoners, and multitude;
                        (Glad, that this day so long deny'd, is view'd)
                        
                        I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
                        That euer king had to his The citie which title is toucht before. empires seate:
                        Neuer came man, more long'd for, more desir'd:
                        And being come, more reuerenc'd, lou'd, admir'd:
                        Heare, and record it: "In a prince it is
                        "No little vertue, to know who are his.
                        
                           To the prince. With like deuotions, doe I stoope t'embrace
                        This springing glory of thy An attribute giuen to great persons, sitly aboue other, humanity, and in frequent vse with all the greeke Poets, especially Homer. Iliad. 
                               — . And in the same booke. . godlike race;
                        His countries wonder, hope, loue, ioy and pride:
                        How well dooth he become the royall side
                        Of this erected, and broade spreading Tree,
                        Vnder whose shade, may Brittaine euer be.
                        And from this branch, may thousand branches more
                        Shoote o're the maine, and knit with euery shore
                        In bonds of marriage, kinred, and increase;
                        And stile this land, the As Luctatius calls Parnassus, Vmbillicum terrae.
                            nauill of their peace.
                        This is your seruants wish, your cities vow,
                        Which still shall propagate it selfe, with you;
                        And free from spurres of hope, that slow minds moue:
                        "He seekes no hire, that owes his life to loue.
                        
                           To the queene. And heere she comes that is no lesse a part
                        In this dayes greatnesse, then in my glad heart.
                        Glory of queenes, and An emphatical speech, & well re-enforcing her greatnes; being by this match, more than either her brother, father, &c. glory of your name,
                        Whose graces doe as farre out-speake your fame,
                        As fame doth silence, when her trumpet rings
                        You Daughter to Frederick secōd king of Den
                                    •
                                 marke, and Norway, sister to Christierne the fourth now there reigning, & wife to Iames our Soueraigne. daughter, sister, wife of seuerall kings:
                        Besides alliance, and the stile of mother,
                        In which one title you drowne all your other.
                        Instance, be The prince Henrie Frederike.
                            that faire shoote, is gone before,
                        Your eldest ioy, and top of all your store,
                        With 
                              Charles duke of Rothsey, and the Lady Elizabeth.
                            those, whose sight to vs is yet deni'd,
                        But not our zeale to them, or ought beside
                        This citie can to you: For whose estate
                        Shee hopes you will be still good aduocate
                        To her best lord. So, whilst you mortall are,
                        No taste of sowre mortalitie once dare
                        Approch your house; nor fortune greete your grace
                        But comming on, and with a forward face.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        TARACHE, or Tumult, in a garment of diuers, but darke colours, her haire wilde, and disordered, a foule and troubled face, about her lay s
                           •
                        aues, swords, ropes, chaines, hammers, stones, and such like to expresse Turmoile. The word was,

                           
                              De Malii. Theo. cons. Panegy. PERAGIT TRANQVILLA POTESTAS.
                        
Claud.

                           Quod violenta nequit: mandata
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               fortius vrget Imperiosa quies.
                        
To shew the benefits of a calme and facile power, being able to effect in a state that, which no violence can. On the other side the second handmaide was

                           ELEVTHERIA,
                        
or Libertie, her dressing white, and some-what antique, but loose and free: her haire flowing downe her backe, and shoulders: In her right hand shee bare a club, on her left a hat, the Characters of freedome, and power: At her feet a cat was placed, the creature most affecting, and expressing libertie. She trode on

                           DOVLOSIS,
                        
or Seruitude, a woman in old and worne garments, leane and meager, bearing fetters on her feet, and hands, about her necke a yoake to insinuate bondage, and the word

                           NEC VNQVAM GRATIOR.
                        
Alluding to that other of Claud.
                        
                           
                              De laud. stil. li. 3.
                               Nunquam libertas gratior extat,
                           Quam sub Rege pio.
                        
And intimated, that libertie could neuer appeare more gracefull, and louely, then now vnder so good a prince. The third hand-maid was

                           SOTERIA,
                        
or Safetie, a damsell in carnation, the colour signifying cheare, and life, shee sat high: vpon her head she wore an antique helme, and in her right hand a speare for defence, in her left a cup for Medicine: at her feet was set a pedestall vpon which a serpent rowld vp did lie. Beneath was

                           PEIRA,
                        
or Danger, a woman dispoiled, and almost naked, the little garment shee hath left her, of seuerall colours, to note her various disposition. Besides her lies a torch out, and a sword broken (the instruments of her furie) with a net and wolues skinne (the ensignes of her malice) rent in pieces. The word,

                           TERGA DEDERE METVS.
                        

                        
                           Lib. 12. Epist. 6. Borrowed from Mart. and implying that now all feares haue turnd their

backes, and our safetie might become securitie, danger being so wholly deprest, and vnfurnisht of all meanes to hurt. The fourth attendant is,

                           EVDAIMONIA,
                        
or Felicity, varied on the second hand, and apparelled richly; in an embroidered robe, and mantle: a faire golden tresse. In her right hand a Caduceus, the note of peacefull wisedome: in her left, a Cornucopia fill'd onely with flowers, as a signe of florishing blessednesse; and crownd with a garland of the same. At her feet,

                           DYSPRAGIA,
                        
or Vnhappinesse, a woman bareheaded, her necke, armes, brest, and feete naked, her looke hollow and pale; she holds a Cornucopia turned downward with all the flowers falne out and scattered, vpon her sits a rauen, as the augury of ill fortune: and the soule was

                           REDEVNT SATVRNIA REGNA.
                        
Out of Virgil,

                           Eclog 4. to shew that now those golden times were returned againe, wherein Peace was with vs so aduanced, Rest receiued, Libertie restored, Safetie assured, and all Blessednesse appearing in euery of these vertues her particular triumph ouer her opposite euill. This is the dumbe argument of the frame, and illustrated with this verse of Virgil, written in the vnder freeze.

                           NVLLA SALVS BELLO:

                                 Aeneid. lib. 11. 
                           
                           PACEM TE POSCIMVS OMNES.
                        
The speaking part was performed, as within the temple where there was erected an altar, to which at the approch of the king appeares the Flamen
                        
                           
                              One of the three Flamines that as some thinke Numa Pompilius first instituted, but we rather with Varro take him of Romulus institutiō, wherof there were only two, Hee, and Dialis: to whom he was next in dignitie. He was alwayes created out of the Nobility, and did performe the rites to Mars, who was thought the Father of Romulus.
                               MARTIALIS.
                        
And to him,

                           GENIVS VRBIS.
                        
The Genius we attired before: To the Flamen we appoint this habit. A long crimson robe to witnesse his nobilitie, his typpet and sleeues white, as reflecting on purity in his religion, a rich mantle of golde with a traine to expresse the digniti
                           •
                         of his function. Vpon his head a 
                           Scaliger in coniect. in Varr: saith Totus Pileus, vel potiùs velamenta, Flammeum dicebatur. vnde Flamine
                                 •
                               dicti.
                         hat of delicate wooll, whose top ended in a cone, and was thence called Apex, according to that of Lucan. lib. 1.

                           Attollens
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               Apicem generoso vertice Flamen.
                        
This Apex was couered with a To this lookes that other coniecture of Varro. lib. 4. de lingua Latina. Flamines, quod licio in capite velati erant semper, ac caput cinctum habeb
                                 •
                              nt filo, Flamines dicti.
                         fine net of yearne which they named Apiculum, and was sustained with a Which in their attire was called Stroppus, in their wiues Inarculum.
                         bowd twigge of Pomegranat tree, it was also in the hot time of Summer to be bound with ribands, and throwne behind them as 
                           Scal. Ibid. in c
                                 •
                              n. Ponè enim regerebant apicem, ne grauis esset summis aestatis caloribus. Amenti
                                 •
                               enim, quae offendices dicebantur sub mentum adductis, religabant; vt cum vellent, regererent, & ponè pendere permitterent.
                         
                        Scaliger teacheth. In his hand he bore a golden censor with perfume, and censing about the altar (hauing first kindled his fire on the toppe) is interrupted by the Genius.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
                        Begin our spring, and with our spring the prime,
                        And According to Romulus his institution, who made March the first month, and consecrated it to his father, of whom it was called Martius, Varr. Fest. in Frag. Martius mensis initiū anni fuit, & in Latio, & post Roman conditam, &c. Aud Ouid. Fast. 3. A te principium Romano dicimus anno: Primus de patrio nomine mensis erit. Vox rata sit, &c. See Macr. lib. 1. Sat. cap. 12. and Solin. in Poly. hist. cap. 3. Quòd hoc mense mercedes exoluerint magistris, quas completus annus deberi f
                                    ••
                                 sset &c.
                            first accompt of yeeres, of months, Some, to whom we haue read this, haue taken it for a Tantologie, thinking Time ynough express'd before in yeeres, and moneths. For whose ignorant sakes we must confesse to haue taken the better part of this trauaile in noting, a thing not vsuall, neither affected of vs, but where there is necessitie, as here, to auoid their dull censures: where in yeeres and moneths we alluded to that is obserued in our former note: but by Time we vnderstand the present, and that from this instant, we should begin to reckon, and make this the first, of our time. Which is also to be helpt by emphasis.
                            of time:
                        And may these Ides as fortunate appeare
                        To thee, as they to In which he was slaine in the Senate.
                            CAESAR fatall were.
                        Be all thy thoughts borne perfect, and thy hopes
                        In their euents still crown'd beyond their scopes.
                        Let not wide heauen that secret blessing know
                        To giue, which shee on thee will not bestow.
                        Blind Fortune be thy slaue; and may her store
                        (The lesse thou seek'st it) follow thee the more.
                        Much more I would: but see, these brazen gates
                        Make haste to close, as vrged by thy fates;
                        Here ends my cities office, here it breakes:
                        Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, shee speakes
                        A short farewell; and lower then thy feet,
                        With feruent thankes, thy royall paynes doth greet.
                        Pardon, if my abruptnesse breed disease;
                        ,,He merits not t'offend, that hastes to please.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Ouer the Altar was written this Inscription:
                     D. I. O. M. BRITANNIARVM. IMP. PACIS. VINDICI. MARTE. MAIORI. P. P. F. S. AVGVSTO. NOVO. GENTIVM. CONIVNCTARVM. NVMINI. TVTELARI.
D. A. CONSERVATRICI. ANNAE. IPSAE. PERENNAE. DEABVSQVE. VNIVERSIS. OPTATIORI. SVI FORTVNATISSIMI. THALAMI. SOCIAE. ET CONSORTI. PVLCHERIMAE. AVGVSTISSIMAE.
ET H. F. P. FILIO. SVO. NOBILISSIMO. OB. ADVENTVM. AD VRBEM. HANC. SVAM. EXPECTATISSIMVM. GRATISSIMVM. CELEBRATISSIMVM. CVIVS. NON. RADII. SED SOLES. POTIVS. FVNESSIMAM. NVPER. AERIS. INTEMPERIEM. SERENARVNT
S. P. Q. L. VOTIS. X. VOTIS. XX. ARDENTISSIMIS.
L. M. HANC. ARAM. P.
                     And vpon the Gate, being shut,
IMP. IACOBVS MAX. CAESAR AVG. P. P.
PACE POPVLO BRITANNICO TERRA MARIQVE PARTA IANVM CLVSIT. S. C.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        All ills shall flie the light: Thy court be free
                        No lesse from enuie, then from flatterie;
                        All tumult, faction, and harsh discord cease,
                        That might perturbe the musique of thy peace:
                        The querulous nature shall no longer find
                        Roome for his thoughts: One pure consent of mind
                        Shall flow in euery brest, and not the ayre,
                        Sunne, moone, or starres shine more serenely faire.
                        This from that loud, blest Oracle, I sing,
                        Who here, and first, pronounc'd, thee Brittaines king
                        Long maist thou liue, and see me thus appeare,
                        As omenous For our more authoritie to induce her thus, See Fest. Auien. paraph. in Arat. speaking of Electra, Non nunquam Oceani tamenistam surgere ab vndis, In conuexa poli, sed sede carere sororum; Atque os discretum procul edere, detestatam. Germanos
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  choros sobolis lachrymare ruinas, Diffusam
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  comas cerni, crinisque soluti Monstrari effigie, &c.
                            a comet, from my spheare,
                        Vnto thy raigne; as that All comets were not fatall, some were fortunately ominous, as this to which we allude; and wherefore we haue Plinies testimonie. Nat. Histo. lib. 2 cap. 25. Cometes in vno totius orbis loco colitur in templo Romae, admodum faustus Diuo Augusto iudicatus ab ipso: qui incipiento eo, apparuit ludis quos faciebat Veneri Genetrici, non multò post obitum patris Caesaris, in collegio ab eo instituto. Nam
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  his verbis id gaudium prodidit. Iisipsis ludorum meorum diebus, sydus crinitum perseptem dies in regione Coeli, quae sub septentrionibus est, conspectum. Id oriebatur circa vndecimam horam diei, clarumque & omnibus terris conspicuum fuit. Eo sydere significari vulgus credidit, Caesaris animam inter Deorum immortalium numina receptam: quo nomine id insigne simulacro capitis eius, quod mox in foro consecrauimus adiectum est. Haec ille in publicum, interiore gaudio sibi illum natum se
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  in eo nasci interpretatus est. Et siverum fatemur, salutare id terrisfuit.
                            did auspicate
                        So lasting glory to AVGVSTVS state.
                     
                  
                  THE END.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  A PANEGYRE, ON THE HAPPIE ENTRANCE OF IAMES, OVR SOVERAIGNE, TO His first high Session of PARLIAMENT in this his Kingdome, the 19. of March, 1603—4.
                  The Author B. I.
                  
                     MART.
                     Licet toto nunc Helicone frui.
                  
                  LONDON, M. DC. XVI.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A PANEGYRE.
                  
                     
                        HEau'n now not striues, alone, our brests to fill
                     With ioyes: but vrgeth his full fauors still.
                     Againe, the glory of our Westerne world
                     Vnfolds himself: & from his eyes are hoorl'd
                     (To day) a thousand radiāt lights, that stream
                     To euery nooke and angle of his realme.
                     His former rayes did onely cleare the skie;
                     But these his searching beams are cast, to pri
                           •
                        
                     
                     Into those darke and deepe concealed vaults,
                     Where men commit blacke incest with their faults;
                     And snore supinely in the stall of sin:
                     Where Murder, Rapine, Lust, doe sit within,
                     Carowsing humane bloud in yron bowles,
                     And make their denne the slaughter-house of soules:
                     From whose foule reeking cauernes first arise
                     Those dampes, that so offend all good mens eyes;
                     And would (if not dispers'd) infect the Crowne,
                     And in their vapor her bright mettall drowne.
                     To this so cleare and sanctified an end,
                     I saw, when reuerend THEMIS did descend
                     Vpon his state; let downe in that rich chaine,
                     That fastneth heauenly power to earthly raigne:
                     Beside her, stoup't on either hand, a maid,
                     Faire DICE, and EVNOMIA; who were said
                     To be her daughters: and but faintly knowne
                     On earth, till now, they came to grace his throne.
                     Her third, IRENE, help'd to beare his traine;
                     And in her office vow'd she would remaine,
                     Till forraine malice, or vnnaturall spight
                     (Which Fates auert) should force her from her right.
                     With these he pass'd, and with his peoples hearts
                     Breath'd in his way; and soules (their better parts)
                     Hast
                           •
                        ng to follow forth in shouts, and cryes.
                     Vpon his face all threw their couetous eyes,
                     As on a wonder: some amazed stood,
                     As if they felt, but had not knowne their good:
                     
                     Others would faine haue shew'ne it in their words:
                     But, when their speech so poore a helpe affords
                     Vnto their zeales expression; they are mute:
                     And only with red silence him salute.
                     Some cry from tops of houses, thinking noise
                     The fittest herald to proclaime true ioyes:
                     Others on ground runne gazing by his side,
                     All, as vnwearied, as vnsatisfied:
                     And euery windore grieu'd it could not moue
                     Along with him, and the same trouble proue.
                     They that had seene, but foure short daies before,
                     His gladding looke, now long'd to see it more.
                     And as of late, when he through London went,
                     The amorous Citie spar'd no ornament,
                     That might her beauties heighten; but so drest,
                     As our ambitious dames, when they make feast,
                     And would be courted: so this Towne put on
                     Her brightest tyre; and, in it, equall shone
                     To her great sister: saue that modestie,
                     Her place, and yeares, gaue her precedencie.
                     The ioy of either was alike, and full;
                     No age, nor sex, so weake, or strongly dull,
                     That did not beare a part in this consent
                     Of hearts, and voices. All the aire was rent,
                     As with the murmure of a mouing wood;
                     The ground beneath did seeme a mouing floud:
                     Walls, windores, roofes, towers, steeples, all were set
                     With seuerall eyes, that in this obiect met.
                     Old men were glad, their fates till now did last;
                     And infants, that the houres had made such hast
                     To bring them forth: Whil'st riper ag'd, and apt
                     To vnderstand the more, the more were rapt.
                     This was the peoples loue, with which did striue
                     The Nobles zeale, yet either kept aliue
                     The others flame, as doth the wike and waxe,
                     That friendly temper'd, one pure taper makes.
                     Meane while, the reuerend THEMIS drawes aside
                     The Kings obeying will, from taking pride
                     In these vaine stirres, and to his mind suggests
                     How he may triumph in his subiects brests,
                     "With better pompe. She tells him first, that Kings
                     "Are here on earth the most conspicuous things:
                     "That they, by Heauen, are plac'd vpon his throne,
                     "To rule like Heauen; and haue no more, their owne,
                     
                     "As they are men, then men. That all they doe
                     "Though hid at home, abroad is search'd into:
                     "And, being once found out, discouer'd lies
                     "Vnto as many enuies, there, as eyes.
                     "That princes, since they know it is their fate,
                     "Oft-times, to haue the secrets of their state
                     "Betraid to fame, should take more care, and feare
                     "In publique acts what face and forme they beare.
                     "She then remembred to his thought the place
                     "Where he was going; and the vpward race
                     "Of kings, praeceding him in that high court;
                     "Their lawes, their endes; the men she did report:
                     "And all so iustly, as his care was ioy'd
                     "To heare the truth, from spight, or flattery voyd.
                     "She shewd him, who made wise, who honest acts;
                     "Who both, who neither: all the cunning tracts,
                     "And thriuing statutes she could promptly note;
                     "The bloody, base, and barbarous she did quote;
                     "Where lawes were made to serue the tyran'will;
                     "Where sleeping they could saue, and waking kill;
                     "Where acts gaue licence to impetuous lust
                     "To bury churches, in forgotten dust,
                     "And with their ruines raise the panders bowers:
                     "When, publique iustice borrow'd all her powers
                     "From priuate chambers; that could then create
                     "Lawes, iudges, consellors, yea prince, and state.
                     "All this she told, and more, with bleeding eyes;
                     "For Right is as compassionate as wife.
                     Nor did he seeme their vices so to loue,
                     As once defend, what THEMIS did reproue.
                     For though by right, and benefite of Times,
                     He ownde their crownes, he would not so their crimes.
                     He knew that princes, who had sold their fame
                     To their voluptuous lustes, had lost their name;
                     And that no wretch was more vnblest then he,
                     Whose necessary good t'was now to be
                     An euill king: And so must such be still,
                     Who once haue got the habit to doe ill.
                     One wickednesse another must defend;
                     For vice is safe, while she hath vice to friend.
                     He knew, that those, who would, with loue, command,
                     Must with a tender (yet a stedfast) hand
                     Sustaine the reynes, and in the checke forbeare
                     To offer cause of iniurie, or feare.
                     
                     That kings, by their example, more doe sway
                     Then by their power; and men doe more obay
                     When they are led, then when they are compell'd.
                     In all these knowing artes our prince excell'd.
                     And now the dame had dried her dropping eyne,
                     When, like an April Iris, flew her shine
                     About the streets, as it would force a spring
                     From out the stones, to gratulate the king.
                     She blest the people, that in shoales did swim
                     To heare her speech; which still began in him
                     And ceas'd in them. She told them, what a fate
                     Was gently falne from heauen vpon this state;
                     How deare a father they did now enioy
                     That came to saue, what discord would destroy:
                     And entring with the power of a king,
                     The temp'rance of a priuate man did bring,
                     That wan affections, ere his steps wan ground;
                     And was not hot, or couetous to be crown'd
                     Before mens hearts had crown'd him. Who (vnlike
                     Those greater bodies of the sky, that strike
                     The lesser fiers dim) in his accesse
                     Brighter then all, hath yet made no one lesse;
                     Though many greater: and the most, the best.
                     Wherein, his choice was happie with the rest
                     Of his great actions, first to see, and do
                     What all mens wishes did aspire vnto.
                     Hereat, the people could no longer hold
                     Their bursting ioyes; but through the ayre was rol'd
                     The length'ned showt, as when th'artillery
                     Of heauen is discharg'd along the skie:
                     And this confession flew from euery voyce:
                     Neuer had land more reason to reioyce.
                     Nor to her blisse, could ought now added bee,
                     Saue, that shee might the same perpetuall see.
                     Which when time, nature, and the fates deny'd,
                     With a twice louder shoute againe they cry'd,
                     Yet, let blest Brittaine aske (without your wrong)
                     Still to haue such a king, and this king long.
                  
                  
                     Solus Rex, & Poeta non quotannis nascitur.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  A PARTICVLAR ENTERTAINMENT OF THE QVEENE AND PRINCE THEIR HIGHNESSE AT ALTHROPE, AT The Right Honourable the Lord SPENCERS, on Satturday being the 25. of Iune 1603. as they came first into the Kingdome;
                  Written by the same Authour, and not before published.
                  The Author B. I.
                  LONDON, M. DC. XVI.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A SATYRE.
                  
                     THe inuention was, to haue a Satyre lodged in a little Spinet, by which her Maiestie, and the Prince were to come, who (at the report of certayne Corne
                        •
                     s that were diuided in seuerall places of the Parke, to signifie her approch) aduanced his head aboue the top of the wood, wondring, and (with his pipe in his hand) began as followeth.
                  
                     SATYRE.
                     HEre? there? and euery where?
                     Some solemnities are neere,
                     That these changes strike mine eare.
                     My pipe and I a part shall beare.
                     And after a short straine with his pipe; againe.
                     Looke, see; (beshrew this tree,)
                     What may all this wonder bee?
                     Pipe it, who that list for mee:
                     I'le flie out abroade, and see.
                     There he leaped downe, and gazing the Queene and Prince in the face, went forward.
                     That is CYPARISSVS face!
                     And the dame hath SYRINX grace!
                     O that PAN were now in place,
                     Sure, they are of heauenly race.
                  
                  
                     Here he ranne into the wood againe, and hid himselfe whilst to the sound of excellent soft Musique, that was there conceald in the thicket; there came tripping vp the lawne, a beuy of Faeries, attending on MAB their Queene, who

falling into an artificiall ring, that was there cut in the path, began to dance a round, whilst their Mistris spake as followeth.
                  
                  
                     FAERIE.
                     
                        Haile, and welcome worthiest Queene,
                        Ioy had neuer perfect beene,
                        To the Nymphs that haunt this greene,
                        Had they not this euening seene.
                     
                     
                        Now they print it on the ground
                        With their feete in figures round,
                        Markes that will be euer found,
                        To remember this glad stound.
                     
                     The Satyre peeping out of the bush, said.
                     Trust her not, you bonny-bell,
                     Shee will fortie leasings tell,
                     I doe know her pranks right well.
                  
                  
                     FAERIE.
                     
                        Satyre, we must haue a spell,
                     For your tongue, it runnes too fleet.
                  
                  
                     SATYRE.
                     Not so nimbly as your feet,
                     When about the creame-bowles sweet,
                     You, and all your Elues doe meet.
                     Here he came hopping forth, and mixing himselfe with the Faeries skipped in, out, and about their circle, while the Elues made many offers to catch at him.
                     This is MAB the mistris-Faerie,
                     That doth nightly rob the dayrie,
                     And can hurt, or helpe the cherning,
                     (As shee please) without discerning.
                  
                  
                     ELFE.
                     PVG, you will anon take warning?
                     Shee, that pinches countrey wenches,
                     If they rub not cleane their benches,
                     And with sharper nayles remembers,
                     When they rake not vp their embers:
                     But if so they chance to feast her,
                     In a shooe shee drops a tester.
                  
                  
                     ELFE.
                     Shall we strip the skipping iester?
                     This is shee, that empties cradles,
                     Takes out children, puts in ladles:
                     Traynes forth mid-wiues in their slumber,
                     With a siue the holes to number.
                     And then leads them, from her borroughs
                     Home through ponds, and water furrowes.
                  
                  
                     
                     ELFE.
                     Shall not all this mocking stirre vs?
                     Shee can start our FRANKLINS daughters,
                     In their sleepe, with shrikes, and laughters,
                     And on sweet Saint ANNE'S night,
                     Feed them with a promis'd sight,
                     Some of husbands, some of louers,
                     Which an emptie dreame discouers.
                  
                  
                     ELFE.
                     
                        Satyre, vengeance neere you houers,
                     And in hope that you would come here
                     Yester-eue the lady For shee was expected here on Mid-summer day at night, but came not till the day following. 
                        Summer,
                     Shee inuited to a banquet:
                     But (in sooth) I con you thanke yet,
                     That you could so well deceiue her
                     Of the pride which gan vp-heaue her:
                     And (by this) would so haue blowne her,
                     As no wood-god should haue knowne her.
                  
                  Here he skipped into the wood.
                  
                     ELFE.
                     Mistris, this is onely spight:
                     For you would not yester-night
                     Kisse him in the cock-shout light.
                  
                  And came againe.
                  
                     SATYRE.
                     By PAN, and thou hast hit it right.
                  
                  There they laid hold on him, and nipt him.
                  
                     FAERY.
                     Fayries, pinch him black and blue,
                     Now you haue him, make him rue.
                  
                  
                     SATYRE.
                     O, hold, MAB: I sue.
                  
                  
                     ELFE.
                     Nay, the deuill shall haue his due.
                  
                  There he ranne quite away and left them in a confusion, while the Faery began againe.
                  
                     SATYRE.
                     
                        Pardon lady this wild strayne,
                        Common with the SYLVAN trayne,
                        That doe skip about this plaine:
                        
                           Elues, apply your gyre againe.
                     
                     
                        And whilst some doe hop the ring,
                        Some shall play, and some shall sing,
                        Weele expresse in euery thing,
                        
                           
                              Quasi Orions ANNA.
                            ORANAS well-comming.
                     
                     
                     SONG.
                     THis is shee,
                     This is shee,
                     In whose world of grace
                     Euery season, person, place,
                     That receiue her, happy be,
                     For with no lesse,
                     Then Bringing with her the Prince, which is the greatest felicitie of kingdomes. a kingdomes happinesse,
                     Doth shee priuate For households. 
                        Lares blesse,
                     And ours aboue the rest:
                     By how much we deserue it least.
                     Long liue ORIANA
                     To exceed (whom shee succeeds) our late DIANA.
                  
                  
                     FAERY.
                     
                        Madame, now an end to make,
                        Deigne a simple gift to take:
                        Only for the Faeries sake,
                        Who about you still shall wake.
                     
                     
                        'Tis done only to supply,
                        His suspected courtesie,
                        Who (since THAMYRA did dye)
                        Hath not brookt a ladies eye,
                     
                     
                        Nor allow'd about his place,
                        Any of the female race.
                        Only we are free to trace
                        All his grounds, as he to chase.
                     
                     
                        For which bountie to vs lent,
                        Of him vnknowledgde, or vnsent,
                        We prepar'd this A iewell was giuen her. 
                           complement,
                        And as farre from cheape intent,
                     
                     
                        In particular to feed,
                        Any hope that should succeed.
                        Or our glorie by the deed,
                        As your selfe are from the need.
                     
                     
                        Vtter not; we you implore,
                        Who did giue it, nor wherefore.
                        And when euer you restore
                        Your selfe to vs, you shall haue more.
                     
                     
                        Highest, happyest Queene farewell,
                        But beware you doe not tell.
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     Here the Faeries hopt away in a fantastique dance, when on a sodaine the Satyre discouered himselfe againe and came forth.
                  
                  
                     SATYRE.
                     Not tell? Ha, ha, I could smile,
                     At this old, and toothlesse wile.
                     Ladie, I haue beene no sleeper,
                     Shee belyes the noble keeper.
                     
                     Say, that here he like the groues:
                     And pursue no forraine loues,
                     Is he therefore to be deemed,
                     Rude, or sauage? or esteemed,
                     But a sorry entertayner,
                     'Cause he is no common strayner:
                     After painted Nymphs for fauours,
                     Or that in his garbe he sauours
                     Little of the nicety,
                     In the sprucer courtiery;
                     As the rosarie of kisses,
                     With the oath that neuer misses,
                     This, beleeue me on the brest,
                     And then telling some mans iest,
                     Thinking to preferre his wit,
                     Equall with his suite by it,
                     I meane his clothes: No, no, no,
                     Here doth no such humour flow.
                     He can neither bribe a grace,
                     Nor encounter my lords face
                     With a plyant smile, and flatter,
                     Though this lately were some matter
                     To the making of a courtier.
                     Now he hopes he shall resort there,
                     Safer, and with more allowance;
                     Since a hand hath gouernance,
                     That hath giuen those customes chase,
                     And hath brought his owne in place.
                     O that now a wish could bring,
                     The god-like person of a king,
                     Then should euen Enuy find,
                     Cause of wonder at the mind
                     Of our wood-man: but loe, where
                     His kingly image doth appeare,
                     And is all this while neglected.
                     Pardon (lord) you are respected
                     
                     Deepe as is the Keepers hart,
                     And as deare in euery part.
                     See, for instance where he sends
                     
                        Here the Satyre fetcht out of the wood, the Lord Spencers eldest sonne, attyr'd and appointed like a huntsman. His son, his heire; who humbly bends
                     Low, as is his fathers earth,
                     To the wombe that gaue you birth
                     So he was directed first,
                     Next to you, of whom the thirst
                     Of seeing takes away the vse
                     Of that part, should plead excuse
                     For his boldnesse, which is lesse
                     By his comly shamefac'tnesse.
                     Rise vp, sir, I will betray,
                     All I thinke you haue to say;
                     That your father giues you here,
                     (Freely as to him you were)
                     To the seruice of this Prince:
                     And with you these instruments
                     Of his wild and Syluan trade,
                     Better not ACTEON had.
                     The bow was PHoeBES, and the horne,
                     By ORION often worne:
                     The dog of Sparta breed, and good,
                     As can ring within a wood;
                     Thence his name is: you shall try
                     How he hunteth instantly.
                     But perhaps the Queene your mother,
                     Rather doth affect some other
                     Sport, as coursing: we will proue
                     Which her highnesse most doth loue.
                     
                        Satyres let the woods resound,
                     They shall haue their welcome crown'd,
                     With a brace of bucks to ground.
                     At that, the whole wood and place resounded with the noyse of cornets, hornes, and other hunting musique, and a brace of choise Deere put out, and as fortunately kill'd, as they were meant to be; euen in the sight of her Maiestie.
                     
                        This was the first nights shew. Where the next day being Sunday, shee rested, and on Munday, till after dinner; where there was a speech sodainly thought on, to induce a morrise of the clownes thereabout, who most officiously presented themselues, but by reason of the throng of the countrey that came in, their speaker could not be heard, who was in the person of No-body, to deliuer this following speech, and attyred in a paire of breeches which were made to come vp to his neck, with his armes out at his pockets, and a cap drowning his face.
                     
                     
                        
                        IF my outside moue your laughter,
                        Pray IOVE, my inside be thereafter.
                     
                     
                        Queene, Prince, Duke, Earles,
                        Countesses; you courtly Pearles:
                        (And, I hope no mortall sinne,
                        If I put lesse Ladies in)
                        Faire saluted be you all.
                        At this time it doth befall,
                        We are the Huisher to a Morrise,
                        (A kind of Masque) whereof good store is
                        In the countrey hereabout,
                        But this, the choise of all the rout.
                        Who, because that no man sent them,
                        Haue got NO-BODIE to present them.
                        These are things haue no suspition
                        Of their ill doing; nor ambition
                        Of their well: but as the Pipe
                        Shall inspire them, meane to skip.
                        They come to see, and to be seene,
                        And though they dance afore the Queene,
                        Ther's none of these doth hope to come by
                        Wealth, to build another Holmby:
                        
                        All those dauncing dayes are done,
                        Men must now haue more then one
                        Grace, to build their fortunes on,
                        Else our soles would sure haue gone,
                        All by this time to our feete.
                        I not deny, where Graces meete
                        In a man, that qualitie
                        Is a gracefull propertie:
                        But when dauncing is his best,
                        (Beshrew me) I suspect the rest.
                        But I am NO-BODIE, and my breath
                        (Soone as it is borne) hath death.
                        Come on clownes, forsake your dumps,
                        And bestirre your hob-nail'd stumps,
                        Doe your worst, Ile vndertake,
                        Not a ierke you haue shall make
                        Any Ladie here in loue.
                        Perhaps your Foole, or so, may moue
                        Some Ladies woman with a trick,
                        And vpon it she may pick
                        A paire of reuelling legs, or two,
                        Out of you, with much adoe.
                        
                        But see, the Hobby-horse is forgot.
                        Foole, it must be your lot,
                        To supply his want with faces,
                        And some other Buffon graces,
                        You know how; Piper play,
                        And let no bodie hence away.
                     
                     There was also another parting Speech; which was to haue beene presented in the person of a youth, and accompanied with diuers gentlemens younger sonnes of the countrey: but by reason of the multitudinous presse, was also hindred. And which we haue here adioyned.
                     ANd will you then, Mirror of Queenes, depart?
                     Shall nothing stay you? not my Masters heart?
                     That pants to leese the comfort of your light,
                     And see his Day ere it be old grow Night?
                     You are a Goddesse, and your will be done:
                     Yet this our last hope is, that as the Sunne
                     Cheeres obiects farre remou'd, as well as neere;
                     So, where so'ere you shine, you'le sparkle here.
                     And you deare Lord, on whom my couetous eye
                     Doth feed it selfe, but cannot satisfie,
                     O shoot vp fast in spirit, as in yeares;
                     That when vpon her head proud Europe weares
                     Her stateliest tire, you may appeare thereon
                     The richest gem, without a paragon.
                     Shine bright and fixed as the Artick starre:
                     And when slow Time hath made you fit for warre,
                     Looke ouer the strict Ocean, and thinke where
                     You may but lead vs forth, that grow vp here
                     Against a day, when our officious swords
                     Shall speake our action better then our words.
                     Till then, all good euent conspire to crowne
                     Your parents hopes, our zeale, and your renowne.
                     Peace vsher now your steps, and where you come,
                     Be Enuie still strooke blind, and Flatterie dumbe.
                  
                  
                     
                     A PRIVATE ENTERTAINMENT of the KING and QVEENE, on May-day in the Morning, At Sir WILLIAM CORNVVALLEIS his house, at High-gate. 1604.
                     By the same Author.
                     
                        THe king, and queene being entred in at the gate, the PENATES, o
                           •
                         household-gods receiued them, attir'd after the antique manner, with iauelines in their hands, standing on each side of the porch, with this speech.
                     
                        PENATES.
                        
                           1.
                           LEape light hearts in euery brest,
                           Ioy is now the fittest passion;
                           Double maiestie hath blest
                           All the place, with that high grace,
                           Exceedeth admiration!
                        
                        
                           2.
                           Welcome, monarch of this Isle,
                           Europes enuie, and her merror;
                           Great in each part of thy stile:
                           
                              Englands wish, and Scotlands blisse,
                           Both France, and Irelands terror.
                           
                        
                        
                           1.
                           Welcome, are you; and no lesse,
                           Your admired queene: the glory
                           Both of state, and comelinesse.
                           Euery line of her diuine
                           Forme, is a beautious storie.
                        
                        
                           2.
                           High in fortune, as in blood,
                           So are both; and blood renowned
                           By oft falls, that make a flood
                           In your veines: yet, all these streines
                           Are in your vertues drowned.
                        
                        
                           1.
                           House, be proud; For of earth's store
                           These two, onely, are the wonder:
                           In them shee's rich, and in no more.
                           Zeale is bound their prayse to sound
                           As loud as fame, or thunder.
                        
                        
                           
                           2.
                           Note, but how the ayre, the spring
                           Concurre in their deuotions;
                           Payres of Turtles sit, and sing
                           On each tree, ore-ioy'd to see
                           In them like loue, like motions.
                        
                        
                           1.
                           Enter sir, this longing dore,
                           Whose glad lord nought could haue blessed
                           Equally; (I'am sure not more)
                           Then this sight: saue' of your right,
                           When you were first possessed.
                        
                        
                           2.
                           That, indeed, transcended this.
                           Since which houre, wherein you gayn'd it.
                           For this grace, both he and his,
                           Euery day, haue learn'd to pray,
                           And, now, they haue obtayn'd it.
                        
                     
                     
                        Here the PENATES lead them in, through the house, into the garden, where MERCVRY, with a second speech, receiued them, walking before them.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Retyre, you houshold-gods, and leaue these excellent creatures to be entertayned by a more eminent deitie. Hayle King, and Queene of the Islands, call'd truely fortunate, and by you made so; To tell you, who I am, and weare all these notable, and speaking ensignes about me, were to challenge you of most impossible ignorance, and accuse my selfe of as palpable glorie: It is inough that you know me here, and come with the licence of my father IOVE, who is the bountie of heauen, to giue you early welcome to the bower of my mother MAIA, no lesse the goodnesse of earth. And may it please you to walke, I will tell you no wonderfull storie. This place, whereon you are now aduanced (by the mightie power of Poetrie, and the helpe of a faith, that can remoue mountaynes) is the Arcadian hill CYLLENE, the place, where my selfe was both begot, and borne; and of which I am frequently call'd CYLLENIVS: Vnder yond' purslane tree stood sometime my cradle. Where, now, behold my mother MAIA, sitting in the pride of her plentie, gladding the aire with her breath, and cheering the spring with her smiles. At her feet, the blushing AVRORA, who, with her rosie hand, casteth her honie dewes on those sweeter herbs, accompanied with that gentle winde, FAVONIVS, whose subtile spirit, in the breathing forth, FLORA makes into flowers, and sticks them in the grasse, as if shee contended to haue the imbroyderie of the

earth, richer then the cope of the skie. Here, for her moneth, the yeerely delicate May keepes state; and from this Mount, takes pleasure to display these valleyes, yon'd lesser hills, those statelier edifices, and towers, that seeme enamour'd so farre off, and are rear'd on end, to behold her, as if their vtmost obiect were her beauties. Hither the Dryads of the valley, and Nymphs of the great riuer come euery morning, to taste of her fauors; and depart away with laps fill'd with her bounties. But, see! vpon your approch their pleasures are instantly remitted. The birds are hush'd, ZEPHYRE is still, the MORNE forbeares her office, FLORA is dumbe, and herselfe amazed, to behold two such maruailes, that doe more adorne place, then shee can time; Pardon, your Maiestie, the fault, for it is that hath caus'd it; and till they can collect their spirits, thinke silence, and wonder the best adoration.
                     
                     
                        Here, AVRORA, ZEPHYRVS, and FLORA, began this song in three parts.
                     
                     SONG.
                     SEe, see, Ô see, who here is come a Maying!
                     The master of the Ocean;
                     And his beautious ORIAN:
                     Why left we off our playing?
                     To gaze, to gaze,
                     On them, that gods no lesse then men amaze.
                     Vp Nightingale, and sing
                     Iug, jug, jug, jug, &c.
                     Raise Larke thy note, and wing,
                     All birds their musique bring,
                     Sweet Robin, Linet, Thrush,
                     Record, from euery bush,
                     The welcome of the King;
                     And Queene:
                     Whose like were neuer seene,
                     For good, for faire.
                     Nor can be; though fresh May,
                     Should euery day
                     Inuite a seuerall paire,
                     No, though shee should inuite a seuerall paire.
                     
                        Which ended: MAIA (seated in her bower, with all those personages about her, as before describ'd) began to raise her selfe, and, then declining, spake.
                     
                     
                        MAI.
                        
                           If all the pleasures were distill'd
                           Of eu'ry flower, in euery field,
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           And all that HIBLA hiues do yeild
                           Were into one broad mazor fild;
                           If, thereto, added all the gummes,
                           And spice, that from PANCHAIA comes,
                           The odour, that HYDASPES lends
                           Or PHoeNIX proues, before she ends;
                           If all the Ayre, my FLORA drew,
                           Or spirit, that ZEPHYRE euer blew;
                           Were put therein; and and all the dew
                           That euer rosy Morning knew;
                           Yet, all diffus'd vpon this bower,
                           To make one sweet detayning houre,
                           Were much too little for the grace,
                           And honor, you vouchsafe the place.
                           But, if you please to come againe,
                           We vow, we will not then, with vaine,
                           And empty passe-times entertayne,
                           Your so desir'd, though grieued payne.
                           For, we will haue the wanton fawnes,
                           That frisking skip, about the lawnes,
                           The Paniskes, and the Siluanes rude,
                           
                              Satyres, and all that multitude,
                           To daunce their wilder rounds about,
                           And cleaue the ayre, with many a shout,
                           As they would hunt poore Echo out
                           Of yonder valley, who doth flout
                           Their rusticke noyse. To visite whome
                           You shall behold whole beuies come
                           Of gaudy Nymphes, who tender calls
                           Well tun'd (vnto the many falls
                           Of sweete, and seuerall sliding rills,
                           That streame from tops of those lesse hills)
                           Sound like so many siluer quills
                           When ZEPHYRE them with musique fills.
                           For these, FAVONIVS here shall blow
                           New flowers, which you shall see to grow,
                           Of which, each hand a part shall take,
                           And, for your heads, fresh garlands make.
                           Wherewith, whilst they your temples round,
                           An ayre of seuerall birds shall sound
                           An Iö paean, that shall drowne
                           The acclamations, at your crowne.
                        
                        
                           All this, and more then I haue gift of saying,
                           
                              MAY vowes, so you will oft come here a Masing.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        MER.
                        And MERCVRY, her sonne, shall venture the displeasure of his father, with the whole bench of Heauen, that day, but he will doe his mothers intents all seruiceable assistance. Till then, and euer, liue high and happy, you, and your other you; both enuied for your fortunes, lou'd for your graces, and admired for your vertues.
                     
                     
                        This was the mornings entertaynment; after dinner, the King, and Queene comming againe into the garden, MERCVRY the second time accosted them.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        Againe, great payre, I salute you; and with leaue of all the gods: whose high pleasure it is, that MERCVRY make this your holy-day. May all the blessings both of earth, and heauen, concurre to thanke you: For till this dayes sunne, I haue faintly inioy'd a minutes rest to my creation. Now, I do, and acknowledge it you sole, and no lesse the diuine benefit. If my desire to delight you, might not diuert to your trouble, I would intreat your eyes to a new, and strange spectacle; a certaine sonne of mine, whom the Arcadians call a god, howsoeuer the rest of the world receiue him: It is the horned PAN, whom in the translated figure of a goate I begot on the faire Spartan PENELOPE; MAY, let both your eares, and lookes forgiue it: These are but the lightest escapes of our Deities. And, it is better in me, to preuent his rusticke impudence, by my blushing acknowledgement, then, anon, by his rude, and not insolent clayme, be enforced to confesse him. Yonder hee keepes, and with him the wood Nymphes, whose leader he is in rounds, and daunces, to this Syluane musique. The place, about which they skip, is the fount of laughter, or BACCHVS spring; whose statue is aduanced on the top; and from whose pipes, at an obseru'd howre of the day, there flowes a lustie liquor, that hath the present vertue to expell sadnesse; and within certaine minutes after it is tasted, force all the myrth of the spleene into the face. Of this is PAN the Guardian. Loe! the fountain begins to run, but the Nymphes at your sight are fled. PAN, and his Satyres wildly stand at gaze. I will approach, and question him: vouchsafe your eare, and forgiue his behauiour, which (euen to me, that am his parent) will no doubt be rude ynough, though otherwise full of salt, which, except my presence did temper, might turne to be gall, and bitternesse; but that shall charme him.
                     
                     
                        PAN.
                        O, it is MERCVRY! Hollow 'hem, agen,
                        What be all these, father? gods, or men?
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        All humane. Onely, these two are deities on earth, but such, as the greatest powers of heauen may resigne to.
                     
                     
                        PAN.
                        Why did our Nymphes run away? can you tell?
                        Here be sweet beauties loue MERCVRY well?
                        I see by their lookes. How say you? great master?
                        Will you please to heere? Shall I be your taster?
                     
                     
                        
                        MER.
                        PAN, you are too rude.
                     
                     
                        PAN.
                        It is but a glasse,
                        By my beard, and my hornes, tis a health, and shall passe.
                        Were he a king, and his mistresse a queene
                        This draught shall make him a petulant spleene.
                        But, trow, is he loose, or costiue of laughter?
                        I'ld know, to fill him his glasse, thereafter,
                        Sure, either my skill, or my sight doth mock,
                        Or this lordings looke should not care for the smock;
                        And yet he should loue both a horse and a hound,
                        And not rest till he saw his game on the ground:
                        Well, looke to him, Dame; beshrow me were I
                        'Mongst these bonny-bells, you should need a good eye.
                        Here mistresse; all out. Since a god is your skinker:
                        By my hand, I beleeue you were borne a good drinker.
                        They are things of no spirit, their blood is asleepe,
                        That, when it is offred 'hem do not drinke deepe.
                        Come, who is next? Our liquour here cooles.
                        Ladies, I'am sure, you all ha' not fooles
                        At home to laugh at. A little of this,
                        Tane downe here in priuate, were not amisse.
                        Beleeue it, she drinkes like a wench, that had store
                        Of lord for her laughter, will you haue more?
                        What answere you, lordings? will you any, or none?
                        Laugh, and be fat, sir, your penance is knowne.
                        They that loue mirth, let 'hem heartily drinke,
                        'Tis the only receipt, to make sorrow sinke.
                        The yong Nymph, that's troubled with an old man,
                        Let her laugh him away, as fast as he can.
                        Nay drinke, and not pause, as who would say must you?
                        But laugh at the wench, that next doth trust you.
                        To you, sweet beauty; nay, 'pray you come hether:
                        E're you sit out, yow'le laugh at a fether.
                        Ile neuer feare you, for being too wittie,
                        You sip, so like a forsooth of the citie,
                        Lords, for your selues, your owne cups crowne,
                        The ladies, ifaith, else will laugh you downe.
                        Goe to, little blushet, for this, anan,
                        Yow'le steale forth a laugh in the shade of your fan.
                        This, and another thing, I can tell you,
                        Will breed a laughter, as low as your belly
                        Of such sullen pieces, IOVE send vs not many,
                        They must be tickled, before they will any.
                        What haue we done? They that want, let'hem call,
                        Gallants, of both sides, you see here is all.
                        
                        PAN'S entertaynment: Looke for no more.
                        Only, good faces, I reed you, make store
                        Of your amorous Knights, and Squiers hereafter,
                        They are excellent sponges, to drinke vp your laughter.
                        Farewell, I must seeke out my Nymphs, that you frighted;
                        Thanke HERMES, my father, if ought' haue delighted.
                     
                     
                        MER.
                        I am sure, thy last rudenesse cannot; for it makes me seriously asham'd. I will not labor his excuse, since I know you more readie to pardon, then he to trespasse: but, for your singular patience, tender you all aboundance of thankes; and, mixing with the Master of the place, in his wishes, make them my diuinations: That your loues be euer flourishing as May, and your house as fruitfull: That your acts exceed the best, and your yeares the longest of your predecessors: That no bad fortune touch you, nor good change you. But still, that you triumph, in this facilitie, ouer the ridiculous pride of other Princes; and for euer liue safe in the loue, rather, then the feare of your subiects.
                     
                     
                        And thus it ended.
                     
                     
                        BEN. IONSON.
                     
                  
                  
                     The entertainment of the tvvo Kings of Great BRITAINE and DENMARKE at THEOBALDS, Iuly 24. 1606.
                     
                        THe Kings being entred the inner Court; aboue, ouer the porch, sate the three Howers, vpon clouds, as at the ports of Heauen; crown'd with seuerall flowers: of which, one bore a Sunne-diall; the other, a Clock; the third, an Hower-glasse; signifying as by their names, Law, Iustice, and Peace. And for those faculties chosen to gratulate their comming with this speech.
                     
                        ENter, Ô long'd for Princes, blesse these bowers,
                        And vs, the three, by you made happie, Howers:
                        
                        We that include all Time, yet neuer knew
                        Minute like this, or obiect like to you.
                        Two Kings, the worlds prime honors, whose accesse
                        Shewes eithers greatnesse, yet makes neither lesse:
                        Vouchsafe your thousand welcomes in this shewer;
                        The Master vowes, not SYBILL'S leaues were truer.
                     
                     
                        
                        Express'd to the King of DENMARKE thus.
                     
                     
                        Qui colit has aedeis, ingentia gaudia adumbrans,
                        Cernendo Reges pace coïre pares,
                        Nos tempestiuas, ad limina, collocat Horas,
                        Quòd bona sub nobis omnia proueniant.
                        Vnum ad laetitiae cumulum tristatur abesse,
                        Quòd nequeat signis laetitiam exprimere.
                        Sed, quia res solùm ingentes hâc parte laborant
                        Vtcun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            expressam credidit esse satis.
                        At, quod non potuit Dominus, suppleuit abunde
                        Frondoso tellus munere facta loquax.
                        Eccos quàm grati veniant quos terra salutat!
                        Verior his folijs nulla SYBILLA fuit.
                     
                     The Inscriptions on the walls were,

                           DATE VENIAM SVBITIS.
                           DEBENTVR QVAE SVNT QVAE
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               FVTVRA.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           EPIGRAMMES hung vp.
                        
                           
                              Ad Reges Serenissimos:
                              SAEpè THEOBALDAE (sortis bonitate beatae)
                              Excepêre suos sub pia tecta deos;
                              Haud simul at geminos: sed enim potuisse negabant:
                              Nec fas est tales posse putare duos.
                              Fortunata antehâc, sed nunc domus vndique faelix,
                              At Dominus quantò (si licet vsque) magis!
                              Et licet, ô MAGNI, folijs si siditis istis,
                              Quêis HORAE summam contribuere fidem.
                           
                           
                              Ad Serenissimum IACOBVM.
                              Miraris, cur hospitio te accepimus HORAE,
                              Cuius ad obsequium non satis annus erat?
                              Nempè quòd adueniant ingentia gaudia raro,
                              Et quando adueniant vix datur hora frui.
                           
                           
                              Ad Serenissimum CHRISTIANVM.
                              Miraris, cur hospitio te accepimus HORAE,
                              Quas Solis famulas Graecia docta vocat?
                              Talis ab aduentu vestro lux fulsit in aedeis,
                              Vt Dominus solem crederet esse nouum.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Others, at their departure.
                        
                           Ad Serenissimum IACOBVM.
                           HOspitio qui te caepit, famulantibus Horis,
                           Cedere abhinc, nullâ concomitante sinit;
                           Nempe omneis horas veniendi duxit amicas
                           Sed discedendi nulla minuta probat.
                        
                        
                           Ad Serenissimum CHRISTIANVM.
                           Te veniente, nouo domus haec frondebat amictu;
                           Te discessuro, non prout ante viret:
                           Nempe, sub accessu solis, nouus incipit Annus,
                           Et, sub discessu, squalida saeuit Hyems.
                        
                        
                           The Author B. I.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     An Entertainment of King IAMES and Queene ANNE, at THEOBALDS, When the House was deliuered vp, with the possession, to the QVEENE, by the Earle of SALISBVRIE, 22. of MAY, 1607.
                     
                     The Prince IANVILE, brother to the Duke of GVISE, being then present.
                     
                        
                           THe King, and Queene, with the Princes of Wales, and Lorraine, and the Nobilitie, being entred into the gallerie, after dinner; there was seene nothing but a trauerse of white, acrosse the roome: which sodainely drawne, was discouered a gloomie obscure place, hung all with black silkes, and in it only one light, which the GENIVS of the house held, sadly attir'd; his Cornucopia readie to fall out of his hand, his gyrland drooping on his head, his eyes fixed on the ground; when, out of this pensiue posture, after some little pause, he brake, and began.
                     
                     
                        GENIVS.
                        LEt not your glories darken, to behold
                        The place, and me, her GENIVS here, so sad;
                        Who, by bold Rumor, haue beene lately told,
                        That I must change the loued Lord, I had.
                        And he, now, in the twy-light of sere age,
                        Begin to seeke a habitation new;
                        
                        And all his fortunes, and himselfe engage
                        Vnto a seat, his fathers neuer knew.
                        And I, vncertaine what I must endure,
                        Since all the ends of dest'ny' are obscure.
                     
                     Here a voice was heard, from behind the darknesse, which bade him,
                     
                        MERCVRIE.
                        Despaire not, GENIVS, thou shalt know thy fate.
                     
                     
                        And withall, the black vanishing, was discouered a glorious place, figuring the Lararium, or seat of the household-gods, where both the Lares, and Penates, were painted, in copper colours; erected with Columnes and Architrabe, Freeze, and Coronice, in which were placed diuers Diaphanall glasses, fill'd with seuerall waters, that shew'd like so many stones, of orient and transparent hiewes. Within, as farder off, in Landtschap, were seene clouds riding, and in one corner, a boy figuring Good Euent, attyred in white, houering in the' ayre, with wings displayed, hauing nothing seene to sustaine him by, all the time the Shew lasted: At the other corner, a MERCVRIE descended, in a flying posture, with his Caduceus on his hand, who spake to the three PARCAE, that sate low in a grate, with an yron roofe, the one holding the rocke, the other the spindle, and the third the sheeres, with a booke of Adamant lying open befor
                              •
                            them. But first, the GENIVS surpriz'dly wonder, vrg'd this doubt, by question.
                     
                     
                        GENIVS.
                        WHat sight is this, so strange! and full of state!
                        The sonne of MAIA, making his descent
                        Vnto the fates, and met with good Euent.
                        
                     
                     
                        MERCVRIE.
                        Daughters of night, and secrecie, attend;
                        You, that draw out the chayne of Destinie,
                        Vpon whose threds, both liues and times depend,
                        And all the periods of mortalitie.
                        The will of IOVE is, that you streight doe looke
                        The change, and fate vnto this house decreed,
                        And speaking from your Adamantine booke,
                        Vnto the GENIVS of the place it read;
                        That he may know, and knowing, blesse his lot,
                        That such a grace, beyond his hopes, hath got.
                     
                     
                        CLOTHO.
                        When, vnderneath thy roofe, is seene
                        The greatest King, and fairest Queene,
                        With Princes an vnmatched payre,
                        One, hope of all the earth, their heyre;
                        The other styled of Lorraine,
                        Their bloud; and sprung from CHARLEMAINE:
                        
                        When all these Glories iointly shine,
                        And fill thee with a heat diuine,
                        And these reflected, doe beget
                        And splendent Sunne, shall neuer set,
                        But here shine fixed, to affright
                        All after-hopes of following night,
                        Then, GENIVS, is thy period come,
                        To change thy Lord: Thus, Fates doe doome.
                     
                     
                        GENIVS.
                        But is my Patron with this lot content,
                        So to forsake his fathers moniment?
                        Or, is it gaine, or else necessitie,
                        Or will to raise a house of better frame,
                        That makes him shut forth his posteritie
                        Out of his patrimonie, with his name?
                     
                     
                        MERCVRIE.
                        Nor gaine, nor need; much lesse a vaine desire,
                        To frame new roofes, or build his dwelling higher;
                        He hath, with mortar, busied beene too much,
                        That his affections should continue such.
                     
                     
                        GENIVS.
                        Doe men take ioy in labors, not t'enioy?
                        Or doth their businesse all their likings spend?
                        Haue they more pleasure in a tedious way,
                        Then to repose them at their iourneys end?
                     
                     
                        MERCVRIE.
                        GENIVS, obey, and not expostulate;
                        It is your vertue: and such powers as you,
                        Should make religion of offending fate,
                        Whose doomes are iust, and whose designes are true.
                     
                     
                        LACHESIS.
                        The person, for whose royall sake,
                        Thou must a change so happie make,
                        Is he, that gouernes with his smile,
                        This lesser world, this greatest Isle.
                        His Ladies seruant thou must be;
                        Whose second would great NATVRE see,
                        Or FORTVNE, after all their paine,
                        They might despaire to make againe.
                     
                     
                        ATROPOS.
                        She is the grace of all, that are:
                        And as ELISA, now a starre,
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                   
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE QVEENES MASQVES. The first, OF BLACKNESSE: Personated at the Court, at WHITE-HALL, on the Twelu'th night, 1605.
                  
                     THe honor, and splendor of these spectacles was such in the performance, as could those houres haue lasted, this of mine, now, had been a most vnprofitable worke. But (when it is the fate, euen of the greatest, and most absolute births, to need, and borrow a life of posteritie) little had beene done to the studie of magnificence in these, if presently with the rage of the people, who (as a part of greatnesse) are priuiledged by custome, to deface their carkasses, the spirits had also perished. In dutie, therefore, to that Maiestie, who gaue them their authoritie, and grace; and, no lesse then the most royall of predecessors, deserues eminent celebration for these-solemnities: I adde this later hand, to redeeme them as well from Ignorance, as Enuie, two common euills, the one of censure, the other of obliuion.
                  
                  
                     
                        Natu. Hist. l. 5 cap. 8. PLINY, 
                        Poly. hist. cap. 40. & 43. SOLINVS, 
                        Lib 4. cap. 5. PTOLOMEY, and of late LEO 
                        Descrip. Afric.
                      the African, remember vnto vs a riuer in Aethiopia, famous by the name of Niger; of which the people were called Nigritae, now Negro's: and are the blackest nation of the world. This Some take it to be the same with Nilus, which is by Lucan called Melas, signifying Niger. Howsoeuer, Plinie, in the place aboue noted, hath this: Nigri slu
                              •
                           io eadem natura, quae Nilo, calamum, papyrum, & 
                              •
                           aesdem gignit animantes. See Solin. aboue mentioned. riuer taketh spring out of a certaine lake, east-ward; and after a long race, falleth into the westerne Ocean. Hence (because it was her Maiesties will, to haue them Black-mores at first) the inuention was deriued by me, and presented thus.
                  First, for the Scene, was drawne a Landtschap, consisting of small woods, and here and there a void place fill'd with huntings; which falling, an artificiall sea was seene to shoote forth, as if it flowed to the land, raysed with waues, which seemed to moue, and in some places the billow to
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     OCEANVS.
                     BVt, what's the end of thy Herculean labors,
                     Extended to these calme, and blessed shores?
                  
                  
                     NIGER.
                     TO do a kind, and carefull fathers part,
                     In satisfying euery pensiue heart
                     Of these my Daughters, my most loued birth:
                     Who though they were the Read Diod. Sicul. lib. 3. It is a coniecture of the old Ethnicks, that they which dwell vnder the South, were the first begotten of the earth. first form'd dames of earth,
                     And in whose sparckling, and refulgent eyes,
                     The glorious Sunne did still delight to rise;
                     Though he (the best iudge, and most formall cause
                     Of all dames beauties) in their firme hiewes, drawes
                     Signes of his feruent'st loue; and thereby shewes
                     That, in their black, the perfectst beauty growes;
                     Since the fix't colour of their curled haire,
                     (Which is the highest grace of dames most faire)
                     No cares, no age can change; or there display
                     The fearefull tincture of abhorred Gray;
                     Since Death her selfe (her selfe being pale and blue)
                     Can neuer alter their most faithfull hiew;
                     All which are arguments, to proue, how far
                     Their beauties conquer, in great beauties warre;
                     And more, how neere Diuinitie they be,
                     That stand from passion, or decay so free.
                     Yet, since the fabulous voices of some few
                     Poore brain-sicke men, stil'd Poets, here with you,
                     Haue, with such enuie of their graces, sung
                     The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
                     Letting their loose, and winged fictions flie
                     To infect all clymates, yea our puritie;
                     As of one 
                           Notissima fabula. Ouid. Met. lib. 2. PHAETON, that fir'd the world
                     And, that, before his heedlesse flames were hurld
                     About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as faire,
                     As other Dames; now blacke, with blacke dispaire:
                     And in respect of their complections chang'd,
                     Are each where, since, for Alluding to that of Iuuenal, Satir. 5. Et cui per mediam nolis occurrere noctem.
                         lucklesse creatures rang'd.
                     Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
                     Most ielous of their beauties) feare, and care
                     Possess'd them whole; yea, and beleeuing The Poets.
                         
                        them,
                     They wept such ceaselesse teares, into my streame,
                     That it hath, thus far, ouerflow'd his shore
                     To seeke them patience: who haue since, ere more
                     As the Sunne riseth, A custome of the Aethiopes, notable in Herod. and Diod. Sic. See Plinie. Nat. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 8. chardg'd his burning throne
                     With volleys of reuilings; cause he shone
                     
                     On their scorch'd cheekes, with such intemperate fires,
                     And other Dames, made queenes of all desires.
                     To frustrate which strange error, oft, I sought,
                     (Though most in vaine, against a setled thought
                     As womens are) till they confirm'd at length
                     By miracle, what I, with so much strength
                     Of argument resisted; els they fain'd:
                     For in the Lake, where their first spring they gain'd,
                     As they sate, cooling their soft Limmes, one night,
                     Appear'd a face, all circumfus'd with light;
                     (And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes 
                        
                           Plin. ibid. neuer dreame)
                     Wherein they might decipher through the streame,
                     These words.
                     That they a Land must forthwith seeke,
                     Whose termination (of the Greeke)
                     Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
                     Their blouds, doth neuer Consult with Tacitus, in vita Agric, and the Paneg. ad Constent.
                         rise, or set,
                     But in his Iourney passeth by,
                     And leaues that Clymat of the sky,
                     To comfort of a greater Light,
                     Who formes all beauty, with his sight.
                     In search of this, haue we three Princedomes past,
                     That speake out Tania, in their accents last;
                     Blacke Mauritania, first; and secondly,
                     Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
                     Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
                     The place vnto these longing Nymphes design'd.
                     Instruct, and ayde me, great OCEANVS,
                     What land is this, that now appeares to vs?
                  
                  
                     OCEANVS.
                     This Land, that lifts into the temperate ayre
                     His snowy cliffe, is Orpheus in his Argonaut. calls it . 
                        Albion the faire;
                     So call'd of Alluding to the rite of stiling princes, after the name of their princedomes: so is he still Albion, and Neptunes sonne that gouernes. As also his being deare to Neptune, in being so imbrac'd by him. Neptunes son, who ruleth here:
                     For whose deare guard, my selfe, (foure thousand yeere)
                     Since old Deucalion's daies, haue walk'd the round
                     About his empire, proud, to see him crown'd
                     About my waues.
                  
                  
                     At this, the Moone was discouered in the vpper part of the house, triumphant in a Siluer throne, made in figure of a Pyramis. Her garments White, and Siluer, the dressing of her head antique; & crown'd with a Luminarie, or Sphaere of light: which striking on the clouds, and heightned with Siluer, reflected as naturall

clouds doe by the splendor of the Moone. The heauen, about her, was vaulted with blue silke, and set with starres of Siluer which had in them their seuerall lights burning. The suddaine sight of which, made NIGER to interrupt OCEANVS, with this present passion.
                  
                  
                     NIGER.
                     Whose pure, auspicious light greetes vs, thus farre!
                     Great Aethiopia,
The Aethiopians worshipd the Moone, by that surname, See Stepha. . in voce AI'ΘOIΓIION and his reasons.
                         Goddesse of our shore,
                     Since, with particular worship we adore
                     Thy generall brightnesse, let particular grace
                     Shyne on my zealous Daughters: Shew the place,
                     Which, long, their longings vrdg'd their eyes to see▪
                     
                     Beautifie them, which long haue Deified thee.
                  
                  
                     AETHIOPIA.
                     NIGER, be glad: Resume the natiue cheare.
                     Thy Daughters labors haue their period here,
                     And so thy errors. I was that bright face
                     Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
                     
                     Read mysticke lines; (which skill PITHAGORAS
                     First taught to men, by a reuerberate glasse)
                     This blessed Isle doth with that TANIA end,
                     Which there they saw inscrib'd, and shall extend
                     Wish'd satisfaction to their best desires.
                     BRITANIA, which the triple world admires
                     This Isle hath now recouered for her name;
                     Where raigne those beauties, that with so much fame
                     The sacred MVSES sonnes haue honored,
                     And from bright HESPERVS to EOVS spred.
                     With that great name BRITANIA, this blest Isle
                     Hath wonne her ancient dignitie, and stile,
                     
                        A world, diuided from the world: and tri'd
                     The abstract of it, in his generall pride.
                     For were the world, with all his wealth, a ring,
                     BRITANIA (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
                     Might be a Diamant worthy to inchase it,
                     Rul'd by a SVNNE, that to this height doth grace it:
                     Whose beames shine day, and night, and are of force
                     To blanch an AETHIOPE, and reuiue a Cor's.
                     
                     His light scientiall is, and (past more nature)
                     Can salue the rude defects of euery creature.
                     Call forth thy honor'd Daughters, then;
                     And let them, 'fore the Brittaine men,
                     
                     Indent the Land, with those pure traces
                     They flow with, in their natiue graces.
                     Inuite them, boldly, to the shore,
                     Their beauties shall be scorch'd no more:
                     This sunne is temperate, and refines
                     All things, on which his radiance shines.
                  
                  
                     Here the Tritons sounded, and they danced on shore, euery couple (as they aduanced) seuerally presenting their fans: in one of which were inscribed their mixt Names, in the other a mute Hieroglyphick, expressing their mixed qualities. Which manner of Symbole I rather chose, then Imprese, as well for strangenesse, as relishing of antiquitie, and more applying to that originall doctrine of sculpture,
                     
                        Diod. Sicul. Herod.
                      
                     which the Aegyptians are said, first, to haue brought from the Aethiopians.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The Names.
                           
                              The Symboles.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              The Queene.
                           
                           1.
                           EVPHORIS.
                           1.
                           A golden tree, laden with fruit.
                        
                        
                           
                              Co. of Bedford.
                           
                           AGLAIA.
                        
                        
                           
                              La. Herbert.
                           
                           2.
                           DIAPHANE.
                           2.
                           The figure Isocaedron of crystall.
                        
                        
                           
                              Co. of Derby.
                           
                           EVCAMPSE.
                        
                        
                           
                              La. Rich.
                           
                           3.
                           OCYTE.
                           3.
                           A payre of naked feet, in a riuer.
                        
                        
                           
                              Co. of Suffolke.
                           
                           KATHARE.
                        
                        
                           
                              La. Beuill.
                           
                           4.
                           NOTIS.
                           4.
                           The SALAMANDER simple.
                        
                        
                           
                              La. Effingham.
                           
                           PSYCHROTE.
                        
                        
                           
                              La. El. Howard.
                           
                           5.
                           GLYCYTE.
                           5.
                           A clowd full of raine, dropping.
                        
                        
                           
                              La. Sus. Vere.
                           
                           MALACIA.
                        
                        
                           
                              La. Wroth.
                           
                           6.
                           BARYTE.
                           6.
                           An vrne' spheard with wine.
                        
                        
                           
                              La. Walsingham.
                           
                           PERIPHERE.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The names of the OCEANIAE were.
                     DORIS.
                     PETRAEA.
                     OCYRHOE.
                     CYDIPPE.
                     GLAVCE.
                     TYCHE.
                     BEROE.
                     ACASTE.
                     CLYTIA.
                     IANTHE.

                           He 
                                 ••
                              od. in T
                                 •
                              eog.
                         
                     
                     LYCORYS.
                     PLEXAVRE.
                  
                  
                     Their owne single dance ended, as they were about to make choice of their men: One, from the sea, was heard to call'hem with this charme, sung by a tenor voyce.
                  
                  
                     
                        SONG.
                        COme away, come away,
                        We grow iealous of your stay:
                        If you doe not stop your eare,
                        We shall haue more cause to feare
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     To which limits, when I had apted my inuention, and being to bring newes of them from the Sea, I induc'd Boreas, one of the winds, as my fittest Messenger; presenting him thus.
                  In a robe of Russet and White mixt, full, and bagg'd; his haire and beard rough, and horride; his wings gray, and full of snow, and ycicles: his mantle borne from him with wyres, and in seuerall puffes; his feet So Paus. in Eliacis reports him to haue, as he was carued in arcâ Cipselli.
                      ending in Serpents tayles; and in his hand a leaue-lesse Branch, laden with ycicles.
                  But before, in midst of the Hall, to keepe the state of the Feast, and Season, I had placed See Iconolog. di Caesare Ripa.
                      
                     Ianuarie, in a throne of siluer; his robe of ash-colour, long, fringed with siluer; a white mantle; his wings white, and his buskins; in his hand a Lawrell bough; vpon his head an Anademe of Lawrell, fronted with the signe Aquarius, and the Character. Who, as Boreas bluster'd forth, discouer'd himselfe.
                  
                     BOREAS.
                     WHich, among these, is ALBION, NEPTVNES sonne?
                  
                  
                     IANVARIVS.
                     WHat ignorance dares make that question?
                     Would any aske, who MARS were, in the wars?
                     Or, which is HESPERVS, among the starres?
                     Of the bright Planets, which is SOL? Or can
                     A doubt arise, 'mong creatures, which is Man?
                     Behold, whose eyes doe dart Promethean fire
                     Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
                     The rest with dutie; yet commanding, cheare:
                     And are obeyed, more with loue, then feare.
                  
                  
                     BOREAS.
                     WHat Power art thou, that thus informest me?
                  
                  
                     IANVARIVS.
                     DO'st thou not know me? I too well know thee
                     By thy 
                           Ouid. Metam. lib. 6. neere the end see—borridus, irâ, quae solit
                                 •
                               est illi, nimi
                                 ••
                              que domestica, vento, &c.
                         rude voice, that doth so hoarcely blow;
                     Thy haire, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
                     Thy serpent feet, to be that rough North-wind,
                     BOREAS, that to my raigne art still vnkind.
                     I am the Prince of Months, call'd IANVARIE;
                     Because by me See the offices and power of Ianus, Ouid. Fast. 1. IANVS the yeare doth varie,
                     Shutting vp warres, proclayming peace, and feasts,
                     Freedome, and triumphs; making Kings his guests.
                  
                  
                     BOREAS.
                     TO thee then, thus, and by thee, to that King,
                     That doth thee present honors, doe I bring
                     
                     Present remembrance of twelue Aethiope Dames:
                     Who, guided hither by the Moones bright flames,
                     To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
                     Enioyn'd againe, and (thence assign'd a day
                     For their returne) were in the waues to leaue
                     Their blacknesse, and true beautie to receiue.
                  
                  
                     IANVARIVS.
                     WHich they receiu'd, but broke their day: and yet
                     Haue not return'd a looke of grace for it,
                     Shewing a course, and most vnfit neglect.
                     Twice haue I come, in pompe here, to expect
                     Their presence; Twice deluded, haue beene faine
                     With Two marriages; the one of the Earle of Essex, 1606. the other of the Lord Hay, 1607. other Rites my Feasts to entertaine:
                     And, now the third time, turn'd about the yeare,
                     Since they were look'd for; and, yet, are not here.
                  
                  
                     BOREAS.
                     IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that caus'd their stay;
                     For they were all prepared by their day,
                     And, with religion, forward on their way:
                     When PROTEVS, Read his description, with Virg. Geor. 4. Est in Carpathi
                                 •
                               Neptuni gurgite vates, Caeruleus Proteus.
                         the gray Prophet of the Sea,
                     Met them, and made report, how other foure
                     Of their blacke kind (whereof their Syre had store)
                     Faithfull to that great wonder, so late done
                     Vpon their Sisters, by bright Albion,
                     Had followed them to seeke BRITANIA forth,
                     And there to hope like fauor, as like worth.
                     Which NIGHT enui'd, as done Because they were before of her complexion. in her despight,
                     And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
                     Thought to preuent in these; lest men should deeme
                     Her colour, if thus chang'd, of small esteeme.
                     And so, by malice, and her magicke, tost
                     The Nymphes at sea, as they were almost lost,
                     Till, on an Iland, they by chance arriu'd,
                     That To giue authoritie to this part of our fiction, Plinie hath a chap. 95. of his 2. booke. Nat. Hist. de Insulis sluctuantibus. & Card. lib. 1. de rerum vari. & cap. 7. reports one to be in his time knowne, in the Lake of Loumond, in Scotland. To let passe that of Delos, &c.
                         floted in the mayne; where, yet, she'had giu'd
                     Them so, in charmes of darknesse, as no might
                     Should loose them thence, but their chang'd Sisters sight.
                     Whereat the Twelue (in pietie mou'd, and kind)
                     Streight put themselues in act, the place to find;
                     Which was the NIGHTS sole trust they so will doe,
                     That she, with labor, might confound them too.
                     For euer since with error hath she held
                     Them wandring in the Ocean, and so quell'd
                     
                     Their hopes beneath their toyle, as (desperat now
                     Of any least successe vnto their vow;
                     Nor knowing to returne to expresse the grace,
                     Wherewith they labor to this Prince, and place)
                     One of them, meeting me at sea, did pray,
                     That for the loue of my The daughter of Erectheus, King of Athens, whome Boreas rauish'd away, into T
                                 •
                              race, as she was playing with other virgins by the floud 
                              
                                 ••
                              ssus: or (as some will) by the fountaine Cephisus.
                         ORYTHYIA,
                     (Whose verie name did heat my frostie brest,
                     And make me shake my snow-fill'd wings and crest)
                     To beare this sad report I would be wonne,
                     And frame their iust excuse; which here I haue done.
                  
                  
                     IANVARIVS.
                     WOuld thou had'st not begun, vnluckie Wind,
                     That neuer yet blew'st goodnesse to mankind;
                     But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
                     Strik'st The violēce of Boreas, Ouid excellently describes in the place aboue quoted. Hâc nubila pello, hâc freta concutio, nodosa
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , robora verto, Induro
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , niues, & terras grandin
                                 •
                               pulso.
                         horrors through the ayre, as sharpe as death.
                  
                  
                     Here a second Wind came in, VVLTVRNVS, in a blue coloured robe and mantle, puffe as the former, but somewhat sweeter; his face blacke, and on his 
                     According to that of Vir. —Denuntiat igneus Buros.
                      
                     head a red Sunne, shewing he came from the East: his wings of seuerall colours; his buskins white, and wrought with gold.
                  
                  
                     VVLTVRNVS.
                     ALl horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
                     Be all things here as calme as is my breath.
                     A gentler Wind, VVLTVRNVS, brings you newes
                     The Ile is found, and that the Nymphs now vse
                     Their rest, and ioy. The Nights black charmes are flowne.
                     For, being made vnto their Goddesse knowne,
                     Bright AETHIOPIA, the siluer Moone,
                     As she was She is call'd , by Eurip. in Helena, which is Lucifera, to which name we here presently allude. HECATE, she brake them soone:
                     And now by vertue of their light, and grace,
                     The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
                     Of all the earth for Beautie. For the more full and cleare vnderstanding of that which followes, haue recourse to the succeeding pages; where the Scene presents it self
                              •
                           . There, their Queene
                     
                     Hath raised them a Throne, that still is seene
                     To turne vnto the motion of the World;
                     Wherein they sit, and are, like Heauen, whirl'd
                     About the Earth; whil'st, to them contrarie,
                     (Following those nobler torches of the Skie)
                     A world of little Loues, and chast Desires,
                     Doe light their beauties, with still mouing fires.
                     And who to Heauens consent can better moue,
                     Then those that are so like it, Beautie and Loue?
                     
                     Hither, as to their new Elysium,
                     The spirits of the antique Greekes are come,
                     
                     
                        Poets and Singes, Linus, Orpheus, all
                     That haue excell'd in So Terence and the Ancients call'd Poesy, Artem musicam.
                         knowledge musicall;
                     Where, set in arbors made of myrtle, and gold,
                     They liue, againe, these beauties to behold.
                     And thence in flowry mazes walking forth,
                     Sing hymnes in celebration of their worth.
                     Whilst, to their songs, two fountaines flow, one height
                     Of lasting Youth, the other chast Delight,
                     That at the closes, from their bottomes spring,
                     And strike the ayre to eccho what they sing.
                     But, why doe I describe what all must see?
                     By this time, neere the coast, they floating be;
                     For, so their vertuous Goddesse, the chast Moone,
                     Told them, the fate of th'Iland should, and soone
                     Would fixe it selfe vnto thy continent,
                     As being the place, by destiny fore-ment,
                     Where they should flow forth, drest in her attyres:
                     And, that the influence of those holy fires,
                     (First rapt from hence) being multiplied vpon
                     The other foure, should make their beauties one.
                     Which now expect to see, great Neptunes sonne,
                     And loue the miracle, which thy selfe hast done.
                  
                  
                     Here, a curtaine was drawne (in which the Night was painted,) and the Scene discouer'd, which (because the former was marine, and these, yet of necessitie, to come frō the sea) I deuised, should be a Island floting on a calme water. In the middest thereof was a seate of state, call'd the thro
                        •
                     e of beautie, erected: diuided into eight squares, and distinguish'd by so many Ionick pilasters. In these Squares the sixteene Masquers were plac'd by couples: behind them, in the center of the Throne was a tralucent Pillar, shining with seuerall colour'd lights, that reflected on their backes. From the top of which Pillar went seuerall arches to the Pilasters, that sustained the roofe of the Throne, which was likewise adorn'd with lights, and gyrlonds; And betweene the Pilasters, in front, little Cupids in 
                           ••
                        ying posture, wauing of wreathes, and lights, bore vp the Coronice: ouer which were placed eight Figures, representing the Elements of Beauty; which aduanced vpon the Ionick, and being females, had the Corinthian order. The first was
                     
                        SPLENDOR.
                     
                  
                  In a robe of flame colour, naked brested; her bright hayre loose slowing: She was drawn in a circle of clouds, her face, and body breaking through; and in her hand a branch, with two The Rose is call'd, elegantlie, by Achil. Tat. lib. 2. , the splendor of Plants, and is euery where taken for the Hieroglyphick, of Splendor. 
                     Roses, a white, and a red. The next to her was

                        SERENITAS.
                     
                  
                  In a garment of bright skie-colour, a long tresse, and waued with a vaile
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        As now! Eccho. As now! Ecch. As now!
                        Yeeld Night, then, to the light,
                        As Blacknesse hath to Beautie;
                        Which is but the same duety.
                        It was An agreeing opinion, both with Diuines and Philosophers, that the great Artificer in loue with his owne Idaea, did, therefore, frame the world. for Beauty, that the World was made,
                        And where she raignes, Alluding to his name of Himerus, and his signification in the name, which is Desiderium post aspectum: and more then Eros, which is onely Cupido, exaspectu amare.
                            
                           Loues lights admit no shade.
                        
                           Ecch. Loues lights admit no shade.
                        
                           Eccho. Admit no shade.
                     
                  
                  Which ended, Vulturnus the Wind spake to the Riuer Thamesis, that lay along betweene the shores, leaning vpon his Vrne (that flow'd with water,) and crown'd with flowers: with a blue cloth of Siluer robe about him: and was personated by Master THOMAS GILES, who made the Daunces.
                  
                  
                     VVLTVRNVS.
                     RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
                     Receiue these Nymphes, within the land:
                     And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
                     Where with thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
                     Of fruitfull Kent, and Essex faire,
                     That lend thee gyrlands for thy hayre;
                     Instruct their siluer feete to tread,
                     Whilst we, againe to sea, are fled.
                  
                  With which the Windes departed; and the Riuer receiu'd them into the Land, by couples and foures, their Cupids comming before them.
                  
                     Their Persons were.
                     The QVEENE.
                     La. ARABELLA.
                     Co. of ARVNDEL.
                     Co. of DERBY.
                     Co. of BEDFORD.
                     Co. of MONTGOMERY.
                     La. ELIZA. GILFORD.
                     L. KAT. PETER.
                     La. ANNE WINTER.
                     La. WINSORE.
                     La. ANNE CLIFFORD.
                     La. MARY NEVILL.
                     La. ELIZ. HATTON.
                     La. ELIZ. GARRARD.
                     La. CHICHESTER.
                     La. WALSINGHAM.
                  
                  These dauncing foorth a most curious Daunce, full of excellent deuice, and change, ended it in the figure of a Diamant, and so, standing still, were by the Musicians, with a second Song (sung by a loud Tenor) celebrated.
                  
                  SONG.
                  SO beautie on the waters stood,
                  (When loue had As, in the creation, he is said, by the ancients, to haue done. seuer'd earth, from flood!
                  So when he parted ayre, from fire▪
                  
                  He did with concord all inspire!
                  And then a motion he them taught,
                  That elder then himselfe was thought.
                  Which thought was, yet, That is, borne since the world, and, out of those duller apprehensions that did not thinke hee was before. the child of earth,
                  For loue is elder then his birth.
                  
                     The song ended; they d
                           •
                        nced forth their second dance, more subtle, and full of change, then the former; and so exquisitely performed; as the Kings maiestie incited first (by his owne liking, to that which all others, there present wish'd) requir'd them both againe, after some time of dancing with the Lords. Which time, to giue them respite, was intermitted with song; first by a treble voyce, in this manner,
                  
                  SONG.
                  IF all these CVPIDS, now, were blind
                  As is I make these different from him, which they 
                           •
                        ayne, caecum cupidine, or petulantem, as I expresse beneath in the third song, these being chaste Loues, that attend a more diuine beautie, then that of Loues commune parent.
                      their wanton brother;
                  Or play should put it in their mind
                  To shoot at one another:
                  What prettie battaile they would make,
                  If they their obiects should mistake
                  And each one wound his mother!
                  
                  Which was seconded by another treble; thus,
                  IT was no politie of court,
                  Albee' the place were charmed,
                  To let in earnest, or in sport,
                  So many Loues in, armed.
                  For say, the Dames should, with their eyes,
                  Vpon the hearts, here, meane surprize;
                  Were not the men like harmed?
                  To which a tenor answer'd.
                  SONG.
                  YEs, were the Loues or false, or straying;
                  Or beauties not their beautie waighing:
                  But here, no such deceipt is mix'd,
                  Their flames are pure, their eyes are fix'd:
                  They doe not warre, with different darts,
                  But strike a musique of like harts.
                  
                     After which songs, they danc'd galliards, and coranto's; and with those excellent graces, that the musique, appointed to celebrate them, shew'd it could be silent no longer: but by the first tenor, admir'd them thus,
                  
                  SONG.
                  HAd those, that dwell in error foule,
                  And hold There hath bee
                           •
                        e such a profane paradoxe published. that women haue no soule,
                  But seene these moue; they would haue, then
                  Said, Women were the soules of men.
                  
                  So they doe moue each heart, and eye
                  With the The Platonicks opinion. See also Mac. lib. 1. and 2. Som.Scip.
                      
                     worlds soule, true harmony.
                  
                  
                     Here, they danc'd a third most elegant, and curious dance, and not to be describ'd againe, by any art, but that of their owne footing: which, ending in the figure, that was to produce the fourth, IANVARY from his state saluted them thus,
                  
                     IANVARIVS.
                     YOur grace is great, as is your beautie, Dames;
                     Inough my feasts haue prou'd your thankfull flames.
                     Now vse your seate: that seate which was, before,
                     Thought stray'ing, vncertayne, floting to each shore,
                     And to whose hauing For what countrey is it thinks not her owne beautie fayrest, yet? euery clime laid clayme,
                     Each land, and nation vrged as the ayme
                     Of their ambition, beauties perfect throne,
                     Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
                     And that, by'impulsion of your destinies,
                     And his attractiue beames, that lights these skies:
                     Who (though with th'Ocean compass'd) neuer wets
                     His hayre therein, nor weares a beame that sets.
                     Long may his light adorne these happy rites
                     
                     As I renew them; and your gracious sights
                     Enioy that happinesse, eu'en to enuy, 'as when
                     
                        Beautie, at large, brake forth, and conquer'd men.
                  
                  
                     At which they danc'd their last dance, into their Throne againe: and that turning, the scene clos'd with this full song.
                  
                  SONG.
                  STill turne, and imitate the heauen
                  In motion swift and euen;
                  And as his Planets goe,
                  Your brighter lights doe so:
                  May youth and pleasure euer flow.
                  But let your state, the while,
                  Be fixed as the Isle.
                  CHO. So all that see your beauties sphaere,
                  May know the'Elysian fields are here.
                  
                     Ecch. Th'Elysian fields are here.
                  
                     Ecch. 'Elysian fields are here.
               
               
                  
                  HYMENAEI, OR The solemnities of Masque and Barriers at a Marriage.
                  
                     IT is a noble and iust aduantage, that the things subiected to vnderstanding haue of those which are obiected to sense, that the one sort are but momentarie, and meerely taking; the other impressing, and lasting: Else the glorie of all these solemnities had perish'd like a blaze, and gone out, in the beholders eyes. So short-liu'd are the bodies of all things, in comparison of their soules. And, though bodies oft-times haue the ill luck to be sensually preferr'd, they find afterwards, the good fortune (when soules liue) to be vtterly forgotten. This it is hath made the most royall Princes, and greatest persons (who are commonly the personaters of these actions) not onely studious of riches, and magnificence in the outward celebration, or shew; (which rightly becomes them) but curious after the most high, and heartie inuentions, to furnish the inward parts: (and those grounded vpon antiquitie, and solide learnings) which, though their voyce be taught to sound to present occasions, their sense, or doth, or should alwayes lay hold on more remou'd mysteries. And, howsoeuer some may squemishly crie out, that all endeuour of learning, and sharpnesse in these transitorie deuices especially, where it steps beyond their little, or (let me not wrong 'hem) no braine at all is super
                        •
                     luous; I am contented, these fastidious stomachs should leaue my full tables, and enioy at home, their cleane emptie trenchers, fittest for such ayrie tasts: where perhaps a few Italian herbs, pick'd vp, and made into a sallade, may find sweeter acceptance, than all, the most nourishing, and sound meates of the world.
                  For these mens palates, let not me answere, O Muses. It is not my fault, if I fill them out Nectar, and they runne to Metheglin.
                  
                  
                     Vaticana bibant, si delectentur.
                  
                  All the curtesie I can doe them, is to crie, againe;

                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     

                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Sit now propitious Aides,
                     To Rites, so duely priz'd;
                     And view two noble Maides,
                     Of different sexe, to VNION sacrific'd.
                     In honour of that blest Estate,
                     Which all good minds should celebrate.
                     
                        Here out of a Microcosme, or Globe, (figuring Man) with a kind of contentious Musique, issued forth the first Masque, of eight men.
                     
                     
                        These represented the foure 
                        That they were personated in men, hath (alreadie) come vnder some Grammaticall exception. But there is more then Grammar to release it. For, besides that Humores and Affectus are both Masculine in Genere, not one of the Specialls, but in some Language is knowne by a masculine word: Againe, when their influences are common to both Sexes, and more generally impetuous in the Male, I see not, why they should not, so, be more properly presented. And, for the Allegorie, though here it be very cleare, and such as might well escape a candle, yet because there are some, must complaine of darknesse, that haue but thicke eyes, I am contented to hold them this Light. First, as in naturall bodies, so likewise in minds, there is no disease, or distemperature, but is caused either by some abounding humor, or peruerse affection; after the same maner, in politick bodies (where Order, Ceremony, State, Reuerence, Deuotion, are parts of the Mind) by the difference, or praedominant will of what we (metaphorically) call Humors, and Affections, all things are troubled and confused. These, therefore, were tropically brought in, before Marriage, as disturbers of that mysticall bodie, and the rites, which were soule vnto it; that afterwards, in Marriage, being dutifully tempered by her power, they might more fully celebrate the happinesse of such as liue in that sweet vnion, to the harmonious lawes of Nature and Reason. Humors, and foure Affections, all gloriously attired, distinguisht only by their seuerall Ensignes and Colours; and, dauncing out on the Stage, in their returne, at the end of their daunce, drew all their swords, offered to encompasse the Altar, and disturbe the Ceremonies. At which, HYMEN troubled, spake:
                  
                  
                     HYMEN.
                     SAue, saue the virgins; keepe your hallow'd lights
                     Vntouch'd; and with their flame defend our Rites.
                     
                     The foure vntemp'red Humors are broke out,
                     And, with their wild affections, goe about
                     To rauish all Religion. If there be
                     A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Bodie,
                     Or little world of Man, from whence these came,
                     Looke forth, and with thy bright and Alluding to that opinion of Pythagoras; who held, all Reason, all Knowledge, all Discourse of the Soule to be meere Number. See Plut. de Plac. Phil.
                         numerous flame
                     Instruct their darknesse, make them know, and see,
                     In wronging these, they haue rebell'd 'gainst thee.
                  
                  
                     Hereat, REASON, seated in the top of the Globe (as in the braine, or highest part of Man) figur'd in a venerable personage, her haire white, and 
                           •
                        rayling to her waste, crowned with lights, her garments blue, and semined with starres, girded vnto her with a white bend, fill'd with Arithmeticall figures, in one hand bearing a Lampe, in the other a bright Sword, descended, and spake:
                  
                  
                     
                     REASON.
                     FOrbeare your rude attempt; what ignorance
                     Could yeeld you so prophane, as to aduance
                     One thought in act, against these mysteries?
                     
                     Are VNION'S 
                           , with the Greekes value the same, that Ceremoniae with the Latines; and imply all sorts of rites: howsoeuer (abusiuely) they haue bin made particular to Bacchus. See Serv. to that of Virg. Aeneid. 4. Qualis commotis excita sacris Thyas.
                         
                        orgies of so slender price?
                     She that makes soules, with bodies, mixe in loue,
                     Contracts the world in one, and therein IOVE;
                     Is 
                           Mac. in som. Scipion. lib. 1. 
                        spring, and end of all things: yet, most strange!
                     Her selfe nor suffers spring, nor end, nor change.
                     
                     No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
                     For none but Humors and Affections would
                     Haue dar'd so rash a venture. You will say
                     It was your zeale, that gaue your powers the sway;
                     And vrge the masqued, and disguis'd pretence,
                     Of sauing bloud, and succ'ring innocence?
                     So want of knowledge, still begetteth iarres,
                     When humorous earthlings will controll the starres.
                     Informe your selues, with safer reuerence,
                     To these mysterious rites, whose mysticke sence,
                     REASON (which all things, but it selfe, confounds)
                     Shall cleare vnto you, from th'authentique grounds.
                  
                  
                     At this, the Humors and Affections sheathed their swords, and retired amazed to the sides of the stage, while HYMEN began to ranke the Persons, and order the Ceremonies: And REASON proceeded to speake.
                  
                  
                     REASON.
                     THe Paire, which doe each other side,
                     Though (yet) some space doth them diuide,
                     This happie Night must both make one
                     Blest sacrifice, to VNION.
                     Nor is this Altar but a signe
                     Of one more soft, and more diuine.
                     The Properly that, which was made readie for the new-married Bride, and was call'd Genialis, à Generandis liberia. Ser. in 6. Aeneid.
                         
                        Geniall bed, where HYMEN keepes
                     The solemne Orgies, void of sleepes:
                     And wildest CVPID, waking, houers
                     With adoration 'twixt the louers.
                     
                     The Tead of white and blooming Thorne,
                     In token of encrease is borne:
                     As See Ouid. Fast. lib. 6. Sic fatus, spinam, quâ tristes pellere posset A foribus noxas, hac erat alba, dedit.
                         also, with the ominous light,
                     To fright all malice from the Night.
                     
                     Like are the 
                           Plutarch. in Quaest. Rom. and Var. lib. 4. de ling. Lat.
                         
                        fire, and water, set;
                     That, eu'n as moisture, mixt with heat,
                     Helpes euerie naturall birth, to life;
                     So, for their Race, ioyne man and wife.
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        Who come to decke the geniall Bower,
                        And bring, with them, the gratefull Hower
                        
                        That crownes such meetings, and excites
                        The married Paire to fresh delights:
                        As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Othes, and Vowes,
                        Soft Whisperings, Embracements, all the Ioyes,
                        And melting Toyes,
                        That chaster LOVE allowes.
                        
                        CHO, Haste, haste, for HESPERVS his head downe bowes.
                     
                  
                  The Song ended, they daunced forth in paires, and each paire with a varied and noble grace; to a rare and full musique of twelue Lutes: led on by ORDER, the seruant of REASON, who was, there, rather a Person of Ceremony, than Vse. His vnder Garment was blue, his vpper white, and painted full of Arithmeticall, and Geometricall Figures; his Hayre, and Beard long, a Starre on his forehead, and in his hand a Geometricall Staffe: To whom, after the Daunce, REASON spake.
                  
                     REASON.
                     COnuey them, ORDER, to their places,
                     And ranke them so, in seuerall traces,
                     As they may set their mixed Powers
                     
                     Vnto the Musique of the Howers;
                     And THESE, by ioyning with them, know
                     In better temper how to flow:
                     Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
                     Report the vertues of the Dames.
                     
                     First This Surname Iuno receiu'd of the Sabines; from them, the Romanes gaue it her: of the Speare, which (in the Sabine tongue) was called Curis, and was that, which they nam'd Hasta Caelibaris, which had stuck in the body of a slain Sword-player, and wherewith the Brides head was drest, wherof Fest. in Voce Celibar, giues these reasons, Vt quemadmodum illa coniuncta fuerit cum corpore Gladiatoris, sic ipsa cum viro sit; vel quia Matronae Iunonis Curitis in tutelâ sit, quae i
                                 •
                              a appellabatur à serenda hasta: vel quòd for
                                 •
                              es viros genituras ominetur; vel quod nuptiali iure imperio viri subij
                                 •
                              itur Nu
                                 •
                              ens, quia Hasta summa armorum, & imperij est, &c. To most of which Plutarch in his Quest. Rom. consents, but addes a better in Romul. That when they diuided the Brides haire with the poynt of the Speare, , it noted their first Nuptialles (with the So
                                 •
                              ines) were contracted by force, and as with enemies. Howsoeuer, that it was a Custome with them, this of Ouid. Fast lib. 2. confirmes. Comat Virgineas hasta recurua comas.
                         CVRIS comes to decke the Brides faire Tresse.
                     Care of the oyntments For the Surname of Vnxia, we haue Mart. Capel. his testimony, De Nupt. Phil. & Mercu▪ lib. 2. quòd vnctionibus praeest: As also Seruius, libro quarto Aeneid. where they both report it a fashion with the Romanes, that before the new-married Brides entred the houses of their Husbands, they adorned the postes of the gates with wollen tawdries, or fillets, and anointed them with oyles, or the fat of wolues, and bores; being superstitiously possest, that such oyntments had the vertue of expelling euills from the familie: and thence were they called Vxores, quasi Vnxores.
                         VNXIA doth professe.
                     
                        She was named Iuga, propter Iugum, (as Seruius sayes) for the yoke which was impos'd, in Matrimony, on those that were maried, or (with Sex. Pomp. Fest.) quòd Iuges sunt eiusdem Iugi Pare
                                 •
                              , vnde & Coniuges. or in respect of the Altar (to which I haue declar'd before) sacred to Iuno, in Vico Iugario.
                         IVGA, her office to make one of twaine:
                     
                        As shee was Gamelia, in sacrificing to her, they tooke away the gall, and threw it behind the Altar; intimating, that (after marriage, there should be knowne, no bitternesse, nor hatred betweene the ioyned couple, which might diuide, or separate them: See Plutarch. Connub. Prae. This Rite I haue somewhere following touch't at. GAMELIA sees that they should so remaine.
                     
                     Faire The title of Iterduca she
                              •
                            had amongst them, quòd ad sponsi aedes, sponsas comitabatur; or was a Protectresse of their iourney. Mart. Capel. De Nupt. Philolo. & Mercur. libro secundo.
                         ITERDVCA leades the Bride her way;
                     And The like of Domiduca, quòd adoptat
                                 •
                              s domus duceret. Mart. ibid.
                         DOMIDVCA home her steppes doth stay;
                     
                        
                           Cinxia, the same Author giues vnto her, as the Defendresse of Maides, when they had put off their girdle, in the Bridall chamb
                                 •
                              r; To which, Festus. Cinxiae Iunonis nomen sanctum habebatur in Nuptijs, quòd initio Coniugij salutio erat Ci
                                 •
                              guli, quo noua Nupta erat cincta. And Arn
                                 •
                              bius, a man most learned in their Ceremonies, lib. 3. ad vers. Gent. saith, Vnctionibus superest Vnxia. Cingulorum Cinxia replicationi.
                         CINXIA the m
                              •
                           id, quit of her Zone, defends;
                     
                        
                           Telia signifies Perfecta, or, as some translate it, Perfectrix; with Iul. Pol
                                 •
                               li
                                 •
                              r. 3. Ononast. 
                            valewes Iuno! Praeses Nuptiarum: who saith, the Attribute descends of , which (with the Ancients) si
                              •
                           nified Ma
                              •
                           iage, and thence, were they calld  that entred into the state. Seruius interprets it the same with Gamel a, Aeneid. 4 ad verb. Et Iunone secundâ: But it implies much more▪ as including the facultie too mature and perfect; See the Greeke Scholiaste on Pind. Nem. in Hym. ad Thyaeum Vliae filium Argi. 
                           : that is, Nuptialls are therefore calld , because they effect Perfection of life, and do note that maturity which should be in Matrimony. For before Nuptialls, she is ca
                              •
                           led Iuno 
                           , that is, Virgo; after Nuptialls, , which is adul
                                 •
                              a, or Perfecta.
                         TELIA (for HYMEN) perfects all, and ends.
                  
                  
                     By this time, the Ladies were payred with the Men; and the whole Sixteene rank'd foorth, in order, to daunce: and were with the song prouok'd.
                  
                  SONG.
                  NOw, now, beginne to set
                  Your spirits in actiue heate;
                  And, since your hands are met,
                  Instruct your nimble feete,
                  In motions, swift, and meete,
                  The happy ground to beate:
                  
                     CHORVS.
Whilst all this Roofe doth ring,
                  And each discording string.
                  With 
                        •
                     uery varied voyce,
                  In VNION doth reioyce.
                  
                     Here, they daunced forth a most neate and curious measure, full of Subtilty and Deuice; which was so excellently performed, as it seemed to take away that Spirit from the Inu
                        •
                     ntion, which the Inuention gaue to it: and left it doubt
                           •
                        ull, whether the Formes flow'd more perfectly from the Authors braine, or their 
                           •
                        eete. The straines were all notably different, some of them formed into Letters, very signifying to the name of the Bridegrome, and ended in manner of a chaine, linking hands: To which, this was spoken.
                  
                  
                     REASON.
                     SVch was Mentioned by Homer Ilia. 
                           
                              •
                           . which many haue interpreted diuersely: al Allegorically, Pla. in Thaeteto, vnderstands it to be the Sunne, which while he circles the world in his course, all things are safe, and preserued: others vary it Macrob (to whose interpretation, I am specially affected in my Allusion) cōsiders it thus: in Sum. Scip. libr. 1. cap. 14. 
                              
                                 •
                              rgo cùm ex summo Deo mens, ex mente anima si
                                 •
                              ; anima verò & condat, & vita compleat omnia quae sequuntur, cunctaque hic vnus fulgor illuminet, & in vniuersis appareat, vt in multis speculis, per ordinem positis, vultus vnus; Cumque omnia continuis successionibus se sequan
                                 •
                              ur, degenerantia per ordinem ad imum meand
                                 •
                              : invenietur 
                                 •
                              ressius intuenti à summo Deo vsque ad vltimam rerum faecem vna mutuis se vinculis religans, & nusquam interrupta connexio. Et hae
                                 •
                               est Homeri Cat
                                 •••
                               aure
                                 •
                              , quam pendere de coelo in terras Deum iussisse commemorat. To which strength and euennesse of connexion, I haue not abiurdly likened this vniting of Humours, and Affections, by the sacred Powers of Marriage.
                         the Golden Chaine let downe from Heauen;
                     And not those linkes more euen,
                     
                     Then these: so sweetly temper'd, so combin'd
                     By VNION, and refin'd.
                     Here no contention, enuy, griefe, deceit,
                     Feare, iealousie haue weight;
                     But all is peace, and loue, and faith, and blisse:
                     What harmony like this?
                     The gall, behinde the altar quite is throwne;
                     This sacrifice hath none.
                     Now no affections rage, nor humors swell;
                     But all composed dwell.
                     O IVNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, IVNO! who
                     Can merit with you two?
                     Without your presence, VENVS can doe nought,
                     Saue what with shame is bought;
                     No father can himselfe a parent show,
                     Nor any house with prospe'rous issue grow.
                     O then! What deities will dare
                     With HYMEN, or with IVNO to compare?
                  
                  
                     The speach being ended, they dissolu'd: and all tooke forth other persons, (men, and women,) to daunce other measures, galliards, and corranto's; the whilst this song importun'd them to a fit rembembrance of the time.
                  
                  SONG.
                  THinke, yet, how night doth wast,
                  How much of time is past,
                  What more then winged hast
                  Your selues would take,
                  If you were but to tast
                  The ioy, the night doth cast
                  (O might it euer last)
                  On this bright virgin, and her happy make.
                  
                  Their Daunces yet lasting, they were the second time importun'd, by speach.
                  
                     REASON.
                     SEe, see! the bright 
                           Stella Veneris, or Venus, which when it goes before the Sunne, is call'd Phosphorus, or Lucifer; when it followes, Hesperus, or Noctifer (as Cat. translates it.) See Cic. 2. de Nat. Deor. Mar. cap. de Nup. Phi. & Mer. l. 8. The nature of this starre Pythagoras first found out: and the present office Clau. expresseth in Fescen. Attollens thalamis Idalium iubar dilectus Veneri nascitur Hesperus.
                         
                        Idalian starre,
                     That lighteth louers to their warre,
                     Complaynes, that you her influence loose;
                     While thus the night-sports you abuse.
                  
                  
                     
                     HYMEN.
                     THe longing bridegroome, It was a custome for the man to stand there, expecting the approch of his Bride. See Hotto. de Rit. Nupt.
                         in the porch,
                     Shewes you againe, the bated torch;
                     And thrice hath IVNO Alluding to that of Virgil. Aeneid. 4. Prima & Tellus, & Pronuba Iuno Dant signum: fulsere ignes, & conscius aether Connubij, &c.
                         mixt her ayre
                     
                     With fire, to summon your repayre.
                  
                  
                     REASON.
                     SEe, now shee cleane with-drawes her light;
                     And (as you should) giues place to night,
                     That spreades her broad, and blackest wing
                     Vpon the world, and comes to bring
                     A 
                           Stat. in Epit. Fulcra, toros
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               deae, tenerum premit agmen Amorum. And Claud. in Epith. Pennati passim pueri, quo quem
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               vocauit vmbra, iacent. Both which, proue the Ancients faynd many Cupids. Reade also Prop. Ele. 29. l. 2. thousand seuerall colour'd loues,
                     Some like sparrowes, some like doues,
                     That hop about the nuptiall-roome,
                     And flutt'ring there (against you come)
                     Warme the chaste bowre, which 
                           Venus is so induced by Stat. Claud. and others, to celebrate nuptialls. CYPRIA strowes,
                     With many a lilly, many a rose.
                  
                  
                     HYMEN.
                     HAste therefore, haste, and call, away:
                     The gentle night is prest to pay
                     The vsurie of long delights,
                     Shee owes to these protracted rites.
                     
                  
                  
                     At this (the whole scene being drawne againe, and all 
                           •
                        ouer'd with cloudes, as a night) they left off their entermixed dances, and return'd to their first places; where, as they were but beginning to moue, this song, the third time, vrg'd them.
                  
                  SONG.
                  O Know to end, as to beginne:
                  A minutes losse, in loue, is sinne.
                  These humours will the night out-weare
                  In their owne pastimes here;
                  You doe our rites much wrong,
                  In seeking to prolong
                  These outward pleasures:
                  The night hath other treasures
                  Then these (though long conceal'd)
                  Ere day, to be reueal'd.
                  Then, know to end, as to beginne;
                  A minutes losse, in loue, is sinne.
                  
                  
                     Here they danc'd their last dances, full of excellent delight and change, and, in their latter straine, fell into a faire orbe, or circle; REASON standing in the midst, and speaking.
                  
                  
                     REASON.
                     HEre stay, and let your sports be crown'd:
                     The perfect'st figure is the round.
                     
                     Nor fell you in it by aduenter,
                     When REASON was your guide, and center.
                     
                     This, this that beauteous 
                           Venus girdle, mentioned by Homer. Il
                                 •
                              . ξ. which was fain'd to be variously wrought with the needle, and in it wouen Loue, D
                                 •
                              sire, Sweetnesse, soft Parlee, Gracefulnesse, Perswasion, and all the Powers of Venus.
                         CESTON is
                     Of louers many-colour'd blisse.
                     Come HYMEN, make an inner ring,
                     And let the sacrificers sing;
                     Cheere vp the faint, and trembling Bride,
                     That quakes to touch her Bridegroom's side:
                     Tell her, what IVNO is to IOVE,
                     The same shall shee be to her loue;
                     His wife: which we doe rather measure
                     
                        See the wordes of Aelius verus, in Spartian.
                         A name of dignitie, then pleasure.
                     
                     Vp youths, hold vp your lights in ayre,
                     And shake abroad So Cat. in Nupt. Iul. & Manlij hath it. Viden', vt 
                                 •
                              aces splendid
                                 •
                              s quatiunt comas? and by and by after, aureas quatiunt comas.
                         their flaming hayre.
                     Now moue vnited, and, in gate,
                     As you (in paires) doe front the state,
                     With gratefull honors, thanke his grace
                     
                     That hath so glorified the place:
                     And as, in circle, you depart
                     Link'd hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
                     May all those bodies still remayne
                     Whom he (with so much sacred payne)
                     No lesse hath bound within his realmes
                     Then they are with the OCEANS streames.
                     Long may his VNION find increase
                     As he, to ours, hath deign'd his peace.
                  
                  
                     With this, to a soft strayne of musique, they pa
                           •
                        'd once about, in their ring, euery payre making their honors, as they came before the state: and then dissoluing, went downe in couples, led on by HYMEN, the Bride, and Auspices following, as to the nuptiall bower. After them, the musicians with this song, of which, then, onely one staffe was sung; but because I made it both in forme, and matter to emulate that kind of poeme, which was call'd 
                     It had the name à Thalam, dictum est autem,  cubiculum Nuptiale primo suo significatu, , quod est simul genialem vitam agere. Scal. in Poet.
                      Epithalamium, and (by the ancients) vs'd to be sung, when the Bride was led into her chamber, I haue here set it downe whole: and doe heartily forgiue their ignorance whom it chanceth not to please. Hoping, that nemo doctus me iubeat Thalassionem verbis dicere non Thalassionis.
                  
                     
                     EPITHALAMION.
                     GLad time is at his point arriu'd,
                     For which loues hopes were so long-liu'd.
                     Lead HYMEN, lead away;
                     And let no obiect stay,
                     Nor banquets (but sweet kisses)
                     The turtles from their blisses.
                     
                        This Poeme had for the most part Versum intercalarem, or Carmen Amoebaeum: yet that not alwaies one, but oftentimes varied, and sometimes neglected in the same song, as in ours you shall finde obserued. 'Tis CVPID calls to arme;
                     And this his last alarme.
                     
                     Shrinke not, soft Virgin, you will loue,
                     Anon, what you so feare to proue.
                     This is no killing warre,
                     To which you pressed are;
                     But fayre and gentle strife
                     Which louers call their life.
                     
                     'Tis CVPID cryes to arme;
                     And this his last alarme.
                     
                     Helpe youths, and virgins, helpe to sing
                     The prize, which HYMEN here doth bring,
                     And did so lately The Bride was alwayes fain'd, to be rauish'd, ex gremio matris: or (if shee were wanting) ex proximâ necessitudine, because that had succeeded well to Romulus, who, by force gat wiues for him, and his, from the Sabines. See Fest. and that of Catul. Qui rapis teneram ad virli virginem.
                         rap
                     From forth the mothers lap,
                     To place her by that side
                     Where shee must long abide.
                     On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
                     This night is HYMEN'S all.
                     See, HESPERVS is yet in view!
                     What starre can so deserue of you?
                     Whose light doth still adorne
                     Your Bride, that, ere the morne,
                     Shall farre more perfect be,
                     And rise as bright as he;
                     When When he is Phosphorus, yet the same starre, as I haue noted before. (like to him) her name
                     
                     Is chang'd, but not her flame.
                     Haste, tender lady, and aduenter;
                     The couetous house would haue you enter,
                     That it might wealthy bee,
                     And you, her At the entrance of the Bride, the custome was to giue her the keyes, to signifie that shee was absolute Mistris of the place, and the whole disposition of the family at her care, Fest.
                         mistris see:
                     Haste your owne good to meet;
                     And This was also another rite: that she might not touch the threshold as shee entred, but was lifted ouer it. Seruius saith, because it was sacred to Vesta, Plut. in Quaest. Rom. remembers diuers causes. But that, which I take to come neerest the truth, was onely the auoyding of Sorcerout drugs, vs'd by Witches to be bury'd vnder that place, to the destroying of marriage-Amitie, or the Power of generation, See Alexand. in Genialibu. and Christ. Landu
                                 •
                              
                            vpon Catul.
                         lift your golden feet
                     Aboue the threshold, high,
                     With prosperous a
                              •
                           gury.
                     
                     Now, youths, let goe your pretty armes;
                     The place within chant's other charmes.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     much lesse description, be recouered to a part of that spirit it had in the gliding by.
                  Yet, that I may not vtterly defraud the Reader of his hope, I am drawne to giue it those briefe touches, which may leaue behind some shadow of what it was: And first of the Attyres.
                  
                  That, of the Lords, had part of it (for the fashion) taken from the antique Greeke statue; mixed with some moderne additions: which made it both gracefull, and strange. On their heads they wore Persick crownes, that were with scroles of gold-plate turn'd outward, and wreath'd about with a carnation and siluer net-lawne; the one end of which hung carelesly on the left shoulder; the other was trick'd vp before, in seuerall degrees of foulds, betweene the plates, and set with rich iewels, and great pearle. Their bodies were of carnation cloth of siluer, richly wrought, and cut to expresse the naked, in manner of the Greeke Thorax; girt vnder the brests with a broad belt of cloth of gold, imbrodered, and fastened before with iewels: Their Labels were of white cloth of siluer, lac'd, and wrought curiously betweene, sutable to the vpper halfe of their sleeues; whose nether parts, with their bases, were of watchet cloth of siluer, chev'rond all ouer with lace. Their Mantills were of seuerall colour'd silkes, distinguishing their qualities, as they were coupled in payres; the first, skie colour
                     ▪ the second, pearle colour; the third, flame colour; the fourth, tawnie: and these cut in leaues, which were subtilly tack'd vp, and imbrodered with Oe's, and betweene euerie ranke of leaues, a broad siluer lace. They were fastened on the right shoulder, and fell compasse downe the back in gracious folds, and were againe tyed with a round knot, to the fastning of their swords. Vpon their legges they wore siluer Greaues, answering in worke to their Labells; and these were their accoutrements.
                  
                  The Ladies attyre was wholly new, for the inuention, and full of glorie; as hauing in it the most true impression of a celestiall figure: the vpper part of white cloth of siluer, wrought with IVNOES birds and fruits; a loose vnder-garment, full gather'd, of carnation, strip't with siluer, and parted with a golden Zone: beneath that, another flowing garment, of watchet cloth of siluer, lac'd with gold; through all which, though they were round, and swelling, there yet appeared some touch of their delicate lineaments, preseruing the sweetnesse of proportion, and expressing it selfe beyond expression. The attyre of their heads did answer, if not exceed; their haire being carelesly (but yet with more art, then if more affected) bound vnder the circle of a rare and rich Coronet, adorn'd with all varietie, and choise of iewels; from the top of which, flow'd a transparent veile, downe to the ground; whose verge, returning vp, was fastened to either side in most sprightly manner. Their shooes were Azure, and gold, set with Rubies and Diamonds; so were all their garments; and euerie part abounding in ornament.
                  No lesse to be admir'd, for the grace, and greatnesse, was the whole Machine of the Spectacle, from whence they came: the first part of which

was a MIKPOKOΣMOΣ, or Globe, fill'd with Countreys, and those gilded; where the Sea was exprest, heightned with siluer waues. This stood, or rather hung (for no Axell was seene to support it) and turning softly, discouered the first Masque (as wee haue before, but too runningly declared) which was of the men, sitting in faire composition, within a mine of seuerall metalls: To which, the lights were so placed, as no one was seene; but seemed, as if onely REASON, with the splendor of her crowne, illumin'd the whole Grot.
                  On the sides of this (which began the other part) were placed two great Statues, fayned of gold, one of ATLAS, the other of HERCVLES, in varied postures, bearing vp the Clouds, which were of Releue, embossed, and tralucent, as Naturalls: To these, a cortine of painted clouds ioyned, which reach'd to the vpmost roofe of the Hall; and sodainely opening, reueal'd the three Regions of Ayre: In the highest of which, sate IVNO, in a glorious throne of gold, circled with Comets, and fierie Meteors, engendred in that hot and drie Region; her feet reaching to the lowest: where, was made a Rainebow, and within it, Musicians seated, figuring airie spirits, their habits various, and resembling the seuerall colours, caused in that part of the aire by reflexion. The midst was all of darke and condensed clouds, as being the proper place, where Raine, Haile, and other watrie Meteors are made; out of which, two concaue clouds, from the rest, thrust forth themselues (in nature of those Nimbi, wherein, by Homer, Virgil, &c. the gods are fain'd to descend) and these carried the eight Ladies, ouer the heads of the two 
                        Atlas, and Hercules, the Figures mentioned before. 
                     Termes; who (as the engine mou'd) seem'd also to bow themselues (by vertue of their shadowes) and discharge their shoulders of their glorious burden: when, hauing set them on the earth, both they and the clouds gathered themselues vp againe, with some rapture of the beholders.
                  
                  But that, which (as aboue in place, so in the beautie) was most taking in the Spectacle, was the sphere of fire, in the top of all, encompassing the ayre, and imitated with such art and industrie, as the spectators might discerne the Motion (all the time the Shewes lasted) without any Moouer; and that so swift, as no eye could distinguish any colour of the light, but might forme to it selfe fiue hundred seuerall hiewes, out of the tralucent bodie of the ayre, obiected betwixt it, and them.
                  And this was crown'd with a statue of IVPITER, the Thunderer.
                  
                  ON the next Night, whose solemnitie was of Barriers (all mention of the former being vtterly remoued and taken away) there appeared, at the lower end of the Hall, a Mist made of delicate perfumes; out of which (a battaile being sounded vnder the stage) did seeme to break forth two Ladies, the one representing Truth, the other Opinion; but both so alike attired, as they could by no note be distinguish'd. The colour of their garments were blue, their socks white; they were crown'd with wreaths of Palme, & in their hands 
                        •
                     ch of thē sustain'd a Palm-bough. These, after the Mist was vanisht,
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     And then, what rules husbands praescribe their wiues!
                     
                     In their eyes circles, they must bound their liues.
                     The moone, when farthest from the sunne she shines,
                     Is most refulgent; neerest, most declines:
                     But your poore wiues farre off must neuer rome,
                     But wast their beauties, neere their lords at home:
                     And when their lords range out, at home must hide
                     (Like to beg'd monopolies) all their pride.
                     When their lords list to feed a serious fit
                     They must be serious; when to shew their wit
                     In iests, and laughter, they must laugh and iest;
                     When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
                     And to their wiues men giue such narrow scopes,
                     As if they meant to make them walke on ropes:
                     No tumblers bide more perill of their neckes
                     In all their trickes; then wiues in husbands checkes.
                     Where virgins, in their sweet, and peacefull state
                     Haue all things perfect; spinne their owne free fate;
                     Depend on no proud second; are their owne
                     
                        Center, and circle; Now, and alwayes one.
                     To whose example, we doe still heare nam'd
                     One god, one nature, and but one world fram'd,
                     One sunne, one moone, one element of fire,
                     So, of the rest; one king, that doth inspire
                     
                        Soule, to all bodies, in their royall spheare:
                  
                  
                     TRVTH.
                     And where is marriage more declar'd, then there?
                     Is there a band more strict, then that doth tie
                     The soule, and body in such vnity?
                     
                        Subiects to soueraignes? doth one mind display
                     In th'ones obedience, and the others sway?
                     Beleeue it, marriage suffers no compare,
                     When both estates are valew'd, as they are.
                     The virgin were a strange, and stubborne thing,
                     Would longer stay a virgin, then to bring
                     Her selfe fit vse, and profit in a make.
                     
                  
                  
                     OPINION.
                     How she doth erre! and the whole heau'n mistake!
                     Looke, how a flower, that close in closes growes,
                     Hid from rude cattell, bruised with no ploughes,
                     Which th' ayre doth stroke, sun strengthē, showres shoot higher,
                     It many youths, and many maydes desire;
                     The same, when cropt by cruell hand is wither'd,
                     No youths at all, no maydens haue desir'd:
                     
                     So a virgin, while vntouch'd she doth remaine,
                     Is deare to hers; but when with bodies staine
                     Her chaster flower is lost, she leaues to appeare
                     Or sweet to young men, or to maydens deare.
                     That conquest then may crowne me in this warre,
                     
                        Virgins, O virgins, flie from HYMEN farre.
                  
                  
                     TRVTH.
                     
                        Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yeeld,
                     For as a lone vine, in a naked field,
                     Neuer extolls her branches, neuer beares
                     Ripe grapes, but with a headlong heauinesse weares
                     Her tender body, and her highest sproote
                     Is quickly leuell'd with her fading roote;
                     By whom no husbandmen, no youths will dwell;
                     But if, by fortune, she be married well
                     To th'elme her husband, many husbandmen,
                     And many youths inhabit by her, then:
                     So whilst a virgin doth, vntouch't, abide
                     All vnmanu
                           •
                        'd, she growes old, with her pride;
                     But when to equall wedlocke, in fit time,
                     Her fortune, and endeuor lets her clime,
                     Deare to her loue, and parents she is held.
                     
                        Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yeeld.
                  
                  
                     OPINION.
                     These are but words; hast thou a knight will trie
                     (By stroke of armes) the simple veritie?
                     
                  
                  
                     TRVTH.
                     To that high proofe I would haue dared thee.
                     Ile strait fetch champions for the bride and me.
                     
                  
                  
                     OPINION.
                     The like will I doe for Virginity.
                     
                  
                  
                     Here, they both descended the hall, where at the lower end, a march being sounded with drummes and phises, there entred (led foorth by the Earle of Notingham, who was lord high Constable for that night, and the Earle of Worc'ster, Earle Marshall) sixteene knights, armed, with pikes, and swords; their plumes, and colours, carnation and white, all richly accoutred, and making their honors to the state, as they march'd by in paires, were all rank'd on one side of the hall. They plac'd sixteene others like accoutred for riches, and armes, onely that their colours were varied to watchet, and white; were by the same Earles led vp, and passing in like manner, by the state, plac'd on the opposite side.
                  
                  
                     By this time, the barre being brought vp, TRVTH proceeded.
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE DESCRIPTION OF THE MASQVE. With the Nuptiall songs. At the Lord Vicount HADINGTONS marriage at Court. On the Shroue-tuesday at night. 1608.
                  
                  
                     THe worthy custome of honouring worthy marriages, with these noble solemnities, hath, of late yeeres, aduanc'd it selfe frequently with vs; to the reputation no lesse of our court, then nobles: expressing besides (through the difficulties of expence, and trauell, with the cheerefulnesse of vnder-taking) a most reall affection in the personators, to those, for whose sake they would sustayne these persons. It behoues then vs, that are trusted with a part of their honor, in these celebrations, to doc nothing in them, beneath the dignitie of either. With this preposed part of iudgement, I aduenture to giue that abroad, which in my first conception I intended honorably fit: and (though it hath labour'd since, vnder censure) I, that know Truth to be alwayes of one stature, and so like a rule, as who bends it the least way, must needes doe an iniurie to the right, cannot but smile at their tyrannous ignorance, that will offer to slight me (in these things being an artificer) and giue themselues a peremptoric licence to iudge, who haue neuer touch'd so much as to the barke, or vtter shell of any knowledge. But, their daring dwell, with them. They haue found a place, to powre out their follies, and I a seate, to sleepe out the passage.
                  The scene to this Masque, was a high, steepe, red cliffe, aduancing it selfe into the cloudes, figuring the place, from whence (as I haue beene, not fabulously, informed) the honourable family of the RADCLIFFES first tooke their name (à cliuo rubro) and is to be written with that Orthography; as I haue obseru'd out of M. CAMBDEN, in his mention of the Earles of Sussex. This cliffe was also a note of height, greatnesse, and antiquitie; before which, on the two sides, were erected two pilasters, chardg'd with spoiles and trophees, of loue, and his mother, consecrate to marriage: amongst which were old and yong persons figur'd, bound with roses, the wedding garments,

rocks, and spindles, hearts transfixt with arrowes, others flaming, virgins girdles, gyrlonds, and worlds of such like; all wrought round and bold: and ouer-head two personages, triumph and victorie, in flying postures, and twise so big as the life, in place of the arch, and holding a gyrlond of myrtle for the key. All which, with the pillars, seem'd to be of burnished gold, and emboss'd out of the mettall. Beyond the cliffe was seene nothing but cloudes, thick, and obscure; till on the sodaine, with a solemne musique, a bright skie breaking forth; there were discouered, first two Both doues, and swannes were sacred to this goddesse, and as well with the one as the other, her chariot in induc'd by Ouid. l. 10. and 11. Metamor.
                      
                     doues, then two Both doues, and swannes were sacred to this goddesse, and as well with the one as the other, her chariot in induc'd by Ouid. l. 10. and 11. Metamor.
                      
                     swannes with siluer geeres, drawing forth a triumphant chariot; in which VENVS sate, crowned with her starre, and beneath her the three Graces, or Charites, AGLAIA, THALIA, EVPHROSYN
                        •
                     , all attyr'd according to their antique figures. These, from their chariot, alighted on the top of the cliffe, and descending by certayne abrupt and winding passages, VENVS hauing left her starre, onely, flaming in her seate, came to the earth, the Graces throwing gyrlonds all the way, and began to speake.
                  
                     VENVS.
                     IT is no common cause, yee will conceiue,
                     My louely Graces, makes your goddesse leaue
                     Her state in heauen, to night, to visit earth.
                     
                     
                        Loue late is fled away, my eldest birth,
                     CVPID, whom I did ioy to call my sonne;
                     And, whom long absent, VENVS is vndone.
                     Spie, if you can, his foot-steps on this greene;
                     For here (as I am told) he late hath beene.
                     With Alluding to the loues, in the Queens Masque before. diuers of his brethren, lending light
                     From their best flames, to guild a glorious night;
                     Which I not grudge at, being done for her,
                     Whose honors, to mine owne, I still prefer.
                     But he, not yet returning, I'am in feare,
                     Some gentle grace, or innocent beautie here,
                     Be taken with him: or he hath surpris'd
                     A second PSYCHE, and liues here disguis'd.
                     Find yee no tract of his stray'd feet?
                  
                  
                     GR. 1.
                     Not I.
                  
                  
                     GR. 2.
                     Nor I.
                  
                  
                     GR. 3.
                     Nor I.
                  
                  
                     VE.
                     Stay nymphs, we then will trie
                     A neerer way. Looke all these ladies eyes,
                     And see if there he not concealed lyes;
                     Or in their bosomes, 'twixt their swelling brests:
                     (The wag affects to make himselfe such nests)
                     Perchance, he'hath got some simple heart, to hide
                     His subtle shape in: I will haue him cry'd.
                     And all his vertues told. That, when they know
                     What spright he is, shee soone may let him goe,
                     
                     That guards him now; and thinke her selfe right blest,
                     To be so timely rid of such a guest.
                     Begin soft GRACES, and proclaime reward
                     To her that brings him in. Speake, to be heard.
                  
                  
                     1. GRACE.
                     
                        Beauties, haue yee seene this toy,
                     Called In this loue, I expresse Cupid, as he is Veneris filius, and owner of the following qualities, ascrib'd him by the antique and later Poets.
                         
                        loue, a little boy,
                     Almost naked, wanton, blind,
                     Cruell now; and then as kind?
                     If he be amongst yee, say;
                     He is VENVS run-away.
                  
                  
                     2. GRACE.
                     Shee, that will but now discouer
                     Where the winged wag doth houer,
                     Shall, to night, receiue a kisse,
                     How, or where her selfe would wish:
                     But, who brings him to his mother,
                     Shall haue that kisse, and another.
                  
                  
                     3. GRACE.
                     H' hath of markes about him plentie:
                     You shall know him, among twentie.
                     All his body is a fire,
                     And his breath a flame entire,
                     That being shot, like lightning, in,
                     Wounds the heart, but not the skin.
                  
                  
                     1. GRACE.
                     At his sight, the See Lucian. Dial. Deor.
                         
                        sunne hath turned,
                     NEPTVNE in the waters, burned;
                     
                        And Claud. in raptu Proserp.
                         
                        Hell hath felt a greater heate:
                     IOVE himselfe forsooke his seate:
                     From the center, to the skie,
                     Are his Such was the power ascribd him, by all the ancients: whereof there is extant an elegant greeke Epigram, Phil. Poë. wherein hee makes all the other deities dispoyld by him, of their ensignes. Ioue of his thunder, Phubu
                                 •
                              
                            of his arrowes, Hercules of his club, &c. 
                        trophaees reared hie.
                  
                  
                     2. GRACE.
                     Wings he hath, which though yee clip,
                     He will leape from lip, to lip,
                     Ouer liuer, lights, and heart,
                     But not stay in any part;
                     And, if chance his arrow misses,
                     He will shoot himselfe, in kisses.
                  
                  
                     
                     3. GRACE.
                     He doth beare a golden Bow
                     And a Quiuer, hanging low,
                     Full of arrowes, that out-braue
                     DIAN'S shafts: where, if he haue
                     Any head more sharpe then other,
                     With that first he strikes his mother.
                  
                  
                     1. GRACE.
                     Still the fairest are his fuell.
                     When his daies are to be cruell,
                     Louers hearts are all his food;
                     And his bathes their warmest bloud:
                     Nought but wounds his hand doth season;
                     And he hates none like to Reason.
                     
                  
                  
                     2. GRACE.
                     Trust him not: his words, though sweet,
                     Seldome with his heart doe meet.
                     All his practise is deceit;
                     Euerie gift it is a bait;
                     Not a kisse, but poyson beares;
                     And most treason in his teares.
                  
                  
                     3. GRACE.
                     Idle minutes are his raigne;
                     Then, the straggler makes his gaine,
                     By presenting maids with toyes,
                     And would haue yee thinke 'hem ioyes:
                     'Tis the ambition of the elfe,
                     To 'haue all childish, as himselfe.
                  
                  
                     1. GRACE.
                     If by these yee please to know him,
                     
                        Beauties, be not nice, but show him.
                  
                  
                     2. GRACE.
                     Though yee had a will, to hide him,
                     Now, we hope, yee'le not abide him.
                  
                  
                     3. GRACE.
                     Since yee heare his falser play;
                     And that he is VENVS Run-away.
                  
                  
                  
                     At this, from behind the Trophaees, CVPID discouered himselfe, and came forth armed; attended with twelue boyes, most antickly attyr'd, that represented the sports, and prettie lightnesses, that accompanie Loue, vnder the titles of IOCI, and RISVS; and are said to wait on VENVS, as she is Praefect of Mariage. Which HORAT. consents to 
                     —Erycina ridens, Quam Iocus circumvolat, & Cupido.
                      Car. lib. 1. Ode 2.
                  
                     CVPID.
                     COme my little iocound sports,
                     Come away; the time now sorts
                     With your pastime: This same night
                     Is CVPID'S day. Aduance your light.
                     With your Reuell fill the roome,
                     That our triumphs be not dumbe.
                  
                  
                     Wherewith they fell into a subtle capriccious Daunce, to as odde a Musique, each of them bearing two torches, and nodding with their antique faces, with other varietie of ridiculous gesture, which gaue much occasion of mirth, and delight, to the spectators. The Daunce ended, CVPID went forward.
                  
                  
                     CVPID.
                     WEll done Antiques: Now, my Bow,
                     And my Quiuer beare to show;
                     That these Beauties, here, may know,
                     By what armes this feat was done,
                     That hath so much honor wonne,
                     Vnto VENVS, and her Sonne.
                     
                  
                  
                     At which, his Mother apprehended him: and circling him in, with the GRACES, began to demand.
                  
                  
                     VENVS.
                     WHat feat, what honor is it, that you boast,
                     My little straggler? I had giuen you lost,
                     With all your games, here.
                  
                  
                     CVP.
                     Mother?
                  
                  
                     VEN.
                     Yes sir, she.
                     What might your glorious cause of triumph be?
                     Ha'you shot She vrges these as miracles, because Pallas, and the Muses are most contrarie to Cupid. See Luc. Dialog. Ven. & Cupid.
                         MINERVA, or the Thespian dames?
                     Heat aged 
                           Rhea, the mother of the gods, whom Lucian, in that place makes, to haue falne frantikely in loue, by Cupids meanes, with Attys. So of the Moone, with Endymion, Hercules, &c.
                         OPS againe, with youthfull flames?
                     Or haue you made the colder Moone to visit
                     Once more, a sheepe-cote? Say, what conquest is it
                     Can make you hope such a renowne to winne?
                     Is there a second HERCVLES brought to spinne?
                     Or, for some new disguise, leaues IOVE his thunder?
                  
                  
                     
                     CVPID.
                     NOr that, nor those, and yet no lesse a wonder;
                     Which to tell, I may not stay:
And there slips from her.
                     
                     
                        Here Hymen, the god of mariage, entred; and was so induc'd here, as you haue him describ'd in my Hymenaei.
                         HYMEN'S presence bids away;
                     'Tis, alreadie, at his night,
                     He can giue you farther light.
                     You, my sports may here abide,
                     Till I call, to light the Bride.
                     
                  
                  
                     HYMEN.
                     VENVS, is this a time to quit your carre?
                     To stoope to earth? to leaue, alone, your starre,
                     Without your influence? and, When she is Nuptijs Praefecta, with Iuno, Suadela, Diana, and Iupiter himselfe. Paus. in Messeniac. & Plut. in problem.
                         on such a night,
                     Which should be crown'd with your most chearing sight?
                     As you were ignorant of what were done
                     By CVPIDS hand, your all-triumphing Sonne?
                     
                     Looke on this state; and if you yet not know,
                     What Crowne there shines, whose Scepter here doth grow;
                     Thinke on thy lou'd 
                           Aeneas, the sonne of Venus, Virgil makes through-out, the most exquisit patterne of Pietie, Iustice, Prudence, and all other Princely vertues, with whom (in way of that excellence) I conferre my soueraigne, applying, in his description, his owne word, vsurped of that Poets. Parcere subiectis & debellar
                                 •
                               superbos.
                         AENEAS, and what name,
                     MARO, the golden trumpet of his fame,
                     Gaue him, read thou in this. A Prince, that drawes
                     By'example more, then others doe by lawes:
                     That is so iust to his great act, and thought,
                     To doe, not what Kings may, but what Kings ought.
                     Who, out of pietie, vnto peace, is vow'd;
                     To spare his subiects, yet to quell the proud,
                     And dares esteeme it the first fortitude,
                     To haue his passions, foes at home, subdued.
                     That was reseru'd, vntill the Parcae spunne
                     Their whitest wooll; and then, his thred begun.
                     Which thred, when In that monstrous conspiracie of E. Gowrie.
                         Treason would haue burst, a soule
                     
                     (To day renown'd, and added to my roule)
                     Oppos'd; and, by that act, to his name did bring
                     The honor, to 
                           Titulo tunc crescere posses, nunc per te titulus.
                         be Sauer of his King.
                     
                     This King, whose worth (if gods for vertue loue)
                     Should VENVS with the same affections moue,
                     As her AENEAS; and no lesse endeare
                     Her loue to his safetie, then when she did cheare,
                     (
                           Virg. Aeneid. lib. 1. After a tempest) long afflicted Troy,
                     Vpon the Lybian shore; and brought them ioy.
                  
                  
                     
                     VENVS.
                     I Loue, and know his vertues, and doe boast
                     Mine owne renowne, when I renowne him most.
                     My CVPID'S absence I forgiue, and praise,
                     That me to such a present grace could raise.
                     His champion shall, hereafter, be my care;
                     But speake his bride, and what her vertues are.
                  
                  
                     HYMEN.
                     SHe is a noble virgin, styl'd the maid
                     
                     Of the Red-cliffe, and hath her dowrie waigh'd;
                     No lesse in vertue, bloud, and forme, then gold.
                     Thence, where my Pillar's rear'd, you may behold,
                     (Fill'd with Loues Trophae
                           •
                        s) doth she take her name.
                     Those Pillars did vxorious The ancient Poets, whensoeuer they would intend any thing to be done, with great Masterie, or excellent Art, made Vulcan the artificer, as Hom. Iliad. Σ. in the forging of Achilles his armour: and Virg. for Aeneas, Aenei. 8. He is also said to be the god of 
                              
                                 •
                              ire, and light. Sometime taken for the purest beame: and by Orph. in Hy
                                 •
                              . celebrated for the Sunne and Moone. But more specially, by Eurip. in Troad. he is made Facifer in nuptijs. Which present office we giue him here, as being calor naturae, and praeses luminis. See Plato in Cratyl. For his description, read Pausa. in Elia.
                         VVLCAN frame,
                     Against this day, and vnderneath that hill,
                     He, and his Cyclopes, are forging still
                     Some strange, and curious peece, t'adorne the night,
                     And giue these graced Nuptials greater light.
                  
                  
                     Here VVLCAN presented himselfe (as ouer-hearing HYMEN) attyr'd in a cassocke girt to him; with bare armes; his haire and heard rough; his ha
                           •
                         of blue, and ending in a Cone: In his hand, a hammer, and tongs; as comming from the Forge.
                  
                  
                     VVLCAN.
                     WHich I haue done; the best of all my life:
                     And haue my end, if it but please my wife,
                     And she commend it, to the labor'd worth.
                     Cleaue solid Rock, and bring the wonder forth.
                  
                  
                     At which, with a lowd and full musique, the Cliffe parted in the midst, and discouered an illustrious Concaue, fill'd with an ample and glistering light, in which, an artificiall Sphere was made of siluer, eighteene foot in the Diameter, that turned perpetually: the Coluri were heightned with gold; so were the Artick and Antartick circles, the Tropicks, the Aequinoctiall, the Meridian, and Horizon; onely the Zodiake was of pure gold: in which, the Masquers, vnder the Characters of the twelue Signes, were plac'd, answering them in number; whose offices, with the whole frame, as it turned, VVLCAN went forward, to describe.
                  
                  
                     
                     VVLCAN.
                     IT'is a spheare, I'haue formed round, and euen,
                     In due proportion to the spheare of heauen,
                     With all his lines, and circles; that compose
                     The perfect'st forme, and aptly doe disclose
                     The heauen of marriage: which I title it.
                     Within whose Zodiack, I haue made to sit,
                     In order of the signes, twelue sacred powers,
                     That are praesiding at all nuptiall howers:

                           
                              1. The first, in ARIES place, respecteth pride
                              Of youth; and beauty; graces in the bride.
                              
                           
                           
                              2. In TAVRVS, he loues strength, and manlinesse;
                              The vertues, which the bridegrome should professe.
                           
                           
                              3. In GEMINI, that noble power is showne,
                              That twins their hearts; and doth, of two, make one.
                           
                           
                              4. In CANCER, he that bids the wife giue way
                              With backward yeelding, to her husbands sway.
                           
                           
                              5. In LEO, he that doth in still the heate
                              
                              Into the man: which, from the following seate,
                           
                           
                              6. Is tempred so, as he that lookes from thence
                              Sees, yet, they keepe a VIRGIN innocence.
                              
                           
                           
                              7. In LIBRA'S roome, rules he that doth supply
                              All happy beds with sweet aequality.
                           
                           
                              8. The SCORPIONS place he fills, that make the iarres,
                              And stings in wedlocke; little strifes, and warres:
                              
                           
                           
                              9. Which he, in th' ARCHERS throne, doth soone remoue
                              By making, with his shafts, new wounds of loue.
                              
                           
                           
                              10. And those the follower, with more heate, inspires,
                              As, in the GOATE, the sun renewes his fires.
                           
                           
                              11. In wet AQVARIVS stead, reignes he, that showres
                              
                                 Fertilitie vpon the geniall bowres.
                           
                           
                              12. Last, in the FISHES place, sits he, doth say;
                              In married ioyes, all should be dumbe, as they.
                              And this hath VVLCAN, for his VENVS, done,
                              To grace the chaster triumph of her sonne.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     VENVS.
                     ANd for this gift, will I to heauen returne,
                     And vowe, for euer, that my lampe shall burne
                     With pure and chasest fire; or As Catul. hath it in nup. In
                                 •
                              . and Manl. without Hymen, which is marriage: Nit potest Venus, famà quod bona comprobet, &c.
                         neuer shine,
                     But when it mixeth with thy spheare, and mine.
                  
                  
                     Here VENVS returnd to her chariot with the graces: while VVLCAN calling out the priests of HYMEN who were the musicians, was interrupted by Pyracmon,
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        Loues common wealth consists of toyes;
                     His councell are those antique boyes,
                     Games, laughter, sports, delights,
                     That triumph with him on these nights:
                     To whom we must giue way,
                     For now their raigne beginnes, and lasts till day.
                     They sweeten HYMENS warre,
                     And, in that iarre,
                     Make all, that married bee,
                     Perfection see.
                     Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished starre.
                     
                     Why stayes the Bride-grome to inuade
                     Her, that would be a matron made?
                     Good night, whilst yet we may
                     Good-night, to you a virgin, say:
                     To morrow, rise the same
                     Your A wife, or matron: which is a name of more dignity, then Virgin. D. Heins, in Nup. Ottonis Heurnij. Cras m
                                 •
                              tri similis tuae redibis.
                         
                        mother is, and vse a nobler name.
                     Speed well in HYMEN'S warre,
                     That, what you are,
                     By your perfection, wee
                     And all may see.
                     Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished starre.
                     
                     To night is VENVS vigil kept.
                     This night no Bride-grome euer slept;
                     And if the faire Bride doo,
                     The married say, 'tis his fault, too.
                     Wake then; and let your lights
                     Wake too: for they'l tell nothing of your nights:
                     But, that in HYMENS warre,
                     You perfect are.
                     And such perfection, wee
                     Doe pray, should bee.
                     Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished starre.
                     
                     That, ere the rosy-fingerd morne
                     
                     Behold nine moones, there may be borne
                     A babe, t'vphold the fame
                     Of RADCLIFFES blood, and RAMSEY'S name:
                     That may, in his great seed,
                     Weare the long honors of his fathers deed.
                     Such fruits of HYMENS warre
                     Most perfect are;
                     And all perfection, wee
                     Wish, you should see.
                     Shine HESPERVS, shine forth, thou wished starre.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE MASQVE OF QVEENES, Celebrated From the house of FAME: By the QVEENE of great BRITAINE, with her Ladies. AT WHITE-HALL. Febr. 2. 1609.
                  
                     IT increasing, now, to the third time of my being vs'd in these seruices to her Maiesties personall presentations, with the Ladies whom shee pleaseth to honor; it was my first and speciall regard, to see that the nobilitie of the inuention should bee answerable to the dignitie of their persons. For which reason I chose the argument, to bee, A celebration of honorable, and true fame, bred out of vertue: obseruing that rule of the 
                        Hor. in Art. Poetic.
                      best artist, to suffer no obiect of delight to passe without his mixture of profit and example. And because her Maiestie (best knowing, that a principall part of life, in these spectacles, lay in their varietie) had commanded me to thinke on some dance, or shew, that might precede hers, and haue the place of a foile or false Masque: I was carefull to decline, not only from others, but mine owne steps in that kind, since the In the Masque at my 
                           
                              •
                           . Hadding. wedding. last yeere, I had an anti-masque of boyes: and therefore now, deuis'd, that twelue women, in the habit of hags, or witches, sustayning the persons of ignorance, suspition, credulitie, &c. the opposites to good Fame, (should fill that part; not as a Masque, but a spectacle of strangenesse, producing multiplicitie of gesture, and not vnaptly sorting with the current, and whole fall of the deuice.
                  His Maiestie, then, being set, and the whole company in full expectation, the part of the scene which first presented it selfe, was an vgly Hell: which flaming beneath, smoked vnto the top of the roofe. And in respect all euills are, morally, said to come from hell; as also from that obseruation of TORRENTIVS vpon HORACE his CANIDIA, 
                        Vid. Laeuin. Tor. Comment. in Hor. Epod. lib. Odo. 5. 
                     quae tot instructa venenis, ex Orci faucibus profecta videri possit: These witches, with a kind

of hollow and infernall musique, came forth from thence. First one, then two, and three, and more, till their number increased to eleuen; all differently attyr'd: some with rats on their head; some on their shoulders; others with ointment pots at their girdles; all with spindles, timbrels, rattles, or other veneficall instruments, making a confused noyse, with strange gestures. The deuice of their attyre was Master IONES his, with the inuention, and architecture of the whole scene, and machine. Onely, I prescrib'd them their properties of vipers, snakes, bones, herbs, rootes, and other ensignes of their magick, out of the authoritie of ancient and late writers, wherein the faults are mine, if there be any found; and for that cause I confesse them.
                  These eleuen witches beginning to dance (which is an vsuall See the Kings Maiesties book, (our Soueraign) of Daemonologie, Bodin. Remig. Delrio. Mal. Maelesi. And a world of others, in the generall: But let vs follow particulars. 
                     ceremonie at their conuents, or meetings, where sometimes also they are vizarded, and masqu'd) on the sodayne, one of them missed their chiefe, and interrupted the rest, with this speech.
                  
                     SIsters, stay, we want our Amongst our vulgar witches, the honor of Dame (for so I translate it) is giuen with a kinde of preeminence to some speciall one at their meetings: which Delrio insinuates, Disquis. Mag. l, 2. quaest. 9. quoting that of Apuleius, lib. de Asin. aureo. de quadam caupona, Regina Sagarum. And addes, vt scias etiam tum quasdam ab ijs hoc titulo honoratas. Which title M. Philippo Ludwigus Elich. Daemonomagi
                                 •
                              , quaest. 10. doth also remember. 
                        Dame;
                     Call vpon her by her name,
                     And the charme we vse to say,
                     That shee quickly When they are to be transported from place to place, they vse to anoynt themselues, and sometimes, the things they ride on. Beside, Apul. testimonio, See these later, Remig. Daemonolatriae, l. 1. c. 14. Delrio. Disquis. Mag. l. 2. quaest. 16. Bodin. Daemonoman. l. 2. c. 4. Barthol. de Spina. quaest. de Strigib. Philippo. Ludwigus Elich. quaest. 10. Paracelsus in magn. & occul. Philosophia, teacheth the confection. Vnguentum ex carne recens netorum infantium, in pulmenti forma coctum, & cum herbis somniferis, quales sunt Papauer, Solanum, Cienta, &c. And Ioa. Bapti. Porta. lib. 2. Mag. Natur. cap. 26. anoynt, and come away.
                  
                  
                     1. CHARME.
                     DAME, DAME, the watch is set:
                     Quickly come, we all are met.
                     
                        These places in their owne nature dire, and dismall, are reckon'd vp, as the fittest from whence such persons should come: and were notably obserued by that excellent Lucan, in the description of his Erictho▪ lib. 6. To which we may adde this corollarie out of Agrip de occult. Philosop. l. 1. c. 48. Saturno correspondent loca quaeuis foetida, tenebrosa, subterranea, religiosa & funesta, vt coemiteria, busta, & hominibus deserta habitacula, & vetustate caduea, loca obseura, & horrenda, & solitaria an
                                 •
                              ra, cauernae, putei: Praeterea piscinae, stagna, paludes, & eiusmodi. And in lib. 3. cap. 42. speaking of the like, and in lib. 4. about the end, Aptissima sunt loca plurimum experientia visionum, nocturnarum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               incursionum & consimilum phantasmatum, vt coemiteria, & in quibus fieri solent executio & criminalis iudicij, in quibus recentibus annis publicae strages factae sunt, vel vbi occisorum cadauera, necdū expiata, nec ritè sepulta, recentioribus annis subhumata sunt.
                         From the lakes, and from the fens,
                     From the rocks, and from the dens,
                     From the woods, and from the caues,
                     From the church-yards, from the graues,
                     From the dungeon, from the tree
                     That they die on, here are wee.
                     Comes shee not yet?
                     Strike another heate.
                  
                  
                     
                     2. CHARME.
                     THe weather is fayre, the wind is good,
                     Vp DAME, o'your 
                           Delr
                                 •
                              o Disq. Mag. l. 2. quaest. 6. has a storie out of Triezius of this horse of wood: but that which our witches call so, is sometimes a broome staffe, sometime a reede, sometime a distaffe. See Remig. Daemonol. l. 1. c. 14. Bodin. l. 2. cap. 4. &c.
                         horse of wood:
                     Or else, tucke vp your gray frock,
                     And saddle your The goat is the deuill himselfe, vpon whom they ride often to their solemnities, as appeares by their confessions in Rem. and Bodin. ibid. His Maiestie also remembers the storie of the deuills appearance to those of Calicut, in that forme, Daemonol. l. 2. c. 3. goate, or your greene Of the greene cock, we haue no other ground (to confesse ingeniously) than a vulgar fable of a witch, that with a cock of that colour, and a bottome of blue thred, would transport her selfe through the ayre; and so escaped (at the time of her being brought to execution) from the hand of iustice. It was a tale when I went to schoole, and somewhat there is like it, in Mar. Delr. Disqui. Mag. lib. 2. quaest. 6. of one Zijti, a Bohemian, that, among other his dexterities, aliquoties equis rhedarijs vectum, gallis gallinaceis ad Epirrhedium suum alligati
                                 •
                              , subsequebatur.
                         cock,
                     And make his bridle a bottome of thrid,
                     To rowle vp how many miles you haue rid.
                     Quickly come away;
                     For we, all, stay.
                     Nor yet? Nay, then,
                     Wee'll trie her agen.
                  
                  
                     3. CHARME.
                     THe owle is abroad, the bat, and the toad,
                     And so is the cat-a-mountayne,
                     The ant, and the mole sit both in a hole,
                     And frog peepes out o' the fountayne;
                     The dogs, they doe bay, and the timbrels play,
                     The All this is but a periphrasis of the night, in their charme, and their applying themselues to it with their instruments, whereof the spindle in antiquitie, was the chiefe: and beside the testimonie of Theocritus, in Pharmaceutria (who only vs'd it in amorous affaires) was of speciall act to the troubling of the moone. To which Martiall alludes, l. 9. ep. 30. Quae nunc Thessalico lunam deducere rhombo, &c. And l. 12. Epig. 57. Cum secta Col
                                 •
                              ho Luna vapulat rhombo.
                         spindle is now a turning;
                     The moone it is red, and the starres are fled,
                     But all the skie is a burning:
                     The This rite also of making a ditch with their nailes, is frequent with our witches; wherof see Bodin. Remig. Delr. Malleus, Mal. Godelman, l. 2. de lamijs, as also the antiquitie of it most viuely exprest by Hor. Satir. 8. l. 1. where he mentions the pictures, and the bloud of a black lamb: All which are yet in vse with our moderne witchcraft. Scalpere terram (speaking of Canidia, and Sagana) Vnguibus, & pullam diueller
                                 •
                               mordicus agnam Coeperunt: Cruor in fossam confusus, vt inde Maneis elicerent animas responsa daturas. Lanea & essigies erat, altera cerea, &c. And then, by and by, Serpente
                                 •
                               at
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               videres Infernas errare caneis, Lunam
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               rubentem, Ne foret his testis, post magna latere sepulchra. Of this ditch Homer makes mention in Circes speech to Vlysses. Odiss. K. about the end, , &c. And Ouid. Metam. l. 7. in Medeas magick, Haud procul egestâ scrobibus tellure duabus Sacra faecit▪ cultros
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               in gutture velleris atri Conijcit, & patulas perfundit sanguine fossas. And of the waxen images, in Hypsipyles epistle to Iason, where he expresseth that mischiefe also of the needles. Deuouet absentes, simulacra
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               cerea fingit. Et miserum tenues in iecur vrget acus, Bodin. Daemon. l. 2. c. 8. hath (beside the knowne storie of king Duffe out of Hector Boetius) much of the witches later practice in that kind, and reports a relation of a french Ambassadors, out of England, of certayne pictures of waxe found in a dunghill, neere Islington, of our late Queenes, which rumor I my selfe (being then very yong) can yet remember to haue been current. ditch is made, and our nayles the spade,
                     With pictures full, of waxe, and of wooll;
                     Their liuers I sticke, with needles quicke;
                     There lacks but the bloud, to make vp the floud.
                     Quickly DAME, then, bring your part in,
                     Spurre, spurre, vpon little Their little Martin is he that cals them to their conuenticles, which is done in a humane voice, but comming forth, they find him in the shape of a great buck goat, vpon whom they ride to their meetings, Delr. Di
                                 •
                              q. Mag. q. 16. l. 2. And Bod Daemon. l. 2. c. 4. haue both the same relation from Paulus Grillandus, of a witc
                              •
                           
                           ▪ 
                           Adueniente nacte, & hora euocabatur voce quadam velut humana ab ipso Daemone, quem non vocant Daemonem, sed Magisterulum, aliae Magistrum Martinettum siue Martin
                                 •
                              llum. Quae sic euocata, mox sumebat pyxidem vnctionis, & liniebat corpus suum in quibusdam partibus & membris, quo lin
                                 •
                              to exibat ex domo, & inueniebat Magisterulum suum in forma hirci illam expectantem apud ostium, super quo mulier equitabat, & applicare solebat fortiter manus ad crineis, & statim hircus ille adscendebat per aerem, & brenissimo tempore deserebat ipsam, &c.
                         MARTIN,
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     HAGGES. For the gathering pieces of dead flesh, Cor. Agrip. de occul. Philosop. lib. 3. cap. 42. and lib. 4. cap. vlt. obserues, that the vse was to call vp ghosts & spirits, with a fumigation made of that (and bones of carkasses) which I make my witch, here, not to cut her selfe, but to watch the Rauen, as Lucan's Erichtbo. lib. 6. Et quodcun
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               iacet nuda tellure cadauer, Ante feras volucres
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               sedet: nec carpere membra Vult ferro manibus
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               suis, morsus
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               luporum Expectat siccis raptura à faucibios artus. As if that piece were sweeter which the Wolfe had bitten, or the Rauen had pick'd, and more effectuous: and to doe it, at her turning to the South, as with the praediction of a storme. Which, though they be but minutes in Ceremonie, being obseru'd, make the act more darke and full of horror. 1.
                     I Haue beene, all day, looking after
                     A Rauen, feeding vpon a quarter;
                     And, soone, as she turn'd her beake to the South,
                     I snatch'd this morsell out of her mouth.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Spuma canum, Lupi crines, nodus Hyenae, oculi Draconum, Serpentis membrana, Aspidis aures, are all mention'd by the Ancients, in witchcraft. And Lucan particularly, lib. 6. Huc quicquid foetu genuit Natura sinistro Miscetur, non spuma canum, quibus vnda timori est, Viscera non Lyncis, non durae nodus Hyenae Defuit, &c. And Ouid. Metamorphos. lib. 7. reckons vp others. But for the spurging of the eyes, let vs returne to Lucan, in the same booke, which piece (as all the rest) is written with an admirable height. Ast vbi sernantur saxis, quibus intimus humor Ducitur, & tracta durescunt tabe medullae Corpora, tunc omneis auidè desaeuit in artus, Immersil
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               manus oculis, gaudetque gelatos Effodisse orbeis, & sic
                                 •
                              a pallida rodit Excrementa manus.
                         2.
                     I Haue beene gathering Wolues haires,
                     The mad Dogges foame, and the Adders eares;
                     The spurging of a dead mans eyes,
                     And all since the euening starre did rise.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Plinie writing of the Mandrake Nat. Hist. lib. 25. cap. 13. and of the digging it vp, hath this ceremonie, Cauens esfossuri contrarium ventum, & tribus circulis amè gladio circumscribunt, postea sodiunt ad occasum spectantes. But we haue later tradition, that the forcing of it vp is so fatally dangerous, as the grone kills, and therefore they doe it with dogges, which I thinke but borrowed from Iosephus his report of the root Ba
                                 •
                              ras, lib. 7. de Bel. Iudaic. Howsoeuer, it being so principall an ingredient in their Magick, it was sit she should boast, to be the plucker vp of it her selfe. And, that the Cock did crow, alludes to a prime circumstance in their worke: For they all confesse, that nothing is so crosse, or balefull to them, in their nights, as that the Cock should crow before they haue done. Which makes, that their little Masters, or Martinets, of whom I haue mention'd before, vse this forme, in dismissing their conuentions. Eia, facessite properè hinc omnes, nam iam galli canere incipiunt. Which I interpret to be, because that bird is the messenger of light, and so, contrarie to their acts of darknesse. See Remig. Daemonolat. lib. 1. cap. 4. where he quotes that of Appollonius, de vmbra Achillis, Philostr. lib. 4. cap. 5. And Euseb. Caesariens. in confutat. contra Hierocl. 4. de Gallicinio.
                         3.
                     I, Last night, lay all alone
                     O'the ground, to heare the Mandrake grone;
                     And pluckt him vp, though he grew full low;
                     And, as I had done, the Cocke did crow.
                  
                  
                     
                        I haue touch'd at this before, in my note vpō the first, of the vse of gathering flesh, bones, and sculs: to which I now bring that piece of Apuleius, lib. 3. de Asino aureo, of Pamp
                                 •
                              ile. Prius
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               apparatu solito instruxit foralem ossicinam, omne genus aromatis, & ignorabiliter laminis literatis, & infoelicium nauium durantibus clauis defletorum, sepultorum etiam, cadauerum expositis multis admodum membris, hic nares, & digiti, illic carnosi claui pendentium, alibi trucidatorum sernatus cruor, & extorta dentibus ferarum trunca caluaria. And, for such places, Lucan makes his witch to inhabit them, lib. 6. Deserta
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               busta Incolit, & tumulos expulsis obtinet vmbris.
                         4.
                     ANd I ha'beene choosing out this scull,
                     From Charnell houses, that were full;
                     From priuate Grots, and publike Pits,
                     And frighted a Sexten out of his wits.
                  
                  
                     
                     5.For this rite, see Barthol. de spina. Quaest. de Strigibus, cap. 8. Mall. Mallefica. Tom. 2. where he disputes at large the transformation of witches to cats, and their sucking, both their spirits, and the bloud, calling them Striges: which Godelman. lib. de Lamijs, would haue à stridore, & auibus foedissimis eiusdem nominis, which I the rather incline to, out of Ouid's authoritie, Fast. lib. 6. where the Poet ascribes, to those birds, the same almost that these doe to the Witches, Nocte volant, puerosque petunt nutricis egenteis, Et vitiant cunis corpora rapta suis: Carpere dicuntur lactentia viscera rostris, Et plenum poto sanguine guttur habent.
                         
                     
                     VNder a cradle I did creepe,
                     By day; and, when the child was asleepe,
                     At night, I suck'd the breath; and rose,
                     And pluck'd the nodding Nurse by the nose.
                  
                  
                     6.Their killing of infants is common, both for confection of their oyntment (whereto one ingredient, is the fat boyl'd, as I haue shew'd before out of Paracelsus & Porta) as also out of a lust to doe murder. Sprenger in Mall. Mallefic. reports, that a witch, a midwife in the Diocoese of Basil, confessed to haue kill'd aboue fortie infants (euer as they were new borne, with pricking them in the braine with a needle) which she had offered to the deuill. See the storie of the three witches in Rem. Daemonola, lib. cap. 3. about the end of the chapter. And M. Philippo Ludwigus Elich. Quaest. 8. And, that it is no new rite, read the practice of Canidia, Epod. Horat. lib. Ode. 5. and Lucan. lib. 6. whose admirable verses I can neuer be wearie to transcribe. Nec cessant à caede manus, si sanguine vino Est opus, erumpat ingulo qui primus aperto. Nec refugit caedes, viuum si sacra cruor
                                 •
                              m Exta
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               funercae poscunt trepidantia mensae. Vulnere si ventris, non qua Natura vocabat Extrahitur partus calidos ponendus in aris; Et quoties saeuis opus est, & fortibus vmbris Ipsa facit Maneis. Hominum mors omnis in vsu est.
                         
                     
                     I Had a dagger: what did I with that?
                     Kill'd an infant, to haue his fat.
                     A Piper it got, at a Church-ale,
                     I bad him, againe blow wind i'the taile.
                  
                  
                     7.The abuse of dead bodies in their witch-craft, both Porphyrio and Psellus are graue Authors of. The one lib. de sacrif. cap. de vero cultu. The other lib. de daemo. which Apuleius toucheth too, lib. 2. de Asin. aureo. But Remigius, who deales with later persons, and out of their owne mouths, Daemonola, lib. 2. cap. 3. affirmes, Haec & nostrae aetatis maleficis hominibus moris est facere, praesertim si cuius supplicio affecti cadauer exemplo datum est, & in crucem sublatum. Nam non solum inde sortilegijs suis materiam mutuantur: Sed & ab ipsis carnifioinae instrumentis, reste, vinculis, palo, ferramentis. Siquidem ijs vulgi etiam opinione inesse ad incantationes magicas vim quandam & potestatem. And to this place, I dare not, out of religion to the diuine Lucan, but bring his verses from the same book. Laqueum, nodosque nocenteis Ore suo rupit, pendentia corpora carpsit, Abrasitque cruces, percussaque viscera nimbis Vulsit, & incoctas admisso sole medullas. Insertum manibus chalibem nigramque per artus Stillantis tabi saniem, virusque coactum Sustulit, & neruo morsus retinente perpendit.
                         
                     
                     A Murderer, yonder, was hung in chaines,
                     The Sunne and the wind had shrunke his veines;
                     I bit off a sinew, I clipp'd his haire,
                     I brought off his ragges, that danc'd i'the ayre.
                  
                  
                     8.These are Canidia's furniture, in Hora. Epod. lib. Ode. 5. Et vncta turpis ou
                                 •
                               ranae sanguine, Plumamque nocturnae strigis. And part of Medeas confection, in Ouid. Metamorph. lib. 7. Strigis infames, ipsis cum carnibus, alas. That of the skin (to make a purse for her Fly) was meant ridiculous, to mocke the keeping of their Familiars.
                         
                     
                     THe Scrich-owles egges, and the feathers blacke,
                     The bloud of the Frogge, and the bone in his backe,
                     I haue beene getting; and made of his skin
                     A purset, to keepe Sir CRANION in.
                  
                  
                     9.
                           Cicuta, Hyoscyomus, Ophioglosson, Solanum, Martagon, Doronicum, Aconitum, are the common veneficall ingredients, remembred by Paracelsus, Porta, Agrippa, and others; which I make her to haue gather'd, as about a castle, church, or some vast building (kept by dogges) among ruines, and wild heapes. 
                     
                     ANd I ha'beene plucking (plants among)
                     Hemlock, Henbane, Adders-tongue,
                     Night-shade, Moone-wort, Libbards-bane;
                     And twise, by the dogges, was like to be tane.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Ossa ab ore rapta 
                                 •
                              eiunae canis, Horace giues Canidia, in the place before quoted. Which ieiunae, I rather change to Gard'ners, as imagining such persons to keepe Mastifes for the defence of their grounds, whither this Hagge might goe also for simples: where, meeting with the bones, and not content with them, shee would yet doe a domesticke hurt, in getting the Catt's braines: which is another speciall ingredient; and of so much more efficacie, by how much blacker the Cat is, if you will credit. Agrip. cap. de suffitibus.
                         10.
                     I, From the iawes of a Gardiners bitch,
                     Did snatch these bones, and then leap'd the ditch;
                     Yet went I backe to the house againe,
                     Kill'd the blacke Cat, and here's the braine.
                  
                  
                     
                        These also, both by the confessions of Witches, and testimonie of Writers, are of principall vse in their witchcraft. The Toad mention'd in Virg. Geo. lib. 1. Inuentusque cauis Bufo. Which by Plinie is call'd Ruheta, Nat. Hist. lib. 32. cap. 5. and there celebrated for the force in Magick. Iuuenal toucheth at it twice, within my memorie, Satir. 1. & 6. And of the Owles eyes, see Corn. Agrip. de occult. Philos. lib. 1. cap. 15. As of the Bats bloud, and wings there: and in the 25. chapter, with Bapt. Porta, lib. 2. cap. 26. 11.
                     I Went to the Toad breedes vnder the wall,
                     I charm'd him out, and he came at my call;
                     I scratch'd out the eyes of the Owle before,
                     I tore the Batts wing; what would you haue more?
                  
                  
                     
                        After all their boasted labors, and plentie of Materialls (as they imagine) I make the Dame not only to adde more, but stranger, and out of their means to get (except the first Papan
                                 •
                              r cornutum, which I haue touch'd at in the confection) as Sepulchris caprificos erutas, & cupressos funebreis, as Horace calls them, where he armes Canidia, Epod. lib. Ode. 5. Then Agaricum Laricis, of which, see Porta. lib. 2. de Nat. Magi, against Plinie. And Basilisci, quem & Saturni sanguinem vocant venefici, tantas
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               vires habere ferunt. Cor. Agrip. de accult. Philos. lib. 1. cap. 42. With the Viper, remembred by Lucan. lib. 6. and the skins of Serpents. Innata
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               rubris Aequoribus custos pretiosae vipera conchae, Aut viuentis adhuc Lybicae membrana cerastae. And Ouid, lib. 7. Nec defuit illis Squamea Ciniphei tenuis membrana chelidri.
                         12. DAME.
                     YEs, I haue brought (to helpe our vowes)
                     Horned Poppie, Cypresse boughes,
                     The Fig-tree wild, that growes on tombes,
                     And iuice, that from the Larch-tree comes,
                     The Basiliskes bloud, and the Vipers skin:
                     And, now, our Orgies let's begin.

                           Here, the Dame put her selfe in the midst of them, and began her following Inuocation; wherein she tooke occasion, to boast all the power attributed to Witches by the Ancients; of which, euery Poet (or the most) doe giue some: HOMER to CIRCE, in the Odyss. THEOCRITVS to SIMATHA, in Pharmaceutria; VIRGIL to ALPHESIBoeVS, in his. OVID to DIPSAS, in Amor. to MEDEA and CIRCE, in Metamorph. TIBVLLVS to SAGA; HORACE to CANIDIA, SAGANA, VELA, FOLIA; SENECA to MEDEA, and the Nurse, in Herc. OEte. PETR. ARBITER to his SAGA, in Frag. and CLAVDIAN to MEGaeRA, lib. 1. in Rufinum; who takes the habit of a Witch, as these doe, and supplies that historicall part in the Poeme, beside her morall person of a Furie; confirming the same drift, in ours.
                        
                     
                     YOu These Inuocations are solemne with them, whereof we may see the formes, in Ouid. Me
                                 •
                              am. lib. 7. in Sen. Trag. Med. in Luc. lib. 6. which of all is the boldest and most horrid: beginning, E
                                 •
                              menides, Stigium
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               nefas, panae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               noceatū, &c.
                         
                        Fiends and Furies (if yet any bee
                     Worse then our selues) you, that haue quak'd to see
                     These The vntying of their knots is, when they are going to some fatall businesse: as Sagana is presented by Horace. Expedita, per totam domum Spa
                                 •
                              
                              gens Auernaleis aquas, Horret capillis, vt marinus asperis, Echinus, aut 
                                 •
                              urrens Aper.
                         knots vntied; and shrunke, when we haue charm'd.
                     You, that (to arme vs) haue your selues disarm'd,
                     And to our powers, resign'd your whips and brands,
                     When we went forth, the scourge of men and lands.
                     
                     You, that haue seene me ride, when HECATE
                     Durst not take chariot; when the boistrous se
                           •
                        ,
                     Without a breath of wind, hath knock'd the skie;
                     And that hath thundred, IOVE not knowing why:
                     When we haue set the elements at warres,
                     Made midnight see the sunne, and day the starres;
                     When the wing'd lightning, in the course, hath staid;
                     And swiftest riuers haue run backe, afraid,
                     To see the corne remoue, the groues to range,
                     Whole places alter, and the seasons change,
                     When the pale moone, at the first voice downe fell
                     Poison'd, and durst not stay the second spell.
                     
                     You, that haue oft, beene conscious of these sights;
                     And thou 
                           Hecate, who is called Triuia, and Triformis, of whom Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 4. Tergeminam
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               Hecaten, tria virgnis ora Dianae. She was beleeu'd to gouerne in witchcraft; and is remembred in all their inuocations▪ See Theoc. in Pharmacent. , & Mede
                                 •
                               in Senec. Meis vocata sacris noctium sidus veni, Pessimos indutae vultus: Fronte non vna minax. And 
                              
                                 •
                              richt. in Luc. Persephone. nostrae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               Hecatis pars vltima, &c.
                         
                        three-formed starre, that, on these nights
                     Art onely powerfull, to whose triple name
                     Thus we incline, once, twice, and thrise the same;
                     If now with rites prophane, and foule inough,
                     We doe inuoke thee; darken all this roofe,
                     With present fogges▪ Exhale earths rott'nest vapors,
                     And strike a blindnesse through these blazing tapers.
                     Come, let a murmuring charme resound,
                     The whilst we This Rite, of burying their Materials, is often confest in Remig. and describ'd amply in Hor. Sat. 8. lib. 1. Vt
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               Lupiharbam variae cum dente colubrae Abdide rint furtim terris, &c.
                         bury all, i' the ground.
                     But first, see euery The Ceremony also, of baring their feet, is expressed by Ouid. Metamorph. lib. 7. as of their haire. Egreditur tectis ves
                                 •
                              es induta recinctas, Nuda pedem, nudos humeris infusa capillos. And Horac. ibid. Pedibus nudis passo
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               capillo. And Senec. in Tragaed. Med. Tibi more Gentis, vinculo soluens comam Secreta nudo nemora lustraui pede.
                         foote be bare;
                     And euery knee. HAG. Yes, dame, they are.
                  
                  
                     4. CHARME.
                     DEepe, Heere they speake as if they were creating some new feature, which the deuill perswades them to be able to do, often, by the pronouncing of words, and powring out of liquors, on the earth. Heare what Agrip. saits De occul. Phil. lib. 4. neer the end. In euocationibus vmbrarum fumigamus cum sanguine recenti, cum ossibus mortuorum, & carne, cum ouis, lact
                                 •
                              , melle, oleo, & similibus, quae ap
                                 •••
                               mediū tribuunt animabus, ad sumenda corpora; and a little before. Nam
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               animae cognitis medijs, per quae quondam corporibus suis coniungebantur, per similes vapores, liquores, nidores
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               facile alliciuntur. Which doctrine he had from Apuleius, without all doubt, or question, who in lib. 3. de Asin aureo. publisheth the same. Tunc decantatis spirantibus fibris lita
                                 •
                               vario latice; nunc rore fontano, nunc lacte vaccino, nunc melle montano, libat & mulsâ Sic illos capillos in mutuos nexus obditos, atque nodatos, cum multis odoribus dat vi
                                 •
                              is carbonibus adolendos. Tunc protinus inexpugnabili Magicae Disciplinae potestate, & cacanuminum coactorum violentia, illa corpora quorum fumabant stridentes capilli spiritum mutuantur humanum, & sentiunt, & audiunt, & ambulant. Et quà nidor suarum ducebat exuuiarum veniunt. All which are meere arts of Sathan, when either himselfe will delude them with a false forme, or troubling a dead body, makes them imagine these vanities the meanes: as in the ridiculous circumstances that follow, he doth daily. O deepe, we lay thee to sleepe;
                     We leaue thee drinke by, if thou chance to be dry;
                     Both milke, and bloud, the dew, and the floud.
                     We breathe in thy bed, at the foot, and the head;
                     We couer thee warme, that thou take no harme:
                     And when thou dost wake,
                     Dame earth shall quake,
                     And the houses shake,
                     And her belly shall ake,
                     As her backe were brake,
                     Such a birth to make,
                     As is the blue drake:
                     Whose forme thou shall take.
                  
                  
                     
                     DAME.
                     NEuer a starre yet shot?
                     Where be the ashes? HAG. Here i'the pot.
                     DAM. This throwing of ashes, and sand, with the flint stone, crosse stickes, and burying of sage &c. are all vs'd (and beleeu'd by them) to the raysing of storme, and tempest. See Remig. li. 1. daemon. cap. 25. Nider. Formicari. cap. 4. Bodin. Daemon. lib. 2. cap. 8. And heare Godelman: lib. 2. cap. 6. Nam quando daemoni grandines ciendi potestatem facit Deus, tum Malifica
                                 •
                               instruit, vt quandoque silicet post tergum in occidentem versus proijciant, aliquando vt arenam aquae torrentis in aërem conijciant, plerumque scopas in aquam intingant, coelum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               versus spargant, vel fossulâ factâ & lotio infuso, vel aquâ digitum meu
                                 •
                              ant: subindè in ollâ porcorum pilos bulliant, nonnunquam trabes vel ligna in ripâ transuersè collocent, & alia id genus deliramenta efficiant. And when they see the successe, they are more confirm'd, as if the euent followed their working. The like illusion is of their phantasie, in sayling in egge-shels, creeping through augur-holes, and such like, so vulgar in their confessions. Cast them vp; and the flint stone
                     Ouer the left shoulder bone:
                     Into the west. HAG. It will be best.
                  
                  
                     5. CHARME.
                     THe stickes are a-crosse, there can be no losse,
                     The sage is rotten, the sulphur is gotten
                     Vp to the sky, that was i'the ground.
                     Follow it then, with our rattles, round;
                     Vnder the bramble, ouer the brier,
                     A little more heat will set it on fire:
                     Put it in mind, to doe it kind,
                     Flow water, and blow wind.
                     
                        Rouncy is ouer, Robble is vnder,
                     A flash of light, and a clap of thunder,
                     A storme of raine, another of hayle.
                     We all must home, i'the 
                           •
                        gge-shell sayle;
                     The mast is made of a great pin,
                     The tackle of cobweb, the sayle as thin,
                     And if we goe through and not fall in —
                  
                  
                     DAME.
                     
                        This stoppe, or interruption shew'd the better, by causing that generall silence, which made all the following Noyses, enforced in the next charme, more direfull, first imitating that of Lucan. Miratur Erichtho Has fatis licuisse moras; irataque morti Verberat immotum vino serpente cadauer, and then their barking, howling, hissing, and confusion of noyse expressed by the same Author, in the same person. Tunc vox Lethaeos cunctis pollentior herbis Excantare deos, confodit murmura primùm. Dissona & humana multùm discordia linguae. Latratus habet illa canum, gemitus
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , luporum, Quod trepidus bubo, quod strin nocturna queruntur, Quod strident vlulant
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ferae, quod sibilat anguis Exprimit, & planctus illisae cautibus vndae, Siluarum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               sonum, fractae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               tonitrua nubis, Tot rerum vox vna suit, See Remig. too, Daemonolat. lib. 1. cap. 19. STay. All our charmes doe nothing winne
                     Vpon the night; our labour dies!
                     Our Magicke-feature will not rise;
                     Nor yet the storme! We must repeate
                     More direfull voyces farre, and beate
                     The ground with vipers, till it sweate.
                  
                  
                     
                     6. CHARME.
                     BArke dogges, wolues howle,
                     Seas roare, woods roule,
                     Cloudes cracke, all be blacke,
                     But the light our charmes doe make.
                  
                  
                     DAME.
                     NOt yet? my rage beginnes to swell;
                     
                        Darkenesse, deuills, night, and hell,
                     Doe not thus delay my spell.
                     
                     I call you once, and I call you twise;
                     I beat you againe, if you stay my thrise:
                     Thorough these cranyes, where I peepe,
                     
                        This is one of their common menaces, when their magicke receiues the least stop. Heare Erichtho againe, ibid. tibi pessime munde Arbiter immiclam ruptis Titana cauernis Et subito feriere d
                                 •
                              e. And a little before to Proserpina. Eloquar immenso terrae sub pondere quae te Contineant, Ennaea dapes, &c.
                         I'le let in the light to see your sleepe.
                     And all the secrets of your sway
                     Shall lie as open to the day,
                     As vnto me. Still are you deafe?
                     Reach me a bough,That wither'd streight, as it shot out, which is called Ramus feralis, by some, and tristis, by Senec. Trag. Med.
                         that ne're bare leafe,
                     To strike the aire; and A deadly poysonous herbe fain'd by Ouid. Metamo. libr. 7. to spring out of Cerberus his foame. Plinie giues it another beginning of name. Nat. Hist. lib. 27. cap 3. Nascitur in nudis cautibus, quas aconas vocant, & inde aconitum dixere, nullo iuxtâ ne puluere quidem nutriente. Howsoeuer the iuice of it is like that liquor which the deuill giues witches to sprinkle abroad, & do hurt in the opinion of all the magick masters.
                         
                        Aconite,
                     To hurle vpon this glaring light;
                     
                        A rusty knife I rather giue her, then any other, as fittest for such a deuilish Ceremony, which Seneca might meane by sacro culto in the Tragedy, where he armes Medea, to the like rite, (for any thing I know) Tibi nudato pectore Moenas, sacro feriam Brachia cultro: Manet noster sanguis ad aras.
                         A rustie knife, to wound mine arme;
                     And, as it drops, I'le speake a charme,
                     Shall cleaue the ground, as low as lies
                     Old shrunk-vp CHAOS, and let rise,
                     Once more, his darke, and reeking head,
                     To strike the world, and nature dead,
                     Vntill my magicke birth be bred.
                  
                  
                     7. CHARME.
                     BLacke goe in, and blacker come out;
                     At thy going downe, we giue thee a shout.
                  
                  
                     
                        These shouts and clamors, as also the voice Har. Har. are very particular with them by the testimony of Bodin. Remig. Delrio. and M. Phil. Lud
                                 •
                              uigus, Elich. who out of them reports it, thus. Tota turba collunies
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               pessima fescanninos in honorem Daemonum cantat obsoenissimos: Haec cauit Har. Har. Illa Diabolo, Diabole, salta huc, salta illuc; Altera, lude hic, lude illic; Alia, Sabaath, Sabaath. &c. Imò clamoribus, sibilis, vlulatibus, popysmis, furit, ac debacchatur: pulueribus, velvenenis acceptu qui hominibus pedibusque spergant.
                         Hoo!
                  
                  
                     At thy rising againe, thou shalt haue two,
                     And if thou dost what, we would haue thee doe,
                     Thou shalt haue three, thou shalt haue foure,
                     Thou shalt haue ten, thou shalt haue a score.
                  
                  
                     
                        Hoo. Har. Har. Hoo!
                  
                  
                     
                     8. CHARME.
                     A Cloud of pitch, a spurre, and a switch,
                     To haste him away, and a whirlewind play,
                     Before, and after, which thunder for laughter,
                     And stormes for ioy, of the roaring boy;
                     His head of a drake, his taile of a snake.
                  
                  
                     9. CHARME.
                     ABout, about, and about,
                     Till the mist arise, and the lights 
                           •
                        lie out,
                     The images neither be seene, nor felt;
                     The wollen burne, and the waxen melt;
                     Sprinkle your liquors vpon the ground,
                     And into the ayre; around, around.
                     Around, around,
                     Around, around,
                     
                        Nor doe they want musique, and in strange manner giuen them by the deuill, if we credit their confessions in Remig. Daem. lib. 1. cap. 19. Such as the Syrbenaean Quires were, which Athen
                                 •
                              us remembers out of Clear
                                 •
                              bus, Deipnos. lib. 15. where euery one sung what he would without harkening to his fellow; like the noise of diuers oares, falling in the water. But be patient of Remigius relation. Miris modis ill
                                 •
                              c miscentur, ac turbantur omnia, nec vllâ oratione satis exprimi queat, quàm strepant sonis inconditis, absurdis, ac discrepantibus. Canit hic Daemon ad tibiam, vel veriùs ad contum, aut baculum aliquod, quod fortè humi repertum buccceu tibiam admouet. Ille pro lyra equi caluariam pulsat, ac digitis concrepat. Alius fuste vel clauâ grauiore quercum tundit, vnde exauditur sonus, ac boatus veluti tympanorum vehementiùs pulsatorum. Intercinunt rancide, & composito 
                                 •
                              d litui morem elangore Daemones; ipsumque coelum fragosa aridaque voce feriunt.
                         Till a musique sound,
                     And the pase be found,
                     To which we may daunce,
                     And our Charmes aduance.
                  
                  AT which, with a strange, and sodayne musique they fell into a The manner also of their dauncing is confest in Bodin. lib. 2. cap. 4. And Remig li. 1. cap. 17. and 18. The summe of which M. Phili. Lud. Elich. relates thus, in his Daemonom. Quaest. 10. Tripudijs interdum intersunt facie liberâ & apertâ, interdum obducta laruâ, linteo, cortice, reticulo, peplo, vel alio velamine, aut farrinario excerniculo inuolu
                              •
                           a. And a little after. Omnia fiunt ritu absurdissimo, & ab omni consuetudine hominum alienissimo, dorsis inuicem obuersis, & in orbem iunctis manibus, saltando circumeant, perinde sua iactantes capita, vt qui oestro agitantur. Remigius addes out of the confession of Sibilla Morelia, Gyrum semper in laeuam progredi. which Plinie obserues in the Priests of Cybile. Nat. Hist. lib. 28 cap 2. and to be done with great religion. Bodin addes, that they vse broomes in their hands, with which we arm'd our witches; and here we leaue them. 
                     magicall daunce, full of praeposterous change, and gesticulation, but most applying to their property: who at their meetings, doe call things contrary to the custome of men, dauncing back to backe, and hip to hip, their hands ioin'd, and making their circles backeward, to the left hand, with strange phantastique motions of their heads, and bodies. All which were excellently imitated by the maker of the daunce, M. HIEROME HERNE, whose right it is here to be named.
                  
                     IN the heat of their daunce, on the sodaine, was heard a sound of lowd musique, as if many instruments had made one blast; with which not onely the Hags themselues, but the hell, into which they ran, quite vanished, and the whole face of the Scene altred, scarce suffring the memory of such a thing: But in the place of it, appeared a glorious, and magnificent building, figuring the house of fame, in the top of which, were discouered the 12. masquers, sitting vpon a throne triumphall, erected in forme of a pyramide, and circled with all store of light. From whom a person, by this time descended, in the furniture of Perseus, and expressing heroique, and masculine vertue, began to speake.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              HEROIQVE VERTVE.
                              SO should, at FAMES lowd sound, and VERTVES sight,
                              All darke, and enuious witchcraft flie the light.
                              
                                 The ancients expressed a braue & masculine Vertue in three figures (of Hercules, Perseus, and Bellerophon.) Of which wee choose that of Perseus, arm'd as we haue describ'd him, out of Hesiod. Scuto. Herc. See Apollodor, the Grammarian, l. 2. de Persco.
                                  I did not borrow HERMES wings, nor aske
                              His crooked sword, nor put on PLVTO'S caske,
                              Nor on mine arme, aduanc'd wise PALLAS shield,
                              (By which, my face auers'd, in open field
                              I slue the GORGON) for an emptie name:
                              When VERTVE cut off TERROR, he gat FAME.
                              And, if when FAME was gotten, TERROR di'de,
                              What black ERYNNIS, or more hellish pride,
                              Durst arme these HAGS, now shee is growne, and great,
                              To thinke they could her glories once defeat?
                              I was her parent, and I am her strength.
                              
                                 Heroique Vertue sinkes not vnder length
                              Of yeeres, or ages; but is still the same,
                              While he preserues, as when he got good FAME.
                              My daughter, then, whose glorious house you see
                              Built of all sounding brasse, whose columnes bee
                              Men making Poets, and those well-made Men,
                              Whose strife it was, to haue the happyest pen
                              Renowne them to an after-life, and not
                              With pride, to scorne the Muse, and die forgot;
                              Shee, that inquireth into all the world,
                              And hath, about her vaulted Palace, hoorl'd
                              All rumors and reports, or true, or vaine,
                              What vtmost lands, or deepest seas containe;
                              (But only hangs great actions, on her file)
                              Shee, to this lesser world, and greatest Ile,
                              To night sounds Honor, which shee would haue seene
                              In yond' bright BEVIE each of them a Queene.
                              Eleuen of them are of times, long gone.
                              PENTHESILEA, the braue Amazon,
                              Swift foot CAMILLA, Queene of Volscia,
                              Victorious THOMYRIS of Scythia,
                              Chast ARTEMISIA, the Carian dame,
                              And fayre-hayr'd BERONICE, Aegypts fame,
                              HYPSICRATEA, glorie of Asia,
                              CANDACE, pride of Aethiopia.
                              
                              The Brittane honor, VOADICEA,
                              The vertuous PALMYRENE, ZENOBIA,
                              The wife, and warlike Goth, AMALASVNTA,
                              And bold VALASCA, of Bohemia.
                              
                              
                              
                                 〈1 page missing〉
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                     Vel mare per medium, fluctu suspensa tumenti,
                     Ferret iter, celereis nec tingeret aequore plantas.
                  
                  And afterward tells her attyre, and armes, with the admiration, that the spectators had of her. All which i
                        •
                      the Poet created out of himselfe, without nature, he did but shew, how much so diuine a soule could exceed her.
                  The third liu'd in the age of CYRVS, the great Persian Monarch; and made him leaue to liue. THOMYRIS, Queene of the Scythians, or Massagets. A Heroine of a most inuincible, and vnbroken fortitude. Who, when CYRVS had inuaded her, and, taking her onely son (rather by trecherie, then war, as she obiected) had slaine him; not touch'd with the griefe of so great a losse, in the iuster comfort she tooke of a greater reuenge, pursued not only the occasion, and honor of conquering so potent an enemy, with whom fell two hundred thousand souldiers: but (what was right memorable in her victorie) left not a messenger suruiuing, of his side to report the massacre. She is remembred both by 
                        In clio.
                      HERODOTVS and 
                        
                           
                              •
                           pit. lib. 1. IVSTINE, to the great renowne, and glorie of her kind: with this Elogie. Quod potentissimo Persarum Monarchaebello congressa est, ipsam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         & vita & castris spoliauit, ad iustè vlciscendam filij eius indignissimam mortem.
                  
                  The fourth was honor'd to life in the time of XERXES, and present at his great expedition into Greece; ARTEMISIA, the Queene of Caria: whose vertue 
                        In Polymn.
                      HERODOTVS, not without some wonder, records. That, a woman, a Queene, without a husband, her sonne a ward, and shee administring the gouernment, occasion'd by no necessitie, but a meere excellence of spirit, should embarque herselfe for such a war; and there, so to behaue her, as XERXES beholding her sight, should say: 
                        Herod. in Vrania.
                      
                     Viri quidē extiterunt mihi foeminae, foeminae autem viri. She is no lesse renowned for her chastitie, & loue to her husband, MAVSOLVS, 
                        Val. Max. l. 4. cap. 6. and A. Gel l. 10. c. 18. whose bones (after he was dead) she preseru'd in ashes, and drunke in wine, making her selfe his tombe: and, yet, built to his memorie a monument, deseruing a place among the seuen wonders of the world, which could not be done by lesse then a wonder of women.
                  The fifth was the faire hayr'd daughter of PTOLOMAEVS PHILADELPHVS, by the elder ARSINOE; who, married to her brother PTOLOMAEVS, surnamed EVERGETES, was after Queene of Aegypt. I find her written both BERONICE, and BERENICE. This lady, vpon an expedition of her new wedded Lord into Assyria, vowed to VENVS, if he return'd safe, and conqueror, the offering of her haire; which vow of hers (exacted by the successe) she afterward perform'd. But, her father missing it, and therewith displeas'd, CONON, a Mathematician, who was then in house-hold with PTOLOMEY, and knew well to flatter him, perswaded the king that it was ta'ne vp to heauen, and made a constellation; she wing him those seuen stars, ad caudam Leonis, which are since called Coma Beronices. Which storie, then presently celebrated by CALLIMACHVS, in a most elegant poeme, CATVLLVS more elegantly conuerted; wherein they call her the Magnanimous, euen from a virgin: alluding (as 
                        Astronom. lib. 2. in Leo.
                      HYGINVS saies) to a rescue shee made of her father in his flight, and restoring the courage and honor of his armie, euen to a victorie. Their wordes are,

                     
                        
                           
                              Catul. de C
                                    •
                                 
                                 ma Beronis.
                            Cognoram d parua virgine magnanimam.
                     
                  
                  The sixth, that famous wife of MITHRIDATES, and Queene of Pontus, HYPSICRATEA, no lesse an example of vertue then the rest; who so loued her husband, as shee was assistant to him in all labours, and hazards of the warre, in a masculine habite. For which cause (as 
                        Lib. 4. ca. 6. de Amo
                              •
                           . 
                              •
                           oning.
                      VALERIVS MAXIMVS obserues) shee departed with a chiefe ornament of her beauty. Tonsis enim capillis, equo se & armis assuefecit, quo facilius laboribus & periculis eius interesset. And, afterward, in his flight from POMPEY, accompanied his misfortune, with a minde, and body equally vnwearied. She is solemnly registred, by that graue Authour, as a notable President of marriage-loyaltie, and loue: vertues, that might raise a meane person to equality with a Queene, but a Queene to the state, and honour of a deitie.
                  
                  The seuenth, that renowne of Aethiopia, CANDACE: from whose excellencie, the succeeding queenes of that nation were ambitious to bee called so. A woman, of a most haughtie spirit against enemies, and a singular affection to her subiects. I finde her celebrated by 
                        Hist. Rom. l 54 DION, and 
                        Nat. hist. lib 6. cap. 29. PLINIE, inuading Aegypt in the time of AVGVSTVS; who, though she were enforc'd to a peace by his Lieutenant PETRONIVS, doeth not the lesse worthily hold her place here; when, euery where, this Elogie remaines of her fame: That she was Maximi animi mulier, tantique in suos meriti, vt omnes d
                           •
                        inceps Aethiopum Reginae eius nomine fuerint appellatae. She gouern'd in Meroe.
                  
                  The eight, our owne honour, VOADICEA, or BOODICEA; By some BVNDVICA, and BVNDVCA: queene of the Iceni. A people, that inhabited that part of our Iland which was called East-Anglia, and comprehended Suffolke, Norfolke, Cambridge, and Huntington shires. Since she was borne here at home, we will first honour her with a home-borne testimony; from the graue and diligent 
                        Ruines of Time. SPENSER.
                  
                     —BVNDVCA Britonesse▪
                     
                     
                        BVNDVCA, that victorious conqueresse,
                     That lifting vp her braue Heroique thought
                     'Bo
                           •
                        e womans weakenesse, with the Romans fought;
                     Fought, and in field against them thrice preuail'd, &c.
                  
                  To which, see her orations in story, made by 
                        Annal. lib. 14. TAC
                        •
                     TVS, and 
                        Epit. Ioan. X
                              •
                           
                           philon. in Ner.
                      DION: wherein is expressed all magnitude of a spirit, breathing to the liberty and redemption of her Countrey. The latter of whom, doth honest her beside, with a particular desciption. BVNDVICA, Britanica foemina, orta stirpe Regia, quaenon solum cis cum magna dignitate praefuit, sed etiam hellum omne administrauit; cuius animus virilis potius quam muliebris erat. And afterwards, Foemina, forma honestissima, vultu seuero, &c. All which doth waigh the more to her true praise, in comming from the mouthes of Romanes, and enemies. She liu'd in the time of NERO.
                  The ninth, in time, but equall in fame, and (the cause of it) vertue, was the chaste ZENOBIA queene of the Palmerynes, who, after the death of

                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     Her house is all of echo made,
                     Where neuer dyes the sound;
                     And, as her browes the cloudes inuade,
                     Her foot doe strike the ground.
                     Sing then good Fame, that's out of Vertue borne:
                     For, who doth Fame neglect, doth Vertue scorne.
                  
                  Here they lighted from their Chariots, and danc'd forth their first dance; then a second, immediately following it: both right curious, and full of subtile and excellent changes, and seem'd perform'd with no lesse spirits, then of those they personated. The first was to the Cornets, the second to the Vyolines. After which, they tooke out the men, and danc'd the measures; entertaining the time, almost to the space of an houre, with singular varietie: when, to giue them rest, from the Musique which attended the Chariots, by that most excellent tenor voice, and exact singer (her Maiesties servant M. IO. ALLIN) this Dittie was sung.
                  SONG.
                  WHen all the Ages of the earth
                  Were crown'd, but in this famous Birth;
                  And that, when they would boast their store
                  Of Worthy Queenes, they knew no more:
                  How happier is that Age, can giue
                  A Queene, in whom all they doe liue!
                  After it, succeeded their third dance; then which, a more numerous composition could not be seene: Graphically disposed into Letters, & honouring the name of the most sweet and ingenious Prince CHARLES Duke of Yorke. Wherein, beside that principall grace of perspicuitie, the motions were so euen and apt, and their expression so iust; as if Mathematicians had lost Proportion, they might there haue found it. The Author was M. THO. GILES. After this, they danc'd Galliards, and Corrantoes. And then their last dance, no lesse elegant (in the place) then the rest, with which they tooke their Chariots againe, and triumphing about the stage, had their returne to the House of Fame celebrated with this last Song; whose notes (as the former) were the work, and honour of my excellent friend, ALFONSO FERRABOSCO.
                  SONG.
                  WHo, Vertue, can thy power forget,
                  That sees these liue, & triumph yet?
                  Th' Assyrian pompe, the Persian pride,
                  
                     Gre
                           •
                        kes glory, and the Romanes di'de:
                  And who yet imitate
                  Their noyses, tarry the same fate.
                  Force greatnesse all the glorious waies
                  You can, it soone decaies;
                  But so good Fame shall neuer:
                  Her triumphs, as their causes, are for euer.
                  To conclude which, I know no worthier way of Epilogue, then the celebration of who were the Celebraters.
                  
                  
                     The QVEENES MAIESTY.
                     The Co. of ARVNDEE.
                     The Co. of DERBY.
                     The Co. of HVNTINGTON.
                     The Co. of BEDFORD.
                     The Co. of ESSEX.
                     The Co. of MONTGOMERY.
                     The Vicou. CRANBORNE.
                     The La. EL. GVILFORD.
                     The La. ANNE WINTER.
                     The La. WINDSORE.
                     The La. ANNE CLIFFORD.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE SPEECHES AT PRINCE HENRIES BARRIERS.
                  
                     The Lady of the Lake, first discouered.
                     
                        A Silence, calme as are my waters, meet
                     Your rays'd attentions, whilst my siluer fee
                     Touch on the richer shore; and to this seat
                     Vow my new duties and mine old repeat.
                     Lest any yet should doubt, or might mistake
                     What Nymph I am; behold the ample lake
                     Of which I am stil'd; and neere it MERLINS tombe
                     Graue of his cunning, as of mine the wombe.
                     By this it will not aske me to proclaime
                     More of my selfe, whose actions, and whose name
                     Were so full fain'd in Brittish ARTHVRS court;
                     No more then it will fit me to report
                     What hath before bin trusted to our squire
                     Of me, my knight, his fate, and my desire
                     To meet, if not preuent his destiny
                     And stile him to the court of Britany;
                     Now when the Iland hath regain'd her fame
                     Intire, and perfect, in the ancient name,
                     And that a monarch equall good and great,
                     Wise, temperate, iust, and stout claimes ARTHVRS seat.
                     Did I say equall? O too prodigall wrong
                     Of my or'c-thirstie, and vnequall tongue!
                     How brighter farre, then when our ARTHVR liu'd,
                     Are all the glories of this place reuin'd!
                     What riches doe I see; what beauties here!
                     What awe! what loue! what reuerence! ioy! and feare!
                     What ornaments of counsaile as of court!
                     All that is high and great, or can comport
                     Vnto the stile of maiestie, that knowes
                     No riuall, but it selfe, this place here showes.
                     Onely the house of Chiualrie (how ere
                     The inner parts and store be full, yet here
                     In that which gentry should sustaine) decayed
                     Or rather ruin'd seemes; her buildings layd
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                   
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     PAT.
                     Nor a deuoish vit a clowd to fesh 'hem out o' te bottome o' te vayter.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     But tey musht eene come and daunch i'teyr mantels now; and snow tee how tey can foot te fading and te fadow, and te phip adunboyne I trow.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     I pre dee now, let not ty sweet faysht ladies make a mocke on 'hem, and scorne to daunsh vit'hem now, becash tey be poore.
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     Tey drinke no bonny clabbe, i' fayt, now
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     It ish better ten vsquebagh to daunsh vit PHATRICK.
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     By my faters hand tey vill daunsh very vell.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     I by St. PATRICK vill tey; for tey be nimble men.
                  
                  
                     DEN.
                     And will leape ash light, be creesh saue me, ash he tat veareste biggesht fether in ty court, king YAMISH.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     For all tey haue no good vindsh to blow tem heter, nor elementsh to presherue 'hem.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     Nor all te foure cornersh o' te world, to creepe out on.
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     But tine owne Kingdomes.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     Tey be honesht men.
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     And goot men: tine owne shubshects.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     Tou hasht very good shubshects in Ireland.
                  
                  
                     DEN.
                     A great good many, o'great goot shubshects.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     Tat loue ty mayesty heartily.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     And vil runne t'rough fire, and vater for tee, ouer t
                           •
                         bog, and te Bannoke, be te graish o' got, and graish o' king,
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     By got, tey vil fight for tee, king YAMISH, and for my mistresh tere.
                  
                  
                     DEN.
                     And my little mayshter.
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     And te vfrow, ty daughter, that is in Tuchland.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     Tey vill spend ter heart, in rer belly for tee, as vell as ter legs, in ter heelsh.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     By creesh, tey vill shpend all teyr cowesh for tee.
                  
                  
                     DEN.
                     Pretee make mush on 'tem,
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     Pretee, sweet faysh doe.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     Be not angry vit te honesh men, for te few rebelsh, & knauesh.
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     Nor beleeue no tayles, king YAMISH.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     For, by got, tey loue tee in Ireland.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     Pray tee, bid 'hem velcome, and got make 'hem rish for tee.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     Tey vill make tem shelues honesht.
                  
                  
                     DEN.
                     Tou hasht not a hundret tousand sush men by my trote.
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     No, nor forty, by my hand.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     By iustish Delounes hant, not twenty.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     By my Lo. deputish hant not ten, in all ti great Britayne. Shall I call hem to tee?
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     Tey shit like poore men i' the porsh yonder.
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     Shtay te peepe i'sh come! harke, harke.
                  
                  
                     
                     DER.
                     Let vsh daunsh ten. Daunsh DENNISE.
                  
                  
                     DEN.
                     By creesh sa' me I ha'forgot.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     A little till our mayshtersh be ready.
                  
                  Here the Foot-men had a daunce, being sixe men, and sixe boyes, to the bag-pipe, and other rude musique, after which they had a song, and then they cry'd,
                  Peash. Peash. Now roome for our mayshters. Roome for our mayshters.
                  Then the Gentlemen dance forth a dance in their Irish mantles, to a solemne musique of harpes: which done, the foot-men fell to speake againe, till they were interrupted by a ciuill gentleman of the nation, who brings in a Bard.
                  
                     DER.
                     How like tow tish YAMISH? And tey had fine cloyshs now, and liueries, like tine owne men and bee.
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     But terugs make t'em shrug a little.
                  
                  
                     DER.
                     Tey haue shit a great phoyle i' te cold, ant bee
                  
                  
                     DON.
                     Isht not pitty te cloysh be drown'd now?
                  
                  
                     PAT.
                     Pre tee shee anoter daunsh and be not veary.
                  
                  
                     GENT.
                     He may be of your rudenesse. Hold your tongues.
                     And let your courser manners seeke some place,
                     Fit for their wildnesse. This is none, be gone.
                     Aduance, immortall Bard, come vp and view
                     The glad, ding face of that great king, in whom
                     So many prophecies of thine are knit.
                     This is that IAMES of which long since thou sung'st,
                     Should end our countreyes most vnnaturall broyles;
                     And if her eare, then deafned with the drum,
                     Would stoupe but to the musique of his peace,
                     Shee need not with the spheares change harmony.
                     This is the man thou promis'd should redeeme:
                     If she would loue his counsels as his lawes,
                     Her head from seruitude, her feete from fall,
                     Her fame from barbarisme, her state from want,
                     And in her all the fruits of blessing plant.
                     Sing then some charme, made from his present lookes,
                     That may assure thy former prophecies,
                     And firme the hopes of these obedient spirits,
                     Whose loue no lesse, then dutie hath cald forth
                     Their willing powers: who if they had much more,
                     Would doe their All, and thinke they could not moue
                     Enough to honour that, which he doth loue.
                     Here the Bard sings to two harpes.
                     SONG. 1.
                     BOw both your heads at once, and hearts:
                     Obedience doth not well in parts.
                     It is but standing in his eye,
                     You'll feele your selues chang'd by and by,
                     
                     Few liue, that know, how quick a spring
                     Workes in the presence of a king:
                     Tis done by this; your slough let fall,
                     And come forth new-borne creatures all.
                     In this song, the Masquers let fall their mantles; and discouer their masquing apparell. Then dance forth.
                     After the dance the Bard sing this.
                     SONG. 2.
                     SO breakes the sunne earths rugged chaines,
                     Wherein rude winter bound her vaines;
                     So growes both streame and source of price,
                     That lately fetterd were with ice.
                     So naked trees get crisped heads,
                     And cullord coates the roughest meads,
                     And all get vigour, youth, and spright,
                     That are but look'd on by his light.
                  
                  
                     MERCVRIE VINDICATED FROM THE ALCHEMISTS AT COVRT BY Gentlemen the Kings Seruants.
                     
                        AFter the lowd musique, the Scene discouered; being a laboratory, or Alchymists workehouse: Vulcan looking to the Registers, while a Cyclope, tending the fire, to the Cornets began to sing.
                     
                        CYCLOPE.
                        
                           SOft, subtile fire, thou soule of art,
                           Now doe thy part
                           On weaker Nature, that through age is lamed.
                           Take but thy time, now she is old,
                           And the Sunne her friend growne cold,
                           She will no more, in strife with thee be named.
                        
                        
                           Looke, but how few confesse her now,
                           In cheeke or browe!
                           From euery head, almost, how she is frighted.
                           The very age abhorres her so,
                           That it learnes to speake and goe
                           As if by art alone it could be righted.
                        
                     
                     The Song ended, Mercurie appeared, thrusting out his head, and afterward his body, at the Tunnell of the middle furnace; which Vulcan espying, cryed out to the Cyclope.
                     
                     
                        
                        VVLCAN.
                        STay, see! our Mercury is comming forth; Art and all the Elements assist. Call forth our Philosophers. He will bee gon, he will euaporate. Deare Mercury! helpe. He flies. He is scap'd. Precious golden Mercury, be fixt; be not so volatile. Will none of the Sonnes of Art appeare?
                     
                     
                        In which time Mercurie hauing run once or twice about the roome, takes breath, and speakes.
                     
                     
                        MERCVRY.
                        NOw the place and goodnesse of it protect me. One tender-hearted creature, or other, saue Mercury, and free him. Ne're an olde Gentlewoman i'the house, that has a wrinckle about her, to hide mee in? I could run into a Seruing-womans pocket now; her gloue, any little hole. Some mercifull vardingale among so many, be bounteous, and vndertake me: I will stand, close, vp, any where, to escape this polt-footed Philosopher, old Smug here of Lemnos, and his smoaky familie. Has he giuen mee time to breathe? Ô the variety of torment, that I haue endur'd in the reigne of the Cyclops, beyond the most exquisite wit of Tyrannes. The whole houshold of 'hem are become Alchymists (since their trade of armour-making fail'd them) onely to keepe themselues in fire, for this winter; for the mischiefe of Secret, that they know, aboue the consuming of coales and drawing of Vskabah. Howsoeuer they may pretend vnder the specious names of Geber, Arnold, Lully, Bombast of Hohenhein, to commit miracles in art and treason again' nature. And, as if the title of Philosopher, that creature of glory, were to be fetch'd out of a furnace, abuse the curious and credulous Nation of metall-men through the world, and make Mercury their instrument. I am their Crude, and their Sublimate; their Praecipitate, and their vnctuous; their male and their female; Sometimes their Hermaphrodite; what they list to stile me. It is I, that am corroded, and exalted, and sublim'd, and reduc'd, and fetch'd ouer, and filtred, and wash'd, and wip'd; what betweene their salts and their sulphures; their oyles, and their tartars, their brines and their vinegers, you might take me out now a sous'd Mercury, now a salted Mercury, now a smoak'd and dri'd Mercury, now a pouldred and pickl'd Mercury: neuer Herring, Oyster, or Coucumer past so many vexations: my whole life with 'hem hath bene an exercise of torture; one, two, three, foure and fiue times an houre ha'they made mee dance the Philosphicall circle, like an Ape through a hoope, or a dogge in a wheele. I am their turne-spit indeed: They eate or smell no rost-meate but in my name. I am their bill of credit still, that passes for their victuals and house-roome. It is through mee, they ha 'got this corner o'the Court to coozen in, where they sharke for a hungry diet below staires, and cheat vpon your vnder-Officers, promising mountaines for their meat, and all vpon Mercuries security. A poore Page o' the Larder, they haue made obstinately beleeue, he shalbe Phisician for the Houshold, next Summer: they will giue him a quantity of the quintessence, shall serue him to cure kibes,

or the mormall o'the shinne, take away the pustles i' the nose, and Mercury is ingag'd for it. A child o' the Scullery steales all their coales for 'hem too, and he is bid sleepe secure, hee shall finde a corner o' the Philosophers stone for't, vnder his bolster, one day, and haue the Prouerbe inuerted. Against which, one day I am to deliuer the Buttry in, so many firkins of Aurum potabile, as it deliuers out Bombards of Budge to them, betweene this and that. For the Pantry, they are at a certaintie with mee, and keepe a Tally, An Ingot, a loafe, or a wedge of some fiue pound weight, which is nothing of nothing, a trifle. And so the Blacke guard are pleased with a any lease of life (for some 999.) especially those o' the boyling house, they are to haue Medeas kettle hung vp, that they may souse into it when they will, and come out renew'd like so many strip'd Snakes at their pleasure. But these are petty Engagements, and (as I saide) below the staires; Marry aboue here, Perpetuity of beauty, (doe you heare, Ladies) health, Riches, Honours, a matter of Immortality is nothing. They will calcine you a graue matron (as it might bee a mother o' the maides) and spring vp a yong virgin, out of her ashes, as fresh as a Phoenix: Lay you an old Courtier o' the coales like a sausedge, or a bloat-herring, and after they ha' broil'd him enough, blow a soule into him with a paire of bellowes, till hee start vp into his galliard, that was made when Mounsieur was here. They professe familiarly to melt down all the old sinners o' the suburbes once in halfe a yeere, into fresh gamesters againe. Get all the crack'd maiden-heads, and cast'hem into new Ingots, halfe the wenches o' the towne are Alchymie. See, they begin to muster againe, and draw their forces out against me! The Genius of the place defend me. You that are both the Sol and Iupiter of this spheare Mercury, inuokes your maiesty against the sooty Tribe here; for in your fauour onely, I growe recouer'd and warme.
                     
                     
                        At which time Vulcan entring with a troupe of threedbare Alchymists, prepares them to the first Antimasque.
                     
                        VVLCAN.
                        BEgin your charme, sound musique, circle him in, and take him: If he will not obey, bind him.
                     
                     
                        They all danc'd about Mercury with varietie of changes, whilst he defends himselfe with his Caducaeus, and after the dance spake.
                     
                     
                        MERCVRIE.
                        IT is in vaine, Vulcan, to pitch your net in the sight of the fowle thus: I am no sleepy Mars, to be catch'd i'your subtile toyes. I know what your aymes are, Sir, to teare the wings from my head, and heeles, and lute mee vp in a glasse, with my owne seales, while you might wrest the Caducaeus out of my hand, to the adultery and spoile of Nature, and make your accesses by it, to her dishonour, more easie. Sir, would you beleeue, it should be come to that height of impudence, in mankind, that such a nest of firewormes, as these are (because their Patron Mulciber heretofore has made

stooles stirre, and statues dance, a dog of brasse to barke, and (which some will say, was his worst acte, a woman to speake) should therefore with their heats cal'd Balnei, cineris, or horse-doung, professe to outworke the Sunne in vertue, and contend to the great act of generation, nay, almost creation? it is so, though. For, in yonder vessels which you see, in their laboratorie, they haue inclos'd Materials, to produce men, beyond the deedes of Deucalion, or Prometheus (of which, one, they say, had the Philosophers stone, and threw it ouer his shoulder, the other the fire, and lost it.) And what men are they, they are so busie about, thinke you? not common or ordinary creatures, but of rarity and excellence, such as the times wanted, and the Age had a speciall deale of neede of: such, as there was a necessitie, they should be artificiall; for Nature could neuer haue thought or dreamt o' their composition. I can remember some o' their titles to you, and the ingredients doe not looke for Paracelsus man among 'hem, that he promised you out of white bread, and dele-wine, for hee neuer came to light. But of these, let me see; the first that occurres; a master of the Duel, a carrier of the differencies. To him went spirit of ale, a good quantitie, with the amalgama of sugar and nutmegs, oyle of othes, sulphure of quarrell, strong waters, valour precipitate, vapor'd o're the helme with tobacco, and the rosin of Mars with a dram o'the businesse, for that's the word of tincture, the businesse. Let me alone with the businesse, I will carrie the businesse. I doe vnderstand the businesse. I doe finde an affront i' the businesse. Then another is a fencer i' the Mathematiques, or the townes-cunning-man, a creature of arte too; a supposed secretary to the starres; but, indeed, a kind of lying Intelligencer from those parts. His materials, if I be not deceiu'd, were iuyce of almanacks, extraction of Ephemerides, scales of the Globe, fylings of figures, dust o'the twelue houses, conserue of questions, salt of confederacy, a pound of aduenture, a graine of skill, and a drop of trueth. I saw vegitals too, aswell as minerals, put into one glasse there, as adders tongue, title-bane, nitre of clyents, tartar of false conueyance, Aurum palpabile, with a huge deale of talke, to which they added tincture of conscience, with the faces of honesty; but for what this was, I could not learne; onely I haue ouer-heard one o' the Artists say, Out o'the corruption of a Lawyer was the best generation of a Broker in suits: whether this were he or no, I know not.
                     
                     
                        VVLCAN.
                        THou art a scorner, Mercury, and out of the pride of thy protection here, mak'st it thy study, to reuile Art, but it will turne to thine owne contumely soone. Call forth the creatures of the first classe, and let them moue to the harmony of our heat, till the slanderer haue seal'd vp his owne lips, to his owne torment.
                     
                     
                        MERCVRY.
                        LEt 'hem come, let 'hem come, I would not wish a greater punishment to thy impudence.
                     
                     
                     
                        There enters the second Antimasque of imperfect creatures, with helmes of lymbecks on their heads: Whose dance ended,
                     
                     
                        MERCVRY proceeded.
                        
                        ARt thou not asham'd, Vulcan, to offer in defence of thy fire and Art, against the excellence of the Sunne and Nature, creatures more imperfect, then the very flies and insects, that are her trespasses and scapes? Vanish with thy insolence, thou and thy Impostors, and all mention of you melt, before the Maiesty of this light, whose Mercury henceforth I professe to be, and neuer againe the Philosophers. Vanish, I say, that all who haue but their senses, may see and iudge the difference betweene thy ridiculous monsters, and his absolute features.
                     
                     
                        At which the whole Scene changed to a glorious bowre, wherein Nature was placed, with Prometheus at her feete; And the twelue Masquers, standing about them. After they had bene a while viewed, Prometheus descended, and Nature after him, singing.
                     
                     
                        NATVRE.
                        HOw yong and fresh am I to night,
                        To see't kept day, by so much light,
                        And twelue my sonnes stand in their Makers sight?
                        Helpe, wise Prometheus, something must be done,
                        To shew they are the creatures of the Sunne,
                        That each to other
                        Is a brother,
                        And Nature here no stepdame, but a mother.
                        
                           CHORVS.
Come forth, come forth, proue all the numbers then,
                        That make perfection vp, and may absolue you men.
                        But shew thy winding wayes and artes,
                        Thy risings, and thy timely startes
                        Of stealing fire, from Ladies eyes and hearts.
                        Those softer circles are the yong mans heauen,
                        And there more orbes and Planets are then seuen,
                        To know whose motion
                        Were a Notion
                        As worthy of youthes study, as deuotion.
                        
                           CHORVS.
Come forth, come forth, proue all the time will gaine,
                        For Nature bids the best, and neuer bad in vaine.
                     
                     The first dance.
                     After which this song.
                     PROMETHEVS. NATVRE.
                     
                        PRO.
                        HOw many, 'mongst these Ladies here,
                        Wish now they such a mother were!
                     
                     
                        NA.
                        Not one I feare,
                        
                        And read it in their laughters.
                        Ther's more I guesse would wish to be my daughters.
                     
                     
                        PRO.
                        You thinke they would not be so old, for so much glory.
                     
                     
                        NA.
                        I thinke that thought so told
                        Is no false piece of story.
                        'Tis yet with them, but Beauties noone,
                        They would not Grandames be too soone.
                     
                     
                        PRO.
                        Is that your Sexes humor?
                        'Tis then since Niobe was chang'd that they haue left that tumor.
                     
                     
                        CHO.
                        Moue, moue againe, in formes as heretofore.
                     
                     
                        NA.
                        'Tis forme allures.
                        Then moue, the Ladies here are store.
                     
                     
                        PRO.
                        
                           Nature is motions mother, as she is your's.
                     
                     
                        CHO.
                        The spring, whence order flowes, that all directs,
                        And knits the causes with th'effects.
                     
                     The maine dance.
                     Then dancing with the Ladies;
                     Then their last dance.
                     
                        After which, Prometheus calls to them in song.
                     
                     
                        PROMETHEVS.
                        WHat'ha you done
                        So soone?
                        And can you from such Beauty part?
                        You'll doe a wonder more then I.
                        I woman with her ills did flie,
                        But you their good, and them denie.
                     
                     
                        CHO.
                        Sure each hath left his heart
                        In pawne to come againe, or els he durst not start.
                     
                     
                        NATVRE.
                        THey are loth to goe
                        I know,
                        Or sure they are no sonnes of mine.
                        There is no banquet, boyes like this,
                        If you hope better, you will misse,
                        Stay here, and take each one a kisse.
                     
                     
                        CHO.
                        Which if you can refine,
                        The taste knowes no such cates, nor yet the pallate wine.
                        No cause of tarrying shun,
                        They are not worth his light, goe backward from the Sun.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE GOLDEN AGE RESTOR'D. In a Maske at Court, 1615. by the Lords, and Gentlemen, the Kings seruants. Lowd musique.
                     
                        PALLAS
                        in her chariot descending.
                        To a softer musique.
                        
                           
                              LOoke, looke! reioyce, and wonder!
                           That you offending mortalls are,
                           (For all your crimes) so much the care
                           Of him, that beares the thunder!
                        
                        
                           IOVE can endure no longer,
                           Your great ones should your lesse inuade,
                           Or, that your weake, though bad, be made
                           A prey vnto the stronger.
                           And therefore, meanes to settle
                           ASTRAEA in her seat againe;
                           And let downe in his golden chaine
                           The age of better mettle.
                        
                        
                           Which deed he doth the rather,
                           That euen enuie may behold
                           Time not enioy'd his head of gold
                           Alone beneath his father.
                        
                        
                           But that his care conserueth
                           As time, so all times honors too,
                           Regarding still what heau'n should doo,
                           And not what earth deserueth.
                        
                        A tumult and clashing of armes, heard within.
                        
                           But harke, what tumult from yond' caue is heard!
                           What noise, what strife, what earth-quake and alarmes!
                           As troubled Nature, for her maker, fear'd;
                           And all the iron-age were vp in armes!
                        
                        
                           Hide me, soft cloud, from their prophaner eyes,
                           Till insolent rebellion take the field,
                           And as their spirits, with their counsels, rise,
                           I frustrate all, with shewing but my shield.
                        
                     
                     
                        Iron age
                        presents it selfe, calling forth the Euills.
                        
                        COme forth, come forth, doe we not heare
                        What purpose, and, how worth our feare,
                        The King of gods hath on vs?
                        Hee is not of the iron breed
                        That would, though Fate did helpe the deed
                        Let shame in so vpon vs.
                        
                        Rise, rise then vp, thou Grandame vice
                        Of all my issue, Auarice,
                        Bring with thee fraud and slander,
                        Corruption with the golden hands
                        Or any subtle
                              •
                           ill, that stands
                        To be a more commander.
                        Thy boyes, Ambition, Pride, and Scorne,
                        Force, Rapine, and thy babe last borne,
                        Smooth Trecherie call hither,
                        Arme Folly forth, and Ignorance,
                        And teach them all our Pyrrhick dance,
                        We may triumph together,
                        Vpon this enemie so great,
                        Whom, if our forces can defeat,
                        And but this once bring vnder,
                        Wee are the masters of the skyes,
                        Where all the wealth, height, power, lyes,
                        The scepter, and the thunder.
                        Which of you would not in a warre
                        Attempt the price of any scarre,
                        To keepe your owne states euen?
                        But, heere, which of you is that hee,
                        Would not himselfe the weapon bee,
                        To ruine IOVE and heauen?
                        About it then, and let him feele,
                        The iron-age is turn'd to steele,
                        Since he begins to threat her:
                        And though the bodies here are lesse
                        Then were the Giants; hee'l confesse
                        Our malice is farre greater.
                     
                     The Antimasque, and their dance, two drummes, trumpets, and a confusion of martiall musique: at the end of which
                     
                        PALLAS
                        shewing her shield.
                        SO change, and perish, scarcely knowing, how,
                        That'gainst the gods doe take so vaine a vow:
                        And thinke to equall with your mortall dates,
                        Their liues that are obnoxious to no fates,
                        'Twas time t'appeare, and let their follies see
                        'Gainst whom they fought, and with what destinee
                        Die all, the can-remaine of you, but stone,
                        And that be seene a while, and then be none.
                        They metamorphos'd, and the scene chang'd, shee calls Astraea and the golden age.
                        Now, now, descend you both belou'd of IOVE,
                        And of the good on earth no lesse the loue,
                        Descend you long long wish'd, and wanted paire,
                        And as your softer times diuide the aire,
                        
                        So shake all clouds off, with your golden haire,
                        For spight is spent: the iron age is fled,
                        And, with her power on earth, her name is dead.
                     
                     1. ASTRAEA. 2. AGE descending.
                     
                        1.2.
                        And are we then,
                        To liue agen,
                        With men?
                     
                     
                        1.
                        Will IOVE such pledges to the earth restore
                        As iustice?
                     
                     
                        2.
                        or the purer ore?
                     
                     
                        PALLAS.
                        Once more.
                     
                     ASTRAEA. AGE.
                     
                        2.
                        But doe they know,
                        How much they owe,
                        Belowe?
                     
                     
                        1.
                        And will of grace receiue it, not as due?
                     
                     
                        PALLAS.
                        If not, they harme themselues, not you.
                     
                     ASTRAEA. AGE.
                     
                        1.
                        True.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        True.
                     
                     
                        QVIRE.
                        Let narrow Natures (how they will) mistake,
                        The great should still be good for their owne sake.
                     
                     They are descended.
                     
                        PALLAS.
                        Welcome to earth and raigne.
                     
                     
                        ASTRAEA. AGE.
                        But how without a traine
                        Shall we our state sustaine?
                     
                     
                        PALLAS.
                        Leaue that to IOVE: therein you are
                        No little part of his MINERVA'S care.
                        Expect a while.
                        Shee calls the Poets.
                        You farre-fam'd spirits of this happie Ile,
                        That, for your sacred songs haue gain'd the stile
                        Of PHOEBVS sons: whose notes they aire aspire
                        Of th'old Aegyptian, or the Thracian lyre,
                        That Chaucer, Gower, Lidgate, Spencer hight
                        Put on your better flames, and larger light,
                        To waite vpon the age that shall your names new nourish,
                        Since vertue prest shall grow, and buried arts shall flourish.
                     
                     Poets descend.
                     
                        2.
                        We come.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        We come.
                     
                     
                        4.
                        Our best of fire
                        Is that which PALLAS doth inspire.
                     
                     
                        
                        PALLAS.
                        Then see you yonder soules, set far within the shade,
                        And in Elysian bowres the blessed seates doe keepe,
                        That for their liuing good, now semigods are made,
                        And went away from earth, as if but tam'd with sleepe:
                        These we must ioyne to wake; for these are of the straine
                        That iustice dare defend, and will the age sustaine.
                     
                     
                        THE QVIRE.
                        Awake, awake, for whom these times were kept,
                        O wake, wake, wake, as you had neuer slept,
                        Make haste and put on arie, to be their guard,
                        Whom once but to defend, is still reward.
                     
                     
                        PALLAS.
                        Thus PALLAS throwes a lightning from her shield.
                     
                     
                        QVIRE.
                        The Scene of light discouered.
                        To which let all that doubtfull darknesse yeeld. 
                     
                     1. ASTREA. 2. AGE.
                     
                        1.
                        Now peace.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        and loue,
                     
                     
                        1.
                        faith.
                     
                     
                        2.
                        Ioyes,
                     
                     
                        1.2.
                        all all increase.
                     
                     POETS.
                     
                        2.
                        And strife
                     
                     
                        2.
                        and hate,
                     
                     
                        2.
                        and feare,
                     
                     
                        2.
                        and paine,
                     
                     
                        4.
                        all cease.
                     
                     
                        PALLAS.
                        A pause.
                        No tumour of an yron vaine.
                        The causes shall not come againe.
                     
                     
                        QVIRE.
                        But, as of old, all now be gold.
                        Moue, moue then to these sounds.
                        And, doe, not onely, walke your solemne rounds,
                        But giue those light and ayrie bounds,
                        That fit the Genij of these gladder grounds.
                        
                           The first dance; after which PALLAS.
                        Alreadie? Doe not all things smile?
                     
                     
                        ASTRAEA.
                        But when they haue enioy'd a while,
                        The ages quickning power:
                     
                     
                        AGE.
                        That euery thought a seede doth bring,
                        And euery looke a plant doth spring,
                        And euery breath a flower:
                     
                     
                        PALLAS.
                        Then earth vnplough'd shall yeeld her crop,
                        Pure honey from the oake shall drop,
                        The fountaine shall runne milke:
                        The thistle shall the lilly beare,
                        And euery bramble roses weare,
                        And euery worme make silke.
                     
                     
                        
                        QVIRE.
                        The verie shrub shall Balsame sweat,
                        And Nectar melt the rocke with heat,
                        Till earth haue drunke her fill:
                        That she no harmefull weed may know,
                        Nor barren Ferne, nor Mandrake low,
                        Nor Minerall to kill.
                     
                     The maine daunce, after which,
                     
                        PALLAS.
                        But here's not all: you must doe more,
                        Or else you doe but halfe restore
                        The ages libertie.
                     
                     
                        POETS.
                        The male and female vs'd to ioyne,
                        And into all delight did coyne
                        That pure simplicitie.
                        Then feature did to forme aduance,
                        And youth call'd beautie forth to dance,
                        And euerie grace was by.
                        It was a time of no distrust,
                        So much of loue had nought of lust,
                        None fear'd a iealous eye.
                        The language melted in the eare,
                        Yet all without a blush might heare,
                        They liu'd with open vow.
                     
                     
                        QVIRE.
                        Each touch and kisse was so well plac'd,
                        They were as sweet as they were chast,
                        And such must yours be now.
                     
                     Dance with Ladies.
                     
                        ASTRAEA.
                        
                           What change is here! I had not more
                           Desire to leaue the earth before,
                           Then I haue now, to stay;
                           My siluer feet, like roots, are wreath'd
                           Into the ground, my wings are sheath'd,
                           And I cannot away.
                        
                        
                           Of all there seemes a second birth,
                           It is become a heau'n on earth,
                           And Ioue is present here,
                           
                           I feele the Godhead: nor will doubt
                           But he can fill the place throughout,
                           Whose power is euery where.
                        
                        
                           This, this, and onely such as this,
                           The bright Astraea's region is,
                           Where she would pray to liue,
                           And in the midd'st of so much gold,
                           Vnbought with grace or feare vnsold▪
                           
                           The law to mortals giue.
                        
                        Galliards and Coranto's.
                        PALLAS ascending calls them.
                        
                        
                           'Tis now inough, behold you here,
                           What IOVE hath built to be your sphere,
                           You hither must retire.
                           And as his bountie giues you cause,
                           Be readie still without your pause
                           To shew the world your fire.
                        
                        
                           Like lights about ASTRAEA'S throne,
                           You here must shine, and all be one,
                           In feruor and in flame.
                           That by your vnion she may grow,
                           And, you sustaining her, may know,
                           The age still by her name.
                        
                        
                           Who vowes, against, or heat or cold,
                           To spin you garments of her gold,
                           That want may touch you neuer,
                           And making garlands euery hower,
                           To write your names in some new flower,
                           That you may liue for euer.
                        
                     
                     
                        QVIRE.
                        To Ioue, to Ioue, be all the honour giuen,
                        That thankefull hearts can raise from earth to heauen.
                     
                  
                  The end.
                  
                  
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   