
      
         
            
            
            HYMENAEI:
OR
The Solemnities of
Masque, and Barriers,
            
            Magnificently performed on the eleventh,
and twelfth Nights, from Christmas;
            At Court:
            To the auspicious celebrating of the Marriage-vnion,
betweene Robert, Earle of Essex, and
the Lady Frances, second Daughter to
the most noble Earle of
Suffolke.
            
            By BEN: IONSON.
            Iam veniet Virgo, iam dicetur Hymenaeus.
            AT LONDON
Printed by Valentine Sims for Thomas Thorp.
1606.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            HYMENAEI.
            
               IT is a noble and iust advantage,
that the things subjected
to Vnderstanding have
of those which are objected
to Sense, that the one
sorte are but momentarie,
and meerely taking; the
other impressing, and lasting:
Else the Glory of all these Solemnities had
perish'd like a Blaze, and gone out, in the Beholders
eyes. So short-liv'd are the Bodies of all
Thinges, in comparison of their Soules. And,
though Bodies oft-times have the ill lucke to be
sensually preferr'd, they find afterwards, the good
fortune (when Soules live) to be vtterly forgotten.
This it is hath made the most royall Princes, and
greatest Persons, (who are commonly the Personaters
of these Actions) not onely studious of Riches,
and Magnificence in the outward Celebration, or
Shew; (which rightly becomes them) but curious
after the most high, and hearty Inventions, to
furnish the inward parts: (and those grounded vpon
Antiquitie, and solide Learnings) which, though
their Voyce be taught to sound to present Occasions,
their Sense, or dooth, or should alwayes lay
holde on more remov'd Mysteries. And, howsoever
some may squeamishly cry out, that all Endevor
of Learning, and Sharpnesse in these transitory

               Devises especially, where it steppes beyond their
little, or (let me not wrong 'hem) no Braine at all
is superfluous; I am contented, these fastidious
Stomachs should leave my full Tables, and enioy
at home, their cleane empty Trenchers, fittest for
such airy Tasts: where perhaps a few Italian Herbs,
pick'd vp, & made into a Sallade, may find sweeter
acceptance, than al, the most norishing, and sound
Meates of the world.
            For these Mens palates, let not mee answere, O
Muses. It is not my fault, if I fill them out Nectar,
and they runne to Metheglin.
               Vaticana bibant, si delectentur.
            
            All the curtesie I can doe them, is to cry, againe;
Praetereant, si quid non facit ad stomachum.
            
            As I wil, from the thought of them, to my better
Subject.
            ON the Night of the Masques (which were two,
One of Men, the Other of Women) the Scene
being drawne, there was first discovered an Altar;
vpon which was inscribed, in Letters of Gold.
            
               Mystically implying, that both It, the Place, and all the succeeding Ceremonies vvere sacred to Marriage, or VNION; over vvhich IVNO vvas praesident: to vvhom there vvas the like Altar erected, at Rome, as she vvas called IVGA IVNO, in the Street, vvhich thence, vvas named lugarius. See Fest. and, at vvhich Altar, the Rite vvas to ioyne the maried Paire vvith bands of silke, in signe of future Concord.
                I. oni. O. imae. M. imae.
VNIONI
SACR.
            To this Altar entred five Pages, attir'd in white,

bearingThose vvere the Quinque Cer
                        •
                     i, vvhich Plutarch in his Quaest. Roman. mentions to be vsed in Nup ti
                        •
                     lls.
                five Tapers of Virgine Waxe; Behinde
them, One representing a Bridegroome: HisThe dressing of the Bridegroome (vvith the Antients) vvas chiefly noted in that, quód tonderetur. lu. Sat. 6. lám
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      à Tonsore magistro Pecteris. And Lucan. li. 2. VVhere he makes Cato negligent of the Ceremonies in Marriage, sayth, Ille nec horrificam sancto dimovit abore Caesar
                        •
                     em.
                haire
short, and bound with party-coloured ribbands,
and gold twist: His Garments purple, and white.
            On the other hand, entred HYMEN (the God of
Marriage) in a saffron-coloured Robe, his vnder-Vestures
white, his Sockes yellow, a yellow Veile
of silke on his left arme, his Head crowned with
Roses, and
                  See hovv he is called out, by Catullus in Nupt. Iul. & Manl. Cinge tempora floribus Suave olentis amaraci &c. 
               Marioram, in his right hand a Torch
of
                  For so I preserve the Reading, there, in Catull. P
                     •
                  eam quate taedam, rather than to change it Spineam; and mooved by the authoritie of Virg. in Ciri, vvhere he sayes, Pronuba nec castos incendet Pinus amores: and Ovid. Fast. lib 
                     •
                  . Expectet puros pinea taeda dies. Though I deny not, there vvas also Spineataeda, vvhich Plinie calles Nuptiarum facibus auspicatissimam. Nat. Hist lib. 16. cap 18. and vvhereof Sextus Pompeius Fest. hath left so particular testimonie. For vvhich, see the follovving Note. Pine tree.
            After him
                  This (by the Antients) vvas called Camillus, quasi Minister (for so that signified in the Hetruriā tong) and vvas one of the three, vvhich by Sex. Pompei. vvere said to be Patrimi
& Matrimi, Pueri praete
                     •
                  tati tres, qui nubentem deducunt: Vnus, qui facem praefert
ex spinâ albâ, Duo qui tenent nubentem. To vvhich conferre that of Varr. lib. 6. de lingua
Lat. Dicitur in nuptijs Camillus, qui Cumerum fert: as also that of Fest. lib. 3. Cumeram
vocabant Antiqui vas quoddam, quod opertum in Nuptijs ferebant, in qu
                     •
                   erant nubentis
vtensilia, quod & Camillum dicebant
                     ••
                  
                  
                     •
                   quod sacrorum Ministrum 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   appell
                     •
                  
                  bant. 
               a Youth, attired in white, bearing
another Light, of white Thorne; vnder his arme, a
litle wicker-Flasket, shut: Behind him two Others,
in white, the one bearing a Distaffe, the other a
Spindle. Betwixt these a Personated Bride, supported,
her haire flowing, and loose, sprinckled with
grey; on her head a Gyrland of Roses, like a Turret;
her Garments white: and, on her back, a Weathers

Fleece hanging downe: Her Zone, or Girdle
about her waste of white wooll, fastned with the
Herculean Knot.
            In the middst went the
                  Auspices vver those that hād fasted the maried Couple; that vvished thē 
                  good lucke; that took care for the Dowry: and heard thē professe that they came together, for the Cause of Children. Iuven. Sat 10. Veniet cum signatoribus Auspex. And Lucan. lib. 2. Iungunturtaciti, contenti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Auspice Bruto. They vvere also stilld Pronubi, Proxenetae, P
                        •
                     
                     ranymphi.
                
               Auspices; after them,
two that sung, in severall colored silks. Of which,
One bore the Water, the Other the Fire: Last of
all the
                  The Custome of Musike at Nuptials, is cleare in all Antiquitie. Ter. Adel. Act. 5. Verum hoc mihi mora est, Tibicina, & Hym
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  um qui cantent. And Claud. in Epithal. Ducant pervigiles carmina Tibiae &c. 
               Musitians, diversly attired, all crowned
with Roses; and, with this Song beganne.
            
               
                  
                     
                        SONG.
                        BId all profane away;
                        None here may stay
                        To view our Mysteries,
                        
                        But, who themselues have beene,
                        Or will, in Time, be seene
                        The selfe-same Sacrifice.
                        
                        For VNION, Mistris of these Rites,
                        Will be observ'd with Eyes,
                        As simple as her Nights.
                        
                           Chorus.
                           Flie then, all profane, away,
                           Flie farre off, as hath the Day;
                           
                              Night her Cortine doth display,
                           And this is HYMENS Holiday.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
The Song being ended, HYMEN presented him
selfe formost; and, after some signe of Admiration,
beganne to speake.
            
               HYMEN.
               
                  VVHat more than vsuall Light
                  (Throughout the Place extended)
                  Makes IVNO'S Fane so bright!
                  Is there some greater Deitie descended?
               
               
                  Orraigne, on earth, those Powers
                  
                  So rich, as with their beames
                  Grace VNION more than our's;
                  And bound her Influence, in their happier streames?
               
               
                  Tis so: This same is he,
                  The King, and Priest of Peace!
                  
                  And that his Empresse, she,
                  That sits so crowned with her owne increase!
               
               
                  O you, whose better Blisses,
                  Have proov'd the strict embrace
                  Of VNION, with chaste kisses,
                  And seene it flowe so in your happy Race;
                  
               
               
                  That know, how well it bindes
                  
                     The fighting Seedes of Things,
                  
                     Winnes Natures, Sexes, Mindes,
                  And ev'ry discord in true Musique brings:
               
               
                  
                  Sit now propitious Aydes,
                  
                  To Rites, so duely priz'd;
                  And view two Noble Maydes,
                  
                  Of different Sexe, to VNION sacrifiz'd.
                  In honour of that blest Estate,
                  
                  Which all Good Mindes should celebrate.
               
            
            Here out of a Microcosme, or Globe (figuring
Man) with a kind of contentious Musique, issued
forth the first Masque, of eight Men, whose Names
in order, as they were then Marshalled, by Couples,
I have Heraldry enough to set downe.

                  1 L. WILLOVGHBY.
                  2 LO. WALDEN.
                  3 Sir IAMES HAY.
                  4 Ear. of MONGOMERY.
                  Sir THOMAS HOVVARD.
                  Sir THOMAS SOMERSET.
                  Ear. of ARVNDELL.
                  Sir IOHN ASHLY.
               
            
            These represented the foureThat they vvere personated in m
                     •
                  n, 
                     •
                  ath (already) come vnder some Gramatical exception. 
                     •
                  ut there is more than Gramar to release it. For, besides that Humores and Affectus are both Masculine in Genere, not one of the Spe
                        ••
                     
                     
                        •
                     lls, but in some Language is knovvne by a Masculine vvord: Againe, vvhen their I
                        ••••
                     ences are common to both Sexes, and more generally impetuous in the Male, I see not, vvhy they should not, so, be more properly presented. And, for the Allegory, though here it be very cleare, and such as might vvell escape a Candle, yet because there are some, must complain of Darknes, that have but thick Eies, I am contented to hold them this L
                     ••
                  h
                     •
                   First, as in Naturall Bodies, so likevvise in Mindes, there is no disease, or distemperature, but is caused either by som abounding Humor, or perverse Affection; After the same maner, in Poli
                        ••
                     ke Bodies (vvhere Order, Ceremony, State, Revere
                        ••
                     e, Devotion, are Parts of the Mind) by the diffrence, or praedominant Wil of vvhat vve (Meta
                        •
                     horically) call Humors, and Affections, all things are troubled and confusd. These, ther
                     ••
                  ore, were Tropically brought in, before Marriage, as disturbers of that Mysticall Body, and the Rit
                        •
                     s, vvhich vvere Soule vnto it; that aftervvards, in Marriage, being dut
                     ••
                  ully temp
                     •
                  ed by hir Power, they might more fully celebrate the happines of such as live in that svveet Vnion, to the harmonious Lavvs of Nature, and Reason. 
               Humors, & foure
Affections, all gloriously attired, distinguisht only,

by their severall Ensignes, and Colours; And, dauncing
out on the Stage, in their returne, at the end
of their Daunce, drew all their swordes, offered to
encompasse the Altar, and disturbe the Ceremonies.
at which HYMEN troubled, spake,
            
               HYMEN.
               SAve, save the Virgins; Keepe your hal
                     •
                  ow'd Lights
               Vntouch'd: And with their flame defend our Rites.
               
               The foure vntempred Humors are broke out:
               And, with their wild Affections, goe about
               To ravish all Religion. If there be
               A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Bodie,
               Or little World of Man, from whence these came,
               Looke forth, and with thy bright andAlluding to that opinion of Pythagoras; vvho held all Reason, all Kn
                           •
                        wledge, all Discourse of the Soule to be mere Number. See Plut. de Plac. Phil.
                   numerous flame
               Instruct their Darkenesse, make them know, and see,
               In wronging these, they have rebell'd gainst thee.
            
            Hereat, REASON seated in the top of the Globe
(as in the braine, or highest parte of Man) figur'd
in a venerable Personage, her haire white, and trayling
to her waste, crowned with Lights, her Garments
blew, and semined with Star
                  •
               es, girded vnto
her with a white Bend, fill'd with Arithmeticall
Figures, in one hand bearing a Lampe, in the other
a bright Sword, descended, and spake.
            
               REASON.
               FOrbeare your rude attempt; what Ignorance
               Could yeelde you so profane, as to advance
               One thought in Act, against these Mysteries?
               
               
                  
Are VNION'S
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , vvith the Greekes value the same, that Ceremoniae vvith the Latines; and imply all sorts of Rites: howsoeuer (abusively) they have beene made particular to Bacc
                           •
                        us. See Serv. to that of Vir. Aene
                           •
                        d. 4. qualis commotis excita sacris Thyas.
                   
                  Orgies of so slender price?
               She that makes Soules, with Bodies, mixe in Love,
               Contracts the World in one, and therein IOVE;
               
               IsMac. in som. Scipion. lib. 1. 
                  Spring, and End of all Things yet, most strange!
               Her selfe nor suffers Spring, nor End, nor Change.
               
               No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
               For none but Humors and Affections would
               Have dar'd so rash a venture. You will say
               It was your Zeale, that gave your powers the sway;
               And vrge the masqued, and disguisd pretence
               Of saving Bloud, and succ'ring Innocence?
               So want of Knowledge, still, begetteth iarres,
               When humorous Earthlings will controle the Starres.
               Informe your selves, with safer Reverence,
               To these mysterious Rites, whose mysticke sense
               
                  REASON (which all things but it selfe) confounds)
               Shall cleare vnto you, from th'authentique grounds.
            
            At this, the Humors & Affections sheathed their
swordes, and retir'd amazed to the sides of the
Stage, while HYMEN began to ranke the Persons,
and order the Ceremonies: And REASON proceeded
to speake.
            
               REASON.
               THe Paire, which doe each other side,
               Though (yet) some space doth them divide,
               This happy Night must both make one
               Blest Sacrifice, to VNION.
               
               Nor is this Altar hut a Signe
               Of one more soft, and more divine
               
                  
TheProperly that, vvhich vvas made ready for the nevv-married Bride, and vvas calld Genialis, à Generandis liberis. Ser. in 
                           •
                        . Aeneid.
                   
                  Geniall Bed, where HYMEN keepes
               The solemne Orgies, voyd of sleepes:
               And wildest CVPID, waking, hovers
               With adoration 'twixt the Lovers.
               
               The Tead of white, and blooming Thorne,
               In token of increase is borne:
               As
                     See Ovid. Fast. lib. 6. Sic fatus, spinam, quâ tristes pellere pesset A foribu
                        •
                      noxas, 
                        •
                     aec 
                        •
                     rat alba, dedi
                        •
                     . also, with the omenous Light,
               To fright all Malice from the Night.
               
               Like are thePlutarch. in Quaest. Rom. And Var. lib. 4 de ling. Lat. 
                  Fire, and Water set;
               That, ev'n as Moysture, mixt with Heate,
               
               Helpes every Naturall Birth, to life;
               So, for their Race, ioyne Man, and Wife.
               
               TheP
                        ••
                     n. Nat. Hist. li. 21. ca. 8 blushing Veyle shewes shamefastnesse
               Th'ingenuous Virgin should professe
               At meeting with the Man: Her Haire
               ThatPomp. Fest. Br
                        •
                     ss Hotto. de Rit. Nup. flowes so liberall, and so faire,
               Is shed with grey, to intimate
               She entreth to a Matrons state.
               For which thoseVar lib. 6. de ling. Lat. and Fest. in Frag. 
                  Vtensills are borne.
               And, that shee should not Labour scorne,
               Her selfe aFest. ibid. 
                  Snowie Fleece doth weare,
               And these herPlutarch. in Quaest. Rom. & in Romul. 
                  Rocke and Spindle beare,
               To shew, that Nothing, which is good,
               Gives checke vnto the highest blood.
               ThePlin. Nat. Hist. li. 8. ca. 48 
                  Zone of wooll about her waste,
               Which, in contrary Circles cast,
               
                  Doth meete in one
                  That vvas Nodus Herculeanus, vvhich the Husband, at night, vntied in signe of good fortune, that hee might be happie in propagation of Issue, as Hercules vvas, vvho left seventie Children. See Fest. in voc. Cingul.
                   strong knot, that bindes,
               
               Tells you, so should all Married Mindes.
               
                  
And lastly, these five Waxen Lights
               
               Imply Perfection in the Rites;
               
               ForPlutarch. in Quaest. Rom. 
                  Five the speciall Number is,
               Whence halow'd VNION claymes her blisse.
               As being all the Summe, that growes
               From the vnited strengths, of those
               Which
                     See Mart. Capel. lib. 6. de Nupt. Phil. & M
                        •
                     r 
                        •
                     n numero Pentade. 
                  Male, and Female Numbers wee
               Do stile, and are First Two, and Three.
               
               Which, ioyned thus, you cannot sever
               In aequall partes, but One will ever
               Remaine as common; so we see
               The binding-force of Vnitie:
               
               For which alone, the peace-full Gods
               
               In Number, alwayes, love the oddes;
               And even partes as much despise,
               Since out of them all Discords rise.
            
            Here, the vpper part of the Scene, which was all
of Cloudes, and made artificially to swell, and
ride like the Racke, beganne to open; and, the
Ayre clearing, in the toppe thereof was discovered
With the Greekes; IVNO vvas interpreted to be the Ayre it selfe. And so Macr. de som. Scip
                        •
                     o. li. 1. c. 17. calls her. Mar. Cap. surnames her Aeria, of reigning there. IVNO, sitting in a Throne, supported by two
beautifullThey vvere sacred to IVNO, in respect of their colors, and temper so like the Aire. Ovid. de Arte Amand. Laudatas ostendit aves Iunonia pennas And Met. li. 2. Habili Saturnia curru Ingreditur liquidum pavonibus aethera pictis.
                
               Peacockes, her attire rich, and like a
Shee was call'd Regina IVNO vvith the Latines, because she vvas Sor
                        •
                     r & Coniux IOVIS, D
                        •
                     orum & h
                        •
                     minum Regis.
                Queene, aReade Apul. describing her, in his 10, of the Asse.
                white Diademe on her head, from
whence descended a Veyle, and that bound with

aAfter the manner of the antique Bend; the varied colors implying the severall mutations of the Ayre, as Shovvres, Devves, Serenitie, Force of vvinds, clouds Tempest, Snovv, Hayle, Lightning, Thunder, all vvhich had their noises signified in hir Timbrell: the 
                     •
                  aculty of causing these being ascribed to her, by Virg. Aeueid. lib. 4. vvhere he makes her say, His ego nigrantem commista grandine nimbum Desuper infundam, & tonitru Coelum omne ciebo.
                
               Fascia of severall color'd silkes, set with all sorts
of Iewelles, and raisd in the top with
                  Lillies vvere sacred to IVNO, as being made vvhite vvith her milke, that fell vpon the earth, vvhen IOVE tooke HERCVLES avvay, vvhome by stealth he had layd to her Breast: the Rose vvas also cal
                     •
                  'd Iunonia.
                
               Lillies, and
Roses; In her right hand she held a Scepter, in the
other a Timbrell, at her golden feete theSo vvas she figur'd at Argos, as a Stepmo
                        •
                     her insulting on the spoyles of her two Privigni, BACCHVS, and HERCVLES. Hide of
a Lion was placed: Round about her sate the Spirites
of the ayre, in severall colours, making Musique,
Above her the Region of Fire, with a continuall
Motion, was seene to whirle circularly, and
IVPITER standing in the Toppe (figuring the Heaven)
brandishing his Thunder: Beneath her the
Raine-bowe, IRIS, and, on the two sides eight Ladies,
attired richly, and alike in the most celestiall
colours, who represented her Powers, as she is the
See Virg. Aeneid. lib. 4. IVNONI ante omnes cui vin
                        •
                     la 
                        •
                     ugalia curae: and in another place, Dant signum prima & Tellus, & Pronuba IVNO: And Ovid. in Phill. Epist. IVNONEM
                     •
                   
                  que terris quae praesidet alma Maritis.
                
               Governesse of Marriage, and made the second
Masque. All which, vpon the discoverie, REASON
made narration of.
            
               REASON.
               ANd see, where IVNO, whose great Name
               Is VNIO, in the Anagram,
               
               Displayes her glistering State, and Chaire,
               As she enlightned all the Ayre!
               
               Harke how the charming Tunes doe beate
               In sacred Concords bout her seate!
               And loe! to grace what these intend,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                  
Eight of her Noblest Powers descend,
               
                  Which are
                  They vvere all eight call'd by particular Surnames of IVNO, ascribed to her for some peculiar propertie in Marriage, as somvvhere after is more fitly declared. 
                  enstil'd her Faculties,
               That governe nuptiall Mysteries;
               And weare those Masques before their faces,
               Lest, dazling Mortalls with their graces
               As they approach them, all Mankind
               
               Should be, like CVPID, stroken blinde.
               These ORDER waytes for, on the ground,
               To keepe, that you should not confound
               Their measur'd steppes, which onely move
               About th' harmonious sphaere of LOVE.
            
            The names of the eight Ladies, as they were after
orderd (to the most conspicuous shew) in their
Daunces, by the rule of their statures; were the

                  Co. of MONGOMERY.
                  
                  
                     Mi. CI. SACKVILE.
                  
                     La. DOR. HASTINGS.
                  Co. of BEDFORD.
                  
                  
                     La. KNOLLES.
                  
                     La. BERKLEY.
                  
                     La. BLANCH SOMERSET.
                  Co. of RVTLAND.
                  
               
            
            Their Descent was made in two great Cloudes,
that put forth themselves severally, and (with one
measure of time) were seene to stoupe, & fall gently
downe vpon the Earth. The maner of their Habites,
came after some Statues of IVNO, no lesse airie,
than glorious. The dressings of their Heades,
rare; so likewise of their Feete: and all full of splendor,
soveraignety, and riches. Whilst they were
descending, this Song was sung at the Altar.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                        SONG.
                        THese, these are they,
                        Whom Humor and Affection must obey;
                        Who come to decke the geniall Bower,
                        
                        And bring, with them, the gratefull Hower
                        
                        That crownes such Meetings, and excites
                        The married Paire to fresh Delights:
                        
                           As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Oths, & Vowes,
                        Soft Whisperings, Embracements, all the Ioyes,
                        
                        
                           And melting Toyes,
                        That chaster LOVE allowes.
                        
                           CHO. Hast, hast, for HESPERVS his head down bowes.
                     
                  
               
            
            The Song ended, they daunced forth in Paires,
and each Paire with a varied and noble grace; to
a rare and full Musique of twelve Lutes: led on by
ORDER, the Servant of REASON, who was, there,
rather a Person of Ceremony, than Vse. His vnder-Garment
was blew, his vpper white, and painted
full of Arithmeticall, and Geometricall Figures; his
Hayre, and Beard long, a Starre on his forehead,
and in his hand a Geometricall Staffe: To whom,
after the Daunce, REASON spake.
            
               REASON.
               COnvey them, ORDER, to their places,
               And ranke them so, in severall traces,
               As they may set their mixed Powers
               
               Vnto the Musique of the Howers;
               
               And THESE, by ioyning with them, know
               In better temper how to flow:
               Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
               
                  
Report the vertues of the Dames.
               
               First
                     
                        
                           •
                        his Surname IVNO receiv'd of the Sab
                        •
                     nes; from them, the Romanes gave it her: of the Speare, vvhich (in the Sabine tongue) vvas called Curis, and vvas that, vvhich they nam'd Hasta Caelibaris, vvhich had stuck in the Body of a slaine Svvord-player, and vvherewith the Brides Head vvas drest. vvhereof Fest. in Voce Celibar. gives these reasons, Vt quemadmodumilla co
                        •
                     uncta fuerit cum corpore Gladiatoris, sic ipsa cum Viro sit; vel quia Matronae IVNONIS Curitis in tutelâ sit, quae ita app
                        •
                     llabatur à ferenda hasta: vel qu
                        •
                     d fortes vir
                        •
                     s genitur as ominetur; v
                        •
                     l qu
                        •
                     d nuptiali iure imperio viri subijcitur Nubens, quià Hasta summa armorum, & imperij est, &c. To most of vvhich Plutarch in his Quaest. R
                        •
                     m. consents, but addes a better in Romul. That vvhen they divided the Brides haire vvith the poynt of the Speare, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , it noted their first Nuptialles (with the Sabines) were contracted by force, and as with Enemies. Hovvsoever, that it was a Custome with them, this of Ovid. Fast. lib. 2. confirmes. Comat Virgineas hasta recurva comas. 
                  CVRIS comes to decke the Brides faire Tresse.
               Care of the oyntmentsFor the Surname of VNXIA, vve have Mart. Capel. his Testimony, De Nupt. Phil. & Merc
                           •
                        . libr. 2. qu
                           •
                        d vnctionibus praeest: As also Servius, libro quarto Aeneid. vvhere they both report it a Fashion vvith the Romanes, that before the nevv-married Brides entred the houses of their Husbandes, they adorned the Postes of the Gates vvith vvoollen Tavvdries, or Fille
                        •
                     s, and annoynted them vvith Oyles, or the fatte of Wolves, and Bores; being superstitiously possest, that such Oyntments had the vertue of expelling Evilles from the Family: and thence vvere they called Vxores, quasi Vnxores.
                   VNXIA doth professe.
               
               
                  
                     Shee vvas named IVGA, propter Iugum, (as Servius sayes) for the yoke vvhich vvas imposd, in Matri
                        ••
                     ony, on those that vvere married, or (vvith Sex. Pomp Fest.) quòd Iuges sunt 
                        ••
                     usdem iugi Pares, vnde & Coniuges. or in respect of the Altar (to vvhich I have declar'd before) sacred to IVNO, in Vico Iugario. 
                  IVGA, her office to make One of Twaine:
               
                  As shee vvas GAMELIA, in sacrificing to her, they tooke avvay the Gall, and threvv it behinde the Altar; intimating, that (after Marriage) there shoulde be knovvne, no Bitternesse, nor Hatred betvveene the ioyned Couple, vvhich might divide, or seperate them: See Plu
                           •
                        arch. Connub. Prae. This Rite I have somevvhere follovving touch'd at. GAMELIA sees that they should so remaine.
               
               Faire
                     The Title of ITERDVCA shee had amongst them, quòd ad sponsi aedes, sponsas comitabatur; or vvas a Protectresse of their journey, Mart. Capel. De Nupt. Philolog. & Mercur. libro secundo. 
                  ITERDVCA leades the Bride her way;
               And
                     The like of DOMIDVCA, quòd ad optatas 
                        〈◊〉
                      duc
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     t. Mart. ibid. 
                  DOMIDVCA home her steppes doth stay:
               
                  
                  
                     CINXIA, the same Author gives vnto her, as the Defendresse of Maydes, vvhen they had put off their Girdle, in the Bridall Chamber; To vvhich, Festus. Cinxiae Iunonis nomen sanctum habebatur in Nuptijs, quod initio Coniugij solutio erat Cinguli, quo nova Nupta erat cincta. And Arnobius, a man most learned in their Ceremonies, lib. 3. advers. Gent. saith, Vnctionibus superest Vnxi
                        •
                     . Cinguloruus Cinxia replicationi. 
                  CINXIA the Maid, quit of her Zone defends;
               
                  TELIA signifies Perfecta, or, as some translate it, Perfectrix; vvith Iul. Pol. libr. 3. O
                           •
                        omast. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      valevves IVNO Praes
                           •
                        s Nuptiarum vvho sai h, the Attribute descends of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , vvhich (vvith the Antients) signified Marriage, and thence, vvere they called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that entred into that estate. Servius interprets it the same vvith GAMELIA, Aeneid. 4. ad verb. Et Iunone secundâ: But it implies much more, as including the faculty to mature, and perfect; See the Greeke Scholiaste on Pind. Nem. in Hym. ad Thyaeum Vliae filium Argi. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : that is, Nuptialls are therefore calld 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     because they effect Perf
                           •
                        ction of Life, and doe note that Maturity vvhich should be in Matrimony. For before Nuptialles, shee is called IVNO 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      that is, Virgo; after Nuptialls, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , vvhich is adulta, or Perf
                           •
                        cta.
                   TELIA (for HYMEN) perfects all, and ends.
               
            
            By this time, the Ladies were payred with the
Men, and the whole Sixteene rank'd foorth, in order,
to daunce: & were with this Song provok'd.
            
               
                  
                     
                        SONG.
                        NOw, now beginne to set
                        Your spirits in active heate;
                        And, since your Hands are met,
                        Instruct your nimble Feete,
                        In motions swift, and meete,
                        The happy ground to beate:
                        
                           Chorus.
                           Whilst all this Roofe doth ring,
                           And ech discording String,
                           With every varied Voyce,
                           In VNION doth rei
                                 •
                              yce.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
Here, they daunced forth a most neate and curious
Measure, full of Subtelty and Device; which
was so excellently performed, as it seemed to take
away that Spirite from the Invention, which the
Invention gave to it: and left it doubtfull, whether
the Formes flow'd more perfectly from the Authors
braine, or their feete. The Straines were all
notably different, some of them formed into Letters,
very signifying to the Name of the Bridgroom
                     •
                  ,
and ended in manner of a Chaine, linking
hands: To which, this was spoken.
            
               REASON.
               SVch was
                     Mentioned by HOMER, Ilia. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . vvhich many have interpreted diversely: all Allegorically; Pla. in Thaeteto, vnderstands it to be the Sunne, vvhich vvhile he circles the vvorlde in his course, all thinges are safe, and preserved: Others vary it. Macrob, (to vvhose interpretation, I am specially affected in my Allusion) considers it thus: in Som. Scip. libr. 1. cap. 14. Ergo cùm ex summo Deo mens, ex mente anima sit; anima ver
                        •
                      & condat, & vita compleat omnia quae sequuntur, cunctaque hic vnus fulgor illuminet, & in vniversis appareat, vt in multis speculis, 
                        •
                     er ordinem positis, vultus vnus; Cumque omnia continuis succession
                        ••
                     us se sequantur, degenerantia per ordinem ad imum meandi: invenietur pressius intuenti à summo Deo vsque ad vltimam rerum faecem vn
                        •
                      mutuis se vinculis religans, & nusquam interrupta connexio. Et haec est Hemeri Catena aurea, quam pendere de coelo in terras Deum ius
                        •
                     isse commemorat. To vvhich strengh and evennesle of connexion, I have not absurdly likened this vniting of Humors, and Affections, by the sacred Powers of Mariage. the Golden Chaine let down from Heaven;
               
               And not those Linkes more even,
               Then these: so sweetly temper'd, so combin'd
               By VNION, and refin'd.
               
                  Here no Contention, Envie, Griefe, Deceipt,
               Feare, Iealousie have weight;
               
               But all is Peace, and Love, and Faith, and Blisse:
               
               What Harmony like this?
               The Gall, behinde the Altar quite is throwne;
               This Sacrifice hath none.
               
                  
Now no Affections rage, nor Humors swell;
               But all composed dwell.
               O IVNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, IVNO! who
               
               Can merit with you two?
               Without your presence, VENVS can doe nought,
               Save what with shame is bought:
               No Father can himselfe a Parent show,
               Nor any House with prosp'rous Issue grow.
               O then! What Deities will dare
               With HYMEN, or with IVNO to compare?
            
            The speach being ended, they dissolv'd: and all
tooke forth other Persons, (Men, and Women,)
to daunce other Measures, Galliards, and Corranto's;
the whilst this Song importun'd them to a fit Remembrance
of the Time.
            
               
                  
                     
                        SONG.
                        Thinke, yet, how Night doth wast,
                        How much of Time is past,
                        What more then winged hast
                        Your selves would take,
                        If you were but to tast
                        The ioy, the Night doth cast
                        (O might it ever last)
                        On this bright Virgin, and her happy Make.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            Their Daunces yet lasting, they were the second
time importun'd, by Speach.
            
               
               REASON.
               
                  SSee, see! the bright
                  
                     Stella Veneris, or VENVS, vvhich vvhen it goes before the Sunne, is call'd Phosphorus, or Lucifer; vvhen it follovves, 
                        
                           •
                        esperus, or Noctifer (as Cat. translates it.) See Cic. 2. de Natu
                           •
                        Deor. Mar. Cap. de Nup. Phi. & Mer. libr. 8. The nature of this starre Pythag
                           •
                        ras first found out; and the present office Claud. expresseth in Fescen. Att
                           •
                        llens thalamis Idalium iubar dilectus Veneri nascitur Hesperus.
                   Idalian Starre,
               
               That lighteth Lovers to their Warre,
               Complaines, that you her influence loose;
               While thus the Night-sports you abuse.
            
            
               HYMEN.
               
                  THe longing Bridegroome,It vvas a Custome for the Man to stand there, expecting the approach of his Bride. See Hotto. de Rit. Nupt.
                   
                  in the Porch,
               
               Shewes you againe, the bated Torch;
               And thrice hath IVNO
                  
                     Alluding to that of Virg. Aeneid. 4. Prima & Tellus, & Pr
                        •
                     
                     nuba IVNO Dant signum: fulsere ignes, & conscius aether Connubij, &c. mixt her Ayre
               
               With Fire, to sommon your repaire.
            
            
               REASON.
               SEe, now she cleane withdrawes her Light;
               And (as you should) gives place to Night:
               
               That spreades her broad, and blackest wing
               Vpon the world, and comes to bring
               AStat. in Epit. Fu
                        •
                     cra, torosq
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     eae, tenerum premit agmen Amorum. And Claud. in Epith. P
                        •
                     nnati passim pueri, quo quem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      
                     
                        •
                     ocavit 
                        •
                     mbra, iacent. Both vvhich, prove the Antients faind many Cupids. Reade also Prop. E
                        ••
                     . 29. libr. 2. thousand severall-colour'd Loves,
               
               Some like Sparrowes, some like Doves,
               That hop about the Nuptiall-Roome,
               
               And flutt'ring there (against you come)
               
                  Warme the chaste Bowre, which
                  VENVS is so induced by Stat. Claud. and others, to celebrate Nuptialls. CYPRIA strowes,
               
               With many a Lilly, many a Rose.
            
            
               
               HYMEN.
               HAste therefore, haste, and call, Away:
               The gentle Night is prest to pay
               The vsurie of long Delights,
               She owes to these protracted Rites.
               
            
            At this (the whole Scene being drawne againe,
and all cover'd with Cloudes, as a Night,) they
left off their entermixed Daunces, and return'd to
their first Places; where, as they were but begining
to move, this Song, the third time, vrg'd them.
            
               
                  
                     
                        SONG.
                        O Know to end, as to beginne:
                        A Minutes losse, in Love, is sinne.
                        These Humors will the Night out weare
                        In their owne Pastimes here;
                        You doe our Rites much wrong,
                        In seeking to Prolong
                        These outward Pleasures:
                        The Night hath other Treasures
                        Then these (though long concea'ld)
                        Ere day, to be reveal'd.
                        Then, know to end, as to beginne;
                        A Minutes losse, in Love, is sinne.
                     
                  
               
            
            Here they daunc'd their last Daunces, full of excellent
delight and change, and, in their latter
straine, fell into a faire Orbe, or Circle; REASON standing
in the midst, and speaking.
            
               
               REASON.
               HEre stay, and let your Sports be crown'd:
               The perfect'st Figure is the Round.
               
               Nor fell you in it by adventer,
               When REASON was your Guide, and Center.
               
               
                  This, this that beauteous
                  VENVS Girdle, mentioned by Homer. Il
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . vvhich vvas fain'd to be variously vvrought vvith the Needle, and in it vvoven Love, Desire, Sweetnesse, Soft Parlee, Gracefulnesse, Perswasions, & all the Powers of VENVS. Ceston is
               
               of Lovers many-coulor'd Blisse.
               Come HYMEN, make an inner Ring,
               And let the Sacrificers sing;
               Cheare vp the faint, and trembling Bride,
               
               That quakes to touch hir Bridegroom's side:
               Tell her, what IVNO is to IOVE,
               
               The same shall she be to her Love;
               
               His Wife: which we doe rather measure
               
                  
                     See the vvords of Aelius verus. in Spartian. A Name of Dignity, then Pleasure.
               
               Vp Youths, hold vp your Lights in ayre,
               And shake abroad
                     So Cat. in Nup. Iul. & Manlij hath it. Viden', vt faces splendid as quatiunt comas? and by and by after, aureas quatiun
                        •
                      comas. their flaming haire.
               Now move vnited, and, in Gate,
               As you (in paires) doe front the State,
               
               With gratefull Honors, thanke his Grace
               
               That hath so glorified the Place:
               And as, in Circle, you depart
               
                  Link'd hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
               May all those Bodies still remaine
               Whom he, (with so much sacred paine)
               No lesse hath bound within his Realmes
               Then they are with the OCEANS streames.
               Long may his VNION find increase
               As hee, to ours, hath deign'd his peace.
            
            
               
With this, to a soft straine of Musique, they
pac'd once about, in their Ring, every Payre making
their Honors, as they came before the State:
and then dissolving, went downe in Couples, led
on by HYMEN, the Bride, and Auspices following,
as to the Nupti
                     •
                  ll Bowre. After them, the Musitians
with this Song, of which, then, onely one
Staffe was sung; but because I made it both in
Forme, and Matter to aemulate that kinde of
Poeme, which was call'dIt had the name à Thalamo, dictum 
                        •
                     st autem, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  
                     
                        ••
                     biculum Nuptiale primo suo significatu, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , quod est simul genialem v
                        •
                     
                     tam agere. Scal. in Poet.
                
               Epithalamium, and (by
the Auntients) vs'd to be song, when the Bride
was led into her Chamber, I have here set it down
whole: and doe hartily forgive their ignorance
whom it chanceth not to please. Hoping, that Nemo
doctus me iubeat Thalassionem verbis dicere non
Thalassionis.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        EPITHALAMION.
                        GLad Time is at his point arriv'd,
                        For which Loves hopes were so long-liv'd.
                        Lead HYMEN, lead away;
                        And let no Obiect stay,
                        Nor Banquets, (but sweete kisses)
                        The Turtles from their Blisses.
                        
                           This Poeme had for the most part Versum intercalarem. or Carmen Amoebaeum; yet that not alvvaies one, but oftentimes varied, and sometimes neglected in the same Song, as in ours you shall finde observed. 
                           Tis CVPID calls to arme;
                        
                        And this his last Alarme.
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
Shrinke not, soft VIRGIN, you will love,
                        Anone, what you so feare to prove.
                        This is no killing Warre,
                        To which you pressed are;
                        But faire and gentle strife
                        Which Lovers call their Life.
                        
                        Tis CVPID cries to Arme;
                        And this his last Alarme.
                        
                        Helpe Youths, and Virgins, helpe to sing
                        The Prize, which HYMEN here doth bring,
                        And did so lately
                              The Bride vvas alvvaies fain'd, to be ravish'd ex Gremi
                                 •
                               Matris; or (if she vvere vvanting) exproximâ Nccessitudine. because that had succeeded vvell to Romulus, vvho, by force ga
                                    •
                                  Wives for him, and his, from the Sa
                              
                                 •
                              ines. See Fest. and that of Catul. Qu
                                 •
                              rapis teneram ad virum virgin
                                 •
                              . rap
                        From forth the Mothers lap,
                        
                        To place her by that side
                        Where she must long abide.
                        On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
                        This Night is HYMEN's all.
                        See, HESPERVS is yet in view!
                        What Starre can so deserve of you?
                        Whose light doth still adorne
                        Your Bride, that ere the Morne,
                        
                        Shall farre more perfect bee,
                        And rise as bright as Hee;
                        
                           When
                           When he is Phosphorus, yet the same Star, as I have noted before. (like to him) her Name
                        Is chang'd, but not her Flame.
                        Hast, tender Lady, and adventer;
                        The cove
                              •
                           ous House would have you enter,
                        That it might wealthy bee,
                        And you, herAt the entrance of the Bride, the Custome vvas to give her the Keyes, to signifie that she vvas absolute Mistresse of the Place, and the vvhole Disposition of the Familie at her Care, Fest.
                            Mistresse see:
                        
                           
Hast your owne good to meete;
                        
                           Aud
                           This vvas also an other Rite; that she might not touch the Threshold as she entred, but vvas lifted over it. Servius saith, because it vvas sacred to VESTA. Plut. in. Quaest. Rom. remembers divers causes. But that, vvhich I take to come nearest the truth, vvas only the avoyding of Sorcerous Drugs, vs'd by Witches to be buri'd vnder that Place, to the destroying of Mariage- Amitie, or the Povver of Generation. See Alexand. in Genialibu. and Christ. Landus vpon Gatul.
                            
                           lift your golden feete
                        
                        Above the Threshold, high,
                        With prosperous Augury.
                        
                        Now, Youths, let goe your pretty armes;
                        The Place within chant's other charmes.
                        Whole showers of Roses flow;
                        And Violets seeme to grow,
                        Strew'd in the Chamber there,
                        As VENVS Meade it were.
                        On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
                        This Night is HYMEN's all.
                        Good Matrons, that so well are knowne
                        To aged Husbands of your owne,
                        Place you our Bride to night;
                        And
                              For this looke F
                                 •
                              st. in Voc. Rapi. snatch away the Light:
                        
                        Thatquo vtro
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               mors prop
                                 ••
                              qua alt erius vl
                                 •
                              rius captari putatur Fest. ibid. she not hide it dead
                        Beneath her Spouse's Bed;
                        Norquo vtro
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               mors prop
                                 ••
                              qua alt erius vl
                                 •
                              rius captari putatur Fest. ibid. he reserve the same
                        To helpe the funerall Flame.
                        
                        So, now you may admit him in;
                        The Act he covets, is no Sinne,
                        But chast, and holy Love,
                        Which HYMEN doth approve:
                        Without whose hallowing Fires
                        All Aymes are base Desires.
                        On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
                        This Night is HYMEN's all.
                        N
                              •
                           w, free from Vulgar Spight, or Noyse,
                        May you enioy your mutuall ioyes;
                        Now, You no Feare controules,
                        
                           
But Lippes may mingle Soules;
                        
                        And soft Embraces binde,
                        To each, the others Minde:
                        Which may no Power vntie,
                        Till One, or both must die.
                        And, looke, before you yeeld to slumber,
                        That your Delights be drawne past number;
                        "Ioyes, got with strife, increase.
                        A
                              ••
                           ect no sleepy peace;
                        But keepe the Brides faire eyes
                        Awake, with her owne Cries,
                        Which are but Mayden-feares:
                        And Kisses drie such teares.
                        Then, Coyne them, twixt your Lippes so sweete,
                        And let not Cockles closer meete;
                        Nor may your Murmuring Loves
                        
                        Be drown'd byA frequent Surname of VENVS, not of the Place, as CYPRIA; but quòd parere 
                                    •
                                 aciat, 
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               
                              Theop. Phurnut. and the Grammarians vpon Homer, See them. 
                           CYPRIS Doves:
                        
                        Let Ivie not so bind
                        As when your Armes are twin'd:
                        That you may Both, e're Day,
                        Rise perfect every way.
                        And, IVNO, whose great Powers protect
                        The Marriage-Bed, with good effect
                        The Labour of this Night
                        
                        Blesse thou, for future Light;
                        And, Thou, thy happy charge,
                        GladD
                                 ••
                              s Naturae, 
                                 •
                              ive gignendi. And is the same in the Male, as IVNO in the Female. Hence Genialis Lectus, qui nuptijs sternitur, in honorem Genij. Fes
                                 •
                              . Genius meus, quia me genuit. 
                           GENIVS, enlarge:
                        That they may Both, e're Day,
                        Rise perfect every way.
                        
                           
And
                              She hath this faculty given her, by all the Antients See Hom. Iliad. 
                                 •
                              . Lucret. in prim. Vir. in 2. Georg &c. 
                           VENVS, Thou, with timely seede
                        (Which may their after-Comforts breede)
                        Informe the gentle Wombe;
                        Nor, let it prove a Tombe:
                        But, e're ten Moones be wasted,
                        The Birth, by CYNTHIA hasted.
                        So may they Both, e're Day,
                        Rise perfect everie Way.
                        And, when the Babe to light is showne,
                        Let it be, like each Parent, knowne;
                        Much of the Fathers Face,
                        More of the Mothers Grace:
                        And eyther Grand-Sires Spirit,
                        And Fame let it inherit.
                        That Men may blesse th' Embraces,
                        
                        That ioyned two such Races.
                        
                        Cease Youths, and Virgins, you have done;
                        Shut fast the Dore: And, as They soone
                        To their Perfection hast,
                        So may their ardors last.
                        So eithers strength out-live
                        All losse that Age can give:
                        And, though full Yeares be tolde,
                        Their Formes growe slowly olde.
                     
                  
               
            
            HItherto extended the first Nights Solemnitie,
whose Grace in the Exequution left not
where to adde vnto it, with wishing: I meane,
(nor doe I court them) in those, that sustain'd the
Nobler parts. Such was the exquisit Performance,
as (beside the Pompe, Splendour, or what wee may

call Apparrelling of such Presentments) that alone
(had all else beene absent) was of power to surprize
with Delight, and steale away the Spectators
from themselves. Nor was there wanting whatsoever
might give to the Furniture, or Complement:
eyther in riches, or strangenesse of the Habites,
delicacie of Daunces, Magnificence of the
Scene, or divine Rapture of Musique. Onely the
Envie was, that it lasted not still, or (now it is past)
cannot by Imagination, much lesse Description,
be recover'd to a part of that Spirit, it had in the
gliding by.
            Yet, that I may not vtterly defraud the Reader
of his Hope, I am drawne to give it those briefe
touches, which may leave behind some shadow of
what it was: And first of the Attires.
            
            That, of the Lords, had parte of it (for the fashion)
taken from the Antique Greeke Statue; mixed
with some Moderne Additions: which made
it both gracefull, and strange. On their Heades
they wore Persick Crowns, that were with Scroles
of Gold-plate turn'd outward; and wreath'd about
with a Carnation and Silver Net-lawne: The one
End of which hung carelesly on the left shoulder,
the other was trick'd vp before in severall degrees
of fouldes, betweene the Plates, and set with rich
Iewelles, and great Pearle. Their Bodies were of
Carnation cloth of silver, richly wrought, and cut
to expresse the Naked, in maner of the Greeke Thorax;
girt vnder the Breasts, with a broade Belt of
Cloth of Golde, imbrodered, and fastned before

with Iewells: Their Labells were of White Cloth
of silver, lac'd, and wrought curiously betweene,
sutable to the vpper halfe of their Sleeves; whose
nether partes, with their Bases, were of Watchet
Cloth of Silver, chev'rond all over with Lace.
Their Mantills were of severall colour'd silkes, distinguishing
their Qualities, as they were coupled
in payres; The first, Skie colour; The second, Pearle
colour; The third, Flame colour; The fourth, Tawnie;
And these cut in leaves, which were subtilly
tack'd vp, and imbrodered with Oo's, and between
every ranke of Leaves, a broad silver Lace. They
were fastned on the right shoulder, and fell Compasse
downe the backe in gratious folds, and were
againe tied with a round Knot, to the fastning of
their Swords. Vpon their legges they wore Silver
Greaves, answering in worke to their Labells; and
these were their Accoutrements.
            
            The Ladies Attire was wholy new, for the Invention,
and full of Glory; as having in it the most
true impression of a Celestiall Figure: The vpper
part of White Cloth of Silver, wrought with IVNOES
Birdes and Fruicts; A loose vnder garment,
full-gather'd, of Carnation, strip't with Silver, and
parted with a Golden Zone; Beneath that, an other
flowing Garment, of Watchet Cloth of Silver,
lac'd with Gold: Through all which, though
they were round, and swelling, there yet appear'd
some touch of their delicate Lineaments, preserving
the sweetenesse of Proportion, and expressing it
selfe beyond expression. The Attire of their Heads,

did answer, if not exceede; their Hayre being carelesly
(but yet with more art, then if more affected)
bound vnder the circle of a rare, and rich Coronet,
adorn'd with all variety, and choyce of Iewells;
from the top of which, flow'd a trasparent Veile
downe to the ground; whose verge, returning
vp, was fastned to eyther side in most sprightly
Manner. Their shooes were Azure, and Gold, set
with Rubies, and Diamonds; so were all their
Garments: and euery part abounding in Ornament.
            No lesse to be admir'd, for the Grace, and
Greatnesse, was the whole Machine of the Spectacle,
from whence they came: the first part of which
was a 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or Globe, filld with Countreys,
and those guilded; where the Sea was 
                  •
               xprest,
heightned with siluer waues. This stoode,
or rather hung, (for no Axell was seene to support
it) and turning softly, discoverd the first
Masque, (as we have before, but too runningly
declar'd) which was of the Men, sitting in faire
Composition, within a Mine of severall Mettalls: To
which, the Lights were so plac'd, as noe one was
seene; but seemed, as if onel
                  •
                REASON, with the
splendor of her Crowne, illumin'd the whole
Grot.
            On the sides of this (which began the other
part) were placed two great Statues, fayn'd of
Gold, one of Atlas, the other of Hercules, in varied
postures, bearing vp the Cloudes, which were of
Releue, embossed, and tralucent, as Naturalls: To

these, a Cortine of painted Cloudes ioyned,
which reach'd to the vpmost Roofe of the Hall;
and sodainely opening, reveal'd the three Regions
of Ayre: In the highest of which, sate IVNO, in a
glorious Throne of Gold, circled with Comets, and
fiery Meteors, engendred in that hot and dry Region;
her Feete reaching to the lowest, where was
made a Rainebow, and within it, Musitians seated,
figuring Ayry Spirits, their habits various, and resembling
the seuerall colours, caused in that part
of the Ayre by reflexion. The midst was all of darke
and condensed Cloudes, as being the proper
Place where Rayne, Hayle, and other watry Meteors
are made; out of which two concave Clouds,
from the rest, thrust forth themselves (in nature
of those Nimbi, wherein, by Homer, Virgill, &c. the
Gods are fain'd to descend) and these carried the
eight Ladies, over the heads of the two
                  Atlas, and Hercules, the
                     •
                   Figures mentioned before. 
               Termes;
who (as the Ingine mov'd) seem'd also to bow
themselves (by vertue of their shadowes) and discharge
their shoulders of their glorious burden:
when, having set them on the Earth, both they,
and the Cloudes gather'd themselves vp againe,
with some rapture of the Beholders.
            
            But that, which (as above in place, so in the beuty)
was most taking in the Spectacle, was the Spheare
of Fire; in the top of all, encompassing the Ayre,
and imitated with such art, and industry, as the
Spectators might discerne the Motion (all the time
the Shewes lasted) without any Moover: and, that
so swift, as no Eye could distinguish any Colour

of the Light, but might forme to it selfe five hundred
severall hewes, out of the tralucent Body of
the Ayre, obiected betwixt it, and them.
            And this was crown'd with a statue of IVPITER,
the Thunderer.
            
            The Designe, and Act of all which, together with
the Device of their Habits, belongs properly to the
Merit, and Reputation of Maister YNYGO IONES;
whom I take modest occasion, in this fit place, to
remember, lest his owne worth might accuse
mee of an ignorant neglect from my silence.
            And here, that no mans Deservings complain of
iniustice (though I should have done it timelier, I
acknowledge) I doe for honours sake, and the
pledge of our Friendship, name Ma. ALPHONSO
FERABOSCO, a Man, planted by himselfe, in that
divine Spheare; & mastring all the spirits of Musique:
To whose iudiciall Care, and as absolute Performance,
were committed all those Difficulties both
of Song, and otherwise. Wherein, what his Merit
made to the Soule of our Invention, would aske to
be exprest in Tunes, no lesse ravishing then his.
V
                     •
                  rtuous friend, take well this abrupt testimonie,
and thinke whose it is: It cannot be Flatterie, in
me, who never did it to Great ones; and lesse then
Love, and Truth it is not, where it is done out of
Knowledge.
            
            The Daunces were both made, and taught by
Maister THOMAS GILES; and cannot bee more
approv'd, then they did themselves: Nor doe I
want the will, but the skill to commend such Subtilties;
               
of which the Spheare, wherein they were
acted, is best able to iudge.
            What was my part, the Faults here, as well as
the Vertues must speake.
Mutare dominum nec potest Liber notus.
            
            ON the next Night, whose Solemnitie was of
Barriers, (all mention of the former, being vtterly
remo'vd, and taken away) there appeared, at
the lower end of the Hall, a Mist made of delicate
perfumes; out of which (a Battaile being sounded
vnder the Stage) did seeme to breake foorth two
Ladies, the one representing TRVTH, the other
OPINION: but both so alike attired, as they could
by no Note, be distinguish'd. The colour of their
Garments were blew, their Socks White; They
were crowned with wreathes of Palme, and in
their hands, each of them sustain'd a Palm-bough.
These, after the Mist was vanished, began to examine
each other curiously with their eyes, and approching
the State, the one expostulated the other
in this manner.
            
               TRVTH.
               WHo art thou, thus that imitat'st my Grace,
               In Steppes, in Habite, and resembled Face?
            
            
               OPINION.
               GraveTruth is fain'd to be the Daughter SATVRNE; vvho indeede, vvith the Auntients vvas no other than TIME, and so his name alludes, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Plut. in Qu
                           •••
                        . To vvhich conferre the Greeke Adage, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Time, and Industry my Parents are;
               My Name is TRVTH, who through these sounds of War
               
               
                  
(Which figure the wise Mindes discursive fight)
               In Mists by Nature wrapt, salute the Light.
            
            
               TRVTH.
               I am that TRVTH, thou some illusive Spright;
               Whome to my likenesse, the blacke Sorceresse Night
               
               Hath of these drie, and empty fumes created.
            
            
               OPINION.
               Best Herald of thine owne Birth, well related:
               Put me and mine to proofe of wordes, and facts,
               In any Question this faire Houre exacts.
            
            
               TRVTH.
               I challenge thee, and fit this Time of Love,
               
               With this Position, which TRVTH comes to prove;
               That the most honor'd state of Man and Wife,
               
               Doth farre exceede th'insociate Virgin-Life.
            
            
               OPINION.
               I take the adverse part; and she that best
               Defends her side, be TRVTH by all confest.
            
            
               TRVTH.
               It is confirm'd. With what an equall brow
               To TRVTH,
                  Hippocrat. in a certaine Epistle to Philopoem. describeth her, Mulierem, quae non mala videatur, sed audacior aspectu & concitatior. To vvhich, Caesare Ripa in his Iconolog. alludeth, in these vvordes, Faccia, ne bella, ne dispiaceuole, &c. 
                  OPINION'S confident! and how,
               Like TRVTH, her Habite shewes to sensuall Eies!
               But whosoe're thou be, in this disguise,
               Cleare TRVTH, anone, shall strippe thee to the heart;
               And shew how mere Phantasticall thou arte.
               Know then, the first Production of Things,
               Required Two; from meere One nothing springs:
               Without that knot, the Theame thou gloriest in,
               (Th'vnprofitable Virgin) had not bin.
               The Golden Tree of Marriage began
               In Paradise, and bore the fruict of Man;
               
               
                  
On whose sweete branches Angells sate, and sung,
               And from whose firme roote all Societie sprung.
               
                  LOVE (whose strong Vertue wrapt Heav'ns soule in Earth,
               
               And made a Woman glory in his Birth
               In Marriage, opens his inflamed Breast;
               And, lest in him Nature should stifled rest,
               His geniall fire about the world he dartes;
               Which Lippes with Lippes combines, and Hearts with Hearts.
               
                  Marriage LOVES Obiect is; at whose bright eies
               He lights his Torches, and call's them his Skies.
               
               For her, he wings his shoulders; and doth flie
               To her white bosome, as his Sanctuary:
               
               In which no lustfull Finger can profane him,
               Nor anie Earth, with blacke Eclipses wane him.
               She makes him smile in sorrowes, and doth stand
               Twixt him, and all wants, with her silver hand.
               In her soft Lockes, his tender Feete are tied;
               And in his Fetters he takes worthy pride.
               And as Geometricians have approv'd
               That Lines, and Superficies are not mov'd
               By their owne forces, but doe follow still.
               Their Bodies motions; so the selfe-lov'd Will
               Of Man, or Woman should not rule in them,
               But each with other weare the Anademe.
               
               
                  Mirrors, thogh deckt with Diamants, are noght worth,
               If the like Formes of Things they set not forth;
               So Men, or Women are worth Nothing, neyther,
               If eithers Eyes and Hearts present not either.
            
            
               OPINION.
               Vntouch'd Virginity, Laugh out; to see
               Freedome in Fetters plac'd, and vrg'd' gainst thee.
               
                  
What Griefes lie groaning on the Nuptiall Bed?
               What dull Satietie? In what sheetes of Lead
               Tumble, and tosse the restlesse Married Paire,
               
               Each, oft, offended with the Others aire?
               From whence springs all-devouring Avarice,
               But from the Cares, which out of Wedlocke rise?
               And, where there is in Lifes best-tempred Fires
               And End, set in it selfe to all desires,
               A setled Quiet, Freedome never checkt,
               How farre are Maried Lives from this effect?
               
                  A narrow Sea, betweene Aulis, a Port of Boeotia, and the Isle Eu
                        
                           •
                        oea. See Pom. Mela. lib. 2. EVRIPVS, that beares Shippes, in all their pride,
               
               Gainst roughest Windes, with violence of his Tide,
               And ebbes, and flowes, seven times in every day,
               Toyles not more turbulent, or fierce then they.
               And thē, what Rules Husbands praescribe their Wives!
               
               In their Eyes Circles, they must bound their Lives.
               The Moone, when farthest from the Sunne she shines,
               Is most refulgent; nearest, most declines:
               But your poore Wives farre off must never rome,
               But wast their Beauties, neare their Lords, at home:
               And when their Lords range out, at home must hide
               (Like to beg'd Monopolies) all their Pride.
               When their Lords list to feede a serious Fit
               They must be serious; when to shew their Wit
               In lests, and Laughter, they must laugh, and iest;
               When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
               And to their Wives Men give such narrow scopes,
               As if they meant to make them walke on Ropes:
               No Tumblers bide more perill of their Necks
               In all their Tricks; Then Wives in Husbands Checks.
               Where Virgins, in their sweete, and peacefull State
               
                  
Have all things perfect; spinne their owne free Fate;
               
               Depend on no prowd Second; are their owne
               
                  Center, and Circle; Now, and alwaies One.
               To whose Example, we doe still heare nam'd
               One God, one Nature, and but one World fram'd,
               One Sunne, one Moone, one Element of Fire,
               
               So, of the Rest; One King, that doth inspire
               
                  Soule, to all Bodies, in this royall Spheare:
            
            
               TRVTH.
               And where is Mariage more declar'd, then there?
               Is there a Band more strict, then that doth tie
               The Soule, and Body in such vnity?
               
                  Subiects to Soveraignes? doth one Mind display
               In th'ones Obedience, and the others Sway?
               Beleeve it, Mariage suffers no compare,
               When both Estates are valew'd, as they are.
               The Virgin were a strange, and stubborne Thing,
               Would longer stay a Virgin, then to bring
               Her selfe fit vse, and profit in a Make.
               
            
            
               OPINION.
               How she doth erre! and the whole Heav'n mistake!
               Loo
                     •
                  e how a Flower, that close in Closes growes,
               Hid from rude Cattell, bruised with no Ploughes,
               Which th' Ayre doth stroke, Sun strengthen, Showers
               
               It many Youths, & many Maids desire; (shoot higher,
               The same, when cropt by cruell hand is wither'd,
               No Youths at all, No Maydens have desir'd:
               So a Virgin, while vutouch'd she doth remaine,
               Is deare to hers; but when with Bodyes stayne
               Her chaster Flower is lost, she leaves to appeare
               Or sweete to Yong Men, or to Maydens deare.
               
                  
That Conquest then may crowne me in this Warre,
               
                  Virgins, O Virgins fly from HYMEN farre.
            
            
               TRVTH.
               Virgins, O Virgins, to sweete HYMEN yeeld,
               
               For as a lone Vine, in a naked Field,
               Never extols her branches, never beares
               Ripe Grapes, but with a headlong heavinesse weares
               Her tender bodie, and her highest sproote
               Is quickly levell'd with hir fading roote;
               By whom no Husband-men, no Youths wil dwell;
               But if, by fortune, she be married well
               To th Elme, her Husband, many Husband-men,
               
               And many Youths inhabite by her, then:
               So whilst a Virgin doth, vntouch't, abide
               All vnmanur'd, she growes old, with hir pride;
               But when to equall Wedlocke, in fit Time,
               Her Fortune, and Endeuor lets her clime
               Deare to h
                     •
                  r Loue, and Parents, she is held.
               Virgins, O Virgins, to sweete HYMEN yeeld.
               
            
            
               OPINION.
               These are but words; hast thou a Knight will trie
               (By stroke of Armes) the simple Veritie?
               
            
            
               TRVTH.
               To that high proofe I would haue dared thee.
               Ile strait fetch Champions for the Brides and Mee.
               
            
            
               OPINION.
               The like will I do for Virginitie.
               
            
            HEre, they both descended the Hall, where at
the lower end, a March being sounded with
Drums and Phifes, there entred (led foorth by

the Earle of Notingham, who was Lord high Constable
for that night, and the Earle of Worc'ster,
Earle Marshall) sixteene Knights, Armed, with
Pikes, and Swords; their Plumes, and Colours,
Carnation and White, all richly accoutred, and making
their Honors to the State, as they march'd by
in Paires, were all rank'd on one side of the Hall.
They plac'd, Sixteene others alike accoutred for
Riches, and Armes, onely that their Colours were
varied to Watchet, and White; were by the same
Earles led vp, and passing in like manner, by the
State, plac'd on the opposite side. Whose Names
(as they were given to me, both in Order, and Orthographie)
were these.

                  TRVTH.
                  Duke of LENNOX.
                  
                  
                     Lo. EFFINGHAM.
                  
                     Lo. WALDEN,
                  
                     Lo. MOV
                        ••
                     EAGLE.
                  
                     Sir THO. SOME
                        •
                     SET.
                  
                     Sir CHAR HOVVARD.
                  
                     Sir IOHN GRAY.
                  
                     Sir THO MOVNSON.
                  
                     Sir IOHN LEIGH.
                  
                     Sir ROB. MAVNSELL.
                  
                     Sir EDVV. HOVVARD.
                  
                     Sir HEN GOODYERE.
                  
                     Sir ROGER DALISON.
                  
                     Sir FRAN. HOVVARD.
                  
                     Sir LEVV. MAVNSELL.
                  
                     Mr. GVNTE
                        ••
                     T.
               
               
                  OPINION.
                  Earle of SVSSEX.
                  
                  
                     Lo. WILLOV
                        ••
                     BY.
                  
                     Lo▪
                      G
                        •
                     RRARD.
                  
                     Sir. ROB. CAR
                        •
                     Y.
                  
                     Sir OL. CRVMVVEL.
                  
                     Sir WIL. HERBERT.
                  
                     Sir ROB. DR
                        •
                     VVRY.
                  
                     Sir WI. WOODHOVSE.
                  
                     Sir CAREY REYNOLDS.
                  
                     Sir RIC. HOVGHTON.
                  
                     Sir WIL. CONSTA
                        •
                     L
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Sir THO. GERRARD,
                  
                     Sir ROB. KYLLEGREVV.
                  
                     Sir THO BADGER.
                  
                     Sir THO. DVTTON.
                  
                     Mr. DIG BIE.
               
            
            
               
By this time, the Barre being brought vppe,
TRVTH proceeded.
            
               TRVTH.
               Now ioyne; and if his varied Triall faile,
               To make my Truth in Wedlocks praise prevaile,
               I will retire, and in more power appeare;
               To cease this strife, and make our Question cleare.
               Whereat OPINION insulting, followed her with
this speach.
            
            
               OPINION.
               I, Doe: it were not safe thou shouldst abide:
               This speakes thy Name, with shame to quit thy side.
            
            Heere the Champions on both sides addresst
themselves for fight, first Single; after Three to
Three: and performed it with that alacritie, and
vigor, as if MARS himselfe had beene to triumph
before VENVS, & invented a new Musique. When,
on a sodaine, (the last Six having scarcely ended) a
striking Light seem'd to fil all the Hall, and out of
it 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Angell or Messenger of Glorie appearing.
            
               ANGEL.
               PRinces, attend a tale of height, and wonder.
               
                  TRVTH is descended in a second Thunder,
               And now will greete you, with ludiciall state,
               To grace the Nuptiall part in this debate;
               And end with reconciled hands these warres.
               Vpon her head she weares a Crowne of Starres,
               Through which her ori
                     •
                  nt Hayre waves to her wast,
               By which beleeving Mortalls hold her fast,
               And in those golden Chordes are carried even
               
                  
Till with her breath she blowes them vp to Heaven.
               She weares a Roabe enchas'd with Eagles Eyes,
               To signifie her sight in Mysteries;
               
               Vpon each shoulder sits a milke white Dove,
               And at her feete doe witty Serpents move:
               Her spacious Armes doe reach from East to West,
               
               And you may see her Heart shine through her breast.
               Her right hand holds a Sunne with burning Rayes,
               Her left a curious bunch of golden Kayes,
               With which Heav'n Gates she locketh, and displayes.
               A Cristall Mirror hangeth at her brest,
               By which mens Consciences are search'd, and drest:
               On her Coach wheeles Hypocrisie lies rackt;
               And squint-eyd Slander, with Vaine-Glory backt
               Her bright Eyes burne to dust: in which shines Fate.
               
               An Angel vshers hir triumphant Gate,
               Whilst with her fingers Fannes of Starres she twists,
               And with them beates backe Error, clad in mists.
               Eternall Vnity behind her shines
               That Fire, and Water, Earth, and Ayre combines.
               Her voyce is like a Trumpet lowd, and shrill,
               Which bids all sounds in Earth, and Heav'n be still.
               And see! descended from her Chariot now,
               In this related Pompe she visits you.
            
            
               TRVTH.
               Honor to all, that Honor Nuptialls.
               
               To whose faire Lot, in 
                     •
                  ustice, now it falls,
               That this my Counterfeit be here disclos'd,
               Who, for Virginity hath her selfe oppos'd.
               Nor, though my Brightnesse doe vndoe her Charmes,
               
               Let these her Knights thinke, that their equall Armes
               
                  
Are wrong'd therein; "For Valure wins applause
               "That dares, but to maint aine the weaker Cause.
               And Princes, see, tis meere OPINION,
               
               That in TRVTH'S forced Robe, for TRVTH hath gone!
               Her gaudy Colours, peec'd, with many Folds,
               Shew what vncer tainties she ever holds:
               Vanish Adult'rate TRVTH, and never dare
               With prowd Maydes prayse, to prease where Nuptialls are.
               And Champions, since you see the Truth I held,
               To Sacred HYMEN, reconciled, yeeld:
               Nor, (so to ye
                     •
                  ld,) thinke it the least Despight
               
               "It is a Conquest to submit to Right.
               
               This Royall Iudge of our Contention
               Will prop, I know, what I have vnder gone;
               To whose right Sacred Highnesse Iresigne
               Low, at his feete, this Starry Crowne of mine,
               To shew his Rule, and Iudgement is diuine;
               These Doves to him I consecrate withall,
               To note his Innocence, without spot, or gall;
               These Serpents, for his Wisedome▪ and these Rayes,
               
               To shew his piercing Splendor; These bright Keyes,
               
               Designing Power to ope the ported Skies,
               And speake their Glori
                     •
                  s to his Subjects Eyes.
               Lastly, this Heart, with which all Hearts be true:
               And TRVTH in him make Treason ever rue.
            
            With This, they were led forth, hand in hand,
reconciled, as in Triumph: and thus the Solemnities
ended.
            Vivite concordes, & nostrum discite munus.
            
         
      
   