
      
         
            
            
            THE CHARACTERS of Two royall Masques. The one of BLACKNESSE, The other of BEAVTIE. personated By the most magnificent of Queenes ANNE Queene of great Britaine, &c. With her honorable Ladyes, 1605. and 1608. at White hall: and Inuented by BEN: IONSON.
            
               Ouid.
               —Salue festa dies, melior
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   reuertere semper.
            
            Imprinted at London for Thomas Thorp, and are to be sold at the signe of the Tigers head in Paules Church-yard.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE QVEENES MASQVES. The first, of Blacknesse: personated at the Court, at White-Hall, on the Twelu'th night. 1605.
            
               THE honor, and splendor of these Spectacles was such in the performance, as could those houres haue lasted, this of mine, now, had beene a most vnprofitable worke: But (when it is the fate, euen of the greatest, and most absolute births, to need, and borrow a life of posterity) little had beene done to the study of magnificence in these, if presently with the rage of the people, who (as a part of greatnesse) are priuiledged by Custome, to deface their carkasses, the spirits had also perished. In dutie, therefore, to that Maiestie, who gaue them their authoritie, and grace; and, no lesse then the most royall of predecessors, deserues eminent celebration for these solemnities: I adde this later hand, to redeeme them as well from ignorance, as enuie, two common euils, the one of Censure, the other of Obliuion.
            
            
               
               
                  Natu. Hist. lib. 5 cap 8. PLINIE, 
                  Poly hist. cap. 40. & 43. SOLINVS, Lib 4. cap. 5 PTOLOMAEE, and of late LEO 
                  Descrip. Afric.
                the African, remember vnto vs a riuer in Aethiopia, famous by the name of Niger; of which the people were called Nigritae, now Negro's: & are the blackest nation of the world. This Some take it to be the same with Nilus, which is by Lucan called M
                        •
                     las, signifying Niger. Howsoeuer, Plinie, in the place aboue noted, hath this: Nigri fl
                        •
                     
                     u
                        •
                     o cadem natura, quae N
                        •
                     lo, calamum, papyrum, & casdem gigni
                        •
                      an. mantes. See Solin. aboue mentioned. riuer taketh spring out of a certain Lake, east-ward; & after a long race, falleth into the westerne Ocean. Hence (because it was her Maiesties will, to haue them Black-mores at first) the inuention was deriued by me, & presented thus.
            First, for the Scene, was drawne a Landtschape, consisting of small woods, and here and there a voide place filld with huntings; which falling, an artificiall Sea was seene to shoote forth, as if it flowed to the land, raised with waues, which seemed to mooue, and in some places the billow to breake, as imitating that orderly disorder, which is common in nature. In front of this Sea were placed sixe The forme of these 
                     〈◊〉
                  , with their trumpets, you may read liuely describd, in Ouid. Met
                        •
                     m. lib. 1. Caeruleū Tritona vocat. &c and in Virgil, A
                        •
                     ne
                        •
                     d l
                        •
                     b. 10. Hunc 
                        〈◊〉
                      imm
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     s 
                        〈◊〉
                     . & se
                     
                        •••
                     nt.
                
               Tritons, in mouing, & sprightly actions, their vpper parts humane, saue that their haires were blew, as pertaking of the Seacolour: their desinent parts, fishe, mounted aboue their heads, and all varied in disposition. From their backs were borne out certaine light pieces of Taffata, as if carried by the winde, and their Musique made out of wreathed shels. Behinde these, a paire of Sea-Maides, for song, were as conspicuously seated; betweene which, two great Sea-horses (as bigge as the life) put forth themselues; the one mounting aloft, & writhing his head from the other, which seemed to sinck forwards; so intended for variation, & that the

Figure behind, might come of better: 
                  Li
                        •
                     ian in PHΓO
                     •
                  . 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   presents Nilus so. Equa fli
                        •••
                     atili insia
                        •
                     ntem. And Statius Neptune, in The
                        •
                     .
                vpon their backs, OCEANVS & NIGER were aduanced.
            OCEANVS, presented in a humane forme, the colour of his flesh, blew; and shadowed with a robe of Sea-greene; his head grey, & The Antients induc'd Oceanus alwayes with a Buss he
                     •
                  di propter 
                        ••
                     m ventorū, a quibus incitatur, & impellit
                        •
                     r: vel quia Tauris 
                        〈◊〉
                      fremitū emittat, vel quia tanquam Taurus suribundus, in littera seratur. Eurip'd. in Oreste.. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   And R
                     •
                  uers somtimes were so call'd. Looke Virg. de Tib
                        •
                     ri, et Eridan
                        •
                     . Geor. 4. A
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     id. 8. Hor. car. lib. 4. Ode. 
                  
                     •
                  4. and Eurip. in Iore.
                horned; as he is described by the Antients: his beard of the like mixt colour▪ he was gyrlonded with Alga, or Sea-grasse; and in his hand a Trident.
            
            NIGER, in forme and colour of an Aethiope; his haire, and rare beard curled, shadowed with a blew, and bright mantle: his front, neck, and wrists adorned with Pearle, and crowned, with an artificiall wreath of Cane, and Paper-rush.
            These induced the Masquers, which were twelue Nymphs, Negro's; and the daughters of NIGER; attended by so many of the The Daughters of Oceanus, & 
                     
                        •
                     ethys. See Hesiod in Theago▪ Orphe. in Hym. and Virgil in Georgie.
                OCEANIAE which were their Light-bearers.
            
            The Masquers were placed in a great concaue shell, like mother of Pearle, curiously made to moue on those waters, and rise with the billow; the top therof was stuck with a cheu'rō
                of lights, which, indented to the proportion of the shell, strooke a glorious beame vpon them, as they were seated, one aboue another: so that they were all seene, but in an extrauagant order.
            On sides of the shell, did swim sixe huge Sea-monsters, varied in their shapes, and dispositions, bearing on their backs the twelue Torch bearers; who were planted there in seuerall graces; so as the backs of some were seene; some in purfle, or side; others in face; & all hauing their lights burning out of Whelks, or Murex shels.
            
               The attire of the Masquers was alike, in all, without difference: the colours, Azure, and Siluer; but returned on the top with a scrole and antique dressing of Feathers, and Iewels interlaced with ropes of Pearle. And, for the front, eare, neck, and wrists, the ornament was of the most choise and orient Pearle; best setting of from the black.
            For the Light bearers, Sea-greene, moued about the skirts with gold and siluer 
                  ••
               eir hayre loose, and flowing, gyrlanded with Sea-grasse, and that stuck with branches of Corall.
            These thus presented, the Scene behind, seemed a vast Sea (and vnited with this that flowed forth) from the terminaton, or horizon of which (being the leuell of the State, which was placed in the vpper end of the Hall) was drawne, by the lines of Prospectiue, the whole worke shooting downewards, from the eye; which decorum made it more conspicuous, and caught the eye a far of with a wandring beauty. To which was added an obscure and cloudy night-piece, that made the whole set of. So much for the bodily part. Which was of Maister YNIGO IONES his designe, and act.
            By this, one of the Tritons, with the two Sea-Maides, began to sing to the others lowd Musique, their voyces being a tenor, and two trebles.
            
            
               
               SONG.
               SOund, sound aloud
               The welcome of the orient Floud,
               Into the West;
               
               Fayre, NIGER, 
                  All Riuers are sayd to be the sonnes of the Ocean: for, as the Antients thought, out of the vapours, exhaled by the heate of the Sunne, Riuers, and Fountaines were begotten. And both by Orph. in Hymn
                     ▪ and Homer Iliad. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Oceanus is celebrated tanquam Pater, & origo dijs, & rebus, quia nihil sine humec
                        
                           •
                        atione nascitur, aut puirescit.
                   sonne to great OCEANVS,
               
               Now honord, thus,
               With all his beauteous race:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   though but black in face,
               Yet, are they bright,
               And full of life, and light.
               To proue that Beauty best,
               Which not the colour, but the feature
               Assures vnto the creature.
            
            
               OCEANVS.
               BE silent, now the Ceremonies done.
               And NIGER, say, how comes it, louely Sonne,
               That thou, the AETHIOPES Riuer, so farre East,
               
               Art seene to fall into th' extreamest West
               
               Of me, the King of flouds, OCEANVS,
               
               And, in mine Empires heart, salute me, thus?
               My ceaselesse current, now amazed stands!
               To see thy labor, through so many lands,
               
                  There wants not inough, in nature, to authorise this part of our fiction, in seperating Niger, from the Ocean, (beside the fable of Alph
                           •
                        us, and that, to which Virgil alludes of Arethusa in his 10. Eclog. Sic tibi, cum fluctus subterlabere Sicanos, Doris amara suam non intermisicat vndam) examples of Nilus, Iordan, and others, whereof see Nican. lib. 1. de flumin. and Plut▪ in vita Syllae. euen of this our riuer (as some thinke) by the name of Melas.
                  Mixe thy fresh billow, with my brackishe streame;
               And, in thy sweetnesse, stretch thy diademe,
               To these farre distant, and vn-equall'd skies
               This squared Circle of coelestiall bodies:
            
            
               
               NIGER.
               Diuine OCEANVS, tis not strange at all,
               That (since the immortal soules of creatures mortal,
               Mixe with their bodies, yet reserue for euer
               A powre of seperation) I should seuer
               My fresh streames, from thy brackish (like things fixed)
               Though, with thy powerful saltnes, thus far mixed.
               " Vertue, though chain'd to earth, will still liue free;
               " And Hell it selfe must yeeld to industry.
            
            
               OCEANVS.
               BVt, what's the end of thy Herculean labors,
               Extended to these calme, and blessed shores?
            
            
               NIGER.
               
                  TO do a kind, and carefull Fathers part,
                  In satisfiyng euery pensiue heart
                  Of these my Daughters, my most loued birth:
                  Who though they were the 
                        Read Diod. Sicul. lib. 3. It is a coniecture of the old Ethnicks, that they, which dwell vnder the South, were the first begotten of the earth.
                     first form'd Dames of earth,
                  And in whose sparckling, and refulgent eyes,
                  The glorious Sunne did still delight to rise;
                  Though he (the best Iudge, and most formall Cause
                  Of all Dames beauties) in their firme hewes, drawes
                  Signes of his feruent'st Loue; and thereby shewes
                  That, in their black, the perfectst beauty growes;
                  Since the fix't colour of their curled haire,
                  (Which is the highest grace of dames most faire)
                  
                     No cares, no age can change; or there display
                  The fearefull tincture of abhorred Gray;
                  
                  Since Death hir selfe (hir selfe being pale & blew)
                  Can neuer alter their most faith-full hew;
                  All which are arguments, to proue, how far
                  Their beauties conquer, in great Beauties warre;
                  And more, how neere Diuinity they be,
                  That stand from passion, or decay so free.
                  Yet, since the fabulous voyces of some few
                  Poore brain-sicke men, stil'd Poets, here with you,
                  Haue, with such enuy of their graces, sung
                  The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
                  Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly
                  To infect all clymates, yea our purity;
                  As of one Notissima fabula. Ouid. Met. lib. 2.
                      
                     PHAETON, that fir'd the world
                  And, that, before his heedles flames were hurld
                  About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as faire,
                  As other Dames; now blacke, with blacke dispaire:
                  And in respect of their complexctions chang'd,
                  Are each where, since, for 
                        Alluding to that of Iuuenall, Satir. 5. Et cui per m
                           •
                        
                        diam nolis occurrerenoctem. luckles creatures rang'd.
                  Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
                  Most iealous of their beauties) feare, and care
                  Posess'd them whole; yea, and beleeuing 
                        The Poets. 
                     them,
                  
                  They wept such ceasles teares, into my streame,
                  That it hath, thus far, ouerflow'd his shore
                  To seeke them patience: who haue since, ere more
                  As the Sunne riseth, 
                        A custome of the Aethiopes, notable in Herod and Diod▪ Sic. See Plinie. Nat. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 8.
                      chardg'd his burning throne
                  With volleys of reuilings; cause he shone
                  On their scorch'd cheekes, with such intemperate fires,
                  And other Dames, made Queenes of all desires.
                  
                     To frustrate which strange error, oft, I sought,
                  (Though most in vaine, against a setled thought
                  As womens are) till they confirm'd at length
                  By miracle, what I, with so much strength
                  Of argument resisted; els they fain'd:
                  For in the Lake, where their first spring they gain'd,
                  As they sate, cooling their soft Limmes, one night,
                  Appear'd a Face, all circumfus'd with light;
                  (And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes 
                     Plin. ibid.
                      neuer dreame)
                  Wherein they might decipher through the streame,
                  These words.
               
               
                  That they a Land must forthwith seeke,
                  Whose termination (of the Greeke)
                  Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
                  Their blouds, doth neuer Consult with Tacitus. in vita Agric. and the Paneg. ad Constant.
                      rise, or set,
                  But in his Iourney passeth by,
                  And leaues that Clymat of the sky,
                  To comfort of a greater Light,
                  
                  Who formes all beauty, with his sight.
               
               
                  In search of this, haue we three Princedomes past,
                  That speake out Tania, in their accents last;
                  Blacke Mauritania, first; and secondly,
                  Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
                  Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
                  The place vnto these longing Nymphes design'd.
                  Instruct, and ayde me, great OCEANVS,
                  
                  What Land is this, that now appeares to vs?
               
            
            
               
               OCEANVS.
               This Land, that lifts into the temperate Ayre
               His snowy cliffe, is 
                     Orpheus in his Argonaut. calls it 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Albion the fayre;
               So call'd of 
                     Alluding to that rite of stiling Princes, after the name of their Princedomes: so is he still Albion, and Neptunes sonne that gouernes. As also his being deare to Neptune, in being so embrac'd by him.
                   Neptunes Son, who ruleth here:
               For whose deare guard, my selfe, (foure thousand yeare)
               Since old Deucalion's daies, haue walk'd the round
               About his Empire, proud, to see him crown'd
               Aboue my waues.
            
            At this, the Moone was discouered in the vpper part of the house, triumphant in a Siluer throne, made in figure of a Pyramis. Her garments White, and Siluer, the dressing of her head antique; & crown'd with a Luminarie, or Sphaere of light: which striking on the clouds, and heightned with Siluer, reflected as naturall clouds do by the splendor of the Moone. The Heauen, about her, was vaulted with blew silke, and set with Starres of Siluer which had in them their seuerall lights burning. The suddaine sight of which, made NIGER to interrupt OCEANVS, with this present passion.The Aethiopians worshipd the Moone, by that surname. See Stepha. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . in voce 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and his reasons.
            
            
               NIGER.
               — O see, our siluer Starre!
               
               Whose pure, auspicious light greetes vs, thus farre!
               Great Aethiopia, Goddesse of our shore,
               Since, with particular worshippe we adore
               Thy generall brightnesse, let particular grace
               Shyne on my zealous Daughters: Shew the place,
               
                  Which, long, their Longings vrdg'd their eyes to see.
               Beautifie them, which long haue Deified thee.
            
            
               AETHIOPIA.
               
                  NIGER, be glad: Resume thy natiue cheare.
               Thy Daughters labors haue their period here,
               And so thy errors. I was that bright Face
               Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
               
               Read mysticke lines; (which skill PITHAGORAS
               
               First taught to men, by a reuerberate glasse)
               This blessed Isle doth with that TANIA end,
               Which there they saw inscrib'd, and shall extend
               Wish'd satisfaction to their best desires.
               
                  BRITANIA, which the triple world admires,
               This Isle hath now recouered for her name;
               Where raigne those Beauties, that with so much fame
               The sacred MVSES Sonnes haue honored,
               And from bright HESPERVS to EOVS spred.
               With that great name BRITANIA, this blest Isle
               Hath wonne her ancient dignitie, and stile,
               A World, diuided from the world: and tri'd
               
               The abstract of it, in his generall pride.
               For were the World, with all his wealth, a Ring,
               
                  BRITANIA (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
               Might be a Diamant worthy to inchase it,
               Rul'd by a SVNNE, that to this height doth grace it:
               Whose Beames shine day, and night, and are of force
               To blanche an AETHIOPE, and reuiue a Cor's.
               
               His light scientiall is, and (past mere nature)
               
                  Can salue the rude defects of euery creature.
               Call forth thy honor'd Daughters, then;
               And let them, 'fore the Brittaine men,
               Indent the Land, with those pure traces
               They flow with, in their natiue graces.
               Inuite them, boldly, to the shore,
               Their Beauties shalbe scorch'd no more:
               This Sunne is temperate, and refines
               All things, on which his radiance shines.
            
            Here the Tritons sounded, & they daunced on shore, euery couple (as they aduanced) seuerally presenting their Fans: in one of which were inscribed their mixt Names, in the other a mute Hieroglyphick, expressing their mixed quallities. Which manner of Symbole I rather chose, then Imprese, as well for strangenesse, as relishing of antiquity, and more applying to that originall doctrine of sculpture,
                  Diod. Sicul. Herod.
                which the Aegiptians are said, first, to haue brought from the Aethiopians.
            
            
               
                  
                      
                     
                        The Names.
                     
                     
                        The Symboles.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The Queene. 
                     
                     1 EVPHORIS. 
                     1 A golden Tree, laden with fruict.
                  
                  
                     
                        Co: of Bedford.
                     
                     1 AGLAIA.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        La: Herbert. 
                     
                     2 DIAPHANE. 
                     2 The figure Isocaedron of cristall.
                  
                  
                     
                        Co: of Derby.
                     
                     2 EVCAMPSE.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        La: Riche. 
                     
                     3 OCYTE. 
                     3 A paire of naked feet, in a Riuer.
                  
                  
                     
                        Co: of Suffolke
                     
                     3 KATHARE.
                      
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        La: Beuill. 
                     
                     4 NOTIS. 
                     4 The Salamander simple.
                  
                  
                     
                        La: Effingham.
                     
                     4 PSYCHROTE.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        La: El: Howard. 
                     
                     5 GLYCYTE. 
                     5 A clowd full of raine, dropping.
                  
                  
                     
                        La: Sus: Vere.
                     
                     5 MALACIA.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        La: Wroth. 
                     
                     6 BARYTE. 
                     6 An vrne' spheard with wine.
                  
                  
                     
                        La: Walsingham
                     
                     6 PERIPHERE.
                      
                  
               
            
            
               The names of the OCEANIAE were.
               
                  
                     Hesiod. in. Theog.
                  DORIS.
               PETRAEA.
               OCYRHOE.
               CYDIPPE.
               GLAVCE.
               TYCHE.
               BEROE.
               ACASTE.
               CLYTIA.
               IANTHE.
               LYCORYS.
               PLEXAVRE.
            
            Their owne single Daunce ended, as they were about to make choice of their Men: One, from the Sea, was heard to call'hem with this charme, sung by a tenor voyce.
            
               SONG.
               Come away, come away,
               We grow iealous of your stay:
               If you do not stop your eare,
               We shall haue more cause to feare
               
                  Syrens of the land, then they
               To doubt the Syrens of the Sea.
            
            Here they daunc'd with their men, seuerall measures, and corranto's. All which ended, they

were againe accited to sea, with a Song of two Trebles, whose cadences were iterated by a double Eccho, from seuerall parts of the Land.
            
               SONG.
               
                  DAughters of the subtle Flood,
                  Do not let Earth longer intertayne you;
                  
                     I. Ecch.
Let Earth longer intertaine you.
                  
                     2. Ecch,
Longer intertaine you.
               
               
                  'Tis to them, inough of good,
                  That you giue this litle hope, to gaine you
                  
                     1. Ecch.
Giue this litle, hope to gaine you.
                  
                     2. Ecch.
Little hope, to gaine you.
               
               
                  If they loue,
                  You shall quickly see;
                  For when to flight you mooue,
                  They'll follow you, the more you flee
                  
                     1. Ecch.
follow you, the more you flee.
                  
                     2. Ecch.
The more you flee.
               
               
                  If not, impute it each to others matter;
                  They are but Earth, & what you vowd was Water.
                  
                     1. Ecch:
but earth & what you vowd was Water.
                  
                     2. Ecch:
earth & what you vowd was Water.
                  
                     1. Ecch.
And what you vow'd was Water.
                  
                     2. Ecc:
You vow'd was Water.
               
            
            
               
               AETHIOPIA.
               
                  I Nough, bright Nymphes, the night growes old,
               And we are greiu'd, we can not hold
               You longer light: But comfort take.
               Your Father, onely, to the Lake
               
               Shall make returne: Your selues with feasts,
               Must here remaine the Ocean's guests.
               Nor shall this vayle, the Sunne hath cast
               Aboue your bloud, more Summers last.
               For which, you shall obserue these rites.
               
               Thirteene times thrise, on thirteene nightes,
               (So often as I fill my Sphaere
               
               With glorious light, throughout the yeare)
               You shall (when all things els do sleepe
               Saue your chast thoughts) with reuerence, steepe
               Your bodies in that purer brine,
               And wholsome dew call'd Ros-marine:
               
               Then with that soft, and gentler fome,
               Of which the Ocean, yet, yeelds some,
               Whereof bright Venus, Beauties Queene,
               Is sayd to haue begotten beene,
               You shall your gentler limmes ore-laue,
               And for your paynes, perfection haue.
               So that, this night, the yeare gone round,
               You do againe salute this ground;
               And, in the beames of yond' bright Sunne,
               
               Your faces dry, and all is done.
            
            At which in a Daunce they returned to the Sea, where they tooke their Shell; and, with this full Song, went out.
            
               
               SONG.
               NOw Dian, with her burning face,
               Declines apace:
               By which our Waters know
               To ebbe, that late did flow.
               Backe Seas, backe Nymphes; but, with a forward grace,
               Keepe, still, your reuerence to the place:
               And shout with ioy of fauor, you haue wonne,
               in sight of Albion, Neptunes Sonne.
            
            So ended the first Masque, which (beside the singular grace of Musicke and Daunces) had that successe in the nobility of performance; as nothing needes to the illustration, but the memory by whome it was personated.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND MASQVE. Which was of Beauty; was presented in the same Court, at White-Hall, on the Sunday night, after the twelfth Night. 1608.
            
            TWo yeares being now past, that her Maiesty had intermitted these delights, and the third almost come; it was her Highnesse pleasure againe to glorifie the Court, & command that I should thinke on some fit presentment, which should answere the former, still keeping thē the same persons, the Daughters of NIGER, but their beauties varied, according to promise, and their time of absence excus'd, with foure more added to their Number.
            To which limitts, when I had apted my inuention, and being to bring newes of them, frō the Sea, I induc'd Boreas, one of the windes, as my fitest Messenger; presenting him thus.
            In a robe of Russet, and White mixt, full, and bagg'd: his haire, and beard rough: and horrid; his wings gray, and ful of snow, and icycles. His mantle borne from him with wires, & in seueral puffes; his feet So Paus. in Eliacis reports him to haue, as he was carued in ar
                        ••
                      Cips
                        •
                     lli.
                ending in serpents tayles; and in his hand a leaueles Branch, laden with icycles.
            But before, in midst of the Hall; to keepe the State of the feast, and season; I had placed See, Iconolog. di Cesare Ripa.
                
               Ianuary, in a throne of Siluer; His robe of Ashcoullor
               
long, fringed with Siluer; a white mantle: His winges white, and his buskins: In his hand a laurell bough, vpon his head an Anademe of laurell, fronted with the signe Aquarius, and the Character. Who as Boreas blusterd forth, discouer'd himselfe.
            
               BOREAS.
               WHich, among these is Albion, Neptunes Sonne?
            
            
               IANVARIVS.
               WHat ignorance dares make that question?
               Would any aske, who Mars were, in the wars?
               Or, which is Hesperus, among the starres?
               Of the bright Planets, which is Sol? Or can
               A doubt arise, 'mong creatures, which is man?
               Behold, whose eyes do dart Promethean fire
               Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
               The rest with duty; yet commanding, cheare:
               And are obeyed, more with loue, then feare.
            
            
               BOREAS.
               WHat Power art thou, that thus informest me?
            
            
               IANVARIVS.
               DOst thou not know me? I, to well, know thee
               
                  By thy Ouid Metam: lib. 6. neere the end see.—horridas i
                        •
                     â, quae soli
                        •
                     a est 
                        •
                     lli, nimiu
                        •
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      domestica, vento, &c. rude voyce, that doth so hoarcely blow,
               Thy haire, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
               Thy Serpent feet, to be that rough North-winde,
               
               
                  Boreas, that, to my raigne, art still vnkinde.
               I am the Prince of Months, call'd Ianuary;
               
               Because by me 
                     See the offices, and power of Ianus. Ouid. 
                        •
                     ast. 1.
                   
                  Ianus the yeare doth vary,
               Shutting vp warres, proclayming peace, & feasts,
               Freedome, & triumphes: making Kings his guests.
            
            
               BOREAS.
               TO thee then, thus, & by thee, to that King,
               That doth thee present honors, do I bring
               Present remembrance of twelue Aethiope Dames:
               Who, guided hither by the Moones bright flames,
               To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
               Enioyn'd againe, and (thence assign'd a day
               For their returne) were in the waues to leaue
               Theyr blacknesse, and true beauty to receaue.
            
            
               IANVARIVS.
               WHich they receau'd, but broke theyr day: & yet
               Haue not return'd a looke of grace for it,
               Shewing a course, and most vnfit neglect.
               Twise haue I come, in pompe here, to expect
               Theyr presence; Twise deluded, haue bene faine
               With 
                     Two marriages; the one of the Earle of Essex. 1606. the other of the Lord Hay. 1607.
                   other rites my Feasts to intertayne:
               And, now the Third time, turn'd about the yeare
               
                  Since they were look'd for; and, yet, are not here.
            
            
               BOREAS.
               IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that caus'd theyr stay;
               For they were all prepared by theyr day,
               And, with religion, forward on theyr way:
               When PROTEVS, 
                  
                     Read his description, with Virg. Geor. 4. Est in Carpathio Neptuni gurgite vates, Caeruleus Proteus. the gray Prophet of the Sea,
               Met them, and made report, how other foure
               Of their blacke kind, (whereof theyr Sire had store)
               Faithfull to that great wonder, so late done
               Vpon theyr Sisters, by bright Albion,
               
               Had followed them to seeke BRITANIA forth,
               And there, to hope like fauor, as like worth.
               Which Night envy'd, as done
                     Because they were before of her complexion.
                   in her despight,
               And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
               Thought to preuent in these; least men should deeme
               Her coulor, if thus chang'd, of small esteeme.
               And so, by mallice, and her magicke, tost
               The Nymphes at Sea, as they were allmost lost,
               Till, on an Iland, they by chance arriu'd,
               That 
                     To giue authority to this part of our fiction. Plinie hath a Chap. 95. of his 2. booke. Nat. Hist. de Insulis fluctuantib
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ 
                     &, Card. lib. 1 de rerum varī. et. Cap. vij. reports one, to be in his time knowne, in the Lake of Loumond, in Scotland. to let passe that of Delos. &c. floted in the mayne; where, yet, she' had giu'd sight.
               Them so, in charmes of darknes, as no might)
               Should loose them thence, but theyr chang'd Sisters
               Whereat the Twelue (in piety mou'd, & kind)
               Streight, put themselues in act, the place to finde;
               Which was the Nights sole trust they so will do,
               That she, with labor, might confound them too.
               For, euer since, with error hath she held
               
                  Them wandring in the Ocean, and so quell'd
               Their hopes beneath their toyle, as (desperat now
               Of any least successe vnto their vow;
               Nor knowing to returne to expresse the grace,
               Wherewith they labor to this Prince, and place)
               One of them, meeting me at Sea, did pray,
               That for the loue of my 
                     The daughter of Erectheus, King of Athens, whome Boreas rauish'd a way, into Thrace, as shee was playing with other virgins by the floud Ilissus: or (as some will) by the Fountaine Cephisus. 
                  ORYTHYIA,
               
               (Whose very name did heate my frosty brest,
               And make me shake my Snow-fill'd wings, & crest)
               To beare this sad report I would be wonne,
               And frame their iust excuse: which here I haue done.
            
            
               IANVARIVS.
               WOuld thou hadst not begun, vnluckie Winde,
               
               That neuer yet blew'st goodnes to mankind;
               But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
               Strik'st 
                     
                        The violēce of Boreas Ouid excellently describes in the place aboue quoted.
                     
                     Hác nubila pello, hác freta concutio, nodosa
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         robora verto, Induro
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        . niues, et terras grandine pulso.
                   horrors through the ayre, as sharp as death.
            
            Here a second Wind came in, VVLTVRNVS, in a blew coulored robe & mantle, pufft as the former, but somewhat sweeter; his face blacke, and on his According to that of Vir. Denuntiat igneus Eu
                     
                        •••
                     .
                head a red Sunne, shewing he came from the East: his winges of seuerall coullors; his buskins white, and wrought with Gold.
            
            
               VVLTVRNVS.
               ALL horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
               
               Bee all things here as calme as is my breath.
               
                  A gentler Wind, Vulturnus, brings you newes
               The Ile is found, & that the Nymphs now vse
               Their rest, & ioy. The Nights black charmes are flowne.
               For, being made vnto their Goddesse knowne,
               Bright Aethiopia, the Siluer Moone,
               
               As she was 
                     She is call'd 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , by Eurip. in Helena. which is Lucifera, to which name we here presently allude.
                   
                  Hecate, she brake them soone:
               And now by vertue of their light, and grace,
               The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
               Of all the earth for Beauty. 
                     For the more full and cleare vnderstanding of that which followes, haue recourse to the succeeding pages; where the Scene presents it selfe.
                   There, their Queen
               
               Hath raysed them a Throne, that still is seene
               To turne vnto the motion of the World;
               Wherein they sit, and are, like Heauen, whirld
               About the Earth; whilst, to them contrary,
               (Following those nobler torches of the Sky)
               A world of little Loues, and chast Desires,
               
               Do light their beauties, with still mouing fires.
               And who to Heauens consent can better moue,
               Then those that are so like it, Beauty and Loue?
               
               Hether, as to theyr new Elysium,
               
               The spirits of the antique Greekes are come,
               
                  Poets, and Singers, Linus, Orpheus, all
               That haue excell'd in 
                     So Terence. and the Antients calld Poesy, Artem musicam. knowledge musicall;
               Where, set in Arb
                     •
                  rs made of myrtle, and gold,
               They liue, againe, these Beautyes to behold.
               And thence, in flowry mazes walking forth
               Sing hymnes in celebration of their worth.
               Whilst, to theyr Songs, two Fountaynes flow, one hight
               Of lasting Youth, the other chast Delight,
               
               That at the closes, from theyr bottomes spring,
               And strike the Ayre to eccho what they sing.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  But, why do I describe what all must see?
               By this time, nere thy coast, they floating be;
               For, so their vertuous Goddesse, the chast Moone,
               
               Told them, the Fate of th' Iland should, & soone
               Would fixe it selfe vnto thy continent,
               
               As being the place, by Destiny fore-ment,
               Where they should slow forth, drest in her attyres:
               And, that the influence of those holy fires,
               (First rapt from hence) being multiplied vpon
               The other foure, should make their Beauties one.
               Which now expect to see, great Neptunes Sonne,
               And loue the miracle, which thy selfe hast done.
            
            Here, a Curtine was drawne (in which the Night was painted.) and the Scene discouer'd. which (because the former was marine, and these, yet of necessity, to come from the Sea) I deuisd, should bee an Island, floting on a calme water. In the middst therof was a Seate of state, call'd the Throne of Beautie, erected: diuided into eight Squares, and distinguish'd by so many Ionick pilasters. In these Squares the sixteene Masquers were plac'd by couples: behind them, in the center of the Throne was a tralucent Pillar, shining with seuerall colour'd lights, that reflected on their backs. From the top of which Pillar went seuerall arches to the Pilasters, that sustained the roofe of the Throne, which was likewise adorn'd with lights, and gyrlonds; And betweene the Pilasters, in front, little Cupids in

flying posture, wauing of wreaths, and lights, bore vp the Coronice: ouer which were placed eight Figures, representing the Elements of Beauty; which aduanced vpon the Ionick, and being females, had the Corinthian order. The first was

                  SPLENDOR.
                  In a robe of flame colour,The Rose is call'd, elegantly, by Achil. Tat. lib. 2. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , the splendour of Plants, and is euery where taken for the Hi
                              •
                           roglyphick of Splendour. naked brested; her bright hayre loose flowing: She was drawne in a circle of clowdes, her face, and body breaking through; and in her hand a branch, with two Roses, a white, and a red. The next to her was
                  SERENITAS.
                  In a garment of bright skye-colour, a long tresse, & waued with a vayle of diuers colours, such as the golden skie some-times shewes: vpon her head a cleare, and faire Sunne shining, with rayes of gold striking downe to the feete of the figure. In her hand a As this of Serenity., applying to the Opticks reason of the Rainebowe
                        ▪ and the Myt
                              •
                           o
                              ••
                           gists making her the Daughter of Electra.
                      
                     Christall, cut with seuerall angles, and shadow'd with diuerse colours, as causd by refraction. The third
                  GERMINATIO.
                  In greene; with a Zone of golde about

her Wast, crowned with Myrtle, her haire likewise flowing, but not of so bright a colour: In her hand, a branch of So Hor. lib. 1. Od. 4. makes it the ensigne of the Spring. Nunc decet 
                              •
                           ut viridi nitidum caput impedire myrto, aut sl
                              •
                           
                           re, terrae quem ferunt solutae. &c. 
                     Myrtle. Her socks of greene, and Gold. The fourth was
                  LAETITIA.
                  IN a Vesture of diuerse colours, and all sorts of flowers embroidered thereon. Her socks so fitted. A They are euery where the tokens of gladnesse, at al feasts, sports. 
                     Gyrland of flowers in her hand; her eyes turning vp, and smiling, her haire flowing, and stuck with flowers. The fift
                  TEMPERIES.
                  IN a garment of Gold, Siluer, and colours weaued: In one hand shee held a The signe of temperature, as also her girlond mixed of the foure Seasons.
                      burning Steele, in the other, an Vrne with water. On her head a gyrland of flowers, Corne, Vine-leaues, and Oliue branches, enter-wouen. Her socks, as her garment. The sixth
                  VENVSTAS.
                  IN a Siluer robe, with a thinne subtle vaile ouer her haire, and it: 
                        P
                              •
                           arles, with the auntients, were the speciall Hieroglyphicks of louelinesse, in quibus nitor tantùm & leuor expetebantur.
                      Pearle about her neck, and forhead. Her socks wrought with pearle. In her hand shee bore seuerall colour'd So was the Lilly, of which the most delicate Citty of the Persians was called Susae: signifiyng that kind of flower, in their tongue. 
                     Lillies. The seauenth was
                  
                     DIGNITAS.
                  IN a dressing of State, the haire bound vp with fillets of gold, the Garments rich, and set with iewells, and gold; likewise her buskins, and in her hand a The signe, of honor, & dignity. 
                     Golden rod. The eight
                  PERFECTIO.
                  
                     IN a Vesture of pure Gold, a wreath of Gold vpon her head. About her body the Both that, & the Compasse are known ensignes of perfection.
                         
                        Zodiack, with the Signes: In her hand a Compasse of gold, drawing a circle.
                     
                     On the top of all the Throne, (as being made out of all these) stood
                  
                  HARMONIA.
                  
                     A Personage, whose dressing had something of al the others, & had her robe painted full of Figures. Her head was compass'd with a crowne of Gold, hauing in it She is so describ'd in Iconolog. di Cesare Ripa, his reason of 7. iewells, in the crowne, alludes to Pythagoras his comment, with Mac. lib. 2. Som. Sci. of the seauen Planets and their Spheares.
                         seauen iewells equally set. In her hand a Lyra, wheron she rested.
                     This was the Ornament of the Throne. The ascent to which, consisting of sixe steppes, was couered with a The inducing of many Cupids wnts not defence, with the best and most receiu'd of the Antients, besides Prop. Stati. Claud. Sido: Apoll especially Phil. in Icon. Amor. whome I haue particularly followed, in this description. multitude of Cupids (chosen out of the best, and most ingenuous youth of the Kingdome, noble, and others) that were the

                        Torch-bearers; and all armed, with Bowes, Quiuers, Winges, and other Ensignes of Loue. On the sides of the Throne, were curious, and elegant Arbors appointed: & behind, in the back part of the Ile, a Groue, of growne trees laden with golden fruict, which other little Cupids plucked, and threw each at other, whilst on the ground They were the notes of Louelinesse and sacred to Venus. See Phil. in that place, mentiond. 
                        Leuerets pick'd vp the bruised apples, and left them halfe eaten. The Ground-plat of the whole was a subtle indented Maze: And, in the two formost angles, were two Fountaines, that ranne continually, the one Of youth. 
                        Hebe's, the other Of pleasure. 
                        Hedone's: In the Arbors, were plac'd the Musitians, who represented the Shades of the old Poets, & were attir'd in a Priest-like habit of Crimson, and Purple, with Laurell gyrlonds.
                  
               
            
            The colours of the Masquers were varied; the one halfe in Orenge-tawny, and Siluer: the other in Sea-greene, and Siluer. The bodies and short skirts of White, and Gold, to both.
            The habite, and dressing (for the fashion) was most curious, and so exceeding in riches, as the Throne wheron they sat, seem'd to be a Mine of light, stroake frō their iewells, & their garmēts.
            This Throne, (as the whole Iland mou'd forward, on the water,) had a circular motion of it owne, imitating that which we cal Motum mundi, from the East to the West, or the right to the left side. For so Hom. Ilia. M. vnderstāds by 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Orientalia mundi: by 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Occidentalia. The

steps, wheron the Cupids sate, had a motion contrary, with Analogy, ad motum Planetarum, from the West to the East: both which turned with their seuerall lights. And with these three varied Motions, at once, the whole Scene shot it selfe to the Land.
            Aboue which, the Moone was seene in a Siluer Chariot, drawne by Virgins, to ride in the cloudes, and hold them greater light: with the Signe Scorpio, and the Character, plac'd before her.
            The order of this Scene was carefully, and ingeniously dispos'd; and as happily put in act (for the Motions) by the Kings Master Carpenter. The Paynters, I must needes say, (not to belie them) lent small colour to any, to attribute much of the spirit of these things to their pen'cills. But that must not bee imputed a crime either to the inuention, or designe.
            Here the loude Musique ceas'd; and the Musitians, which were placed in the Arbors, came forth through the Mazes, to the other Land: singing this full Song, iterated in the closes by two Eccho's, rising out of the Fountaines.
            
               SONG.
               WHen Loue, at first, did mooue
               From 
                     So is he faind by Orpheus, to haue appear'd first of all the Gods: awakend by Clotho, and is therefore call'd Phanes, both by him, & Lactantius. out of Chaos, brightned
               So was the world, and lightned,
               
                  As now!
Ecch.
As now!
Ecch.
As now!
               Yeeld Night, then, to the light,
               As Blacknesse hath to Beauty;
               
               Which is but the same duety.
               It was 
                     An agreeing opinion, both with Diuines and Philosophers, that the great Artificer in loue with his own Idaea, did, therefore, frame the world.
                   for Beauty, that the World was made,
               And where shee raignes, 
                     Alluding to his name of Himerus, and his signification in the name, which is Desiderium posta spectum: and more then Eros, which is only Cupido, ex aspectu amare. 
                  Loues lights admit no shade.
               
                  Ecch.
Loues lights admit no shade.
               
                  Ecch.
Admit no shade.
            
            Which ended, Vulturnus the Wind, spake to the Riuer Thamesis that lay along betweene the shores, leaning vpon his Vrne (that flow'd with water,) and crown'd with flowers; with a blew cloth of Siluer robe about him: and was personated by Maister THOMAS GILES, who made the Daunces.
            
            
               VVLTVRNVS.
               RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
               Receiue these Nymphes, within the land:
               And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
               
               Wherewith thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
               Of fruictfull Kent, and Essex faire,
               That lend thee gyrlands for thy haire;
               Instruct their siluer feete to tread,
               Whilst we, againe to sea, are fled.
            
            With which the Windes departed; and the Riuer receiu'd them into the Land, by couples & foures, their Cupids comming before them.
            
               
               Their Persons were.
               The QVEENE.
               
                  La. ARABELLA.
               
                  Co. of ARVNDEL.
               
                  Co. of DERBY.
               
                  Co. of BEDFORD.
               
                  Co. of MONTGOMERY.
               
                  La. ELIZ. GILFORD.
               
                  La. KAT. PETER.
               
                  La. ANNE WINTER.
               
                  La. WINSORE.
               
                  La. ANNE CLIFFORD.
               
                  La. MARY NEVILL.
               
                  La. ELIZ. HATTON.
               
                  La. ELIZ. GARRARD.
               
                  La. CHICHESTER.
               
                  La. WALSINGHAM.
            
            The dauncing forth a most curious Daunce, full of excellent deuice, and change, ended it in the figure of a Diamant, and so, standing still, were by the Musitians, with a second Song (sung by a loud Tenor) celebrated.
            
               SONG.
               SO Beauty on the waters stood,
               (When Loue had 
                     As, in the Creation, he is sayd, by the Antients, to haue done.
                   seuer'd earth, from flood!
               So when he parted ayre, from fire,
               He did with concord all inspire!
               And then a Motion he them taught,
               That elder then himselfe was thought.
               Which thought was, yet, 
                     That is, borne since the world, and, out of those duller apprehensions that did not thinke he was before.
                   the child of earth,
               For Loue is elder then his birth.
            
            The Song ended; they Daunced forth their second Daunce, more subtle, and full of change, then the former; and so exquisitely performed;

as the Kings Maiestie incited first (by his owne liking, to that which all others, there present, wish'd) requir'd them both againe, after some time of dauncing with the Lords. Which time, to giue them respite, was intermitted with Song; first by a treble voyce, in this manner.
            
               SONG
               IF all these Cupids, now, were blind
               As is 
                     I make these different from him, which they faine caecum cupidinē, or petulantem. as I expresse beneath in the third song. these being chast Loues, that attend a more diuine beauty, then that of Loues commune parent. their wanton Brother;
               
               Or play should put it in their mind
               To shoot at one another:
               What pretty battayle they would make
               If they their obiects should mistake
               And each one wound his Mother!
               
            
            Which was seconded by another treble; thus.
            
               SONG.
               IT was no politie of Court,
               Albee' the place were charmed,
               To let in earnest, or in sport,
               So many Loues in, armed.
               For say, the Dames should▪ with their eyes,
               Vpon the hearts, here, meane surprize;
               Were not the men like harmed?
            
            To which a tenor answerd.
            
               SONG.
               YEs, were the Loues or false, or straying;
               Or Beauties not their beauty waighing:
               
                  But here, no such deceipt is mix'd,
               Their flames are pure, their eyes are fix'd:
               They do not warre, with different darts,
               But strike a musique of like hearts.
            
            AFter which Songs, they daunc'd Galliards, & C
                     •
                  ranto's; and with those excellent Graces, that the Musique, appointed to celebrate them, shew'd it could be silent no longer: but by the first Tenor, admit'd them thus.
            
               SONG.
               HAd those, that dwell in error foule,
               And hold 
                     There hath beene such a prophane Paradoxe published.
                   that women haue no soule,
               But seene these moue; They would haue, then
               Sayd, Women were the soules of Men.
               
               So they do moue each heart, and eye
               With the 
                     The Platonicks opinion. See also Mac. lib. 1. and 2. Som. Scip. 
                  Worlds soule, true Harmonie.
               
            
            HEere, they daunc'd a third most elegant, and curious Daunce, and not to be describ'd againe, by any art, but that of their owne footing: which, ending in the figure, that was to produce the fourth, Ianuary from his state saluted them, thus,
            
               IANVARIVS.
               YOur grace is great, as is your Beauty, Dames;
               
               Inough my Feasts haue prou'd your thankfull flames.
               Now vse your Seate: that seate which was, before,
               Thought stray'ing, vncertayne, floting to each shore,
               And to whose hauing 
                     For what Countrey is it thinks not her owne beauty fayrest, yet?
                   euery Clime layd clayme,
               Each Land, and Nation vrged as the ayme
               
                  Of their ambition, Beauties perfect Throne,
               
               Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
               And that, by'impulsion of your destenies,
               And his attractiue beames, that lights these Skies:
               Who (though with th'Ocean compass'd) neuer wets
               His hayre therein, nor weares a beame that sets.
               Long may his light adorne these happy rites
               
               As I renew them; and your gratious sights
               Enioy that happinesse, eu'en to envy, 'as when
               
                  Beauty, at large, brake forth, and conquer'd men.
            
            At which they daunc'd theyr last dance, into their Throne againe: and that turning, the Scene clos'd with this full Song.
            
            
               SONG.
               STill turne, and imitate the Heauen
               
               In motion swift and euen;
               And as his Planets goe,
               Your brighter lights do so:
               May Youth and Pleasure euer flow.
               But let your State, the while,
               Be fixed as the Isle.
               
               
                  Cho
So all that see your Beauties sphaere
               
                  Cho
May know the Elysian Fields are here.
               
                  Echo.
Th'Elysian feilds are here.
               
                  Echo.
                  Elysian feilds are here.
            
            The end.
            
         
      
   