
      
         
            
            
            
               B. ION:
HIS PART OF
King Iames his Royall and Magnificent
Entertainement through his
Honorable Cittie of London,
Thurseday the 15. of
March. 1603.
            So much as was presented in the first and last of
their Triumphall Arch's.
            With his speach made to the last Presentation, in the
Strand, erected by the inhabitants of the Dutchy,
and Westminster.
            
            Also, a briefe Panegyre of his Maiesties first and well
auspicated entrance to his high Court of Parliament,
on Monday, the 19. of the same
Moneth.
            With other Additions.
            
               
                  Mart.
                Quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos.
            Printed at London by V. S. for
Edward Blount, 1604.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     ❧ The Pegme at Fen-church
                  
                     PResented it selfe in a square and flat
vpright, like to the side of a Citty: the
top therof, aboue the Vent, and Crest,
adorn'd with houses, towres, and steeples,
set off in prospectiue. Vpon the Battlements
in a great capitall Letters was inscribed,
LONDINIVM:
According to Tacitus: At Suetonius mir
                           •
                         constantia,
medios inter hosteis Londinium perrexit,
                     Annal. lib. 14. cognomento
quiàem Coloniae non insigne, sed copia Negotiatorum,
& commeatu maxime celebre. Beneath that, in a
lesse and different Character, was written
CAMERA REGIA
Which Title immediately after the Norman Conquest
it beganne to haue;Camd. Bri
                           •
                        . 374. and by the indulgence
of succeeding Princes, hath beene hitherto continued.
In the Freeze ouer the gate, it seemeth to
speake this verse:

                        PAR DOMVS HAEC COELO,
                        SED MINOR EST DOMINO.
                     
Taken out of Martiall,
                     Lib. 8. Epig. 36 and implying, that though
this Cittie (for the state, and magnificence) might
(by Hyporbole) be saide to touch the starres, and
reach vp to heauen, yet was it farre Inferior to the
Maister thereof, who was his Maiestie; and in that
respect vnworthy to receiue him. The highest person
aduaunc'd therein, was
MONARCHIA BRITANNICA
                     
and fittely: applying to the aboue mentioned
Title of the Citty, the Kings Chamber, and therefore
heere placed as in the proper seate of the Empire:
for,Brit. 367. so the glorie and light of our Kingdome
M. Camden, speaking of London, saieth,
shee is, totius Britanniae Epitome, Britannicíque imperii
sedes, Regúmque Angliae Camera, tantum inter

                           •
                        mneis eminet, quantum (vt ait ille) inter viburna Cupressus.
Shee was a woman richly attir'd in cloth of
golde and tissue; a rich mantle; ouer her state twoo
Crownes hanging, with pensile shieldes thorow
them; the one lim'd with the particular Coate of
England, the other of Scotland: on either side also a
Crowne, with the like Scutchions, and peculiar
Coats of France, & Ireland. In her hand she holdes
a Scepter; on her head a fillet of gold, inter-wouen
with Palme & Lawrel; her haire bound into foure
seuerall points, descending from her Crownes; &
and in her lappe a little Globe, inscrib'd vpon

                        ORBIS BRITANNICVS.
                        And beneath, the word
                        DIVISVS AB ORBE.
                     
To shew, that this Empire is a world diuided from
the world, and alluding to that of* Clau.
                     De mallij Theodor. cons. Panegyri.
                     
                        —Et nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
                        
                           And Virg.
                        —Et penitus toto diuisos orbe Britannos.Eclog. 1.
                        
                     
The wreathe denotes Victory and Happines. The
Scepter & Crowns soueraignty. The Shieldes the
precedency of the Countries and their distinctions.
At her feete was set
THEOSOPHIA,
                     
or Diuine wisdome, al in white, a blew mantle seeded
with Stars, a crowne of Stars on hir head. Hir garments
figur'd Truth, Innocence and Cleerenesse.
She was alwayes looking vp; in her one hand shee
sustained a Doue, in the other a Serpent:Matth. 10. 16. the last to
shew her Subtilty, the first her Simplicity; alluding
to that text of Scripture,Prou. 8. 15. 
                     Estote ergo prudentes sicut
serpentes, & simplices sicut columbae. Her word,
PER ME REGES REGNANT.
                  
                  Intimating, how by her, all Kings do gouerne,
and that she is the foundation and strength of kingdomes,
to which end, she was here placed, vpon a
Cube, at the foote of the Monarchie, as her Base
and stay.Antiqui Genium omniū gignendarum rerum existimarūt Deum: et vrbib. quam hominib. vel caeteris rebus natū. Lil. Gre. Gy. in Synt. deor. 15. & Rosin. Antiq. Ro. lib. 2. cap. 14. Directly beneath her stoode
GENIVS VRBIS.
                  
                  A person attir'd rich, reuerend, and antique: his
haire long and white, crowned with a wreathe of
Plane tree, which is saide to be Arbor genialis; his
mantle of purple, and buskins of that colour: Hee
held in one hand a Goblet, in the other a braunch
full of little twigges, to signifie Increase and Indulgence:
His word
HIS ARMIS.
pointing to the two that supported him, whereof
the one on the right hand, was
BOVLEVTES.
Figuring the Councell of the Citty,Civica corona fit è fronde querna, quoniam cibus, victus
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         antiquissimus querceus capisolitus sit. Ros. libr. 10. cap. 
                           •
                        7. and was suted
in blacke and purple; a wreathe of* Oake vppon
his head; sustaining for his ensignes, on his left
arme a scarlet roabe, and in his right hand the

                     
                        
                           •
                        ascicul
                           •
                         v
                           ••
                        
                        garum, intra quas obligata securis erat, sic, vt ferrum in summo fasce extaret, Ros. lib. 7. cap. 3. vbi notandum est, non debere precipitem, & solutam iram esse magistratus. Mora enim allata, & cunctatio, dum sensim virgae solvuntur, identidem consilium mutauit deplect
                           •
                        ndo. Quando autem vitia quaedam sunt corrigibilia, deplorata alia; castigant virgae, quod revocari valet, immendabile secures praecidunt. Plut. Prob. Rom. 82. Fasces, as tokens of Magistracie, with this inscription;
SERVARE CIVES.
                  
                  The other on the left hand.
POLEMIVS
                  The warrelike force of the City, in an antique
Coate, or Armour, with a Target and Sword; his
helme on, and crowned with Lawrell, implying
Strength and Conquest: in his hand he bore the
Standard of the Citty, with this word,
EXTINGVERE ET HOSTEIS.
                  
                  Expressing by those seuerall Motts, connexed,
that with those Armes of Councell and Strength,
the Genius was able to extinguish the Kings enemies,
and preserue his Citizens, alluding to those
verses in Seneca,
                     Octa: Act: 2
                     
                        Extinguere hostem, maxima est virtus Ducis.
                        Servare Cives, maior est patriae, patri.
                     
                  
                  Vnderneath these, in an Aback thrust out before
the rest lay
TAMESIS.
                  
                  The Riuer, as running along the side of the City;
in a skinne made like flesh, naked, and blew.
His mantle of sea-greene or water colour, thinne,
and bolne out like a sayle; Bracelets about his
wreasts, of willow and sedge, a crowne of sedge
and reede vpon his head, mixt with water-lillies;
alluding to Virgills description of Tiber;
                     
                     
                        —Deus ipse loci,Aen. lib. 8. fluvie Tyberinus amoeno,
                        Populeas inter senior se att
                              •
                           llere frondes
                        Visus. cum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
                        Carbasus. & crineis vmbrosa tegebat Arundo.
                     
                  
                  His beard, and haire long, and ouergrowne. He
leanes his arme vpon an earthen pot, out of which,
water, with liue Fishes, are seene to runne forth,
and play about him. His word,
FLVMINA SENSERVNT IPSA.
A Hemistich of Ouids:
                     Amor. lib. 3. el. 5. The rest of the verse being,
quid esset amor.
                  
                  Affirming, that Riuers themselues, and such
inanimate Creatures, haue heeretofore beene
made sensible of Passions, and Affections; and
that hee, nowe, no lesse pertooke the ioy of
his Maiesties gratefull approach to this Citty, than
any of those persons, to whome he pointed, which
were the daughters of the Genius, and sixe in number:
who, in a spreading ascent, vpon seuerall grices,
help to beautifie both the sides. The first,
EVPHROSYNE,
or Gladnes: was suted in greene, a mantle of diuers
colors, embroydred with all varietie of floures: on
her head a Gyrland of Myrtle, in her right hand a
cristall Cruze filld with wine, in the left a Cup of
golde: at her feete a Tymbrell, Harpe, and other
Instruments, all ensignes of gladnesse,Hor. car. 
                           •
                        . ode 27.
                     
                        Natis in vsum laetitiae scyphis, &c.
                        And in another place,
                        Nunc est bibendum,& Ode. 37 nunc pede libero
                        Pulsanda Tellus, &c.
                      Her word.Stat. Syl. 4. Epu. Domit.
                  
                  HAEC AEVI MIHI PRIMA DIES.
                  
                     
As if this were the first houre of her life, and the
minute wherein she beganne to be; beholding so
long coueted, and look'd for a presence. The second.
SEBASIS.
or Veneratio, was varied in an ashe colour'd sute,
and darke mantle, a vayle ouer her head of ashcolour:
her hands crost before her, and her eyes
halfe closde: Her word:
MIHI SEMPER DEVS.Virg. Ecl. 
                              •
                           .
                     
                  
                  Implying both her office of reuerence, and the
dignity of her obiect, who being as God on earth,
should neuer be lesse in her thought: The third:
PROTHYMIA.
or Promptitude, was attir'd in a short tuckt garment
of flame-colour, wings at her backe; her hayre
bright, & bound vp with ribands; her breast open,
virago-like; hir buskins so ribanded: She was crowned
with a Chaplet of Trifoly, to expresse readines,
and opennesse euery way; in her right hand shee
held a squirrell, as being the creature most full of
life and quicknesse: in the left a close round Censor,
with the perfume sodainely to be vented forth
at the sides. Her word:
QVA DATA PORTA.Aene. 1.
                     
                  
                  Taken from an other place in Virgill where Eolus
at the command of Iuno letts forth the winde;Aene. 1.
                     
                        —ac venti velut agmine facto
                        Qua data p
                              •
                           rta ruunt, & terras turbine perflant.
                     
                  
                  And shew'd that shee was no lesse prepar'd with
promptitude, and alacrity, then the windes were,

vpon the least Gate that shall be opened to his
high commaund. The fourth
AGRYPNIA.
or Vigilance, in yellow, a sable mantle, seeded with
waking eies, and siluer fringe: her Chaplet of Heliotropium,
or Turnsole; in her one hand a Lampe,
or Cresset, in her other a Bell. The Lampe signified
search and sight, the Bell warning. The Heliotropium
care; and respecting her obiect. Her word
SPECVLAMVR IN OMNEIS.
                  
                  Alluding to that of Ouid, where he describes the
office of Argus,
                     
                        —Ipse pr
                              •
                           cul mon
                              •
                           is sublime cacumen
                        Occupat,Met. 1. vnde sedens partes speculatur in omneis.
                     
and implying the like duety of care and vigilance in
her selfe. The fifth
AGAPE.
Or louing Affection, in Crimson fringed with
golde, a mantle of flame-colour, her Chaplet of
red and white roses; in her hand a flaming heart:
The flame expressed zeale, the red and white roses,
a mixture of Simplicity with Loue: her robes
freshnes and feruency.De 4. Cons. Honor. Panegyri Her word,
NON SIC EXCVBIAE.
Out of Claudian, in following

                        —Nec circumstantia peila
                        —Quàm tutatur amor.
                     
Inferring, that though her Sister before had protested
watchfulnes, & circumspection, yet no watch

or guard could be so safe to the estate, or person of
a Prince, as the loue and naturall affection of his
Subiects: which she in the Citties behalfe promised.
The sixt,
OMOTHYMIA.
Or Vnanimity in blew, her roabe blew, and buskins.
A Chaplet of blew lillies, shewing one trueth
and intirenesse of minde. In her lappe lies a sheafe
of arrowes bound together, and she her selfe sittes
weauing certaine small siluer twists. Her word,

                        FIRMA CONSENSVS FACIT.
                        Auxilia humilia firma,Pub. Syr. Mi. &c.
                     
                  
                  Intimating, that euen the smallest and weakest
aydes, by consent, are made strong: herselfe personating
the vnanimity, or consent of Soule, in all
inhabitants of the Citty to his seruice.
                  ¶These are all the personages, or liue figures,
whereof onely two were Speakers (Genius and Tamesis)
the rest were Mutes. Other dumbe complements
there were, as the Armes of the Kingdome
on the one side, with this Inscription.

                        HIS VIREAS.
                        With these maist thou flourish.
                     
                  
                  On the other side the Armes of the City, with

                        HIS VINCAS.
                        With these maist thou conquer.
                     
                  
                  In the centre, or midst of the Pegme, there was
an Aback, or Square, wherein this Elogie was written.

                        Maximus hic Rex est, & lucc serenior ipsa
                        Principe quae talem cernit in vrbe Ducem;
                        
                           
Cuiu
                              •
                            Fortunam superat sic vnica Virtus,
                        Vnus vt is reliquos vincit vtrâque viros.
                        Praeceptis alii populos, multâque fatigant
                        Lege; sed exemplo nos rapit ille suo.
                        Cuique frui totâ fas est vxore marito,
                        Et sua fas simili pignora nosse pa
                              •
                           ri.
                        Ecce vbi pignoribus circumstipata coruscis
                        It comes, & tanto vix minor ANNA viro.
                        Haud metus est, Regem posthac ne proximus Hares,
                        Neu Successorem non amet ille suum.
                     
                  
                  This, and the whole frame, was couered with a
curtaine of silke, painted like a thicke cloude, and
at the approach of the K. was instantly to bee
drawne. The Allegory being, that those cloudes
were gathered vpon the face of the Citty, through
their long want of his most wished fight: but now,
as at the rising of the Sunne, all mistes were dispersed
and fled. When sodainely vpon silence made to
the Musikes, a voyce was heard to vtter this verse;
Totus adest oculis,Clau. de laud. Stil. lib. 3. aderat qui mentibus olim,
                  
                  Signifying that hee now was really obiected to
their eyes, who before had beene only, but still,
present in their mindes.
                  ¶Thus farre the complementall parte of the
first; wherein was not only labored the expression
of State and Magnificence (as proper to a triumphall
Arch) but the very Site, Fabricke, Strength,
Policie, Dignitie and Affections of the Cittie
were all laide downe to life: The nature, and propertie
of these Deuises being, to present alwaies

some one entire body, or figure, consisting of
distinct members and eache of those expressing it
selfe, in the owne actiue spheare, yet all, with that
generall harmony so connexed, and disposed, as
no one little parte can be missing to the illustration
of the whole: where also is to be noted, that the
Symboles vsed, are not, neither ought to be simply
Hierogliphickes, Emblemes, or Imprese, but a mixed
Character, pertaking somwhat of all, and peculierly
apted to these more magnificent Inuentions:
wherein the Garments, and Ensignes deliuer the
nature of the person, and the Word the present
office. Neither was it becomming, or could it
stand with the dignity of these shewes (after the
most miserable & desperate shift of the Puppits) to
require a Truch-man, or (with the ignorant Painter)
one to write. This is a Dog; or, This is a Hare:
but so to be presented, as vpon the view they might
without cloude, or obscurity declare themselves to
the sharpe and learned: And for the multitude, no
doubt but their grounded iudgements gazed, said
it was fine, and were satisfied.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              The speeches of Gratulation.
                              
                                 GENIVS.
                                 TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspir'd,
                                 To giue our Age the day so much desir'd.
                                 What all the minutes, houres, weekes, months, and yeares,
                                 That hang in file vpon these siluer haires,
                                 Could not produce, beneath theAs being the first, free, and naturall gouernement of this Iland, after it came to ciuilitie. Brittane stroke,
                                 
                                    
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and NormanIn respect they vver all Cōquests & the obedience of the subiect more inforced. yoke,
                                 This point of Time hath done. Now London reare
                                 Thy forehead high, and on it striue to weare
                                 Thy choisest Gems; Teach thy steepe Towres to rise
                                 Higher with people: Set with sparkling eies
                                 Thy spacious windowes; and in euery streete,
                                 Let thronging Ioy, Loue, and Amazement meete.
                                 Cleaue all the ayre with show
                                       •
                                    es, and let the cry
                                 Strike through as long, and vniuersally
                                 As Thunder; For, thou now art blist to see
                                 That sight, for which thou didst beginne to bee.
                                 When
                                       Rather then the Citie shuld vvant a Founder, vve choose to folovve the receiu'd story of Brute, vvhether fabulous, or true, and not altogether vnvvarrāted in Poetrie: since it is a fauor of Antiquity to fevv cities, to let them knovv their first Authors. Besides, a learned Poet of our time, in a most elegāt vvork of his Con. Tam. & ISIS, celebrating London hath this verse of her:
                                       
                                          Aemula maternae tollens sua lumina Troiae. Here is also an antient rite alluded to in the building of Citties, vvhich vvas to giue them their boundes vvith a plough, according to Vir. Aen. li. 10. Interea Aeneas vrbem designat Aratro. And Isidore li. 15. cap. 2. Vrbs vocata ab orbe, quod antiquae ciuitates in orbem fiebant; vel ab vrbe parte 
                                                ••
                                             ratri, quo muri designabantur, vnde est illud. Optauit
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              locum regno & concludere sulco.
                                       
                                     
                                    Brutus plough first gaue thee infant boūds,
                                 And I, thy GENIVS walk't auspicious rounds
                                 In eueryPrimigenius sulcus dicitur, qui in condenda noua vrbe, taur
                                          •
                                        & vacca designationis causa imprimitur; Hitherto respects that of Camd. Brit. 368. speaking of this Cittie, Quicun
                                          
                                             
                                          
                                          que
                                        autem condiderit, vitali genio, constructam fuisse ipsius fortuna docuit. furrow; Then did I forelooke,
                                 And saw this day
                                       For so all happy dayes vvere. Plin. cap. 40. lib. 7. Nat. Hist. To vvhich Horace alludes, lib. 1. ode. 36. Cressa ne careat pulchra dies nota. And the other Plin. epist. 11. lib. 6. O diem laetum, not and umque mihi candidissimo calculo. With many other in many places. Mart. lib. 8. epi. 45. lib. 9. epi. 53. lib. 10. 38. lib. 11. 37. Stat. lib. 4. Syl. 6. Pers, sat. 2. Catull. epig. 69. &c.
                                     mark't white inThe Parcae, or Fates, Martianus calls them scribas ac librarias superûm; vvhereof Clotho is saide to be the eldest, signifying in Latine Euocatio.
                                     
                                    Clotho's booke.
                                 The seuerall
                                       Those before mentioned of the Brittane, Romane, Saxon, &c. and to this Register of the Fates allude those verses of Ouid Met. 15—Cernes illic molimine vasto. Exaere, & solido rerum tabularia ferro: Quae neque concussum coeli, ne
                                          
                                             
                                          
                                          que
                                        fulminis Iram, Nec metuunt vllas tuta at
                                          
                                             
                                          
                                          que
                                        aeternaruinas. Inuenies illic incisa adamante peren
                                          ••
                                        Fata &c.— Circles, both of change and sway,
                                 
                                    
Within this Isle, there also figur'd lay:
                                 Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
                                 Was this, whose present happinesse we taste.
                                 Why keep you silence Daughters? What dull peace
                                 Is this inhabites you? Shall Office cease
                                 Vpon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
                                 More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME knowe
                                 That Article, wherein your flame stoode still,
                                 And not aspir'd? Now heauen auert an ill
                                 Of that blacke looke. Ere pause possesse your breasts
                                 I wish you more of plagues: "Zeale when it rests,
                                 Leaues to be Zeale. Vp thou tame RIVER, wake;
                                 And from thy liquid limbes this slumber s
                                       •
                                    ake:
                                 Thou drown'st thy selfe in inofficious sleepe;
                                 And these thy sluggish waters seeme to creepe,
                                 Rather than flow. Vp, rise, and swell with pride
                                 Aboue thy bankes. "Now is not euery Tyde.
                              
                              
                                 TAMESIS.
                                 TO what vaine end should I contend to show
                                 My weaker powres, when Seas of pompe o'reflow
                                 The Citties face: and couer all the shore
                                 With sands more rich thanA riuer diuiding Spaine and Portugall, and by the consent of Poets stil'd aurifer.
                                     
                                    Tagus wealthy ore?
                                 When in the flood of Ioy, that comes with him,
                                 He drownes the world; yet makes it liue and swimme,
                                 And spring with gladnesse: Not my fishes heere,
                                 Though they be dumbe, but doe expresse the cheere
                                 Of these bright streames. No lesse may
                                       Vnderstanding Euphrosyne, Sebasis, 
                                          〈◊〉
                                       , &c These, and I
                                 Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.
                              
                              
                                 
                                 GENIVS.
                                 INdeede, true Gladnesse doth not alwayes speake:
                                 Ioy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weake.
                                 Yet (lest the feruor of so pure a flame
                                 As this my Citty beares, might loose the name,
                                 Without the apt euenting of her heate)
                                 Know greatest IAMES (and no lesse good, than great.)
                                 In the behalfe of all my vertuous Sonnes,
                                 Whereof myThe Lord Maior vvho for his yeere, hath Senior place of the rest, and for the day vvas chief Serieant to the King. eldest there, thy pompe forerunnes,
                                 (A Man without my flattring, or his Pride,
                                 As worthy, as hee'sAboue the blessing of his present office, the vvord had some particular allusion to his name, vvhich is Benet, and hath (no doubt) in time bin the contraction of Benedict.
                                     blest to be thy guide)
                                 In his graue name, and all his Brethrens right,
                                 (Who thirst to drinke the Nectar of thy sight)
                                 The Councell, Commoners, and Multitude;
                                 (Glad, that this day so long deny'd, is viewd)
                                 I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
                                 That euer King had to hisThe Cittie, vvhich title is toucht before. Empires seate:
                                 Neuer came man, more long'd for, more desir'd:
                                 And being come, more reuerenc'd, lou'd, admir'd:
                                 Heare, and record it: In a Prince it is
                                 No little vertue, to know who are his.
                                 
                                    To the Prince. With like deuotions, doe I stoope t'embrace
                                 This springing glory of thyAn attribute giuen to great persons, fitly aboue other, Humanity, & in frequent vse vvith al the Greek Poets, especially Homer. Iliad. 
                                       
                                          〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                       —
                                          〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                       . And in the same Booke.—
                                          〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                       . Godlike race;
                                 His Countries Wonder, Hope, Loue, Ioy and Pride:
                                 How well dooth he become the royall side
                                 Of this erected, and broade spreading Tree,
                                 Vnder whose shade, may Brittane euer be.
                                 And from this branch, may thousand branches more
                                 Shoote or'e the Maine, and knit with euery shore
                                 In 
                                       •
                                    onds of Marriage, Kinred, and Increase;
                                 
                                    
And stile this Land, theAs Lactant. calls Parnass
                                             •
                                          , Vmbilicum terra. Nauill of their peace.
                                 This is your Seruants wish, your Citties vow,
                                 Which still shall propagate it selfe, with you;
                                 And free from spurres of Hope, that slow mindes moue:
                                 He seekes no hire, that owes his life to Loue.
                                 
                                    To the Queene. And heere she comes that is no lesse a part
                                 In this dayes greatnesse, then in my glad heart.
                                 Glory of Queenes, andAn emphaticall speach, & vvell re-enforcing her greatnes; being by this match, more than either hir Brother, Father, &c. Glory of your Name,
                                 Whose Graces doe as farre out-speake your Fame,
                                 As Fame doth silence, when her Trumpet rings
                                 YouDaughter to Frederik secōd kind of Denmarke, & Norway, sister to Christierne the fourth novve there raigning, & vvife to Iames our Soueraigne. Daughter, Sister, Wife of seuerall Kings:
                                 Besides Alliance, and the stile of Mother,
                                 In which one Title you drowne all your other.
                                 Instance, be
                                       The Prince Henry Frederike. that faire shoote, is gone before
                                 Your eldest Ioy, and top of all your store,
                                 With those, whose sight to vs is yet deni'd,
                                 But not our zeale to them, or ought beside
                                 This Citty can to you: For whose estate
                                 Shee hopes you will be still good Aduocate
                                 To her best Lord. So, whilst you mortall are,
                                 No taste of sower mortalitie once dare
                                 Approach your house; nor Fortune greete your Grace
                                 But comming on, and with a forward face.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE OTHER AT TEMPLE
BARRE.
                  
                     CArried the frontispice of a Temple,
the Wals of which and Gates
were Brasse; the Pillers Siluer,
their Capitals and Bases Golde:
in the highest point of all was erected
a Ianus head, and ouer it
written.
                  IANO QVADRIFRONTI
SACRVM.
                  Which title of Quadrifrons is said to be giuen
him,Bassus apud Macro▪ lib. 1. Satur. ca. 9. as he respecteth all Climates, and filles all parts
of the world with his Maiestie; which Martiall
would seeme to allude vnto in that Hendicasillable,
                     li. 8. Epi. 2.
                     Et linguâ pariter locutus omni.
Others haue thought it by reason of the foure Elements,
which brake out of him, being Chaos: for
Ouid is not afraide to make Chaos and Ianus the
same, in those verses

                        Me Chaos antiqui (nam sum res prisca) vocabant:Fast. lib. 1.
                        
                        Adspice, &c.
                     
                     
                        ••
                     
                     
                        
PLVTVS.
or Wealth,
                     So Cephisiodotus hath fained him See Paus. in Boeoti. & Phil. in Imag. contrarie to Aristop. Theogn. Lucian and others, that make him blinde and deformed. a little boy, bare headed, his locks curled,
and spangled with golde, of a fresh aspect, his body
almost naked, sauing some rich robe cast ouer him;
in his armes a heape of gold Ingots to expresse riches,
whereof he is the God: Beneath her feete lay
ENYALIVS.
or Mars, Groueling, his armour scattered vpon him
in seuerall peeces, and sundrie sortes of weapons
broken about him, her word to all was
VNA TRIVMPHIS IN NVMERIS POTIOR.
                     
                        pax optima rerum
                        Quas homini nouisse datum est,Si
                                 •
                              
                              ▪ Ital▪
                            pax vna Triumphis
Innumeris potior.
                     
signifieng that peace alone was better, and more to
be coueted then innumerable Tryumphes, besides,
vpon the right hand of her, but with some little
descent, in a Hemicycle was seated
ESYCHIA.
or Quie
                           •
                        , the first handmaid of peace; A woman
of a graue and venerable aspect, attired in black, vpon
her head an artificiall nest, out of which appeared
Storkes heads to manifest a sweete repose.
Her feete were placed vpon a Cube, to shewe stability,

and in her lappe shee held a Perpendicular
or leuell, as the ensigne of Euennesse and Rest; on
the top of it sate a Halcion or Kings-fisher. She had
lying at her feete
TARACHE.
or Tumult, in a garment of diuers, but darke coulers,
her haire wilde, and disordered, a fowle and troubled
face, about her laye staues, swordes, ropes,
chaines, hammers, stones, and such like to expresse
Turmoile. The word was
PERAGIT TRANQVILLA POTESTAS.De Malii Theo. cōs. Panegy.
                     
                     
                        Claud. Quod violent a nequit: mandat a
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         fortius vrget
Imperiosa quies.
To shewe the benefits of a calme and facile power,
being able to effect in a state that, which no violence
can. On the other, side the second handmaide,
was
ELEVTHERIA.
or Libertie, her dressing white, & som-what antique
but loose and free; her haire flowing downe her
backe, and shoulders: In her right hand shee bare
a Club, on her left a Hat, the Characters of freedom,
and power: At her feete a Catt was placed, the
creatrue most affecting, and expressing libertie. She
trode on

Rauen, as the Augury of ill fortune: & the Soule was
REDEVNT SATVRNIA REGNA.
Out of Virgil,
                     Eclog. 4. to shewe that nowe those golden
times were returned againe, wherein Peace was with
vs so aduannced, Rest receaued, Libertie restored,
Safetie assured, and all Blessednesse appearing in euery
of these vertues her perticular Triumphe ouer her
opposite euill. This is the dumbe argument of the
frame, and illustrated with this verse of Virgil, written
in the vnder freeze.Aeneid. lib. 11.
                     
                        NVLLA SALVS BELLO
                        PACEM TE POSSIMVS OMNES.
                     
The speaking parte was performed, as within the
Temple where there was erected an Altar, to which
at the approach of the K. appeares the Flamen
                     
                        One of the three Flamines that as some think Numa Pō
                              pilius first instituted, 
                              •
                           ut vve ra
                           
                              •
                           her vvith Varr
                                 •
                              
                            take him of Romulus institution, vvhereof there vvere onely tvvo, Hee, and Dialis: to vvhom he vvas next in dignity. He vvas alvvaies created out of the Nobilitie, & did performe the rites to Mars, vvho vvas thought the Father of Romulus.
                         MARTIALIS.
And to him.
GENIVS VRBIS.
The Genius we attired before: To the Flamen wee
appoint this habit. A long Crimson robe to witnesse
his nobility, his typpet and sl
                        •
                     eues white as reflecting
on purity in his religion, a rich mantle of gold
with a traine to expresse the dignity of his function.

Vpon his head aScaliger in coniect. in Varr: saith Totus Pileus, vel potiùs velamenta, Flamm
                           •
                        um dicebatur. vnde Flamines dicti. Hat of delicate wooll, whose top
ended in a Cone, and was thence called Apex,
according to that of Lucan. lib. 1.
Attollens
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Apicem gen
                           •
                        roso vertice Flamen.
This Apex was couered with a
                        To this lookes that other coniecture of Varro. lib. 4. de lingua Latina Flamines, quòd licio in Capite vel
                           •
                        ti erant semper, ac caput cinctum hab
                           •
                        bant filo, Flamines dicti fine net of yearne
which they named Apiculum, & was sustained with
aWhichin their attire vvas called Stroppus, in their vviues Inarculum.
                      bowd twigge of Pomgranat tree, it was also in
the hot time of Summer to be bound with Ribands,
and throwne behinde them asScal. Ibid: in con. Pone enim regerebant apicem, ne grauis esset summis aestatis caloribus. Amentis enim, quae offendices dicebantur sub mentum adductis, religabant; vt cum vellent, regererent, & pone pen
                           •
                        ere permitterent. 
                     Scaliger teacheth.
In his hand hee bore a golden Censor with perfume,
and censing about the Altar (hauing first
kindled his fier on the toppe) is interrupted by the
Genius.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 GENIVS.
                                 STay, what art thou, that in this strange attire,
                                 Darst kindle stranger, and vnhallowed fire
                                 Vpon this Altar?
                              
                              
                                 FL.
                                 Rather what art thou
                                 That darst so rudely interrupt my vowe?
                                 My habit speakes my name.
                              
                              
                                 GE.
                                 A Flamin?
                              
                              
                                 FL.
                                 Yes,
                                 AndOf Mars, vvhose rites (as vvee haue touch
                                          •
                                        before) this Flamē
                                        did specially celebrate. 
                                    Martialis calld.
                              
                              
                                 GE.
                                 I so did gesse
                                 By my short view, but whence didst thou ascend
                                 Hither? or how? or to what mistick end?
                              
                              
                                 FL.
                                 The noise, and present tumult of this Day,
                                 Rowsd me from sleepe, and silence, where I lay
                                 Obscur'd from light; which when I wakt to see,
                                 I wondring thought what this great pompe might be.
                                 
                                    
When (looking in my Kalender) I found
                                 TheWith 
                                          〈◊〉
                                        the 15. of March, vvhich vvas the present day of this Triumph; and on vvhich the great feast of Anna Perenna (among the Romās) vvas yearly and vvith such solemnitie remēbred. Oui. Fast. 3. Idibus est Annae festū geniale Perennae, Haud procul a ripis, &c.
                                     Ides of Marche were entred, and I bound
                                 With these, to celebrate the Geniall feast
                                 OfWho this Anna should be (vvith the Romanes themselues) hath beene no trifling controuersie. Some haue thought her fabulously the sister of Dido, some a Nimphe of Numicius; some Io; some Themis. Others an olde vvoman of Bouillae, that fed the seditious multitude, in Mont
                                             •
                                           sacr
                                             •
                                          , vvith Wafers, and fine Cakes, in time of their penurie: so vvhom, aftervvard (in memory of the benefit) their peace being made vvith the Nobles, they ordaind this feast. Yet, they that haue thought nearest, haue mist all these, and directly imagined her the Moone. And that she vvas calld Anna, Quia mensibus impleat annū. O
                                             ••
                                          d. ibid. To vvhich, the vovv that they vsd in her Rites, somvvhat confirmingly alludes; vvhich vvas. vt Annare, & Perenn
                                             •
                                          re commodè liceret. Maor. Sat. lib. 1. cap. 1
                                             •
                                          .
                                     
                                    ANNA stil'd PERENNA,
                                    So Ouid. ibid. Fast. makes Mars speaking to her, Mense meo coleris, iunxi mea tempora tecum. 
                                    MARS his guest;
                                 Who, in this Moneth of his, is yearly call'd
                                 To banquet at his Altars; and in stald;
                                 
                                    Nuper e
                                          •
                                       at dea facta, &c. ibid. Ouid. A Goddesse with him, since shee filles the Yeare,
                                 AndWhere is vnderstood the meeting of the Zodiack in March, the month vvherein she is celebrated. knits the oblique scarfe that girts the spheare.
                                 Whilest foure fac't IANVS turnes hisThat face vvherevvith he beholds the Spring. vernall looke
                                 Vpon their meeting howers, as if he tooke.
                                 High pride and pleasure.
                              
                              
                                 GE.
                                 Sure thou stil dost dreame,
                                 And both thy tongue, and thought rides on the streame
                                 Of Phantasy: Behold here Hee nor Shee,
                                 
                                 Haue any Altar, Fane, or Deity.
                                 Stoope; read but thisWritten vpon the Altar, for vvhich vvee refer you to the Page. D. 3. inscription: and then veiwe
                                 To whome the Place is consecrate. Tis trew
                                 That this is IANVS Temple, and that nowe
                                 He turnes vpon the Yeare his freshest browe;
                                 That this is MARS his moneth; and these the Ides,
                                 Wherein his ANNE was honourd; Both the Tides,
                                 Titles, and Place, wee knowe: But these dead rites
                                 Are long since buried, and newe power excites
                                 More highe and hartie flames. Loe, there is hee,
                                 
                                    
Who brings with him aThe Queene. to ansvvere vvhich in our inscription vvee spake to the King MARTE MAIORI.
                                     greater ANNE then shee:
                                 Whose strong and potent vertues haueThe Temple of Ianus vve apprehend to be both the house of War, & Peace; of War, vvhen it is open; of Peace vvhen it is shut: And that there, each ouer the othe
                                          •
                                        is interchangeably placd, to the vicissitude of Times. defac'd
                                 Sterne MARS his Statues, and vpon them plac'd
                                 His,Which are Peace, Rest, Liberty, Safetie, &c▪ and vvere his actiuely, but the vvorlds passiuely. and the worlds blest blessings: This hath brought
                                 Sweete Peace to sit in that bright state she ought
                                 Vnbloodie, or vntroubled; hath forc'd hence
                                 All tumults, feares, or other darke portents
                                 That might inuade weake mindes; hath made men see
                                 Once more the face of welcome Liberty:
                                 And doth (in all his present actes) restore
                                 That first pure world, made of the better Ore.
                                 Now Innocence shall cease to be the spoile
                                 Of rauenous Greatnesse, or to steepe the soile
                                 Of raised Pesantrie with teares, and bloud;
                                 No more shall rich men (for their little good)
                                 Suspect to be made guiltie; or vile Spies
                                 Enioye the lust of their so murdring eyes:
                                 Men shall put off their Yron mindes, and hearts;
                                 The Time forget his olde malicious artes
                                 With this new minute; and no print remaine
                                 Of what was thought the former ages staine.
                                 Back FLAMIN, with thy superstitious fumes,
                                 And cense not heere; Thy ignorance presumes
                                 Too much, in acting any Ethnick rite
                                 In this translated Temple: Heere no wight,
                                 To sacrifice, saue my deuotion comes,
                                 That brings insteed of those thy
                                       Somevvhat a strange Epithite, in our tongue, but proper to the thing; for they vvere only Mascul
                                          •
                                       ne Odours, vvhich vvere offerd to the Altars. Vir. Ecl. 8. Verbenas
                                          
                                             
                                          
                                          que
                                        adole pingueis, et mascula Tura. And Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 12. cap. 14. speaking of these, hath Quod ex eo rotunditate gutt
                                          ••
                                        pependit, Masculum vocamus, cum alias non fere mas vocetur, vbi non sit femina: religioni tributum ne sexus alter vsurparetur. Masculum aliqui putant a specie testium dictum. See him also, lib. 34. cap. 11. And A
                                          •
                                       nob. lib. 7. aduers. Gent. Non si mille 
                                          •
                                       upō
                                       dera masculi Turis ince
                                          •
                                       das, &c. Masculine gummes.
                                 
                                    
My Citties heart; which shall for euer burne
                                 Vpon this Altar, and no Time shall turne
                                 The same to ashes: Heere I fixe it fast,
                                 Flame bright, flame high, and may it euer last.
                                 Whilest I, before the figure of thy Peace,
                                 Still tend the fire; and giue it quick increase
                                 With praiers, wishes, vowes; whereof be these
                                 The least, and weakest: that no Age may leese
                                 The Memory of this so rich a daye;
                                 But rather, that it henceforth yearely may
                                 Begin our Spring and with our spring the prime,
                                 And
                                       According to Romulu
                                             •
                                           his institution, vvho made March the first Month and consecrated it to his Father, of vvhome it vvas called Martius: Varr. Fest. in Frag. Martius mensis in
                                          •
                                       tium anni fuit, et in La
                                          •
                                       io, & post Romam conditam &c. And Ouid. Fast. 3. A te principium Romano dicimus anno: Primus de patri
                                          •
                                        nomine mensis erit. Vox ratafit; &c. See Macro lib. 1. Sat. cap. 12. and Solin. in Poly. hist. cap. 3 Quòd hoc mēse mercedes e
                                          •
                                       oluerint magistris, quas completus annus deberi fecisset, &c. first accompt of Yeares, of Months,Some, to vvhom vve haue read this, haue takē it for a Tautologie, thinking Time inough express'd before, in Yeares, and Months. For vvhose ignor
                                          •
                                       nt sakes vve must confesse to haue taken the better part of this trauale in noting, a thing not vsuall, neither affected of vs, but vvhere there is necessitie, as here, to auoide their dull censures: vvhere in Yeares and Months vve alluded to that is obserued in our former note; but by Time vve vnderstand the present, & that from this instant, we should begin to reckon, and make this the first, of our Time. Which is also to be helpt by Emphasis.
                                     of Time:
                                 And may these Ides as fortunate appeare
                                 To thee, as they toIn vvhich he vva
                                          •
                                        slaine in the Senate. 
                                    Caesar fatall were.
                                 Be all thy Thoughts borne perfect, and thy Hopes
                                 In their euents still crownd beyond their scopes.
                                 Let not wide Heauen that secret blessing know
                                 To giue, which shee on thee will not bestow.
                                 Blind Fortune be thy slaue; and may her store
                                 (The lesse thou seek'st it) follow thee the more.
                                 Much more I would: but see, these brazen Gates
                                 Make hast to close, as vrged by thy Fates;
                                 Here ends my Cities office, here it breakes:
                                 Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speakes
                                 A short farewell; and lower then thy feete,
                                 With feruent thankes, thy royall paines doth greete.
                                 Pardon, if my abruptnesse breed disease;
                                 He merits not t'offend, that hastes to please.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
Ouer the Alter was written this
Inscription:
                  
                     D. I. O. M.
BRITANNI ARVM. IMP.
PACIS. VINDICI. MARTE. MAIORI. P. P.
F. S. AVGVSTO. NOVO. GENTIVM. CONIVNCTARVM.
NVMINI. TVTELARI.
D. A.
CONSERVATRICI. ANNAE. IPSAE. PERENNAE.
DEABVSQVE. VNIVERSIS. OPTATIORI. SVI
FORTVNATISSIMI. THALAMI. SOCIAE. ET
CONSORTI. PVLCHERIMAE. AVGVSTISSIMAE.
ET
H. F. P.
FILIO. SVO. NOBILISSIMO. OB. ADVENTVM.
AD VRBEM. HANC. SVAM. EXPECTATISSIMVM.
GRATISSIMVM. CELEBRATISSIMVM.
CVIVS. NON. RADII. SED
SOLES. POTIVS. FVNESSIMAM. NVPER.
AERIS. INTEMPERIEM. SERENARVNT
S. P. Q. L.
VOTIS. X. VOTIS. XX. ARDENTISSIMIS.
L. M.
HANC. ARAM.
P.
                  
                  
                     
And vpon the Gate being shut,
                  
                     IMP. IACOBVS MAX.
CAESAR AVG. P. P.
PACE POPVLO BRITANNICO
TERRA MARIQVE PARTA
IANVM CLVSIT. S. C.
                  
               
               
                  
                     THus hath both Court-Towne-and
Countrey-Reader, our portion
of deuise for the Cittie; neither
are we ashamed to professe
it, being assured well of the difference
betweene it and Pageantry.
If the Mechanick part yet
standing, giue it any distaste in the wrye mouthes
of the Time, we pardon them; for their owne ambitious
ignorance doth punish them inough. From
hence we will turne ouer a new leafe with you, and
lead you to the Pegme in the Strand, a worke
thought on, begun, and perfected in twelue dayes.
                  
                     
                     THe Inuention was a Raine-bow,
the Moone, Sunne, and those seauen
Starres, which antiquitie hath
stil'd the Pleiades, or Vergiliae, aduanced
betweene two Magnificent
Pyramid's of 70. foote in
height, on which were drawne his Maiesties seuerall
pedigrees Eng. and Scot. To which body (being
framd before) we were to apt our soule. And
finding that one of these seauen lights, Electra, is
rarely or not at all to be seene, (as Ouid. lib. 4. Fast.
affirmeth.

                        Pleiades incipient humeros releuare paternos:
                        Quae septem dici, sex tamen esse solent.
                     
And by and by after,

                        Siue quòd Electra Troiae spectare ruinas
                        Non tulit: aute oculos opposuit
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            manum.
                     
And Festus Auien.Paraph. in Arat Phaen
                           •
                        m.
                     
                        Fama vetus septem memor at genitore creatas
                        Longaeuo: sex se rutila inter sider a tantùm
                        Sustollunt, &c.
                     
And beneath

                        —cerni sex solas carmine Mynthes
                        Asserit: Electram coelo abscessisse profundo, &c.)
                     
We ventred to follow this authoritie; and made her
the speaker: presenting her hanging in the ayre, in
figure of a Comet; according to Anonymus. Electra
non sustinens videre casum pronepotum sugerit; vnde
& illam disso lutis crinibus prop
                           •
                        er luctum ire asserunt,
et propter comas quidam Cometen appellant.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                              The speach.
                              
                                 Electra.
                                 THe long
                                       Fest. Aui. paraph. Pars ait Idae
                                             •
                                           def
                                             •
                                          ē
                                          tem incendia Troiae, 
                                             •
                                          t numerosa suae lugē
                                          tem funerae gentis, Electram tetris moestum dare nubibus orbem. Besides the reference to antiquity, this speach might be vnderstood by Allegorie of the Tovvne here, that had beene so ruined vvith sicknesse, &c. Laments, I spent for ruin'd Troy,
                                 
                                 Are dried; and now mine eyes run teares of Ioy.
                                 No more shall men suppose Electra dead,
                                 Though from the consort of her sisters fled
                                 Vnto theHygi
                                          •
                                       us. Sed postquā Troia f
                                          •
                                       it capta, & Progenies cius quae à Dardano fuit euersa, dolore permotam ab his se remouisse, & in circ
                                          ••
                                       o qui A
                                          •
                                       cticus dicitur constitisse, &c. 
                                    Arctick circle, here to grace,
                                 And guild this day with her
                                       Electra signifies Serenity it selfe, and is compounded of 
                                          〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                        vvhich is the Sunne, and 
                                          〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                        that signifies serene. She is mentioned to be Anim
                                             •
                                           sphaerae solis, by Proclus. Com. in Hesiod.
                                     serenest Face▪
                                 
                                 And see, my
                                       She is also faind to be the Mother of the R
                                             •
                                          inbovv. Nascitur enim I
                                          •
                                       is ex aqua et serenitate, è refractione radiorū scilicet: Arist. in Meteorol. daughter Iris hasts to throw
                                 Her Rose at wings, in compasse of a bow,
                                 About our state, asVal. Flac. Argonaut. 1. makes the Rainbovv indic
                                          •
                                       m serenitatis. Emicuit res
                                          •
                                       rata di
                                          •
                                       s, coelum
                                          
                                             
                                          
                                          que
                                        resoluit. Arcus, & in summos redier unt nubila montes. signe of my approch
                                       •
                                    
                                 
                                 Attracting to her seate from
                                       A name of the Sunne. Stat. The. lib. 1. torquentem corn
                                          •
                                       a Mithra
                                          •
                                       . And Martian. Capel. lib. 3. de nup. Mer. & Phil. Te Serapim Nilus, Memphis vener
                                          •
                                       tur Osirin; Dissona sacra Mithran, &c. 
                                    Mithras coach,
                                 A thousand different, and particular hewes,
                                 Which shee throughout her body doth diffuse.
                                 The Sunne, as loath to part from this halfe spheare,
                                 
                                 Stands still; and Phoebe labors to appeare
                                 In all as bright (if not as rich) as hee:
                                 And, for a note of more serenity,
                                 My sixeAlcyone,. Celaeno, Taygete, Asterope, Merope, Maia. vvhich are also said to bee the soules of the other sphaeres, as Electra of the S
                                             •
                                          nne. Proclus. ibi. in com. Alcyone Veneris. Celaeno Saturni. Taygete Lunae. Asterop. Iouis. Merope Martis. Maia Mercurij. faire Sisters hether shift their lights;
                                 To do this hower the vtmost of her Rites.
                                 Where least the captious, or prophane might doubt,
                                 How these cleare heauenly bodyes come about
                                 All to be seene at once; yet neithers light
                                 Eclips'd, or shadow'd by the others sight:
                                 
                                    
Let Ignorance know, great King, this Day is thine,
                                 And doth admit no Night; but all do shine
                                 As well nocturnall, as diurnall fiers,
                                 To adde vnto the flame of our desiers.
                                 Which are (now thou hast closd vpAlluding backe to that of our Tēple. 
                                    IANVS gates,
                                 And giu'n so generall peace to all estates)
                                 That no offensiue mist, or cloudie staine
                                 May mixe with splendor of thy golden raigne;
                                 But, as th' ast free'd thyLondon. 
                                    Chamber, from the noyse
                                 Of Warre and Tumult; thou wilt powre those ioyes
                                 VponHis Citty of Westminster, in vvhose name, and at vvhose charge, together vvith the Duchie of Lancaster this Arch vvas erected. this Place, which claimes to beSince here, they not only sate being Crovvnd, but also first receiued their Crovvnes. the Seate
                                 Of all thy Kingly race: the Cabinet
                                 To all thy Counsels; and the iudging Chayre
                                 To this thy speciall Kingdome. Whose so faire
                                 And wholsome Lawes, in euery Court, shall striue
                                 By Aequity, and their first Innocence to thriue;
                                 The base and guiltie bribes of guiltier men
                                 Shall be throwne back, and Iustice looke, as when
                                 She lou'd the earth, and feard not to be sold
                                 For that,Hor. Car. lib. 4. Ode. 9. Ducentis ad se cun
                                          •
                                       ta pecuniae. which worketh all things to it, Gold.
                                 The Dam of other euils, Auarice
                                 Shall here lock downe her Iawes, and that rude vice
                                 Of ignorant, and pittied Greatnesse, Pride,
                                 Decline with shame; Ambition now shall hide
                                 Her face in dust, as dedicate to sleepe,
                                 That in great Portalls wont her watch to keepe.
                                 All ills shall flie the light: Thy Court be free
                                 
                                    
No lesse from Enuie, then from Flatterie;
                                 All Tumult, Faction, and harsh Discord cease,
                                 That might perturbe the musique of thy Peace:
                                 The querulous Nature shall no longer finde
                                 Roome for his Thoughts: One pure concent of minde
                                 Shall flowe in euery brest, and not the Ayre,
                                 Sunne, Moone, or Starres shine more serenely faire.
                                 This from that lowd, blest Oracle, I sing
                                 Who here, and first pronounc'd, thee Brittaines King
                                 Long maist thou liue, and see me thus appeare,
                                 As omenous
                                       For our more authoritie to induce her thus, See Fest. Auien. paraph. in Arat. speaking of Electra, Nonnumquam Oceani tamen istam surgere ab vndis, In conuexa poli, sed sede carere sororum; Atque os discretum procul edere, detestatam Germanos
                                          
                                             
                                          
                                          que
                                       , choros sobolis lachrym
                                          •
                                       re ruin
                                          •
                                       s, Diffusam
                                          
                                             
                                          
                                          que
                                        comas c
                                          •
                                       rni, crinisque soluti Monstrari effigie, &c. a Comet, from my Spheare,
                                 Vnto thy raigne; as thatAll Comets vvere not fatall, some vvere fortunatly ominous, as this to vvhich vve allude; and vvherefore vve haue Plinies testimonie. Nat. Histo. lib. 2. cap. 25. Cometes in vno totius orbis loco colitur in templo Romae, admodum faustus Diuo Augusto iudicatus ab ipso: qui incipiente eo, apparuit ludis quos faciebat Veneri Genetrici, non multo 
                                             •
                                          ost obitum patris Caesaris, in Collegio ab eo instituto. Nam
                                             
                                                
                                             
                                             que
                                           his verbis id gaudium prodidit. Iisipsis ludorum meorum diebus, sydus crinitum per septem dies in regione Coeli, quae sub septentrionibus est, conspectum. Id oriebatur circa vndecimam horam di
                                          •
                                       i, clarumque & omnibus terris conspicuum fuit. Eo sydere significari vulgus credidit, Caesaris animam inter Deorum immortalium numina receptam: quo nomine id insigne simulacro capitis eius, quod mox in foro consecrauimus adiectum est. Hec Ill
                                             •
                                           in publicum, interiore gaudio sibi illum natum, se
                                             
                                                
                                             
                                             que
                                           in conasci inter pretatus est. Et si verum fatemur, salutare id terris fuit.
                                     did auspicate
                                 So lasting glory to Augustus state.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The end.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  B. I.
HIS PANEGYRE.
                  On the happie entrance of IAMES
our Soueraigne to his first high
Session of Parliament in this
his Kingdome the 19.
of March.
1603.
                  
                     
                        Mart.
                      Licet toto nunc Helicone frui.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A PANEGYRE.
                  HEau'n now not striues, alone, our brests to fill
                  With Ioyes: but vrgeth his full fauors still.
                  Againe, the Glory of our Westerne world
                  Vnfolds himselfe: and from his Eies are hoorl'd,
                  (To day) a thousand radiant lights, that streame
                  To euery nooke, and angle of his realme.
                  His former raies, did only cleare the skie;
                  But these his searching beames are cast, to prie
                  Into those darke, and deepe concealed vaults,
                  Where men commit black incest with their faults;
                  And snore supinely in the stall of Sinne:
                  Where Murder, Rapine, Lust, do sit within
                  Carow
                        •
                     ing humane blood, in iron bowles,
                  And make their Den the slaughter house of soules:
                  From whose foule reeking cauernes first arise
                  Those dampes, that so offend all good mens eies;
                  And would (if not dispers'd) infect the Crowne,
                  And in their vapor her bright Mettall drowne.
                  To this so cleare, and sanctified an end,
                  I saw, when reuerend TH
                        •
                     MIS did descend
                  Vpon his state; let downe in that rich chaine,
                  That fastneth heauenly power to earthly raigne:
                  Beside her, stoup't on either hand, a Mayd,
                  Faire DICE, and EVNOMIA; who were said
                  To be her daughters: and but faintly knowne
                  On Earth, till now, they came to grace his throne.
                  
                     
Her third, IRENE, help'd to beare his traine;
                  And in her office vow'd shee would remaine,
                  Till forraine Malice, or vnnaturall spight
                  (Which Fates auert) should force her frō her right.
                  With these he pas'd, and with his peoples hearts
                  Breath'd in his way; and Soules (their better parts)
                  Hasting to follow forth in shouts, and cries.
                  Vpon his face all threw their couetous eyes,
                  As on a Wonder; Some amazed stood,
                  As if they felt, but had not knowne their good:
                  Others would faine haue shew'n it in their words,
                  But, when their speach so poore a helpe affords
                  Vnto their zeales expression; They are mute:
                  And only with red silence him salute.
                  Some cry from tops of houses, thinking noise
                  The fittest Herald to proclame true ioyes;
                  Others on ground runnes gazing by his side,
                  All, as vnwearied, as vnsatisfied:
                  And euery Windore greiu'd it could not moue
                  Along with him, and the same trouble proue.
                  They, that had seene, but foure short daies before,
                  His gladding looke, now long'd to see it more.
                  And as of late, when he through London went,
                  The amorous Citty spar'd no ornament,
                  That might her beauties heighten; but so drest
                  As our Ambitious Dames, when they make feast,
                  And would be courted: so this Towne put on
                  Her brightest tire; and in it aequall shone,
                  
                     
To her great Sist
                        •
                     r: saue that Modesty,
                  Her Place, and Yeares gaue her precedency.
                  The Ioy of either was alike, and full;
                  No Age, nor Sexe so weake, or strongly dull,
                  That did not beare a part in this concent
                  Of Hearts, and Voices. All the Aire was rent,
                  As with the murmure of a moouing wood;
                  The ground beneath did seeme a mouing floud
                  Walls, windores, roofes, towers, steeples, al were set
                  With seuerall eyes, that in this obiect met.
                  Old men were glad, their Fates till now did last;
                  And Infants, that the howers had made such hast
                  To bring them forth: Whilst riper ag'd, and apt
                  To vnderstand the more, the more were rap't.
                  This was the Peoples Loue, with which did striue
                  The Nobles zeale, yet either kept aliue
                  The others flame, as doth the Wike and Waxe
                  That frendly temperd one pure Taper makes.
                  Meane while, the reuerend Themis drawes aside
                  The Kings obeying will, from taking pride
                  In these vaine stirres, and to his mind suggests
                  How he may triumph in his subiects brests,
                  With better pompe. She tells him first, that Kings
                  Are here on earth the most conspicuous Things:
                  That they, by Heauen, are plac'd vpon his throne,
                  To rule like Heauen; & haue no more, their owne,
                  As they are Men, then Men. That all they doe
                  Though hid at home, abroad is search'd into:

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
And, being once found out, discouer'd lies
                  Vnto as many Enuies, there, as Eyes.
                  That Princes, since they know it is their Fate,
                  Oft-times, to haue the secrets of their state
                  Betraid to Fame, should take more care, and feare
                  In publique Acts what face and forme they beare.
                  She then remembred to his thought, the Place
                  Where he was going; and the vpward race
                  Of Kings, praeceding him in that high Court;
                  Their Lawes, their Endes; the Men she did report:
                  and all so iustly, as his Eare was ioy'd
                  To heare the Truth, from spight, or flattery voyd.
                  She shewd him, who made wise, who honest Acts;
                  Who both, who neither: all the cunning tracts,
                  And thriuing statutes she could promptly note;
                  The bloody, base, and barbarous she did quote;
                  Where Lawes were made to serue the Tyran' will;
                  Where sleeping they could saue, and waking kill;
                  Where Acts gaue Licence to impetuous lust
                        •
                     
                  
                  To bury Churches, in forgo
                        •
                     ten dust,
                  And with their ruines raise the Pandars Bowers:
                  When, publique Iustice borrow'd all her Powers
                  From priuate Chambers; that could then create
                  Lawes, Iudges, Consellors, yea Prince, and State.
                  All this she told, and more, with bleeding Eyes;
                  For Right is as compassionate as wise.
                  Nor did he seeme their vices so to loue,
                  As once defend, what THEMIS did reproue.
                  
                     
For though by Right, and b
                        •
                     nefite of Times,
                  
                  He ownde their Crowns, he would not so their crimes.
                  He knew that Princes, who had sold their Fame
                  To their voluptuous lustes, had lost their Name;
                  And that no wretch was more vnblest then he,
                  Whose necessary good t'was now to be
                  An euill King: And so must such be still,
                  Who once haue got the habit to doe ill.
                  One wickednesse another must defend;
                  For Vice is safe, while she hath Vice to friend.
                  He knew, that those, who would, with loue, command,
                  Must with a tender (yet a stedfast) hand
                  Sustayne the raynes, and in the checke forbeare
                  To offer cause of Iniurie, or Feare.
                  That Kings, by their example, more do sway
                  Then by their Power; and men do more obay
                  When they are lead, then when they are compell'd.
                  In all these knowing Artes our Prince excell'd.
                  And now the Dame had dried her dropping eyne,
                  When, like an April Iris, flew her shine
                  About the streetes, as it would force a spring
                  From out the stones, to gratulate the King.
                  She blest the People, that in shoales did swim
                  To heare her speech; which still began in him
                  And ceas'd in them. She told them, what a Fate
                  Was gently falne from Heauen vpon this State;
                  How deare a Father they did now enioy
                  That came to saue, what Discord would destroy:
                  
                     
And entring with the power of a King,
                  The Temp'rance of a priuate Man did bring.
                  That wan affections, ere his steps wan ground;
                  And was not hot, or couetous to be crown'd
                  Before mens hearts had crown'd him. Who (vnlike
                  Those greater bodies of the sky, that strike
                  The lesser fiers dim) in his accesse
                  Brighter then all, hath yet made no one lesse;
                  Though many greater: and the most, the best.
                  Wherein, his Choise was happie with the rest
                  Of his great actions, first to see, and do
                  What all mens wishes did aspire vnto.
                  Hereat, the People could no longer hold
                  Their bursting ioyes; but through the ayre was rol'd
                  The length'ned showt, as when th' Artillery
                  Of Heauen is discharg'd along the sky:
                  And this Confession flew from euery voyce.
                  Neuer had Land more reason to reioyce.
                  Nor to her blisse, could ought now added bee,
                  Saue, that she might the same perpetuall see:
                  Which when Time, Nature, and the Fates deny'd,
                  With a twice lowder showte aga
                        •
                     ne they cry'd.
                  Yet, let blest Brittaine aske (without your wrong)
                  Still to haue such a King, and this King long.
                  Solus Rex, & Poëta non quotannis nascitur.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                  A
PARTICVLAR
ENTERTAINment
of the QVEENE and PRINCE
their Highnesse to Althrope, at the
Right Honourable the Lord SPENCERS, on
Saterday being the 25. of Iune 1603. as they came
first into the Kingdome; being written by
the same Author, and not before
published.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     
                     THe Inuention was, to haue a Satyre
lodged in a little Spinet, by which her
Maiestie, and the Prince were to
come, who (at the report of certaine
Cornets that were diuided in seuerall
places of the Parke, to signifie her approach)
aduanced his head aboue the toppe of the wood,
wondering, and (with his Pipe in his hand) began as followeth.
                  
                     SATIRE.
                     HEre? there? and euery where?
                     Some solemnities are neare,
                     That these changes strike mine eare.
                     My Pipe and I a part shall beare.
                     And after a short straine with his Pipe; againe.
                     Looke, see; (beshrew this Tree,)
                     What may all this wonder be?
                     Pipe it, who that list for me:
                     I'le flie out abroade, and see.
                     There hee leaped downe, and gazing the Queene and
Prince in the face, went forward.
                     That is Cyparissus face!
                     And the Dame hath Syrinx grace!
                     O that Pan were now in Place,
                     Sure they are of heauenly race.
                     Here he ranne into the wood againe, and hid himselfe

whilst to the sound of excellent soft Musique that was
there conceald in the thicket; there came tripping vp
the lawne, a Beuy of Faeries attending on Mab their
Queene, who falling into an artificiall ring, that was
there cut in the pathe, began to daunce a round, whilst
their Mistresse spake as followeth.
                  
                  
                     FA
                           •
                        RIE.
                     
                        Haile, and welcome worthiest Queene,
                        Ioy had neuer perfect beene,
                        To the Nimphes that haunt this Greene,
                        Had they not this euening seene.
                     
                     
                        Now they Print it on the Ground
                        With their feete in figures round,
                        Markes that will be euer found,
                        To remember this glad stound.
                     
                  
                  The Satyre peeping out of the bush, said.
                  Trust her not you bonny-bell,
                  Shee will forty leasinges tell,
                  I doe know her pranks right well,
                  
                     FA
                           •
                        RIE.
                     Satyre, wee must haue a spell,
                     For your tongue, it runnes to fleete.
                  
                  
                     SATYRE.
                     Not so nimbly as your feete,
                     When about the creame-boules sweete.
                     You, and all your Elues do meete.
                  
                  
                     
Here hee came hopping forth, and mixing himselfe with
the Faeries skipped in, out, and about their Circle,
while the Elues made many offers to catch at him.
                  This is Mab the mistresse-Faerie,
                  That doth nightly rob the Dairie,
                  And can hurt, or helpe the cherning,
                  (As shee please) without discerning.
                  
                     ELFE.
                     Pug, you will anone take warning?
                     Shee, that pinches countrey wenches,
                     If they rub not cleane their benches,
                     And with sharper Nailes remembers,
                     When they rake not vp their Embers:
                     But if so they chaunce to feast her
                     In a shooe she drops a tester.
                  
                  
                     ELFE.
                     Shall we strip the skipping Iester?
                     This is shee, that empties Cradles,
                     Takes out Children, puts in Ladles:
                     Traines forth Midwiues in their slumber,
                     With a siue the holes to number.
                     And then leads them, from her Borroughs
                     Home through Ponds, and water furrows.
                  
                  
                     ELFE.
                     Shall not all this mocking stir vs?
                     Shee can start our Franklins daughters,
                     In their sleepe, with shrikes, and laughters,
                     And on sweet Saint Anne's Night,
                     Feed them with a promisd sight,
                     
                        
Some of husbands, some of Louers,
                     Which an empty dreame discouers.
                  
                  
                     ELFE.
                     
                        Satyre, vengeance neere you houers,
                     And in hope that you would come here
                     Yester-eue the LadyFor shee was expected there on Midsommer day at night, but came not till the day following. 
                        Summer,
                     
                     She inuited to a Banpuet:
                     But (in sooth) I con you thanke yet,
                     That you could so well deceiue her
                     Of the pride which gan vp-heaue her:
                     And (by this) would so haue blowne her,
                     As no wood-god should haue known her.
                     Heere he skipped into the Wood.
                  
                  
                     ELFE.
                     Mistres, this is onely spight:
                     For you would not yester-night
                     Kisse him in the Cock-shoutlight:
                     And came againe,
                  
                  
                     SATIRE.
                     By Pan, and thou hast hit it right.
                     There they layd hould on him, and nipt him,
                  
                  
                     FAERY
                           •
                        
                     
                     Fai
                           •
                        ies, pinch him black and blew,
                     Now you haue him 
                           〈◊〉
                         him rue:
                  
                  
                     SATIR
                           ••
                        
                     
                     O, hold, Mab: I sue.
                  
                  
                     ELFE.
                     Nay, the Deuill shall haue his due.
                  
                  There hee ran quite awaye and left them in a confusion
while the Faery began againe,
                  
                     
                     SATIRE.
                     
                        Pardon Lady this wild straine,
                        Common with the Syluan traine.
                        That do skip about this plaine:
                        Elues, apply your Gyre againe.
                     
                     
                        And whilst some do hop the ring,
                        Some shall play, and some shall sing,
                        Weele expresse in euery thing,
                        
                           
                              Quasi Oriens Anna. 
                           Oranas well-comming.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              SONG.
                              THis is shee,
                              This is shee,
                              In whose world of Grace
                              Euery Season, Person, Place,
                              That receiue her, happie be,
                              For with no lesse,
                              ThenBringing with her the Prince, which is the greatest felicitie of Kingdoms. a Kingdomes happinesse,
                              Doth shee priuateFor housholds. 
                                 Lares blesse,
                              And ours aboue the rest:
                              By how m
                                    •
                                 ch we deserue it least.
                              Long line 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 
                              
                              To exceed (whom shee succeeds) our late Diana.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     FAE
                           •
                        Y.
                     
                        Madame, now an end to make,
                        Deigne a simple guift to take:
                        
                           
Only for the Faeries sake,
                        Who about you still shall wake.
                     
                     
                        Tis done only to supply,
                        His suspected courtesy,
                        Who (since Thamyra did dye)
                        Hath not brookt a Ladyes eye,
                     
                     
                        Nor allow'd about his place,
                        Any of the female race.
                        Only we are free to trace
                        All his grounds, as he to chase.
                     
                     
                        For which Bountie to vs lent,
                        Of him vnknowledgde, or vnsent,
                        We prepar'd thisA Iewell was giue
                                 •
                               her. 
                           Complement,
                        
                        And as farre from cheape intent,
                     
                     
                        In particular to feede,
                        Any hope that should succede.
                        Or our glory by the deed,
                        As your selfe are from the need.
                     
                     
                        Vtter not; we you implore,
                        Who did giue it, nor wherefore,
                        And when euer you restore
                        Your selfe to vs, you shall haue more.
                     
                     
                        Highest, happiest Queene farewell,
                        But beware you do not tell.
                     
                     
                        
Here the Faeries hopt away in a fantastique daunce,
when on a sodaine the Satyre discouered himselfe
againe and came 
                           •
                        oorth.
                  
                  
                     SATYRE.
                     Not tell? Ha, ha, I could smile,
                     At this old, and toothlesse wile.
                     
                        
                           ••
                        dy, I haue beene no sleeper,
                     Shee belies the noble Keeper.
                     
                     Say, that heere he like the Groues:
                     
                     And pursue no 
                           •••
                        raine Loues,
                     Is he therefore to be deemed,
                     Rude, or sau
                           •
                        dge? or esteemed,
                     But a sorry Entertainer,
                     Cause he is no common strainer:
                     After painted Nimphes for sauors,
                     Or that in his Garbe he sauors
                     Little of the nice
                           •
                        y,
                     In the sprucer Courtiery;
                     As the Ros
                           ••
                        y of kisses,
                     With the oath that neuer misses,
                     This, Beleeue me on the brest,
                     
                     And then telling some mans iest,
                     Thinking to preferre his wit,
                     Equall with his suite by it,
                     I meane his Clothes: No, no, no,
                     Here doth no such humor flow.
                     He can neither bribe a grace,
                     
                        
Nor encounter my Lords face
                     With a pliant smile, and flatter,
                     Though this lately were some matter
                     To the making of a Courtier.
                     Now he hopes he shall resort there,
                     Safer, and with more allowance▪
                     
                     Since a hand hath gouernance,
                     That hath giuen those Customes chase,
                     And hath brought his owne in place.
                     O that now a wish could bring,
                     The God-like person of a King,
                     Then should euen Enuiefinde,
                     Cause of wonder at the minde
                     Of our Wood-man: But loe where
                     His Kingly Image doth appeare,
                     And is all this while neglected:
                     Pardon (Lord) you are respected
                     Deepe as is the Keepers hart,
                     And as deere in euery part.
                     See,Here the Satyre fetcht out of the Wood, the Lord Spécers eldest sonne attirde and appointed like a Huntsman. for instance where he sends
                     His Sonne, his Heire; who humbly bends
                     Lowe, as is his Fathers earth,
                     To the wombe that gaue you birth:
                     So he was directed first.
                     Next to you, of whome the thirst
                     Of seeing takes away the vse
                     Of that part, should plead excuse
                     For his boldnesse, which is lesse
                     
                        
By his comlie shamfastnesse.
                     Rise vp Sir, I will betray,
                     All I thinke you haue to say;
                     That your Father giues you here,
                     (Freely as to him you were)
                     To the seruice of this Prince:
                     And with you these Instruments
                     Of his wilde and Sy
                              ••
                           an trade,
                     Better not 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         had.
                     The Bow was Ph
                              •
                           ebas, and the horne,
                     By Orion often worne:
                     The Dog of Sparta breed, and good,
                     As can ring within a Wood:
                     Thence his name is: you shall trye
                     How he hunteth instantly.
                     But perhaps the Queene your mother,
                     Rather doth affect some other
                     Sport, as coursing: we will proue
                     Which her Highnesse most doth loue.
                     
                        Satyres let the Woods refound,
                     They shall haue their welcome crownd,
                     With abrace of 
                           〈◊〉
                         to ground.
                     At that, the whole Wood and place re
                           •
                        ounded with the
noise of Cornets, Hornes, and other Hunting Musique,
and a brace of 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         p
                           •
                        t out; and as fortunately
killd, as they were meant to be; euen in the
sight of her Maiesti
                           •
                        .
                     
                        
This was the first Nights shew. Where the next day
being Sunday, she rested, and on Monday, till after dinuer;
where there was a speach sodainly thought on, to induce
a Morrise of the Clownes there about, who most officiouslie
presented themselues, but by reason of the throng
of the Countrey that came in, their Speaker could not be
hard, who was in the person of No-body, to deliuer
this following speach and attired in a paire of Breeches
which were made to come vp to his neck, with his armes
out at his pockets, and a Cap drowning his face.
                     
                        If my outside moue your Laughter,
                        Pray Ioue, my inside be thereafter.
                     
                     
                        Queene, Prince, Duke, Earles,
                        Countesses; you courtly Pearles:
                        (And, I hope no mortall sinne,
                        If I put lesse Ladyes in)
                        Faire saluted bee you all.
                        At this time it doth befall,
                        We are the Huisher to a Morrise,
                        (A kind of Masque) whereof good store is
                        In the Countrey here about,
                        But this, the choise of all the rout.
                        Who because that no man sent them,
                        Haue got No-body to present them.
                        These are Things haue no suspicion
                        Of their ill doing: nor Ambition,
                        
                           
Of their well: but as the Pipe
                        Shall inspire them, meane to skip.
                        They come to see, and to bee seene,
                        And though they dance afore the Queene,
                        Ther's none of these doth hope to come by
                        Wealth, to build another Holmby:
                        
                        All those dauncing dayes are done,
                        Men must now haue more then one
                        Grace, to build their fortunes on,
                        Else our soules would sure haue gone,
                        All by this time to our feete.
                        I not deny where Graces meete
                        In a man, that quality
                        Is a gracefull Property?
                        But when dauncing is his best,
                        (Beshrew me) I suspect the rest.
                        But I am No-body, and my Breath
                        (Soone as it is borne) hath death.
                        Come on Clownes forsake your dumps,
                        And bestir your Ho
                              •
                           naild stumps,
                        Do your worst, Ile vndertake,
                        Not a Ierke you haue shall make
                        Any Lady here in Loue.
                        Perhaps your Foole, or so, may moue
                        Some Ladies woman with a Trick,
                        And vpon it she may pick
                        A paire of reuelling legs or two,
                        Out of you with much a doe.
                        
                           
But see the Hobby-horse is forgot.
                        Foole it must bee your lot,
                        To supplie his want with faces
                        And some other Busson graces
                        You know how; Piper playe,
                        And let no body hence away.
                     
                     There was also another parting speach, which was to
haue been presented in the person of a youth, and accompained
with diuerse Gentlemens yonger sonnes of the
Countrey, but by reason of the Multitudinous presse,
was also hindred. And which wee haue here adioyned.
                     ANd will you then Mirror of Queenes depart?
                     Shall nothing stay you? not my Masters heart
                     That pants to leese the comfort of your light,
                     And see his Day e
                           •
                        e it be old grow Night?
                     You are a Goddesse, and your will be done;
                     Yet this our last hope is, that as the Sunne
                     Cheares obiects far remou'd, as well as neare,
                     So where soe're you shine, you'le sparkle here.
                     And you deare Lord, on whome my couetous eye
                     Doth feede it selfe but cannot satisfie,
                     O shoote vp fast in spirit, as in yeares;
                     That when vpon her head proud Europe weares
                     Her stateliest tire, you may appeare thereon
                     The richest Gem without a paragon.
                     Shine bright and fixed as the Artic
                              ••
                           
                         starre:
                     
                        
And when flow Time hath made you fit for war,
                     Looke ouer the strict Ocean, and thinke where
                     You may but leade vs forth, that grow vp here
                     Against a day, when our officious swords
                     Shall speake our action better then our words.
                     Till then, all good euent conspire to crowne
                     Your Parents hopes, our zeale, and your renowne.
                     Peace, vsher now your steps, and where you come,
                     Be Enuie still stroke blind, and Flattery dumbe.
                     Thus much (which was the least of the Entert
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        ement
in respect of the reality, abondance, delicacie, and order of
all things else) to doe that seruiceable right, to his noble
Friend, which his affection owes, and his Lordships merit
may challenge, the Author hath sufferd to come out, and
encounter Censure: and not here vnnecessarily adioyned,
being performed to the same Queene & Prince; who
were no little part of these more labord and 
                           •
                        riumphall
shewes. And to whose greatest part, he knowes the Ho. L.
(had he beene so blest as to haue seene him at his Lodge)
would haue stretcht in obseruance, though he could not in
Loue or zeale.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   