
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
A TREATISE OF Patience in Tribulation: First, Preached before the Right Honourable the Countesse of Southampton in her great heauines for the death of her most worthy Husband and Sonne: afterward inlarged for the helpe of all that are any way afflicted crossed or troubled.
                  By WILLIAM IONES B. of D. and P. of Arraton in the Isle of Wight.
                  
                  
                     Psal. 126. 5.
                     They that sowe in teares shall reape in ioy.
                  
                  Herevnto are ioyned the Teares of the Isle of Wight, shed on the Tombe of their most Noble Captaine HENRIE Earle of Southampton and the Lord Wriothesly his Sonne.
                  
                     The Tombe and Epitaph.
                  
                  
                     HENRYE IAMES WRIOTHESLEY Anagram: HERE I SEE MANY WORTHIES LY:
                     
                        Here yee see two but two's not all: for why
                        In these two Worthyes many Worthyes dye
                        O what a generation's here surprized
                        Of Noble bloud which was in them comprized?
                     
                  
                  Printed at London by William Iones dwelling in Red- 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  
                     TO THE 
                           ••
                        GHT HONOV
                     RABLE THE COVNTESSE 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     HAMPTON all peace and comfort. &c.
                  
                     
                        MOST Honourable Lady:
                  
                  
                     THe meanest seruant, of the greatest Lord, the glory of his Countrey, & your Ladyships wonderfull ioy and Honour, out of a strange amazement, begins now to looke vp: and the I can doe nothing beseeming such Honour, or worthy of these iudicious times; yet am I so obliged, that I cannot hold my peace, choosing to be taxed for anything rather then for want of dutie and thankefulnes. When the Tabernacle was building, the poorer sort which brought Goates haire and Rams skins were as well accepted, as they which brought Purple and Scarlet. This is my comfort, that such is your Noble disposition, that you will not dispise the hearty endeauor of the poorest well willer of your Honorable Family. It was no small ioy unto me for diuers yeares to come in my course, and stand in presence of that mirrour of Nobility, that I might heare his wisdome, and behold his gracious conuersation: Many a storme haue I indured both by Sea and Land; But when I saw his face, his gracious countenance dispelled all ill weather, and made mee as resolute to returne the next time as euer. I should willingly haue spent my daies in his seruice; yea I haue often wished that my life had beene sacrificed for his, that your Honour and this Land might haue still enioyed such a compleate ornament



and pillar, 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  But when I consider that thou (
                        〈◊〉
                     ) tookest 
                        〈◊〉
                      from vs, I lay my hand vpon my mouth and humbly with all who consider his worth, to humble themselues in 
                        〈◊〉
                      and fasting, that Gods Iudgements 
                        〈…〉
                      Land, which the falling of such Stars 
                        〈…〉
                      As for your selfe, Madame, who haue 
                        〈…〉
                      heart already with fasting, and weeping, and 
                        〈…〉
                      tation; I pray God to giue you patience and com
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      plaine sort, I labour to perswade your Ladyship 
                        〈…〉
                      in this sermon, which I humbly commend vnto your 
                        〈◊〉
                      nours perusall: the rather because you told me it did▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      good. And though your Ladyship may thinke, & wee can not deny, but the stroake which cut off two such worthies at once, was very grieuous, yet as the Minister of Christ in the name of Christ, I beseech your Honour to take to heart the goodnes of the Lord towards you in those that still remaine. Your Ladyship hath two louing and most worthy Daughters, married to godly, wise, vertuous personages, you haue also another hopefull young Lady. And your Honour hath a Sonne, who giues great hope that he will tread in his Noble Fathers steps, and be heire of his vertues. All these things are worthy to be remēbred dayly with praise; which I doubt not but your Ladiship doth. And so praying for the perpetuall prosperity of your Honourable house, I leaue your Honour in the hands of the Almighty God and our mercifull Sauiour, who is able to do aboundantly aboue all that wee can desire or thinke.
                  
                     Your Honours most humble seruant to be euer commanded in the LORD. W. IONES.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A TREATISE OF PATIENCE IN TRIBVLATION, &c.
                  
                     ROM. 12. 12.
                     
                        
                           Patience in Tribulation.
                        
                        Tis St. Augustines saying, on Psal. 37. Omnis morbus animae habet in Scripturis medicamentum suum: Euery disease of the soule hath a medicine in the Scriptures: And the most effectuall medicine ordained for Tribulation is Patience; therefore saith the Spirit in my Text, Be patient in tribulution.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     FIrst to open the words. The word translated 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     tribulation; comes of a Verbe which signifies to pinch, as the foote is pinched in a strait shooe; or to presse, as Grapes are squeezed in the Winepresse: Metaphorically tis vsed for to afflict, or to bring into any strait of body or mind; and so the substantiue signifies any thing which is hard and crosse to the nature of man; yea any euill which we suffer in bodie or mind.
                  The euils which are here meant by tribulation, are either ordinary or extraordinary. I cal those ordinary e
                        •
                     its to



which all mankind is subiect more or lesse; as labour, care, trauell, sicknesse, diseases, aches, paines, wants, griefes for death of friends, and other ineuitable casualties.
                  Extraordinary euills are either persecution inflicted vpon the godly by the wicked: or wrongs which are done by men of the world for malice or couetousnes, or meerly out of a mischieuous disposition; or calamities, which can bee impute directly to no second cause, but to Gods own hand.
                  Now concerning all these kinds of euill, comprehended vnder the word Tribulation, the Apostle speaking by inspiration, commaunds vs to bee patient. The word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , translated patience, signifies, Quietly abiding vnder: And we may be said quietly to abide vnder any tribulation, when we neither fret, nor doe any thing against godlinesse, or any part of Gods Word; but walke in our calling orderly, as if no such thing had happened vnto vs.
                  This patience in the Old Testament is termed silence, Esay 30. 15. In silentio & 
                           •
                        pe erit fortitudo vestra. In silence and hope shall be your strength. That is, If yee quietly indure your affliction, and put your trust in the Lord, yee shall ouercome. Psal. 39. 9. I was dumbe and opened not my mouth, because thou didst i
                           •
                        . That is, I patiently indured thy visitation. After the same manner is Christs patience set forth, Esay 53. 7. He is brought as a Lambe to the slaughter, and as a sheepe before her shearers is dumbe, so he openeth not his mouth. Yet let no man imagine that Christs patience was onely outward; twas inward also: Hee vnderwent whatsoeuer was laid vpon him, with a quiet mind. And so must wee indure all tribulation with a quiet mind: a quiet mind is the principall thing in the definition of Patience, giuen both by Philosophers and Diuines. Tully sayes, Patientia est virtus omnis adversitatis impetus aequanimiter portans: Patience is a vertue which suffers all aduersitie with a quiet mind. August. Patientia est virtus qua mala aequo animo toleramus. Patience is a vertue whereby we suffer euills with an equall mind: which Thomas Aquinas expounds thus.



                     Mala id est aduersa aequo animo, id est sine turbatione animi. Euills, 2. 3. q. 136. 
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        
                      that is to say Crosses; with an equall minde, that is, without trouble of mind. Now whereas he sayes by euils, we must vnderstand only aduersities or crosses, tis euident tis no true patience, when a man suffers the euill of sin in himselfe or others with a quiet mind. Saint Bernard sayes well, vera patientia est pati contra quod libeat, non praeter quod 
                     Ad Eugenium. 
                     liceat. Tis true patience to suffer against our will, nor against godlinesse. They therefore are greatly to bee blamed which suffer themselues to bee drawne into any sin; as drunkennesse or whoredome by leud companions, bee they neuer so great.
                  Againe, whereas tis said that, to the making vp of true patience, there is required a quiet mind, void of perturbation; it seemes tis the Lords will that we voluntarily submit our selues vnto affliction. Patience perforce is no patience: if wee suffer murmuringly and with grudging, though we suffer neuer so much, tis nothing worth.
                  Neither yet let any imagine, that wee are here called to such a kind of voluntary suffering, that we should run into affliction, and of our owne accord enter into temptation. Twas sencelesly done by Baals Priests to launce themselues; And the Romanists cannot without sinne imitate them, whiles they whip themselues, and goe in hairecloth, and lye on the ground: Who requires this at their hands: We must quietly vndergo any affliction that is cast vpon vs: wee must not voluntarily rush into any tribulation.
                  By this which hath beene said, tis easie to gather the Doctrine of this Text, and tis this: All Christians must, with a quiet and godly m
                        •
                     nd, beare all crosses and afflictions that befall them thorough the whole course of their life. There is no one dutie wherunto we are oftner called in Scripture, then vnto Patience; and no maruell: For there is no vertue more necessary then patience, none more excellent. Saint Augustine in his Booke of patience,



                     Cap. 1. calls it, Magnum Dei donum: The great gift of God. And the Apostle sayes to all Christians, Yee haue need of patience, Heb. 10. 36. Well doth hee say, Yee haue need of patience; because, so many are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34. And no man can come where Christ now is, except hee patiently take vp his crosse dayly, Luke 9. 23. Tis the Apostles resolution, Act. 14. 22. Wee must through much tribulation enter into the kingdome of God.
                  
                  And if yee search the Scripture, yee shall find, that tribulation hath beene the lot of the righteous in all ages. The first Saint, Abel, least he should want trouble, was assaulted by his owne brother Cain. How was Noah troubled with the wicked world? Who knowes not the tribulation of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and of all their posteritie in Egypt, in the Wildernesse, in the Land of Canaan, and in Babylon?
                  
                  Descend lower and obserue the life of Christ and his followers, and yee shall find it full of manifold tribulation: what tongue can tell the tribulation of the Primitiue Church, and the Christians in all Ages since? Yea Paul sets it downe as a Law that shall not bee broken, That, all that will liue godly in Christ Iesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12.
                  
                     Obiect. The Church hath often and long beene free from tribulation; as whiles Ioseph liued in Egypt: In the time of Dauid and Salomon: And tis written, Act. 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Iudea, and Galile, and Samaria. So also tis recorded in Constantines time, and in the dayes of diuers other Christian Emperours the Church had much peace.
                  And how can we forget the wonderfull peace and freedome which our owne Church hath enioyed, in the reign of our late blessed Queene Elizabeth, and our late Soueraigne Lord King Iames?
                  
                  
                     Answ. Though the Church and people of God, haue



sundry times beene free from publike persecution by the hand of Authority, as in Queene Maries dayes. As also from open inuasion, as in 88. Yet neuer was there wanting some Ismaels and Esaus in the Church, to persecute all Isaacs and Iakobs. So it was in Saint Pauls time, as hee testifies, Gal. 4. 29. As he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit; so is it now: and so hath it beene euer since; and so it is now, and so shall it be vntill the dissolution of all things: All that will liue godly in Christ Iesus shall suffer persecution.
                  
                  They shall not alwayes be banished, imprisoned, wracked, tormented, burnt, &c. But they shall bee alwayes hated, reproched, reuiled, slandred, nicknamed, derided, made laughing stocks, and table talke, and musick for drunkards and wantons, and swearing swaggerers, and euery idle, riotous, and vnthriftie companion. The mouth of the Lord hath said it, Esay 59. 15. He that departeth from euill maketh himselfe a prey; that is to say, Hee makes himselfe a scorne and derision to all that are round about him: which are not resolued to deny vngodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to liue soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Sheep among wolues can haue no rest: No more can the children of God among the children of this world. Tis worthily obserued by Saint Augustine, in Psal. 55. Nunquam deerit persecutio Christiano: si ergo pro Christo pressuram non dum pateris, vide ne pie in Christo viuere non dum coeperis. Persecution shall neuer be wanting to a Christian, if therfore as yet thou sufferest no tribulation for Christs sake, suspect thy selfe that thou hast not yet begun to liue godly in Christ Iesus. If thou liue so priuately that none abroad take notice of thee: yet, if thou walke with God, with an vpright heart, the Deuil will raise vp some storme against thee in thine owne Family: Thou shalt be sure to find, either a mocking Cham, or a rebellious Absolon, or a spitefull Doeg, or a cursing Shemei, or a false hearted Ioab, or a scoffing Michol. Lastly, if all the world would let thee



alone; yet, if thou be a child of God, thou shalt in no case want some tribulation long: Some sicknesse or weaknesse shall take hold vpon thee: Some anguish of heart, or griefe of mind shall trouble thee; Crosses will come one in the neck of another: Thou shalt lose thy goods by Sea, by Land, by Fire, by Thieues: Thy hopefull Corne-fields shall bee blighted; thy sheepe and thy fatlings shall die in thy pasture; thy louing friends, nay thy beloued children shall be taken from thee: some, whiles they hang on the brests; others when they are growne vp and are of great hope: Nay more, thy dearest Rachel shall bee taken out of thy bosome; or the Lord will take away from thy head, thy glory, thy sweet companion, thy staffe thy comfort. Some way or other thou shalt surely be afflicted: for the Spirit of Truth hath said it, Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord loueth hee chasteneth, and scourgeth euery sonne whom hee receiueth.
                  
                  Seeing then it is so plaine, that all Gods children must thorough much tribulation enter into the kingdome of heauen: it followes directly, that all that will bee saued, must of necessitie bee armed with patience. For how shall we be able to keepe faith and our holy profession, if we be not heartned with patience and quiet mindes to beare all tribulation?
                  The want of this Grace of Patience hath beene the cause, why many (who made a good profession) when persecution, or some other tribulation arose, haue started backe and behaued themselues like meere worldlings. VVherfore least any of vs in time of tribulation should fall away, and giue vp all that wee haue heard, like the hearers which are compared to the stony ground, Luke 8. 13. Let vs euen now whiles it is called to day, begin to vse the best meanes that we can to settle our soules in patience. There be very many means prescribed by Diuines; among which may it please you to take notice of these fiue?
                  The first is Prayer. In his owne strength (saith Hannah) 
                     1. Meanes.


                     
                     shall no man preuaile, 1. Sam. 2. 9. But, our helpe commeth from the Lord our God which made heauen and earth, Psalm. 121. 2. Now the sanctified meanes to obtaine any good thing, as helpe, strength, patience in tribulation, is Prayer, as Christ saith, Matth. 7. 7. Aske and it shall bee giuen you: againe, Iohn 16. 23. Whatsoeuer yee shall aske the Father in my name, hee will giue it you. On the other side S. Iames saith plainely, Chap. 4. 2. Yee haue not, because yee aske not. Many surely haue not patience in tribulation, because they are not earnest in prayer: wherefore, if wee affect this great and rare gift of patience, let vs be instant in prayer. Euery Booke is full of the commendation of prayer; but he that would reape any benefit by prayer, must resolue with himselfe to enter into a set course of prayer, as Dauid and Daniel did, and continually vpon euery occasion lift vp his heart vnto God, and be very thankfull for the least fauour.
                  The second meanes is humblenesse of mind. If thou 2. wouldst bee patient in tribulation thou must labour for Humilitie, which is the ground-worke of all Grace. God giues Grace to the humble, saith Iames and Peter. He which is of an humble Spirit, hath that within him, which will quench the furious passion of impatience, as soone as it begins to burne out.
                  If thou hast cause of griefe or vexation giuen thee by a froward wife, a strange husband, a rebellious child, a dissolute seruant, an vniust or foule-mouthed neighbour, a faithlesse friend, or a cruell enemy; thy humble spirit will tell thee, that thou hast behaued thy selfe more vntowardly towards thy heauenly Father: and if he strike thee with sicknesse, with want, or any other calamitie; if hee take from thee thy children, thy friends, thy wealth, thy Honour; If thou hast an humble minde, it will tell thee this, It is Gods great mercy that thou thy selfe art not confounded and cast into hell. It will make thee say with Dauid, in that great triall when he fled from Absolon, 2 Samuel 15. 26. Here am I., let him doe to mee as seemeth good vnto him.
                  
                  
                     
The third meanes to worke patience, is the ioynt exercise of Faith, Hope, and a good Conscience. Hee that by 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . faith laies hold on the forgiuenesse of sin, and reconciliation with God by the bloud of Christ: And withall by the eye of hope entreth within the vayle, and beholdeth the glory prepared: This man shall bee able quietly, constantly, Heb. 6. 19. and patiently to indure all crosses, afflictions and tribulation, which God, the Deuill, and all the world can lay vpon him; especially if hee ioyne vnto faith and hope a good conscience. For the cabbinet to lay vp, the jewells of faith and hope in, that they may stand vs in stead at euery assault, is a good conscience. Faith indeed first breeds a good conscience, and then a good conscience doth (as it were) nourish faith; so that hee which stickes not to make shipwracke of a good conscience, will quickly fall away from faith, and then euery tribulation will make him impatient.
                  This threefold cord of faith, hope, and a good conscience, is that which heretofore hath kept the Saints and Martyrs constant and patient in all their afflictions. They were put vpon troubles and tribulation, intolerable inhumane iudgement; yet were they more then conquerours through faith, hope, and a good conscience. Because they beleeued their sinnes were forgiuen, and in the course of sobrietie, righteousnesse and godlinesse, waited for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of their Sauiour Christ, nothing could dash them out of countenance.
                  Wouldest thou bee patient in tribulation? then must thou doe as thou hearest the Saints haue done. Thou must first beleeue, according to the tenour of the Gospel, that thy sinnes are forgiuen, and withall consider what a wonderfull benefit this is; then canst thou not chuse but be patient in any tribulation. It is most certaine, thou neuer didst truely esteeme the fauour of God in Christ; thou didst neuer soundly ponder what an inestimable benefit the forgiuenesse of sins is, if thou canst not be contented



therewith, and willing with patience to indure any tribulation which the Lord shall lay vpon thee. Moreouer, if thou hast respect vnto the recompence of reward, thou wilt esteem reproch, losse of Honor, wealth, friends, worldly contentment, greater treasure then all the commodities in the world.
                  Lastly, a good conscience is a strong supporter in all manner of tribulation; did not the Heathen say,

                        —Hic murus aheneus esto
                        Nil conscire mali.—
                     
                  
                  It is a brazen wall against all assault to be guiltie of no sin.
                  What made Ioseph so patient in prison? His conscience was not clogged with guilt: what made his brethren so much moued at the first touch? They had euill consciences. Euen so any tribulation will make thee impatient, if thou hast not purged thy conscience from dead workes: but if thou resoluest in all things to walke honestly, whatsoeuer it cost thee, thou shalt be able to beare with a quiet mind whatsoeuer befall thee.
                  The fourth meanes to cause patience, is to set thy selfe 4. to indure hardnesse as a good Souldier of Iesus Christ, 2 Tim. 2. 3. It is good for a man to beare the yoake from his youth, Lament. 3. 27. Tribulation worketh patience, Rom. 5. 3.
                  The fifth meanes of patience, is to enter into serious 5. meditation concerning the ground, carriage, vse, and issue of all tribulation.
                  The principall meditations wherewith our hearts may 1. Medit. be taken vp, are foure. First, that all tribulation comes from God. Secondly, that in all tribulation he deales wisely and louingly. Thirdly, that he sends tribulation for some good end. Fourthly, that he is ready alwayes to afford helpe for the present, and to deliuer in fit season. All these well weighed are able to make vs patient in any tribulation. To speake to them seuerally.
                  First, That all our afflictions from the one end of our



life vnto the other, both great and small, come vpon vs from God himselfe, is plaine by the constant confession of the Saints, and the euidence of Scripture. Iob sayes, Iob 1. 21. The Lord gaue, and the Lord hath taken away.
                  
                  If yee read the Text, yee shall find that the Sabeaus took away his Oxen and Asses: the Chaldeans his Camels; yet Iob makes this confession, The Lord hath taken away. Psalme 119. 75. Dauid saith to God, Thou hast afflicted mee; yet we know it was Saul and his followers, and Shemei and Absolon, &c. that afflicted Dauid. So the Israelites say, Hos. 6. 1. Come let vs returne vnto the Lord: hee hath torne, hee hath smitten vs. Amos 3. 6. Shall there be euill in a City, and the Lord hath not done it? Iob 5. 6. Affliction commeth not out of the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground.
                  
                  Here ye see it is a confessed truth, All tribulation comes from the Lord. Which being so, what fitter exhortation can I adde, then that Heb 12. 5. My sonne despise not the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him, verse 9. Wee haue had fathers of our flesh which corrected vs, and wee gaue them reuerence, shall wee not much rather bee in subiection to the Father of Spirits? Marke how Dauid in a great tribulation behaues himselfe, onely vpon this consideration, that it was the Lords doing, Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumbe, and opened not my mouth, because thou didst it. Here yee see Dauid professes hee was silent in affliction, because hee considered it was Gods doing. Nothing is more forcible to represse the violence of griefe in the day of trouble, then to call to mind that wee haue to doe, not with mortall men, but with the Almighty and euerliuing God. For how comes it to passe that the greater part of the world is ouertaken with impatience, when trouble lights vpon them; but because they doe not recount, that they wrangle and brawle with God himselfe? Therefore, whiles some cast their crosses and afflictions vpon fortune, some impute them to the malice or cruelty of this or that man, some ascribe them to one cause, and some vnto another,



and scarce one of an hundred absolutely acknowledges Gods hand; they freely fall to grieue, complaine, fret and murmure without measure.
                  But Dauid cleane contrary, that hee may silence all rebellious motions, turnes his eye to the Lord, and considering him in his wise prouidence, as the author of all his trouble, resolues to bee silent and put it vp with a quiet mind. And so accordingly let vs know, that in any affliction that befalls vs at any time, this is the principall worke of faith, to humble vs vnder Gods hand, and make vs rest in his doing with silence, as Saint Peter counsells, Ch. 1. 5. 6. Humble your selues vnder the mightie hand of God.
                  
                  Besides (as Caluine notes) which is the second Meditation, 2. Medit. it must be obserued that men do then subiect themselues, to God in tribulation with quiet and patient mindes, when they are perswaded that, as God doth all, so he doth it as a wise Iudge and louing Father. For many wicked men in tribulation acknowledge Gods hand; yet because they reckon of him as a cruell Tyrant, they cease not through impatience to blaspheme his holy name. But Dauid doth so acknowledge Gods iudgements vpon himselfe, that hee takes them as from the hand of a wise God, and louing Father; and therefore rests well pleased and patient whatsoeuer he doth, saying, I was dumbe, I opened not my mouth, because thou, O Lord, didst it: Thou, I say, which, as thou art the Almightie God, so thou art also wise, louing, and tender Father vnto mee.
                  Euen so, if we, when we are cast into the bed of sorrow, and furnace of tribulation, would seriously meditate vpon the wisdome and loue of the great God (from whose hand we say we take the visitation) assuredly we should possesse our soules in patience.
                  A man that is perswaded of the loue and skill of a Physician or Chirurgeon, which is but a man like himselfe and may be false, or deceiued; will put himselfe into his hand most readily, and be content to be launched and se
                        〈…〉
                     , or



to take downe bitter pills and fulsome potions, and to doe or suffer any thing according to his direction, in hope of bodily health. How much more would wee bee patient in any tribulation, if we were thoroughly perswaded, that our God (without whose prouidence one haire falls not from our head) did administer these bitter things vnto vs, in wonderfull wisdome and great loue to our soules? This made Dauid so patient, Psal. 119. 75. I know O Lord (saith hee) that thy iudgements are right, and that thou in faithfulnesse hast afflicted me. Therefore was he so quiet; and when his spirit began to lash out in a kind of discontented humour, because Gods hand was vpon him so heauy and so long: marke how hee checks himselfe, saying, Psal. 42. 11. Why art thou cast downe, O my soule, and why art thou disquicted within mee? Hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God. Here note, I pray you, what the ground of Dauids patience in his tribulation, when his enemies reproched him, saying, Where is thy God? it was this, hee was fully perswaded that God was his God, that is to say, his wise Guardian, his mightie Protector, his louing father, and that hee did all that hee did to him most wisely, most louingly, with respect vnto the amendment of his life, and the saluation of his soule. Euen so, if we also would beleeue Gods Word, which tels vs, that God as often as hee suffers any tribulation to fall vpon vs; in wisdome, loue, and faithfulnesse causes vs to bee afflicted, we would be quiet vnder his mightie hand; yea, wee would solace our soules with the peaceable fruit of affliction in the end. This made Saint Paul say in the name of all beleeuers, Rom. 5. 3. Wee glory in tribulations. This made Dauid say long before, Psal. 94. 19. In the multitude of my sorrowfull thoughts within mee, thy comforts delight my snule. Where note, hee saith not, when my tribulations and sorrowes are ouer, but euen in the middest of the multitude of them, I feele sound spirituall comfort, because I know that thou art the onely wise God, and my



mercifull Sauiour and Redeemer, which bringest all these things vpon mee. Thou diddest cause Saul to persecute mee, and mine own sonne Absolon to rise vp against mee; Thou baddest Shemei to curse mee, and many others to reproach and reuile me; Thou hast often cast mee vpon the bed of sicknesse; thou, I say, which art the only wise God, and my louing Sauiour, didst all these things; therefore I am so farre from fretting, that I find comfort, euen whiles I See more in the treatise of faith. am exercised vnder thy hand.
                  The like comfort will arise vnto any one of vs, in any trouble or tribulation, vpon the like consideration; to wit, that God (who is the author of all afflictions) sends them vpon vs, in singular wisdome and loue for our good: which that it may make the deeper impression, I wil come to the third Meditation; which is, touching the speciall 3. Medit. ends for which God doth suffer tribulation to fall vpon vs. The ends are three. First, Gods owne glory. Secondly, The example of others. Thirdly, Our owne speciall good; vpon which I will chiefly insist.
                  First, One way whereby God is said to be glorified in his Saints, is when they patiently suffer tribulation for his names sake. Thus did the Martyrs glorifie God, whiles they cheerefully suffered for the truth.
                  The second end, is the example of others. Therefore doth God bring strong Christians to bee tried by afflictions, that they which are weake (seeing their patience and constancy) may bee encouraged to bee quiet in the day of triall.
                  The third end is for our owne good, and that foure wayes. First, To try vs. Secondly, To purge vs. Thirdly, To quicken vs. Fourthly. To heape more glory vpon vs. That for these foure ends God sends tribulation vpon vs, it is euident by Scripture. For the first end, which is triall, it is said, 1 Pet. 4. 12. Beloued, thinke it not strange concerning the fiery tryall, which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened vnto you; But reioyce, &c. Deut. 8. 2. 3. Moses saith to



the people of Israel, The Lord led thee these forty yeeres in the Wildernesse, to humble thee, and to proue thee, to know what was in thy heart, whether thou wouldest keepe his commandements, or no.
                  
                  
                     Quest. But did not God sufficiently know them without this kind of tryall.
                  
                     Answ. Yes surely: for as Dauid saith, Psal. 139. 2. He vnderstands our thoughts a farre off. But wee know not our selues, before we be tried by some tribulation. Some think they are strong, and that nothing can disquiet them; but when God laies his hand vpon them, they are troubled aboue measure. Others thinke they haue no strength, that they shall not bee able to stand in the euill day, and therefore grow exceeding sad: But when they are brought to the lists, they are found stronger then many which made great boast.
                  Againe, the world is prone to censure all that labour to liue godly in Christ as hypocrites, as Satan said of Iob. Therefore the Lord, to cleere his children of this grieuous imputation, tries them with afflictions, that their vprightnesse may shine out, as Iobs did.
                  The second benefit of tribulation is purging our soules, Esay 1. 25. God saith to his Church; I will turne my hand vpon thee, and purely purge away thy drosse. Esay 27. 7. Hath hee smote Israel, as he smote those that smote him? Answ. Verse 9. By this shall the iniquitie of Iacob bee purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sinne. Here the Spirit declares the different ends, for which God strikes his children, and the wicked; The wicked he strikes to destroy them: His children hee strikes too, but it is to purge away their sinne. So againe, God sayes of some of the Israelites, Zach. 13. 9. I will refine them as siluer, and will try them as gold. VVhen these mettalls are cast into the fire, the drosse onely is consumed, they came out more pure. So Gods children, when they are cast into the furnace of affliction, come out more pure. Thus was Dauid purged by affliction, as he confesseth,



                     Psal. 119. Nay one of the most notorious sinners that euer was, Manasses, was purged by tribulation, 2 Chronicles 33. 12. When hee was in affliction hee besought the Lord, and humbled himselfe greatly before the God of his Fathers, and when hee was brought to Ierusalem into his Kingdome, hee tooke away the strange God, and repaired the Altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace-offerings and thank-offerings, and commanded Iudah to serue the Lord: what an alteration is here wrought by tribulation? The like effect it hath in euery one in whom God hath any portion. Neither hath any man almost from the beginning beene soundly turned from his sinfull wayes, but by some affliction of body or mind. Aske your owne consciences, yee that are truely conuerted, whether your conuersion were not occasioned by tribulation.
                  The third end of tribulation, is to quicken all Sauing graces in vs, Psal. 119. 72. Dauid saith, It is good for mee that I haue bin afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes: why, but did not Dauid know Gods Statutes before? Yes: but by affliction hee was put in mind to walke the way of the Lord more diligently. Affliction made him more frequent and earnest in prayer: Affliction made him put his trust in God more confidently: Affliction made him more watchfull ouer his owne wayes, and more carefull to keepe them in compasse which were committed to his charge: Affliction made him more compassionate towards others that were in any tribulation: Affliction made him more humble. In a word, by affliction, God did so frame and fashion him that he made him a man after his owne heart; therefore well may he say, as hee doth; It is good for me that I haue beene afflicted. The like good end doth God ayme at when hee afflicts any of vs, as it is plainely declared, Hebrewes 12. 10. Hee chastens vs for our profit, that wee may bee made partakers of his holinesse.
                  
                  The fourth end of our tribulation is, that wee may bee the more glorified in heauen. Rom. 8. 17. If wee suffer with



Christ, we shall be glorified together, 1 Pet. 1. 7. The tryall of our faith, thogh it be tried with fire, shalbe found vnto praise, and honour, and glory, at the appearing of Iesus Christ.
                  
                  Thus yee see how many excellent ends of tribulation the Lord propounds, which being duly considered, are able to make vs not onely patient in any tribulation, but also joyfull and thankfull. I cannot omit what S. Augustine sayes of tribulation, hauing respect only vnto the last end, to wit, the multiplying of our glory according to the measure of our tribulation. His words bee these: That I may after this languishing life see Christ in glory, and be partaker of so great a good; what though sicknesse weakens me, labours oppresse me, watchings spend me, cold benumne me, heat inflame me? Nay, though my whole life be spent in sighes and sorrowes; what is all to that rest which shall insue in the life to come? Why 
                     Non est ad astra mallis é terris via. Senec.
                      
                     doe wee complaine of want of rest seeing wee haue vndertaken a iourney wearisome and troublesome? Besides, there is no other way to heauen; as Christ was ordained first to suffer tribulation, and then to enter into his Glory, Luke 24. 26. So all that are Christs are appointed to afflictions, 1 Thess. 3. 3. Againe, Rom. 8. 29. Whom God did fore-know, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Sonne, that is, Not onely in regard of holinesse, but also of tribulation: For the seruant is not greater then the Lord; If they haue persecuted mee, they will persecute you also, saith Christ, Ioh. 5. 20. And yet againe, Luke 9. 23. Whosoeuer will come after mee, must take vp his crosse dayly. Now no man can bee said to take vp his crosse, but he that is patient in tribulation. The crosse of it selfe is not the way to the Crowne; but the patient bearing of the Crosse. Saint Paul sayes fitly, If a man striue for masteries, he is not crowned, except he striue lawfully, 2 Tim. 2. 5. Wherefore, if we desire the ioyes of the Kingdome of Heauen, let vs be content to walke patiently without murmuring and fretting, through the stony lane of tribulation. The Israelites liked the Land of Canaan very well, but when they felt hardship in the Wildernesse, they murmured,



and the Prophet sayes, They prouoked the Lord, and he slew them by thousands. If we commit the like sinne, how shall wee escape the like iudgement? when Dauid sent Embassadours to the King of Ammon, to comfort him after his Fathers death, he euill intreated them, and Dauid was exceeding angry. Behold afflictions are the Lords Embassadours, which hee sends vnto vs for many good ends; wherefore if wee grudge and repine, if we mourne without measure, and fret and chafe at them, surely wee shall greatly prouoke the Lords indignation against vs.
                  Let vs therefore hearing these things, be perswaded to be patient in all manner of tribulation, the rather, because God hath promised to bee with vs in all trouble, and to help vs to beare it, and in very good time to deliuer vs out of all our tribulation. This is the fourth Meditation. The 4. Medit. first clause whereof; viz. That God will bee with vs, and helpe vs in trouble, may be proued: First, By the promises out of Gods Word: Secondly, By examples, instances, and experience. The Scripture is full of promises of Gods comfortable presence; I will cite onely that of Esa. 43. 1. Thus saith the Lord, feare not, for I haue redeemed thee, and when thou passest through the waters I will bee with thee: when thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burnt: For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Sauiour. Feare not, for I am with thee. Here, by fire and water we may vnderstand all manner of tribulation into which Gods children fall: In all which the Lord promises to be with them; and how can they miscarry with whom the Almightie is?
                  But perhaps some wil say, This is indeed a large & gracious promise; but it was made only to the people of Israel.
                  
                  
                     Answ. Paul speaking to the Romans, which were Gentiles, as well as wee, saith, Rom. 15. 4. Whatsoeuer things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture might haue hope. More plainely, Heb. 13. 5. the Spirit teacheth euery one to apply vnto himselfe that promise which was made onely to Ioshua, I will not leaue thee, nor forsake thee: wherby it is sure, 2 Sam. 10.


                     
that what promise soeuer thou findest in all the Scripture made to a beleeuer, thou (if thou beleeuest) hast as good interest in it, as he to whom it was made. Wherefore, when thou fallest into any tribulation, comfort thy selfe with the promise of Gods presence; because he saith, I will not leaue thee. Neither hath God onely promised his presence, Iosh. 1. but also afforded it vnto his children. Esay 63. 9. It is said of Gods people, In all their affliction, he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saued them; In his loue and in his pittie hee redeemed them, and hee bare them, and carried them all the dayes of old. More particularly, how often doth Dauid say, That God was with him in the needfull time of trouble, and that he was his rock, his fortresse, his refuge, his strong helpe, that hee deliuered him out of all his troubles: and Psa. 23. 4. he makes this comfortable profession, Though I walke through the valley of the shadow of death, I will feare no euill: for thou art with me. Not to multiply examples; how confidently doth Saint Paul say in the name of all beleeuers, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. Blessed be God, euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comforteth vs in all our tribulation: Againe, verse 5. As the sufferings of Christ abound in vs; so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ. Russinus lib. 1. cap. 36. brings an excellent example of God presence in affliction. One Theodorus was, for the profession of the Christian Faith, wracked and tortured about two or three houres most cruelly; yet neuerthelesse that godly man was all the while ioyful, and cheerefully sang Psalmes vnto God. After hee was let loose, some of his friends asked him whether he felt no paine vpon the racke: Hee said, some small paine he felt; but there was with him a faire young man, as hee seemed, who still wiped the sweat from his face, and refreshing him as it were with coole water, caused that hee felt lesse paine then when he was let downe. All that are in tribulation now adayes, doe not behold the presence of the Lord, as Theodorus did; but all that beleeue are partakers of the Lords spirituall presence, whereby he inables them to doe



or suffer any thing, according to that, Phil. 4. 13. I am able to doe all things, thorough Christ Iesus that strengtheneth mee. Vpon which word Bernard wel notes, that man by Nature impotent, by Grace is made omnipotent: verily, hee that beleeues is made able to doe or suffer any thing. For all things are possible to him that beleeueth, Mar. 9. 23. And no maruell; for Faith drawes whom the Lord of Life and Glory, and makes him present in euery place, in euery affliction, and how can there want comfort in his presence, where is fulnesse of ioy for euer? It was the perswasion or spirituall sight of this presence of the Lord, that helped the Saints in all their tribulation. This made Moses, not feare the Kings wrath, Heb. 11. 27. Hee indured, as seeing him who is inuisible. This supported Dauid when hee was in his enemies Countrey, and his owne men spake of stoning him. 1 Sam. 30. 6. What was it but the presence of the Lord, that strengthened both the three children before the fiery furnace, and Daniel in the Lions den? This made Peter sleep sweetly in prison the night before hee should bee slaine, Acts 12. This made Stephen speake boldly to his fierce enemies, Asts 7. This made Paul and Silas sing Psalmes in prison at midnight, Acts 16. This made many beleeuers, which were tried by mockings, scourgings, and wrackings, despise the paine and the shame, Heb. 11. In like manner, if wee could perswade our selues that the Lord, according to his gracious promise, is with vs in all our tribulation, it would make vs quiet, and strongly comfort vs. O the ioy of the Lords presence, is able to bring mighty things to passe: what cannot he doe, and turne to our good; which called light out of darknes, & made all things of nothing; if we would but giue glory to his Word, which sayes, Hee is with vs in trouble, and alwaies at hand to helpe vs in all our tribulation. Feare not, for I am with thee, saith the Lord to euery one that is in trouble. Esay 43. 1.
                  
                  For the confirmation of this difficult point, That God is with them that are in tribulation; mark what Christ saith, Iohn 16. 33. These things haue I spoken, that in mee yee might



haue peace. In the world yee shall haue tribulation; But bee of good cheare, I haue ouercome the world. Againe, he sayes, Matthew 28. 20. Loe I am with you alwayes, euen vnto the end of the world: which wordes by Hieronym. and Chrysostome are vnderstood of Christs presence to all beleeuers vnto the worlds end. But the manner of his presence is spirituall: viz. He is present by his Spirit: of this Spirit it is that hee sayes, Iohn 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and hee shall giue you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for euer; Euen the Spirit of Truth, which dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. Againe, Ioh. 16. 7. It is expedient for you that I goe away: for if I goe not away the Comforter will not come vnto you, but if I depart I will send him vnto you. By these places it is euident what kind of presence Christ promised to his Church and euery beleeuer vnto the worlds end; Euen the presence of his Spirit, which is the Comforter; and if any aske how Christ by his Spirit doth comfort beleeuers in tribulation, and make them patient: I answere, three wayes. First, The Spirit teacheth them to apply vnto themselues, the precious promises of presence and assistance, as Esay 43. 2. When thou passest through the water, I will be with thee, Psalme 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that feare him. Psa. 37. 5. Commit thy way vnto the Lord, trust also in him, and he will bring it to passe. These and many such promises doth the Spirit teach beleeuers to apply vnto their own soules, declaring also how God hath made good such promises from time to time, to al that trusted in him.
                  Secondly, Christ by his Spirit helps beleeuers in tribulation, by powring into their hearts the gifts and graces of the Spirit, whereby they are made patient; as namely, joy, courage, patience, confidence, peace of conscience, the spirit of supplication; yea, the Spirit helpes all our infirmities, and makes intercession vnto God for vs, Rom. 8. 26.
                  Thirdly, The Spirit workes patience in vs, By bearing witnesse to our spirits that wee are the children of God; if children, then heires, heires of God, and ioynt heires with Christ: so that if wee suffer with him, we shall also be glorified together:



Rom. 8. 16. These be strong comforts, able to make any man patient: wherefore, if we loue our soules, let vs now, whiles wee haue time get these comforts about vs, that when we fall into any tribulation wee may haue comfort at hand. They that are of abilitie will alwayes haue in a readinesse hot waters, and cordialls against qualmes and sudden fits. How much more ought we to be wise in prouiding against the qualmes of our soules, considering that wee are daily subiect to some tribulation or other? Now, the principall cordiall for the soule in all distresse, is the comfort of the Holy-ghost, which Chriss hath promised to all beleeuers. Let all beleeuers therefore, soundly stay their hearts in all tribulation vpon this Comforter, which as hee is inuincible in himselfe, so is he able to ouercome all euill whatsoeuer to which we are subiect. If this Comforter be with vs, wee need not feare what befalls vs, whether tribulation, or distresse, or persecution, or famine, or nakednesse, or perill, or sword, in all these we shall be more then conquerors. Yea, we need not feare pouertie, reproch, sicknesse, desolation, torment, death; this Comforter hath consolation in store, which will comfort vs in despight of all these euills in their greatest extreamitie.
                  Nature and Art can worke onely by meanes: But the Spirit, which is the Comforter of beleeuers in all tribulation, can work with meanes, and without meanes, yea and against meanes: Psal. 112. 4. Vnto the vpright there ariseth light in darknesse. I may adde ioy in sorrow, peace in trouble, abundance in want, life in death.
                  VVhen any beleeuer is called out by God to be tried by tribulation, the Spirit forthwith either furnishes him with sufficient strength, or abates the strength of the affliction: as we see in Ioseph, Moses, the three children, the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs in all ages. Let vs therfore, hearing these things out of the Word of Truth, labor daily to find them verified in our selues, that we may be patient in tribulatiō.
                  Now followes the latter clause of the fourth Meditation: viz. That God in all tribulation will giue a seasonable



and gracious issue. If their were no end of tribulation, it were in vaine to perswade to patience. But nothing is more often mentioned in Scripture then an end of trouble. Psal. 34. 19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord deliuereth them out of all. Ioh. 16. 20. Yee shall be sorrowfull, but your sorrow shalbe turned into ioy. How often doth Dauid confesse that the Lord deliuered him out of all his tribulation? Ob. Yea, but Dauid and others complain that it is very long before the Lord helps them; and the same complaint doe many in these dayes take vp, insomuch that they begin to faint vnder the burden of sicknesse, want, disgrace, &c. before they be deliuered.
                  
                     Ans. This is true, the Lord sometimes deferres long before he helpes vs in tribulation; but he doth it in wisdome, if we had eyes to see it. To some he defers to grant their suit, that he may make them more earnest in prayer, which is an exercise wherein he greatly delights.
                  Secondly, He deferres some, to make them more sweetly taste the benefits when it comes, whereas if it were presently granted, it would be quickly forgotten.
                  Thirdly, God delaies to send help in trouble, to put vs in mind how we haue put off from day to day to turn to him.
                  Fourthly, Most commonly God prolongs the time of our tribulation, because it hath not fully accomplished the worke for which he sent it. Our vaine imaginations are not cast downe; our rebellious lusts are not mortified; our minds are not humbled; our compassion towardes others in affliction is not stirred vp; our hearts are not weaned from this world: wherefore if the hand of God at any time be vpon thee, presently enter into examination with thy selfe, and deale impartially with thy soule, and humble thy selfe mightily, if thou expect deliuerance: For God delights not in thy tribulation, but delayes only vntill thou art prepared for deliuerance.
                  
                     Obiect. I haue examined all my wayes, and humbled my selfe greatly, and beene very earnest in prayer long, and yet I see no end of trouble.
                  
                     
                     Ans. Perhaps thou dost make too much hast, whereas the course which God prescribes, is to wait patiently the Lords leisure. Hab. 2. 4. The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speake and not lye: Though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. The thing to be obserued hence is, that no man must indent with God concerning the time of deliuerance, but must patiently indure the Lords leasure and pleasure. The best meanes to hasten reliefe in tribulation is, to throw thy selfe downe before God, saying, Here I am Lord; doe with mee what thou wilt; I am content to wait thy leasure, and to tarry vntill thou in thy wisdome seest it fit to release mee.
                  
                     Obiect. I see no meanes of redresse, though I tarry neuer so long, I am in great want, and debt, and weaknesse, and haue many to relieue, and haue no friends left.
                  Marke what the Spirit saith, Psal. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord, and be doing good; so shalt thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shalt be fed. Againe, vers. 25. I haue beene young and now am old, yet neuer saw I the righteous forsaken. Remember moreouer, how the Lord prouided for the widdow of Sarepta, 1 King. 17. His hand is not now shortned.
                  Lastly, if thou keepe faith and a good conscience, and resoluest that thou wilt not vse any indirect meanes to helpe thy selfe or thine; but depend vpon God, thou shalt be sure with poore Lazarus to be receiued into the Kingdome of Heauen when thou dyest; this will make amends for thy tribulation.
                  But, me thinks, I heare some Rachel complaining, that she hath lost a gracious sonne, and can haue no more; yea, as worthy an husband as the world can yeeld, how should she bepatient? Ans. 1. Thou hast not lost that which God hath found. 2. God hath giuen thee his Sonne to bee thy husband, will not this make amends for thy sonne and thy husband? Is not he better-then ten sons and husbands.
                  In a word, let thy tribulation be what it may; let there be neuer so many impediments, neuer so strong aduersaries, neuer so weake meanes: Nay, let thy case be desperate



in the eye of man, yet if thou canst beleeue and wait, the Lord will surely in good time send thee helpe from his holy place, as hee hath done to all Saints which did put their trust in him. How can it bee otherwise; seeing his Name is still wonderful, his Power alsufficient, his wisdome infinite, his Truth infallible, his Loue immutable, his Promise & Grace as large as euer, & our Mediator Iesus Christ making intercession for vs, the same for euer? Dauid, Ps. 37. 37. bids vs, marke the perfect man, & behold the vpright: for the end of that man is peace. And it is worth the marking also, which Saint Paul saith of himselfe, 2 Tim. 4. 16, 17. No man stood with mee, notwithstanding the Lord stood with mee and strengthened mee, and I was deliuered out of the mouth of the Lyon, and the Lord will deliuer mee from euery euill worke, and will preserue mee vnto his heauenly Kingdome.
                  
                  Vpon what ground doth Paul speake this? surely, because he beleeued. So then, if wee beleeue Gods promises made in the Word, wee also may say as boldly as he, The Lord will deliuer vs from euery euill worke, and will preserue vs vnto his heauenly Kingdome.
                  
                  Seeing then all our tribulation comes from the Lord, and he deales with vs most wisely and louingly; and neuer sends any tribulation, but for some good end; as namely, his owne glory, the example of our weake brethren, or our owne good, in trying, purging, quickning vs, and heaping more glory vpon vs: And lastly, seeing hee is with vs in all tribulation, and helpes vs to beare it, and hath promised to giue a gracious issue; wee shall shew our selues to be very vnreasonable men, if we wil not from hence forth set our selues to be patient in tribulation.
                  I will conclude with S. Iames 5. 10. Take my brethren, the Prophets, who haue spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction and of patience. Behold wee count them happy which inaure: Yee haue heard of the patience of Iob, and haue seene the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pittifull, and of tender mercy. Wherefore whatsoeuer your tribulation be, Be yee also patient vnto the comming of the Lord. To whom be glory for euer and euer.
                  Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  TEARES OF THE Isle of Wight, shed on the Tombe of their most Noble, valorous, and louing Captaine and Gouernour, the right Honourable HENRIE, Earle of Southampton: who dyed in the Netherlands, Nouemb. 10/20 at Bergen-vp-Zone.
                  
                  As also the true Image of his Person and Vertues, IAMES; the Lord Wriothesley, Knight of the Bath, and Baron of Titchfield; who dyed Nouemb. 5/15 at Rosendaell. And were both buried in the Sepulcher of their Fathers, at Tichfield, on Innocents day. 1624.
                  
                     They were louely and pleasant in their liues; and in their death they were not diuided. 2 Sam. 1. 23.
                  
                     —Quis tali fando
                     Temperet à lachrymis?—
                  
                  Honoris, Amoris, Doloris Ergô.
                  
                     HENRYE IAMES WRIOTHESLEY Anagram: HERE I SEE MANY WORTHIES LY.
                     
                        Here yee see two but two's not all: for why
                        In these two Worthyes many Worthyes dye.
                        O what a generation's here surprized
                        Of Noble bloud which was in them comprized?
                     
                  
                  Printed at London by William Iones dwelling in Red
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, THOMAS, EARLE OF SOVTHAMPTON; All Peace and Happinesse.
                  
                     My very Honourable good Lord:
                  
                  
                     IT hath pleased God to make your Lordship Heire vnto your most Noble Father, and therefore I thinke you haue most right to these Teares, which were shed for him, and your renowned Elder Brother. If I did not know by mine own obseruation, that your Lordship was a diligent Obseruer of all your Fathers Vertues (touching which also, you haue a daily Remembrancer) I would exhort you to behold the shadow of them delienated here, by those which much admired him liuing, and shall neuer cease to honour his Memory, and loue those that doe any Honour vnto him. The Lord increase the Honour of your House, and reioyce ouer you to doe you good, vntill hee haue Crowned you with Immortalitie.
                  
                     Your Lordships at command, W. IONES.
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE READER.
                  
                     COming lately to London, I found in publike & priuat, many Monuments of honor, loue and griefe, to those Great Worthies; the Earle of Southampton, and his Sonne, which lately deceased in the Low-Countries, whiles they did Honour to our State and Friends. And because it cannot be denied, but wee of the Isle of Wight (of whom that Noble Earle had the speciall Charge and Care) were most obliged vnto his Honour: I thought it very meet to publish these Teares, which (for the greater part) were shed in the Island long since for priuate vse, and adiudged to darknesse; but that my selfe (being bound by particular duty to doe all Honour to these Gracious Lords) intreated that they might still liue, which not without importunitie I obtained. And now they are set forth, neither for fashion, nor flattery, nor ostentation; but meerely to declare our loue and respect, to our neuer sufficiently Commended Noble Captaine. So take them without curiositie; and farewell.
                  
                     Thine W. I.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Vpon the Death of the right Noble and Honourable Lord, HENRY, Earle of Southampton, Baron of Tichfield, Knight of the most Honorable Order of the Garter: Captaine of the Isle of Wight.
                  
                  
                     Mors vltima, linea rerum.
                     Quis est homo qui viuet & non videbit mortem? Ps.
                     
                  
                  
                     YEe famous Poets of this Southerne Islle,
                     Straine forth the raptures of your Tragick Muse;
                     And with your Laurea't Pens come and compile,
                     The praises due to this Great Lord: peruse
                     His Globe of Worth, and cke his Vertues braue,
                     Like learned Maroes at Mecenas graue.
                  
                  
                     Valour and Wisdome were in thee confin'd;
                     The Gemini of thy perfection,
                     And all the Graces were in thee combin'd,
                     The rich mans ioy and poores refection.
                     Therefore the King of Kings doth thee imbrace,
                     For aye to dwell in iust Astraeas place.
                  
                  
                     Nought is Immortall vnderneath the Sun,
                     Wee all are subiect to Deaths restlesse date,
                     Wee end our liues before they are begun,
                     And mark't in the Eternall Booke of Fate.
                     But for thy Selfe, and Heire one thred was spun
                     And cut: like Talbots and his valiant Sonne. H. 6. 32. 1454.
                     
                  
                  
                     Planet of Honour rest, Diuinely sleepe
                     Secure from iealousie and worldly feares,
                     Thy Soule IEHOVAH will it safely keepe:
                     I, at thy Vrne will drop sad Funerall Teares.
                     Thou A'leluiahs vnto God alone,
                     And to the Lambe that sits amidst his Throne.
                  
                  
                     I can no more in this lugubrious Verse:
                     Reader depart, and looke on Sidneys Herse.
                  
                  
                     FRA. BEALE;
                  
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the much deplored Death, of the Right Honourable, HENRY, Earle of SOVTHAMPTON, &c. Captaine of the Isle of Wight. And of the Right Honourable, IAMES, Lord WRIOTHESLEY, his most hopefull Sonne, and worthy Image of his Vertues.
                  
                     HENRY SOVTHAMPTON, Anagram; The Stampe in Honour.
                     
                     
                        'TWas neere a fortnight, that no sun did smile
                        
                        Vpon this cloudy Orbe; and all that while
                        The Heau'ns wept by fits, as their pale feares
                        Presented to them matters for their teares:
                        
                        And all the winds at once such gusts forth sent
                        Of deep-fetch't sighs, as filled where they went,
                        The shoares with wracks; as if they mean't the state
                        Of all the world, should suffer with that fate.
                        
                     
                     
                        We of the lower sort, loath that our wings
                        By proudly soaring into Gods or Kings
                        
                        Reserv'd designments, should be iustly fear'd,
                        Fearing to search, stay'd till the cause appear'd.
                        Yet simply thought that Nature had mistaken
                        Her courses, so, that all her ground were shaken,
                        And her whole frame disioynted; wherewithall
                        Wee look't eich houre the stagg'ring world should fall.
                        Till by a rumour from beyond-sea flying,
                        Wee found the cause: SOVTHAMPTON lay a dying.
                     
                     
                        O had we found it sooner, e're the thred
                        
                        Of his desired life had quite beene shred▪
                        
                        
                           
Or that pure soule, of all good men belou'd
                        Had left her rich-built l
                                 •
                              dge to be remou'd,
                        Yet to a richer Mansion! We had then
                        Preuented this great losse. Our pray'rs amain
                        Had flow'n to Heau'n, and with impetu'ous strife,
                        And such vnited strength, su'ed for his life,
                        
                        As should haue forc't th'allmighties free consent.
                        Not that we enuie, or shall e're repent
                        His flight to rest; but wishing he had stood,
                        Both for our owne, and for our countries good,
                        T'haue clos'd our eyes; (who onely now suruiue,
                        To waile his losse; and wish we so may thriue,
                        As we lament it truely.) That a race
                        Of men vnborne, that had not seeene his face,
                        
                        Nor known'n his vertues, might without a verse,
                        
                        Or with lesse anguish, haue bedew'd his herse,
                        
                        But he was gone ere any bruit did grow,
                        And so we wounded, ere we saw the blow.
                     
                     
                        Thou long tongu'd Fame, that blabbest all thou
                        But send'st ill newes to fly, where ere thou goe'st,
                        Like dust in March, what mischiefe did thee guide, know'st
                        This worst of ills, so long from vs to hide?
                        That, whilst we dream'd all well, and nothing thought,
                        But of his honourable battails fought,
                        And braue atchieuements, by his doing hand,
                        O're any newes could come to countermand
                        Our swelling hopes, the first report was spread,
                        Should stricke vs through, at once: Southamptons dead.
                        
                     
                     
                        Had it com'n stealing on vs, and by slow
                        Insensible degree's, ben taught to goe,
                        As his disease on him, 't had so prepar'd
                        Our hearts, against the worst that could be dar'd,
                        That, in the vpshott, our misgiuing feares
                        
                        Would haue fore-stall'd, or quallified our teares. 
                           Vti vulgo accipi
                              
                                 〈…〉
                               fatum; pro 
                                 〈◊〉
                               seris, 
                                 〈◊〉
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              .
                        
                        But thus to wound vs! O distastrous * luck!
                        
                           Struck dead, before we knew that we were struck.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        VVhence 'tis; that we so long a loofe did hover,
                        Nor could our witts, and senses soone recover,
                        T' expresse our griefe, whilst others vainely stroue
                        In time t' outstripp vs, who could not in loue.
                        
                        " Light cares will quickly speake; but great ones, craz'd
                        " With their misfortunes, stand a while amaz'd.
                     
                     
                        Even my selfe, who with the first assay'd
                        To lanch into this deepe, was so dismay'd,
                        That sighs blew back my Barke, and sorrows tyde
                        
                        Draue her against her course, and split her side
                        So desp'rately vppon a rocke of feares,
                        
                        That downe she sunke, and perish't in my teares;
                        
                        Nor durst I seeke to putt to Sea againe,
                        Till tyme had won on griefe, and scour'd the Maine.
                     
                     
                        Ev'n yet, me thinks, my numbers doe not flow,
                        As they were wont; I find them lame, and slow.
                        
                        My buisie sighs breake off eich tender linke,
                        
                        And eyes let fall more teares, than Pen doth inke.
                        
                     
                     
                        O how I wish, I might not writt at all;
                        Not that I doe repine, or ever shall,
                        To make SOVTHAMPTONS high priz'd vertues glory.
                        
                        The eternall subiect of my well-tun'd storie;
                        
                        But loath to make his exequies and herse
                        
                        The argument of my afflicted verse.
                        
                        Me thinks, it never should be writt, nor read,
                        
                        Nor ought I tell the world, SOVTHAMPTON'S dea
                        
                     
                     
                        A man aboue all prayse: the richest soile
                        
                        Of witt, or art, is but his lusters foile,
                        
                        Fall's short of what he was, and seru's alone,
                        To set forth, as it can, so rich a stone,
                        
                        Which in it selfe is richer; of more worth,
                        
                        Than any witt, or art, can blazon forth.
                        In peace, in warr, in th' country, in the Court,
                        
                        In favour in disgrace, earnest and sport,
                        
                        In all assayes, the blanke of ev'rie Pen,
                        
                        THE STAMPE IN HONOVR, and delight of men.
                        
                        
                           
                           Should enuie be allow'ed, rather than speake,
                        
                        
                           What she must needes of him, her heart would breake.
                        
                        
                           Religion, wisedome, valour, courtesse,
                        
                        
                           Temperance, Iustice, Affabilitie,
                        
                        And what the Schoole of vertues ever taught,
                        And meere humanitie hath ever raught,
                        We are all in him; so couch't so dulie plac't,
                        And with such liberall endowments grac't,
                        In such a perfect mixture, and so free
                        From selfe-conceiptednesse, or levitie,
                        
                        As if He onely were their proper Spheare,
                        
                        And They but liu'd, to haue their motion there.
                        " Such greatnesse with such goodnes seldome stood;
                        " Seldome is found a man, so great, so good.
                        Nor doe I fall vpon his worth, so much
                        To blazon it, as to giue the world a tuch
                        Of what by his sadd fall, it selfe hath lost.
                        
                        " Great benefitts are know'en, and valu'd most
                        
                           " By their great wants. We neuer knew to prize
                        
                           Southampton right, vntill Southampton dy'es.
                        
                     
                     
                        Yet had he dy'd alone, some ease't had beene,
                        His reall liuing Image to haue seene.
                        In his ripe Sonne, grow'n to the pitch of Man,
                        
                        And who, in his short course, so swiftly ran,
                        
                        That he outwent his Elders, and ere long
                        Was old in Vertue, though in yeeres but young;
                        
                        " Put on his Gowne betime, and in his Downe
                        Put on his Armes, to beautifie his Gowne.
                        
                        But ô, sad Fate! Prepost'rous Death would haue
                        
                           Him too, because so ready for the graue.
                        
                        The Father was his ayme; yet being loth
                        To leaue the Sonne, now seene, he would haue both,
                        
                        And like a Marshall, or a Herald rather,
                        Surpriz'd the Sonne to vsher vp the Father.
                        
                     
                     
                        O that I could suppose my selfe to bee
                        True Poet, rap't into an extasie!
                        
                        
                           
And speaking out of a redundant braine,
                        
                        
                           Not what is simplie true, but what I faine,
                        
                        That I might thinke the storie I impart
                        But some sad fiction of that coyning art!
                        
                        How pleasing would th'adult'rate error bee?
                        How sweete th'imposture of my Poesie?
                        
                        What euer true esteeme my life hath gain'd,
                        I would haue false, that this were also fain'd.
                        
                        But Greife will not so leaue the hould it had,
                        But still assures me, 'tis as true, as sad.
                        
                     
                     
                        You bonds of Honour, by th'allmïghties hand,
                        
                        
                           Seal'd, and deliuer'd, to this noble Land,
                        
                        To saue her harmelesse from her debt to fate;
                        
                        How is't, that you so soone are out of date?
                        
                        You promis'd more, at your departure hence,
                        Than to returne with your deere liues expence
                        
                           Defac't, and cancell'd. You most glorious starres,
                        
                        Great ornaments both of our Peace and Warres,
                        
                        Than which, there moues not, in Great Britains spheare,
                        
                        Sauing the Mouers selfe, and his Great heire,
                        
                        A brighter couple; When you left our shore
                        
                        In such great lustre, you assur'd vs more,
                        Than to returne extinct. O vaine reliefe!
                        
                        To fill that state wirh ioy, your owne with griefe.
                        
                        You were not with Dutch ioy receiued their,
                        
                        As now, with sorrow, you are landed here.
                        
                     
                     
                        O' if the period of your liues were come,
                        Why stay'd you not to yeeld them vp at home?
                        
                        Where, the good Lady, Wife, and Mother both,
                        For right-diuided loue, and true-plight troth,
                        
                        And all the graces, that that sex hath won,
                        Worthy of such a Husband, such a Sonne,
                        
                        With de
                              •
                           re imbracings might haue clipt your death,
                        
                        And from your lips, haue suck't your yeelding breath,
                        
                        And kneeling by your beds, haue stretch't your thighes,
                        
                        And with her tender fingers clos'd your eyes.
                        
                        
                           
Where manie Oliue branches, of ripe growth,
                        Might by their teares haue testifi'd how loath
                        They were to part, either from slip, or stock,
                        
                        And many Noble friends, whose high minds mock
                        The frowns of stars, might with endeered spirits
                        
                        Haue render'd you, the tribute of your merits.
                        
                     
                     
                        Why rather went you to a strange dull clyme,
                        
                        Rich only in such trophies of the time,
                        
                        In such post hast, there to resigne them, where
                        
                        The foggie aire is clog'd with fumes of beere,
                        
                        Amongst a people, that profainely thinke,
                        They were borne but to liue, and liue to drinke,
                        
                        A stupid people, whose indocil hearts
                        
                        Could neuer learne to value your great parts,
                        
                        
                           As much vnworthy of you, as vnable
                        
                        To iudge of worth, the very scum and rable
                        
                        Of baptiz'd reason? O why went you hying
                        To giue to them the honour of your dying?
                        Yet with this point of greife, some comfort striu'es:
                        
                           They onely knew your deaths, but we your liues.
                        
                     
                     
                        Or if you needes must to the state be sent,
                        
                        Why did you not returne the same you went?
                        The whole went hence: the better parts we lack;
                        And but the courser parts alone come back,
                        
                        And scarcely parts; since in a state farre worse:
                        
                        We sent SOVTHAMPTON, but receiue a corse.
                        
                     
                     
                        Alas; what haue Great HENRIES merited,
                        That they by death should thus be summoned?
                        HENRIE the great of France; and HENRIE then
                        
                           Of WALES the greater, Cynosure of men;
                        
                        And now SOVTHAMPTONS HENRIE, great in fame,
                        
                        But greater farre in goodnes, than in name?
                        
                     
                     
                        Had he but left his like, nor higher stil'd,
                        More blamelesse death had beene, my selfe more mild
                        
                        But since their liues scarce one, to make a doubt,
                        Traduce me, Enuie, I must needes flye out.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Imprudent state of ours, that did not scan
                        Rightly, what'twas to hazard such a man,
                        
                        To saue ten thousand Holands, or of him
                        
                        
                           For Europes selfe, to venture but a lim!
                        
                        " The building is more subiect to decay,
                        " When such a piller is remou'd away.
                     
                     
                        But, ô I erre: Deere Countrey, I confesse,
                        
                           Griefe, and distraction make me thus transgresse
                        
                        All rules of Reason: Your designes are good.
                        O pardon me. And yet he might haue stood,
                        Pardon againe. Alas I doe not know
                        In this distraction, how my verses flow,
                        But whilst I am my selfe, if euer thought
                        
                        But tempt my heart, or tongue, but whisper, ought
                        'Gainst your dread hests, may my bold tongue with wondor.
                        Rot as it lyes, and hart-strings crack asunder.
                     
                     
                        But thou accursed Netherland, the stage
                        
                        And common theater of bloud and rage,
                        
                        On thee Ile vent my vncontrouled spleene,
                        
                        And stabbe the to the heart, with my sharpe teene.
                        Thou whose cold pastures cannot be made good,
                        
                        But with continuall shour's of reeking blood;
                        
                        Nor fields be brought to yeald increase agen,
                        But with the seeds of carcasses of men.
                        
                        Whose state, much worse than vs'rers, onely thriues
                        By th'large expence and forfeitures of liues;
                        
                        Yet bankerupt-like, who day lie for thy store
                        Without regard of payment, borrowst more.
                        Wherein in threescore years, more men of worth
                        Haue perish't, than th' whole countrey hath brought forth
                        
                           Since the Creation; and of lower sorte
                        More haue beene forc't to trauile through the porte
                        
                        Of ghastlie death, vnto the common wombe,
                        
                        Than well that lirtle bottome can entombe;
                        
                        How art thou worthy, that to saue thy harmes
                        
                        Or worke them, this Ita christianus orbis vbique 
                                 〈◊〉
                               solet. 
                           new world should rise in armes,
                        
                           
And bandy factions? That for thy deare sake,
                        
                           Kingdomes should ioyne, and Countries parties take?
                     
                     
                        Curst be thy Cheese and Butter; (All the good
                        
                        That 
                              •
                           're the world receiv'd for so much blood)
                        
                        May maggots breed in them, vntill they flie
                        Away in swaims; May all thy Kine goe dry
                        Or cast their Calues; and when to Bull they gad,
                        May they grow wilde, and all thy Bulls run mad.
                     
                     
                        Better that all thy Salt and senny marishes
                        
                        Had quite bin sunke, (as some whole-peopled parishes
                        
                        Already are; whose towers peere o're the flood,
                        
                        To tell the wandring Sea-man where they stood.)
                        Than that these Worthies only, should haue crost
                        The straights of death, by sayling to that coast.
                        
                        Whose losse not all that State can recompence:
                        Nay; should their worths be ballanc't, not th'expence
                        
                        Of Spaines vast Throne, losse of the Monarchs selfe
                        And all his subiects, and the glorious pelfe
                        
                        Of both the Indies, whence his trifles come,
                        Nor of th'triformed Gerion of Rome,
                        
                        With all his boystrous Red-caps, and the store
                        Of diuers-colour'd shauelings, that adore
                        That strange Chimera, with the lauish rent
                        
                        That feed's them all, were halfe sufficient.
                        
                     
                     
                        You Leiden-Doctors, how were you mistooke?
                        How did your iudgement step besides the booke?
                        
                        Where was your Art? that could not find the way
                        To cure two such, in whose know'n valour lay
                        Your Countries weale. For whom you should haue show'n
                        The vtmost of that Art, that e're was know'n
                        Or practiz'd, amongst artists; and haue stroue
                        T'haue turn'd the course of Nature, and t'haue droue
                        Things to their pristin state, reducing Men
                        
                        Meerly to Elements, and thence agen
                        Moulding them vp anew, preseruing life
                        
                        In spight of death, and sharpe diseases strife.
                     
                     
                        
                        Dull leaden Doctors: (Leiden is too good,
                        For you, poore men, that neuer vnderstood
                        More wayes of Physicke, than to giue a drench
                        
                        To cure the big-swolne Dutch, or wasted French.)
                        
                        Pardon you neighbour Nations: what I had
                        Of reason's yours; but griefe hath made me mad.
                        How durst you to such men such boldnesse show,
                        As t' practise with those parts you did not know?
                        
                        Or meddle with those veines, that none should strike
                        
                        But those, that had beene practiz'd in the like?
                        
                        Alas! you knew not how their bodies stood;
                        Their veines abounded with a Nobler blood,
                        
                        Of a farre purer dye, and farre more rife
                        
                        VVith actiue spirits, of a nimbler life,
                        
                        Than e're before, you practiz'd on. May all
                        The sicknesses that on our nature fall,
                        And vex rebellious man for his foule sin,
                        
                        Seize on you all throughout, without, within,
                        
                        For this presumptuous deed, and want of skill;
                        
                        And may such potions as haue pow'r to kill,
                        
                        Be all your physicke; yet, corrected, striue
                        To weare you out, and keepe you long aliue.
                        
                     
                     
                        But, O, mee think's I raue? 'Tis time to end,
                        When, 'gainst the rules I loue, I so offend.
                        
                        Pardon, you learned Artists: well I know
                        Your skill is great, and you not spar'd to show
                        The vtmost of it. Yet when all's assay'd,
                        The debt to God and nature must be pay'd.
                     
                     
                        You precious Vrus, that hold that Noble dust,
                        Keepe safe the wealth, committed to your trust.
                        
                        And you, deare Reliques of that ample worth,
                        That whilom through your crenices shin'd forth,
                        That now haue put off Man, and sweetly lye;
                        T'expect your Crowne of Immortality;
                        
                        Rest there repos'd, vntouch't, and free from care,
                        
                        Till you shall meet your soules, with them to share
                        
                        
                           
In that rich glory, wherein now they shine,
                        
                        Disdaining all, that's not like them; Diuine.
                        
                        Where I assur'd, againe, to see, and greet you,
                        Resolue to weepe, till I goe out to meet you.
                     
                     
                        Ità non cecinit, at verè, pijssime
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            flevit. Ille dolet verè, qui sine teste dolet.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Certaine touches vpon the Life and Death of the Right Honourable HENRIE, Earle of Southampton, and his true Image, IAMES, the Lord Wriothesley his eldest Sonne.
                  
                     TO THE READER.
                     
                        REader, beleeue me, 'tis not Gaine, nor Fame
                        That makes me put in my neglected Name;
                        Mong'st learned Mourners that in Sable Verse,
                        Doe their last Honour to this dolefull Herse.
                     
                     
                        Nor did these Lords, by liuing bountie, tie
                        To Them, and to their Heires my Poetry:
                        For, to speake plainly, though I am but poore;
                        Yet neuer came I knocking to their doore:
                        Nor euer durst my low obscuritie,
                        Once creepe into the luster of their die.
                     
                     
                        Yet since I am a Christian, and suppose
                        My selfe obliged, both with Verse and Prose;
                        Both with my Pencills, and my Pens best Art;
                        With eye, tongue, heart, and hand, and euery part
                        In each right Noble well-deseruing Spirit,
                        To honour Vertue, and commend true merit.
                        Since first I breath'd and liu'd within the Shire,
                        That giues a Title to this honoured Peere;
                        Since twelue long Winters I, my little Flock
                        Fedin that At Thorley, in the Ile of Wight.
                            Isle that (wal'd with many a rock;
                        
                           
And circled with the Maine) against her shore,
                        Hear's the proud Ocean euery day to rore;
                        And sitting there in sun-shine of his Glory
                        Saw his faire Vertues, read his lifes true Story.
                     
                     
                        Who see's not, I haue reason to make one,
                        In this Isle's, Churches, Countries common mone?
                        Or thinks that in his losse I haue no part,
                        When the whole Kingdome seems to feele the smart?
                     
                     
                        Let him that list his griefs in silence mutter,
                        I cannot hold; my plaints I needs must vtter:
                        I must lament, and sigh, and write, and speake,
                        Lest while I hold my tongue, my heart should breake.
                     
                     
                        W. PETTIE.
                     
                  
                  
                     I. To the Right Honourable, HENRY, Earle of Southampton.
                     
                        THe changing World, and the Eternall Word;
                        Nature, Art, Custome, Creatures all accord
                        To proue (if any doubted) that we must
                        (Since All haue sin'd) all die and turne to dust.
                     
                     
                        But (deare SOVTHAMPTON) since deserued praise
                        Came thronging on Thee faster then thy dayes;
                        Since thy Immortall Vertues then were seene
                        (When thy graue head was gray) to be most greene;
                        VVe fooles began to hope that thy lifes date,
                        Was not confined to our common fate.
                        But that thou still should'st keep the worlds faire Stage,
                        Acting all parts of goodnesse: that Each Age
                        Succeeding ours, might in thy action see,
                        What Vertue, (in them dead) did liue in Thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     II.
                     
                        BVt oh vaine thoughts, though late, we find alas;
                        The fairest flowers that th'earth brings forth are grass:
                        
                           
Wealth, Honor, Wisdome, Grace, nor Greatnesse can
                        Adde one short moment to the life of Man.
                        Time will not stay: and the proud King of feanes;
                        Not mov'd by any Presents, Prayers or teares;
                        Doth trample downe fraile flesh, and from the wombe
                        Leads vs away close prisoners to the tombe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        III. To both the Lords.
                     
                        ANd you braue Lords, the glorie of your Peeres,
                        More laden with your Honors then your yeeres;
                        Deare to Your Soueraigne, faithfull to the State;
                        Friends to Religion, ill men's feare and hate:
                        Death, as his Captiues, here hath laid full lowe,
                        And left your friends long legacies of woe.
                        Griefe to your Country, to your house sad losses,
                        T'our Armies dread, to our designements crosses.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        IIII. To the Liuing.
                     
                        TEll me (yee liuing wights) what marble heart,
                        Weying our wants, doth not with sorrow smart
                        To see those glorious Starres that shin'd so cleere,
                        In our disconsolate darke Hemisphere:
                        To see these Pillars, whose firme Basies prop't
                        Our feeble State; the Cedars that oretop't
                        The ayric clouds, yeelding to Birds a Neast,
                        Shadow and shelter to the wearied Beast:
                        Now by Death's bloudie hand, cut downe, defaced,
                        Their Light ecclipsed, and their height abased?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        V. To Death.
                     
                        YEt boast not (cruell Tyrant) of thy spoyle,
                        since with thy conquest thou hast won the foile:
                        For they (O happy Soules) diuinely armed
                        Could not (though hit) be with thine arrowes harmed.
                     
                     
                        Thus robbed, not of Beeing, but of Breath,
                        Secure they triumph ouer stinglesse Death;
                        And while their pure immortall part inherits
                        The heauenly blisse, with glorified Spirits;
                        
                           
Their dust doth sleepe in hope, and their good name
                        Liue's in th'eternall Chronicles of fame.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        VI. To the Hollanders vpon the returne of the Lords Corpes.
                     
                        HOlland: t'is knowne that you vnto our Nation
                        Haue long bin linc'kt in friendlie Combination:
                        T'is knowne, that we to you haue daily, duly,
                        All offices of loue performed truely.
                     
                     
                        You still haue had protection from our Forts,
                        Trade to our Townes, and harbour in our Ports;
                        When big-swolne Spaine you threatend to deuour,
                        We to your weaker ioyn'd our stronger power.
                        And our old souldiers willingly, vnprest,
                        Ran to your wars as fast as to some feast:
                        We man'd your Cities, and instead of stones,
                        Helpt you to build your Bulwarks with our bones.
                        Nor had your Castles now vnbattered stood,
                        Had not your slime ben tempered with our blood.
                     
                     
                        All this we did: and more are still content,
                        With men, munition, mony to preuent
                        Your future ruine; Hence with warie speede
                        Our state sent ouer to your latest neede.
                        Ten Noble heads, and twice ten thousand hands,
                        All prest to execute their wise commands:
                        Mongst them our good Southampton, and his ioy,
                        Deare Iames in hart a man, in age a boy.
                     
                     
                        But oh your fatall fields, vnhappie soile,
                        Accurst Acheldama, foule den of spoile,
                        Deaths Hospitall, like Hell the place of woe,
                        Admit all commers, but nere let them goe;
                     
                     
                        Churl's to your aide, we sent strong liuing forces,
                        And you in lieu returne vs liuelesse corses.
                        Ah Noble Lords: went you so farre to haue
                        Your Death, and yet come home to seeke a graue?
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        VII. To the young Lord.
                     
                        BRight starre of Honour, what celestiall fires
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                            thy youthfull bloud; that thy desires
                        
                           
Mount vp so fast to Glories highest Spheres,
                        So farre beyond thine equalls and thy yeares?
                     
                     
                        Whil'st others Noblie borne, ignoblie staine
                        Their bloud and youth with manners base and vaine,
                        Thou to thy Fathers holie lessons lending
                        Thine eare; and to his liue's faire patterne bending
                        Thy steps; did'st daily learne for sport or need
                        Nimblie to mount and man thy barbed steed;
                        Fairelie thy serious thoughts to write or speake,
                        Stoutlie vpon thy foe, thy lance to breake.
                        It did not with thine actiue spirit suite
                        To wast thy time in fingring of a Lute,
                        Or sing mong'st Cupids spirits a puling Dittie
                        To moue some femall Saint to loue or pittie.
                        T'was Musick to thine eare in ranged batle
                        To heare sad Drums to grone, harsh Trumpets ritle:
                        Or see, when clouds of bloud do rent in sunder,
                        The pouders lightning, and the Canons thunder.
                     
                     
                        And when thou might'st at home haue liued free
                        From cares and feares in soft securitie,
                        Thou scorning such dishonorable ease,
                        To all the hazards both of land and sea's,
                        Against Religions and thy Countries foes,
                        Franklie thy selfe and safetie did'd expose.
                     
                     
                        O Sacred virtue thy mild modest glances,
                        Rais'd in his tender heart, these amorous trances,
                        For thy deare loue so dearely did he weane
                        His youth from pleasures, and from lusts vncleane:
                        And so in thy straight narrow paths still treading,
                        He found the way to endlesse glorie leading.
                     
                  
                  
                     VIII.
                     
                        But soft (sad Muse) tis now no fitting taske,
                        The prayses of his well spent Youth t'vnmaske,
                        To sing his pious cares, his studious night's,
                        His thriftie daies, his innocent delights,
                        
                           
Or tell what store of vsefull obseruations
                        He gain'd at home and mong'st the neighbring Nations.
                     
                     
                        Leaue we this virgin theame vntouch't, vntainted,
                        Till some more happie hand so liuely paint it,
                        That all Posteritie may see, and read,
                        His liuing virtues when hee's cold and dead.
                     
                  
                  
                     IX.
                     
                        (SWeet Youth) what made thee hide thine amorous face,
                        And cheekes scarce downie in a steelie case,
                        And like yong Cupid vnder Mars his sheild,
                        Mongst men of armes to braue it in the field?
                     
                     
                        Thought'st thou (o fondling) cruell death would pitty
                        The faire, the yong, the noble, wise and witty,
                        More then the foule and foolish, base and old?
                        Oh no: the tirant bloudy, blind and bold,
                        All the wide world in single combate dareth,
                        And no condition, sex or age he spareth.
                     
                  
                  
                     X.
                     
                        YEt some supposed since in open fight
                        Thou had'st so often scap't his murdering might,
                        That sure he fear'd to throw his fatall dart
                        Against thine innocent faith-armed heart:
                     
                     
                        Yet sooth to say; twas thy sweet louely youth
                        That so often mou'd flint-harted Death to ruth.
                        Though now intangled in thy locks of amber
                        The inamour'd monster dogs thee to thy chamber,
                     
                     
                        And there (alas) to end the mortall strife,
                        He rauish thee of beautie and of life.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        XI. To Nature.
                     
                        NAture, although we learne in Graces schoole,
                        That children must not call their mother foole.
                        Yet when we see thee lauishly to burne,
                        
                           Two or three lights when one would serue the turne. 
                           Sil
                                 •
                              .
                        
                        When we perceiue thee through affection blind,
                        Cocker the wicked, to the good vnkind.
                        
                           
Ready the stinking rankest Weeds to cherish,
                        When Lillies, Violets, and sweet Roses perish:
                        Wee cannot chuse but tell thee 'tis our thought,
                        That age or weaknesse (Nature) makes thee dote.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        XII. Natures reply to the Censure.
                     
                        VAine men, how dare yee, in your thoughts vnholy;
                        Mee, (nay your Maker) to accuse of folly?
                        And all impatient with your plaints importune
                        Heav'n, Earth, and Hell, Death, Destiny, and Fortune?
                     
                     
                        When 'tis not these poore Instruments that cause
                        Your Crosses: but the neuer changing Lawes
                        Of your Almightie, mercifull Creator;
                        Who sitting supreme Iudge and Moderator
                        Of mens affaires: doth gouerne and dispence
                        All, by his All-disposing Prouidence;
                     
                     
                        And equally his glorious ends aduances
                        By good or bad, happy or haplesse chances.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        XIII. To the Right Honourable, Elizabeth, Countesse of Southampton.
                     
                        GReat and good Lady, though wee know full well,
                        What tides of griefe in your sad brest doe swell:
                        Nor can in this our simple mourning Verse,
                        The thousand'th part of your deepe cares reherse.
                     
                     
                        Yet as the lesser rivulets and fountaines,
                        Run hastning from the Fields, the Meads, & Mountaines,
                        Their siluer streames into the Sea to poure,
                        So flow our tributary teares to your;
                        That from the boundlesse Ocean of your sorrow
                        Our eyes new springs, our harts new griefs may borrow.
                     
                  
                  
                     XIIII. Eidem.
                     
                     
                        COuld we as easily comfort, as complaine;
                        Then haply this our charitable paine,
                        Might merit from your grieued heart some thanks:
                        But oh, our griefs so swell aboue the banks
                        
                           
Of shallow custome, and the feeble fences
                        That are oppos'd by Reason, Art, or Senses;
                        That if Religion rul'd not our affections,
                        And pacifi'd our passions insurrections;
                        We should in mourning misse, both meane and scope,
                        And sorrow (Pagan-like) sans Faith or Hope.
                     
                  
                  
                     XV. Eidem.
                     
                     
                        MAdam, though we but aggrauate your Crosses,
                        Thus sadly to repeat your former losses:
                        Whil'st you sit comfortlesse, as all vndone,
                        Mourning to lack an Husband and a Sonne.
                     
                     
                        Yet may it giue your grieued heart some ease,
                        To saile with company in sorrow's Sea's;
                        To thinke in them you are not tost alone,
                        But haue the Kingdome partner in your mone:
                        To thinke that those for whom you weep, are blest,
                        Lodg'd in the heauenly harbour, where they rest
                        Secure, nere more to grieue, to want, to feare,
                        To sin, to Die, or to let fall a teare.
                     
                     
                        So though heauens high Decree haue late bereft you
                        Of two at once, yet hath his bountie left you
                        Many faire daughters, and a sonne t' inherit
                        Your Loue, our Honour, and his Fathers Spirit.
                     
                     
                        W. P.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The least part of the shadow of Southamptons worth.
                  
                     GReat Lord; thy losse though I surcease to mourne,
                     Sith Heauen hath found Thee: yet I'le take my turne
                     to wait vpon thy Obsequies a while,
                     And traile my Pen, with others of my File:
                     And tell thy worth; th' effects where of wee felt,
                     That in the lists of thy command haue dwelt.
                     Religions Champion, Guardian of that Isle;
                     Which is the Goshen of Great Brittains soyle:
                     
                        
How good, how great example dy'd in thee,
                     When th' Heire of both, preuents thy destiny?
                     And scarce a pattern's left for those behind
                     To view in one so Great; so good a mind.
                     Thou Man of Men, how little doth thy Name
                     Need any Muses praise, to giue it Fame:
                     Whose liu'ry gayn'd by merit, thou hast worne,
                     And beg'd or bought esteeme didst hold in scorne:
                     But wast in darkest lustre, chillingst cold
                     A perfect Dimond, though not set in gold;
                     And whether thy regard were good or ill,
                     Did'st (constant) carry one set posture still.
                     Needs must the world grow base, and poore at last,
                     That Honours stock so carelesly doth wast,
                     How prodigall is shee, that would send forth
                     At once, Two Noble Persons of such worth,
                     As Great Southampton, and his Martiall Heyre?
                     VVhen scarce one Age yeelds such another payre.
                     Combin'd in resolution, as in fate,
                     To sacrifice their liues for good of State:
                     How forward was his youth, how farre from feares:
                     As great in hope, as hee was young in yeeres.
                     How apt and able in each warlike deed
                     To charge his foe, to mannage fiery steed?
                     Yet these but Essayes were of what was hee,
                     Wee but the twilight of his spirit did see.
                     What had his Autumne bin? wee yet did spy
                     Only the blossoms of his Chieualry.
                     Death enuious of his actions, hastned Fate
                     Atchieuements glory to anticipate.
                     In both whose periods, this I truly story
                     That earths best essence is but transitory.
                     You valiant hearts, that grudged not your blood
                     To spend for Honour, Country, Altars good:
                     Your high attempt, your Noble House doe crowne
                     That those to dye in Bed of Fame; not 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           〈…〉
                        e still admir'd, esteem'd, belov'd; for why
                     Records of Vertue, will not let you die:
                     Your Actiue Soules in fleshly gyues restrain'd,
                     Haue Victory, and Palmes of triumph gain'd:
                     Your Belgick Feauer, doth you Being giue,
                     And Phoenix-like, you burne, and dye, and liue.
                  
                  
                     Qui per virtutem peritat non interit.
                     AR. PRICE.
                  
               
               
                  Vpon the Life and Death of the Right Honourable, HENRIE, Earle of Southampton:
                  
                  
                     
                        And the Lord Wriothesly his Son
                     
                        
                           Henry Wriothesly Earle of Southampton, Anagram:
                           
                           Thy Honour is worth the praise of all Men.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     GREAT WORTHY, such is thy renowned Name,
                     Say what I can, it will make good the same.
                     On such a theame I would euen spend my quill,
                     If I had meanes according to my will:
                     And tho I want fine Poets Wit and Art,
                     I gladly streine the sinewes of my heart:
                     And prostrate at the Tombe of these two Lords
                     My tongue, my pen, and what my Fate affords.
                  
               
               
                  
                     HENRY WRIOTHESLEY Earle of Southampton. Anagram: Vertue is thy Honour; O the praise of all men!
                  
                     SOme men not worth, but fauour doth aduance
                     Some vulgar breath, some riches doe inhance:
                     Not so the Noble Squire, of whom I treat,
                     
                        
                           ••
                        ught makes him honour'd, but Vertues great
                     Cardinall, Morall, Theologicall,
                     Consider well and behold in him all
                     
                        
Yet notwithstanding all his Vertues, hee
                     Lies now in dust and darknesse: Hereby see
                     How Death can rent the hopes of worthy Squires,
                     And dash their proiects, and crosse their desires.
                     Yet shall not Death triumph in Vertues fall,
                     For this his Name is still esteem'd of all.
                     Death strooke his Body; onely that could die,
                     His Fame is fresh; his Spirit is gone on hie.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IAMES WRIOTESLEY, Baron of Tichfield, Anagram; Boyles in Field, to reach worthy's Fame.
                  
                     O Rare bright Sparke of ancient Chiualry,
                     In tender yeeres affecting warlike Glory!
                     O Noble Impe of that thrice Noble Sire,
                     What was it that thus kindled thy desire?
                     Surely 'twas thy presaging Spirit: For why!
                     Hauing small time thou would'st doe worthily.
                     Thou took'st thy flight, because in heauinesse
                     Would'st not see drown'd a world of Worthinesse.
                  
                  
                     Vpon the sudden and immature Death of both the Lords.
                     
                        HEre wee see verified, All flesh is grasse;
                        And the glory thereof like flower of grasse;
                        The flower fadeth long before the grasse:
                        So worthiest Persons before other passe.
                     
                  
                  
                     A comfortable Conclusion.
                     
                        THo Death on them hath shew'd his vtmost power,
                        Heav'ns King hath crown'd them with th' Immortall flower.
                        
                           GVILIELMVS IONE'S,
Capellanus mestissimus feci
                              •
                            invit â Miner▪
                        
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   