
      
         
            
            
            THE
MYSTERIE OF
CHRISTES
NATIVITIE.
            A Sermon Preached in the Parish
Church of ALL-SAINTS in DORCHESTER,
within the Countie
of DORSET, the 25. day of December
1613. being CHRISTMAS
DAYE.
            
            By WILLIAM IONES, Maſter of Arts, and
Preacher of Gods Word.
            
            
               BERNARD.
               Puto me iam ſpernere non poterit Chriſtus,
               Os de offibus meis, & caro de carne mea.
               How is it poſſible that the bleſſed Sonne of God ſhould now reiect me, ſith by taking
our nature vpon him, he is become fleſh of my fleſh and bone of my bone.
            
            
               LONDON.
Printed for Richard Hawkins, and are to be ſold at his Shop
in Chancery-lane, neere Seriants Inne.
1614.
         
         
            
            
            To the Worſhipfull M. THOMAS
HVSSY Juſtice of Peace, Maſter
IASPER MELLER Eſquire, Maſter
LAVRENCE MELLER, M. THO. PAWLET,
M. Mathew Chubb, M. Richard Blachford, and M.
THOMAS BLACHFORD, Gentlemen of
Dorſet-ſhire, my eſpeciall kind and louing
friends, Grace and Peace bee multiplied
through Chriſt Ieſus
our LORD.
            
               AS the preaching of the
Goſpell of Chriſt was not,
nor is, the leaſt gift of
grace that God gaue vnto
his Church; but euen the
greateſt miracle that euer
Chriſt wrought hecre on
earth, for our Conuerſion
vnto theMath. 11. 6. faith: So the
abuſe of this grace is not
the leaſt, but the greatest
ſinne, that can be committed. The which being truly conſidered;

I maruell not a little?3. Ep. Ioh. v. 9. why Diotrephes with his
Schollers will perſiſt in reſiſting of this grace; or Simon
Magus with his Champions continue in purchaſing of this
grace;Act. 8. 18. or Iudas with his Succeſſors perſeuer in buying and
ſelling of Chriſt Spouſe the Church, contrarie to the Goſpell
of grace. But foraſmuch as that I minde not in this
enſuing Treatiſe to tax them,Matth. 26. 15. or their wicked abuſes: Yet
my prayers vnto God for them ſhalbee; to turne their
hearts from farther renting of the garments of Chriſt and
his Church, leaſt they become like vnto theſe their predeceſſors,
partakers not of the leaſt grace.
            The ſubiect or matter, wherewith I am now to preſent
your Worſhips withall: is touching the myſterie of Chriſt
his Natiuitie. The Text hath beene handed often, and by
manie; Yea and of ſuch men, who for their great vnderſtanding,
reading, wittie inuention, and profound Iudgement,
haue manie degrees exceeded my ſelfe. Yet to ſatiſfie
the earneſt and godly requests of ſome of my eſpeciall
good friends, I haue enterpriſed, and aduentured, to ſet
forth the ſame in print: hoping that your Worſhippes will
vouchſafe to giue it the peruſall, and accept theſe the
firſt fruits of my labours, with the ſelfe-ſame affection
wherwith it is offered; how ſmal and ſimple ſoeuer it ſeeme
to be. And now the Lord Ieſus giue it his grace, that it may
not be like firekinled on his Altar in vaine;Mal. 1. 9. but that it may
proue to bee as the morning Incenſe, and as euening Sacrifice,
acceptable vnto God, and profitable vnto this
Church.
            Vnto the ſame God will I pray alwayes to powre downe

his mercies vpon you, to enrich you with his graces,
and to preſerue your Worſhips for the good
both of Church and Common-wealth,
vnto his glorie
AMEN.
            
               Your worſhips to be commanded
W. IONES,
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE MYSTERIE
OF CHRISTES
NATIVITIE.
            
               GALAT. 4. 4.
               When the fulneſſe of time was come, God ſent his Sonne
made of a woman, &c.
            
            
               
                  WIth what ſolemnitie
wee are to celebrate
this day of Chriſts
Natiuitie (Deerely
beloued) the many
myſteries, and excellencies
therein contained,
may declare
vnto vs. Now is Hee
brought out of the
Virgins wombe, who
before liued eternally in the boſome of his Father:
Now is the Word, that made the world, borne an Infant

into the world, Now the Ancient of dayes is become
a Child: Now Iudas Lyon rowſed himſelfe to
encounter the Red Dragon: Now Iacobs ſtarre aroſe
to be the Gentles light, and Iſraels glorie: Now the
Bridegrome came out of his Chamber, to meet his
Spouſe: Now the Sonne of God became man, that
men might be made the ſonnes of God: Now Chriſt
came out clothed with our fleſh, that wee might bee
inueſted with his ſpirit: Now the Lord took on him
the forme of a ſeruant, that we his ſeruants might be
made partakers of his Lordſhip. Theſe great bleſſings,
doth this bleſſed day conueigh vnto vs. Wherfore
to put you in mind, that your vnderſtadings may
be enlightned to know them; and your wils inclined
to ſerue and praiſe GOD for them: I haue made
choice of this text, which being indeed the Quinteſſence
of the Golpell, propoſeth vnto vs concerning
Chriſt his comming theſe circumſtances. Firſt, The
time, when the fulneſſe of time, &c. Secondly, The
cauſes, God ſent his Sonne. Thirdly, The manner, made
of a Woman &c. Fourthly, The end, that he might redeeme
them, &c. Theſe points are beſt be ſeeming this
time: which when breifly & rudely I ſhall haue diſcourſed
vpon, I wil then end, & cōmend yee to God.
            
               When the fulneſſe of time was come &c. Three
things, meaſure all durations; Aeternitie, Immortalitie,
Time. Aeternitie hath neyther beginning nor end;
and is proper only to God, who is euerlaſting. Immortalitie
hath beginning, but none end; and is proper
to Spirits, as Angels, and mens ſoules, that once

were not, and yet now cannot die. Time hath both
beginning and end, and is proper to all bodies, ſuch
as are poſſible and corruptible ſubſtances: of whom
tis ſaid, omniaorta occidunt & aucta ſeneſcunt: Now
then Chriſt conſiſting of Godhead, ſoule, and bodie,
hath theſe his three Natures limited by theſe three
quantities, his Godhead by Eternitie, his ſoule by Immortalitie:
and his bodie by Time. Thus in reſpect
not of his Diuinitie, but his Humanitie, the maker of
Time was made in time, and Time ſaith Ariſtotle is the
meaſure of motion, but Paul here ſhewes vs more
ſtrange Philoſophie, that it is the meaſure of the firſt
Mouer it ſelfe. Would yee not wonder (Deere Chriſtians)
to heare that a Gyants foote ſhould bee thruſt
into a childes ſhooe, or that the Ocean Sea ſhould bee
intruded into a bottle, and aſmuch then may you
maruell at this that God who is infinite, ſhould bee
borne in a time finite, but this doubt is thus diſſolued
three things, vt ſupra &c. And as our Apoſtle ſaith,
in the fulneſſe thereof. As places, ſo time haue their
fulneſſe and emptineſse, ſome places are emptie hauing
nought but ayre in them, and ſome are repleniſhed
with ſiluer, with Gold, Pearle, Precious ſtones,
and ſuch like treaſure, like ſo of times, ſome are void
of ſtrange accidents, and ſome are full of memorable
and admirable occurrents, & in ſuch a time was our
Sauiour borne, as the age of the world, the yeare,
moneth, day, houre, theſe parts of time may impart
vnto vs; Touching the Worlds age, know that it was

the ſixth. The firſt age was from Adam to Noah. The
ſecond from Noah to Abraham. The third from Abraham
to Dauid. The fourth from Dauid to the tranſmigration
from Babylon. The fifth from that to Chriſts
Natiuitie, which fell in the ſixth age: where note an
excellent myſterie, how correſpondent Gods workes
of our creation, and recreation are. As in the worlds
ſixth day God did make man: ſo in the worlds
ſixth age hee did redeeme man. In the worlds
ſixth day the firſt Adam was made, in whom wee are
deformed: and in the worlds ſixth age was the ſecond
Adam made, in whom wee are reformed. Here
ariſe now two queſtions: why God louing man ſo wel,
had not beene borne before or preſently after mans
fal, ſith Gratia ab officio quod mor a tar dat abeſt. Secondly:
why God minding to die for the ſinnes of all the
world, had not defer'd his comming to the end of the
world. Six is a number neyther diminute nor ſuperabundant,
but perfect, ſith all his partes put together
doe make the whole, as 1. 2. and 3. make ſix: ſo then
in the number of perfection came the author of perfection.
By ſixe ſtaires did men aſcend to Salomons
throne, and by ſix ages came the word to the throne
of grace. Theſe ſcruples thus I remoue. Firſt, for
Chriſt to haue beene borne before Adam fel, had bin
an action ſuperfluous. For the end of his comming
being (vtinquit Euang.) to ſeeke the loſt Sheep of the
houſe of Iſrael; to bind vp the broken hearted, to call
ſinners to repentance, and by it to ſaluation: what
needed this ſeeker before man was loſt? what needed
this Phiſition before man was ſick? what needed this

Sauiour before Adam was a ſinner? Againe for Chriſt
to haue come preſently after mans fall, had beene alſo
very inconuenient. Man ſinned by pride, and by
pride was throwne into calamitie: from which if
ſtraightwayes hee ſhould haue beene freed, perhaps
the ſpirit of loftineſſe and inſolencie might haue
come vpon him againe. God therefore ſixe ages leſt
him in his miſerie, that he might know his fault, &
knowing it, be humbled for the ſame. Farther it was
meet, that as the entrance of a King into a Citie, ſo
the comming of ſo worthie a perſon as the ſonne of
God into the World, ſhould bee foreſhewed by the
predictions of ſuch worthie meſſengers, as were the
Patriarckes and Prophets; which could not haue beene
had Chriſt beene borne in the time of Adam. As for
the deferring of his birth to the end of the World,
Theſe reaſons diſproue it. Firſt, the teſtimonie of
Abacuc. 3. where it is ſaid of God there, the workes
of his mercie ſhould bee reuiued in medio annorum. Againe
why ſhould Chriſt then bee borne on earth,
when men ſhall haue no faith to beleeue on him, no
Charitie to loue him, and no Religion to worſhippe
him? But theſe things ſhall happen in the latter daies
(as the Euangeliſts write) and therefore the Worlds
end is a ſeaſon, rather for Chriſt to come in iudgment
to reuenge, then in mercie to redeeme. This for the
age. Now for the yeare. It was the two and fortieth
of the reign of Auguſtus Caeſar the Roman Emperor:
in whoſe time that Chriſt was borne, it was in regard
of the manie reſemblances that were between them.
As Auguſtus was a temporal, ſo was Chriſt a Spiritual

Monarch. As Auguſtus was the ſecond Emperour
of Rome, ſo was Chriſt the ſecond perſon in Trinitie.
As Auguſtus was ſo called, becauſe hee did amplifie
his Regiment, ſo Chriſt was ſo called, becauſe he doth
annoint vs his ſeruants: as Auguſtus taxing the
world receiued tribute from men and regiſtred their
names. So Chriſt preaching vnto the world had obedience
yeelded vnto him, and noted ſuch as ſerued
him in the Booke of life. As Auguſtus hauing vanquiſhed
his enemies; planted peace among his people
(for in his dayes the Temple of Ianus was ſhut, that
elſe in the time of warre was wont euer to bee open)
ſo Chriſt hauing ſubdued his foes, Death and the Deuill,
placed quietneſſe in the conſcience of his Childrē,
who before were diſtreſſed with many troubles;
from the age and the yeare, come we to the Month
and the Day. Chriſt was borne on the fiue and twentieth
day of December, then being the ſhorteſt day of
the yeare and Sunday: as both by the fathers is teſtified,
and by calculation may be proued, wherof note
with me eyther the reaſons or myſtries. December is
the tenth moneth and in it was he borne, that came
to make ſatiſfaction for our tranſgreſſion of his Fathers
ten Commandements. December concludes the
old yeare, and giues way to a new, and Christ now
born gaue an end to the old Ceremonies of the Law,
and brought in, in ſteed thereof the new ordinances
of grace. Ten degrees went the Sunne backward to
ſignifie to ſicke Ezechiah that he ſhould not die, and

ten moneths in aſſuming our fleſh did Chriſt goe back
as it were for his Majeſtie to aſſure vs of his mercie,
the number of ten is the firſt Article: compound of
the figure, 1. and a cipher 0. and in the tenth moneth
was he borne, whoſe perſon did conſiſt of the figure
of his Diuinitie, and the cipher of his humanitie. In
the ſhorteſt day is the Sunne in his greateſt and loweſt
South declination, and when was the ſonne of God
euer farther from the Aequinoction of his glorie and
lower in baſeneſſe, then when hee came out into the
world, clothed with our fleſh. In the ſhorteſt day the
Sunne is ſaid to be in his Tropick, that is ſo called of
the Greek word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                to turne, & when ſo graciouſly
as now in his birth did the ſonne of God turne vnto
vs,Ioh. 3. 30. ſaith Iohn Baptiſt of Chriſt, Ioh. 3. me oportet minui illum
autem creſcere, verified as in their qualities of dignitie
and eſtimation: So alſo in the times of their Natiuities.
Iohn Baptiſt was borne the longeſt day of the
yeare, and therefore being at the higheſt his time muſt
decreaſe: and Chriſt was borne in the ſhorteſt, and
therefore being at the loweſt, his time muſt needs encreaſe.
In the ſhorteſt Day, the Sunne beginnes that returne,
that turnes joy and comfort to liuing thinges,
and Chriſt now put his firſt foot in that race, that
yeelds bleſſedneſſe and happineſſe to all Chriſtians:
in the ſhorteſt day, the cold is greateſt, and therefore
ſayth Bernard, Christ choſe a time trouble ſome to his
fleſh, that we ſhould learne not to pamper ours: on a
Sunday, GOD the Father in his power beganne the

world: and now on a Sunday, GOD the ſonne in his
mercie began to redeeme the world. Sunday was firſt
made before any other time: and Chriſt theron borne,
is called the firſt begotten of al Creatures. On Sunday
God made the light, and on Sunday now produced
was he, that is the true light, lightning euery one that
comes into the world, as alſo all thoſe that ſit in darkneſſe
& the ſhadow of death. To proceed yet to more
particulars. What part of the day? & what houre was
Chriſt borne in?Luc. 2. 8. 11. 
               Luc. 2 records that it was in the night,
when the Shepheards were watching their flockes,
that though the Angell ſaid to them, there is borne
this day to ye a Sauiour, ye are to vnderſtand it ſpoken
not of the artificiall day, that holds from Sun to Sun,
but of the naturall day that containes the ſpace of
foure and twentie houres. Thus in the time of darkneſſe
was hee borne, that came to diſſolue
the power of darkneſſe; ſhining in darkneſſe,
when the darkneſſe could not comprehend him.
Nox is ſo called a nocendo, becauſe if men then walke
without light, they may eaſily hurt themſelues: and
now as a Phyſition in the beſt opportunitie came the
great helper in the time of hurting; to ſhew that hee
was ſtrōger then the deuil. Chriſt vāquiſhed the deuil
in his own time, the Prince of the night, in the night.
Farther, touching the houre, if we may beleue Cardanus
that great Phyſition & Aſtronomer, it was about
tenne of the clock, and fifteene minutes. For he in his
Comment vpon Ptolemies quadripartite, treating
Chriſts Natiuitie, makes the eleuenth degree of Virgo
               
to aſcend in prima domo, which could not bee but at
that time. The Fathers write that hee was borne at
midnight, as Hierom, and Bernard: which of theſe opinions
is trueſt, I will not decide. Myſteries there are
in both of them. If Cardan ſay true, then it fitly fell
out, that the Sonne of a Virgin was borne when the
heauenly figure Virgo did aſcend. If the Fathers ſay
true, then opportunately came he in medio noctis, that
was to be the medium betweene God and man. The
greateſt obſcuritie is at midnight; and then therefore
was produced the greateſt light; hee that was the
brightnes of his fathers glorie. Thus then in the ſixth
age of the World, in the two and fortieth yeere of
Auguſtus Caeſars Reigne, in the moneth of December,
in the fiue and twentieth and ſhorteſt day, on Sunday,
betweene ten and twelue at night, was our bleſſed
Sauiour bleſſedly born. Which ſeaſon Saint Paul cals
the fulneſſe of time, as becauſe each part thereof, as ye
ſee, is full of myſteries, ſo by reaſon of other occaſions
that I am now to acquaint you with. And firſt,
this then. Whatſoeuer God eyther promiſed, or the
Patriarckes and Prophets eyther in their ſpeeches
foreſhewed, in their actions prefigured, or affections
deſired▪ that all at this time is fully fulfilled. Now accompliſhed
are Gods promiſes made to Eue, that her
ſeed ſhould bruiſe the Serpents head.
               Gen. 3. 
               Gen. 3. to Abraham
that in his ſeed all Nations of the earth ſhould bee blest.
Gen. 22. to Dauid that of the fruit of his loynes,
               Gen. 22. 
               hee would
ſet one on his ſeat that ſhould rule as a King for euer. Pſal.
132.Pſa. 132. Now fulfilled are the Predictions of the Patriarcks

and Prophets;
               Gen. 49. of Iacob when he ſaid. Gen. 49. the Scepter
ſhall not be taken from the Tribe of Iuda, and a Captaine
from his thigh, till he come, that is to be ſent, and hee ſhall
be the expectation of Nations. Of Moſes when he ſaid
Deut. 18.Deut. 18. 
               A Prophet ſhall the Lord our God raiſe vp
vnto yee, among your brethren, him ſhall yee heare. Of Balam,
when he ſaid,Num. 24. 
               Numb. 24. a ſtarre ſhall riſe from Iacob:
and a ſtaffe from Iſrael, that ſhall ſtrike the Moabites.
Of Eſay, when he ſaid, that a Virgin ſhould beare a ſonne,
and call his name Emanuel.Eſa. 7. 
               Eſ. 7. Of Michea: when he
ſaid,Mich. 5. 
               Mich: 5. And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art but a little
one in reſpect of thouſands in Iuda: and yet there ſhall come
forth of thee one, that ſhall bee the ruler of Iſrael, and his
comming forth is from the beginning, and from the days of
Eternitie.
               Dail. 9. Of Daniel, when he ſaid Dan. 9. that after certaine
weekes of yeares expired the holy of holyes ſhould be
annointed. Now fulfilled are the Figures of the Patriarcks
and Prophets Actions: Now Abraham came a
ſtranger into Aegypt: When Christ came as a Pilgrime;
where comming amongſt his owne, his owne receiued
him not: Now Moſes was put into a Baſket. Ioſeph
throwne into the pit, Hieremy into the Dungeon.
Daniel into the Lyons Denne, when Christ was ſent
into this wretched World, a place of perplexities:
Now the ſtone was cut from the Mountaine without
hands, when Chriſt was borne of his mortall Mother,
neuer being begotten by mortall father: Now Aarons
rod did bud and beare Almonds, when a ſpotleſse
Virgin did produce a Child: Now a woman did compaſſe

a man, when hee was contained in a womans
womb, that doth himſelf cōprehend heauen & earth:
Now a Riuer flowed to water Paradiſe, when Chriſt
was borne; with his bloud to waſh away the ſinnes of
the world: Now the Mountaines did diſtil ſweetnes,
when Heauen did let God to deſcend on earth: Now
Salomon made himſelfe a Throne of Iuorie, when
Christ made himſelfe a bodie of fleſh in the Virgins
wombe: Now the Doue came from Noahs Arke, when
the ſonne of God came from the boſome of his Father:
Now the buſh burned and was not conſumed,
when a Virgine brought forth a Son, and was
not corrupted: mercy and truth met together, when
Chriſts Diuinitie and Humanitie met in one perſon, to
work our redemption. Now the Sunne was couered
with a Cloud, when God clothed himſelfe with our
fleſh. Againe now fulfilled are the deſires of the Patriarches
and Prophets. Abraham tooke great joy of this
Day,Ioh. 8. and now he ſaw it Ioh. 8. Expectabo ſalutare tuum
ſaith Iacob Gen 49.Gen. 49. 
               I will wait for thy ſaluation, O Lord
and now behold his expectation ſatisfied. Dauid cried
out, Pſal. 48.Pſ. 48. 
               oſtende nobis domine miſericor diam tuam,
and now he might ſay as in Pſal. 47.Pſ. 47. 
               ſuſcepimus Deus
miſericor diam tuam in medio templi. Begge no longer
Moſes to ſay to God as it is Deu. 18.Deu. 18. 
               mitte obſecro quem
miſſurus es; for now is he come amongſt vs. Crie not
longer out Eſay as it is. Eſ. 64.Eſa. 64. 
               Vtinam diſrumperes coelos
& deſcenderes, O that thou wouldest cleaue the Heauens
and come downe, for this day came hee out of a

Virgins wombe. The ſumme of this is this: Now are
Gods promiſes, the Patriarches and Prophets predictions,
actions, and affections, fulfilled. And therefore
moſt excellently is it termed the fulneſſe of time. Againe,
now was the fulneſſe of Gods Communication
when he came to giue vs himſelfe in his ſonnes fleſh;
wherein as it is. Col 2.Col. 2. 
               dwelt the fulneſſe of the Godhead
bodily. Now was the fulneſſe of mans Redemption,
when a Sauiour was borne to begin the gracious work
therof in preſeruing vs, by his merits, from ſin, death,
hell, and the Deuill: Now was the fulneſſe of graces
promotion,Ioh. 1. 16. 
               We taking them out of his fulnes as Ioh. ſaith.
And who can denie this to be the fulneſſe of time? To
this let me addo, that the world was now ful of miracles:
Now the Angels ſang in heauen and comforted
ſhepheards on earth: Now a ſtrange ſtarre guided the
wiſemen to Christ: Now a wel-spring in Rome did
runne with Oyle: Now three Sunnes appeared, ſhining
firſt ſeuerally, and then joyntly: Now Augustus
his aeternum palatium, that was propheſied neuer
to fall before a Virgin did beare a child, was ruinated
to the ground: Now Auguſtus, aſking one of the Sybils
whether there were any where a greater perſon
then himſelfe, ſaw in the Sunne a Virgin giuing an Infant
ſucke, to whom afterwards hee dedicated an Altar,
and called it, Aram Coeli, the Altar of Heauen.
And thus yee ſee it proued, that it was the fulneſſe of
time, when he, that as S. Ioh. ſaith, full of grace & truth
was borne amongſt vs. The Iewes expect yet a Meſstas
               
to come: denying Ieſus whom wee beleeue on,
to bee the Worlds Sauiour. And the Turkes
dare to compare him with their Mahomet. But
this doctrine of the fulneſſe of time, wherein Chriſt
was born, doth moſt plainly and forcibly confute
them. For ſith all the promiſes and mercies of
God; ſith the propheſies, figures, and deſires of
our famous forefathers, and manie admirable
Miracles, met in the time of Christs Natiuitie;
and that neuer Mahomet had the like; nor any
Creature can haue the like: wee are fully to bee
reſolued, by this fulneſſe of time, the true Meſstas
to bee borne. I could ſpend more time in discourſing
vpon this time, but that greater matters,
viz. The cauſes of Chriſts birth doe now
offer themſelues vnto mee in theſe wordes, God
ſent his ſonne: Where the Efficient cauſe is God;
the formall cauſe his ſending; and the materiall
cauſe his Sonne Christ himſelfe: God ſent. Who?
the Father, the Sonne, or the Holy Ghoſt?
Surely all three of them. For know, that
opera a Trinitatis ſunt in-diuiſa: and, vnleſſe in perſonall
reſpects, euermore in Eſſentiall actions,
what one doth they all doe; as now in this worke
of Christs birth, the whole Trinitie ſhewed
their induſtrie.Ioh. 8. 42. 5. 36. 37. 
               The Father ſent mee ſaith Christ,
Ioh. 13. 20. Here the Father labours. I went out
from the Father and came into the World:
               Rom. 8. 32. Here is
the labour of the Sonne.Ioh. 16. 28. 
               The Holy Ghost ſhall come

vpon thee quoth the Angell Gabriel to the bleſſed
Virgin,
               Luc. 5. 35. when ſhe was to conceiue Chriſt: this is
the labour of the Holy Ghoſt. Thus the
three perſons, being one GOD, had each of
them their action in CHRISTS Incarnation;
and that moſt fitly: ſith it being a worke of great
power, Wiſdome, and goodnes, it was requiſite
that the Father with his power, the Sonne with
his Wiſedome, and the Holie Ghoſt with his
Goodneſſe, ſhould accompliſh it. What more
powerfull a thing, then to joyne two ſuch extreamely
diſtant Natures as the Creatour and
the Creature together! It is GODS eſpeciall
power in compound bodies, to joyne
the foure Elements together; it is greater
power to joyne our bodie to our created ſpirits,
that is to ſay, our ſoules. But to joyne all
theſe to the increated ſpirit, God; this is a might
aboue all meaſure.
            Againe what more wiſe thing, then that to the
perfection and complement of the whole; the beginning
and the end of a worke ſhould hang
together. And now note this myſterie. The
Word was the beginning of the VVorld: for by
it GOD made the World; and Adam was
the laſt Creature of the VVorld. The Word
then becomming Man, the firſt and the laſt,
that is to ſay GOD and man, were vnited together.
Againe what greater goodneſſe can

bee, then that the Creatour ſhould communicate
himſelfe to the Creatures? It is his great
kindneſſe, that God giues himſelfe to his Creatures
by his eſsence, preſence, and power: it is
his greater kindnes that he giues himſelfe to good
men by his grace: but that hee ſhould giue himſelfe
to our nature, by Vnion with it, that is to
ſay, by aſſuming our Humanitic into his Diuinitie;
this ſurmounts all fauour that may bee ſaid
or thought vpon. Thus I ſay the Fathers power,
the Sonnes wiſdome, and the Holy Ghoſts goodneſſe,
were all Actors in clothing Chriſt with our
fleſh. To the doing whereof what moued them?
our merits? no; (Brethren) but their mercies according
to that of Ioh. 3.Ioh. 3. 16. 
               God ſoloued the World,
that he ſent his ſonne, &c. Loue is manifeſted three
wayes: Dono, paſsione, opere, in giuing, ſuffering,
and working. The Father ſhewed his loue, when
he gaue vs his Sonne: the Sonne ſhewed his loue,
when hee ſuffered Death for our ſinnes; and the
Holy Ghoſt ſhewes his loue, in ſetting vs forward
in good workes. Thus the manifeſtation of the
bleſſed Trinities power, wiſdome, goodneſſe, and
mercie, are as it were the foure wheeles, vpon
which the Charriot of Gods prouidence brought
Chriſt into this world: Who came as ſent, God
ſent ſayth my text. Heere is a doubt worthie to
be diſcuſt. Chriſt was neuer ſeparated from God
his Father. For when Saint Iohn ſaw him vpon

earth, hee yet acknowledged him to bee in the
boſome of his Father ſecundum id 1.Ioh. 1. 18: 
               cap. vnigenitus
quie ſt in ſinis patris, &c. as alſo that hee was
in Heauen,Ioh. 3. 13. 
               ſecundumid tertio capite, nemo aſcendit,
&c. qui eſt in coelo; yea that hee was in the world
before his birth,Ioh. 1. 3. ſith hee made the World; as it is
cap. 1. and how then may it be ſaid, that God ſent
him, when hee neuer went from him? An Interpretation
ſhall make euident all this. Miſsio, ſaith
Thomas Aquinas commenting vpon this place, fuit
aſſumptio Carnis, non depoſitio maieſtatis: Chriſt
left not to bee God, when hee became man; but
tooke more vnto his Godhead when hee became
man, viz. our Humanitie into his Diuinitie: that
through our viſible nature aſſumed, he might acquaint
vs with his inuiſible excelencies, which els
could neuer haue beene known of vs. As the Sun
ſhining in his perfit brightnes, can not be looked
vpon; but in a Cloud or miſt, hauing his beames
refracted, may bee beheld ſo God, in his infinite
and incomprehenſible eſſence, being conſidered
of vs, cannot be knowne of vs, for he is too powerful
an object for our weake vnderſtanding; but in
our Nature, by his ſonne aſſumed, hauing his
glorie and Majeſtie contracted, wee may take a
full view of him. And thus Chriſt his incarnating
is his proper ſending. But why ſent God his ſonne
the ſecond perſon in Trinitie? Wherefore had not
the Father, and the Holy Ghoſt, come to be man

aſwel as the Sonne? (Brethren) this is a high point
in Diuinitie, requiring judiciall and attentiue
eares: which if yee lend mee, thus then I reſolue
yee.
            Truely there wanted no power in any of
thoſe perſons to performe this; for they are all
Omnipotent, and able to doe what ſoeuer pleaſeth
them. But yet why the ſonne did it rather
then the reſt; great reaſons are to bee alleaged.
Firſt, It was meete that by what inſtruments God
made the World, by the ſame he ſhould repaire 
the World: But God by his ſonne made the
World, as it is Heb. 1. and therfore as it is 2. Cor. 5.
well was God in Chriſt, by whom hee reconciled the
World.
               Heb. 1. 2. Cor. 5. Secondly, It was fit that hee who was the
ſonne in the Diuinitie, ſhould alſo bee the ſonne 
in Humanitie: leaſt if the Father or the Holy
Ghoſt had bin the ſonnes of men, they had then
beene temporall ſonnes to the Eternall ſonne.
Thirdly, the Father is of himſelfe alone, and the
Sonne is of the Father. Now then more ſeemely 
it is that he be ſent, who is of another, then he
that is of himſelfe. Fourthly, the Sonne was
ſent to be man, that wee might know how the 
father did loue man in ſending ſo precious a
thing to redeeme man therby, thus to ſtrengthen
our languiſhing hope, that ſith God thought not
his Sonne too good forvs, how can wee doubt
but that hee will beſtow all other things on vs

                whatſoeuer wee begge of him? Fiftly, GOD
bath predeſtinated vs ſaith Saint Paul Romans 8.Rom. 8. 29.
               to bee conformable to the Image of his ſonne:
that therefore had hee not ſent his Sonne,
how could wee bee like to his Sonne? had
not he come that was the Naturall ſonne; wee
ſhould neuer haue beene adopted ſonnes. The
ſonne of God therefore was made the ſonne of
man, that we ſonnes of men might bee made the
ſonnes of God. Sixtly, God the ſonne is the middle
 perſon betweene God the Father, and God
the Holy Ghost, and therefore was fitteſt to bee
 ſent to bee the mediator betweene God and man. Seuenthly,
He that was to worke our redemption
was to be an interceſſor and ſupplicator to God
for vs. But theſe properties are more proper to
a ſonne, then a Father: for a ſonne is to intreat
the Father, and not the Father the ſonne. And
therefore did God beſt to ſend his ſonne. Laſt of
all; the Mediator betweene God and man was to
pacifie, ſo to teach and guide man to be obedient
vnto God. Now then Chriſt being the word of God
and wiſdome of God, as Saint Iohn and Saint Paul
affirme: meeteſt was hee, the ſonne, to be mans
Teacher and Counſailor. Why God ſent his Son
yee ſee the Reaſons. Now behold wee in what
manner he ſent him: the third thing I am to ſpeak
of. It is ſaid made of a woman and made vnder the
law. What is written before in my text of him,

that in the fulneſſe of time God ſent him, pointes to
his Diuinitie, and his glorie: but that now Hee
is made of a Woman and vnder the Law, this
ſhewes his Humanitie and Humilitie: How
the two Natures Godhead and Manhood were
vnited together in the vnitie of his perſon. Paul
1. Tim. 3. talkes of a great myſterie of pietie,1. Tim. 3. 
               How
God was manifeſted in the fleſh, iuſtified in the ſpirit,
was ſeene of Angels, was preached to the Gentiles,
beleiued on in the World, and aſſumed into glorie.
And heere behold this production of God, to be
made of a woman, is the beginning of it; opening
as it were the doore to the other moſt admirable
actions. But what a ſtrange thing is this, that the
maker of the World ſhould thus bee made of a
woman: and that the Creatour ſhould haue his
being from a Creature. This rightly to conceiue,
ye are to note this. Chriſt in reſpect of his Godhead,
was increated; in reſpect of his ſoule he was
created; and in reſpect of his bodie he was made
of a woman. As we Chriſtians are borne, firſt,
naturally of our Parents, and afterwards are born
ſpiritually of the Holy Ghoſt: So Chriſt beeing
God, was begotten naturally of God; and now
being man, was made temporally of a woman.
Verbum caro factum eſt, &c. ſaith Saint Iohn cap. 1.
Paul affirmeth 2.2. Tim. 2. Heb. 2. 
               Tim. 2. that he came of the ſeed of
Dauid, and Heb. 2. that no where hee tooke on him the
Angels, but the ſeed of Abraham tooke he on him,
               
and all this by being made of a woman, Of a Woman'?
yee will ſay what reaſon had God to effect
ſo ſtrange an action: I will tell yee; to aduance
his glorie, and doe vs the more good. O how
kind did God ſhew himſelfe in taking vpon him
our fraile nature! Hee might haue come to vs as
he did to Moſes and the Iſraelites on Mount Sinay
in thundering, lightning, fire, and ſmoake: hee
might haue come to vs in the ſubſtance of an Angell
aſsumed, but yet becauſe hee loued man, to
man he came in the eſtate of man. O how juſt did
God ſhew himſelfe to bee made of a Woman!
The Deuill before had conquered all fleſh in the
firſt Adam: and now the ſecond Adam took fleſh
in it to ſubdue the Deuill. O how wiſe did God
herein ſhew himſelfe, that when one man by
ſinne had diſpleaſed him, another man by his
righteouſneſſe ſhould pacific him! I meane Ieſus,
who being God, therefore became man to be the mediatour
betweene God and man: Which office no
other Creature neyther man nor Angell could
poſſibly haue executed, ſith infinite being the
Maieſtie of him that by ſinne was offended, by
no perſon but him that is of infinite goodneſſe
it could be appeaſed. Chriſt therefore tooke God
and man into the vnitie of his perſon to reconcile
God and man into the vnitie of affection.
Theſe & ſuch like inuiſible excellencies of kindneſſe,
Iuſtice, Wiſdome, to make viſible vnto vs,

he took on him our viſible nature in mercie descending
to vs; ſith wee in might could not aſcend
to him. Secondly, Chriſtus factus eſt, &c. As for
the promotion of his owne glorie, ſo for the procurement
of our good, in many things to help vs;
to inſtruct our faith which could not but beleeue,
when ſhe heard God himſelfe to ſpeake; to comfort
our hope which could not but bee cheered,
when ſhe ſaw God vnited to our nature; to kindle
our charitie, that could not but loue God, ſenſibly
perceiuing how God loued man, to draw our
actions to vertue, that could not but imitate God,
giuing himſelfe for an example; and to make vs
partakers of his Diuinitie, that as God was the
ſonne of man, ſo wee men ſhould bee made the
ſonnes of God. Againe, Chriſtus factus eſt, &c. to
remoue many euils from vs, that the deuill the
author of ſin, though hee were an Angell ſhould
not be preferred before vs; that man conſidering
the dignitie of his nature, how it is in vnion with
God, ſhould not ſpot it with ſinne, that our preſumption
with the thought of Chriſtes merites,
our pride with the remembrance of his humilitie,
and the feare of death and hell with the conſideration
of his perſon, might bee daunted and abated.
Further, Dei filius factus eſt, &c. to verifie
his Incarnation. Valentine held Chriſt to haue
brought a body with him from heauen, and to
haue taken no fleſh from his Mother, Marcion,

Apelles, Cerdonius, and Manes, affirmed Chriſt to
haue but a phantaſtical body, ſuch as Angels and
ſpirits aſſume. The Turkes and Moores imagine
Chriſt to bee the breath of God, whom becauſe
God ſaw that the Iewes would crucifie, he therefore
ſuffered Chriſt to delude their eyes, in ſeeming
to doe and ſuffer what hee did not. But
theſe hereſies are notably confuted in this, That
he was made of a woman. For if a woman were his
true Mother, bearing him ten Monethes in her
wombe, bringing him forth & giuing him ſucke:
then vndoubtedly he was a true man, and had a
true, naturall, and not a celeſtiall and phantaſticall
body, Laſt of all, Chriſt was made of a Woman,
to grace women kind with his birth, that before
had diſgraced it ſelfe with the deuils temptation.
A woman in Paradiſe, was a meane to make man
a ſinner, and a woman in Bethlem was an inſtrument
to bring forth to man a Sauiour. Wherefore
an ancient Father ſaith thus; Becauſe the
male kind is more noble, Chriſt would be a man:
and yet that woman ſhould not bee contemned,
hee was borne of a woman. But why doth Paul
here name ſo expreſſly a woman, and not mention
a man? Becauſe indeede man had no action in
Chriſts generation: For as our Sauior being God
had a Father, & no mother: So being man he had
a Mother, but no Father. Where note, that mankind
is brought forth foure kind of wayes. Adam
               
was made without man or woman: Eue was
made of a man without a woman: We are made
of men and women; and Chriſt was made of a
woman without a man. If yee aske of what woman?
I anſwere yee, Marie the Virgine, Whom all
generations doe call bleſſed.
               Luc. 1. 48. Of her bloud or ſeede,
by the working of the Holy Ghoſt was Chriſt
made. O what ſtrange birth was this, that a virgin
was the Mother, and God the Sonne! ſaith
Bernard. It became not God to haue any Mother
but a maiden: and it beſeemed a maide to haue
no ſonne but God.
            Wonders are in this mother, and in this ſonne.
This mother was ſanctified with the fulneſſe of
grace, with the ouer-shadowing of the Holy
Ghoſt, and the inhabitation of the Sonne of God.
Shee was, ſaith Saint Bernard, Sinepudore foecunda,
ſine grauamine granida, ſine dolore puerpera. By
bearing Chriſt, ſhee was the ſtarre that gaue light
to the Sunne, the branch that bare the Vine, the
Riuer that yeelded the fountaine, the daughter
that brought forth her Father, the creature that
gaue being to the Creatour: ſhee was I ſay the
Mother of her Father, and the daughter of her
Sonne, yonger then her birth, leſser then what
ſhee contained, a maiden, and a Mother, to haue
a Sonne with God the Father: whereas Virgines
were curſed for barrenneſſe, and wiues for bringing
forth with ſorrow, Marie was free from either

of theſe: For being a Virgine ſhee was fruitfull,
and bringing forth child ſhee felt no paines.
As the Sunne ſhines through glaſſe and corrupts
it not: So God came made of a Virgine without
breach of her chaſtitie. And becauſe ſhee conceiued
without ſinne, ſhee was therefore deliuered
without paines. Aganie, wonders are in this
Sonne. In the inſtant of his conception, and now
by ſucceſſion of time he was a perfit man in ſoule
and body, voide of ſinne and full of grace. Hee
had a father in heauen, and a mother on earth,
but yet a father without a mother, and a mother
without a father. Further by being made of a woman,
of a Lord he became a ſeruant, of eternall he
was made temporall, of infinite he became an infant,
of high he became low, of incomprehenſible
locall, of intelligible, ſenſible: borne hee was in a
womans wombe, himſelfe bearing the World,
and ſuck he did at a maidens breſts, himſelfe giuing
food to all things. Thus of a woman was Chriſt
made, and not onely ſo, but alſo Vnder the Law:
made of a woman is the humilitie of his birth; made
vnder the Law is the humilitie of his life: in birth,
in life, and in manie other thinges crying out vnto
vs, that we would learne of him, to bee humble
and meeke. Among the Iewes diuers lawes were
in vſe in Chriſts time, the Morall, Ceremoniall, Iudiciall,
and vnder all theſe our Sauiour was made.
Yee will object how can this bee? They (ſaith

Paul) Gal. 5. that are led by the Spirit,
               Gal. 5. 18. 
               are not vnder
the Law: but Chriſt was led by the ſpirit, and was
full of the ſpirit, and therfore the law had nought
to doe with him. For anſwere accept this. To
be vnder the Law carrieth a double ſenſe; to bee
vnder eyther the obſeruance of the Law, or the
oppreſſion of the Law. Now then Chriſt was vnder
the obſeruance of the Law. For he was circumciſed
the eight day, preſented afterwardes
in the Temple, and did thoſe things that the law
required: but not vnder the oppreſſion of the
Law, ſo as the breach thereof did any way burden
him; ſith hee was harmeleſſe and innocent▪
And yet in reſpect of our ſinnes, the guilt wherof
in mercie he vndertooke, he was vnder the lawes
oppreſsion. Alſo for the puniſhment due to our
offences, the Law inflicted on him; it accuſed
him, and condemned him before the Tribunall
of God of all the ſinnes of the World; it made
his bodie ſweat water and bloud, it made his
ſoule heauie to the death; and on the Croſſe ſo
perplexed his whole humanitie that he cried out,
My God my God, why haſt thou for ſaken me. Thus
the bleſſed maker of all thinges was twiſe now
made. Firſt, Of a Woman, to entertaine our Nature,
and ſecondly, Vnder the Law, to ſuſtaine our
ſinnes. And all this to what end? It followes in
the end of my Text, which ſhewes the end why
Chriſt came, &c. To redeeme thoſe that were vnder

the Law, that we might receiue the adoption of ſonnes.
See (Deere Chriſtians) how proportionable Gods
meanes are to the effecting of his purpoſes! Chriſt
was made vnder the Law to redeeme vs from the
Law, and was made the ſonne of a Woman, that we
might receiue the adoptiō to be the ſons of God. Two
generall and ſingular bleſſings containing all that
Chriſt hath done for vs, are heere conueighed vnto
vs: Redemption, and Exaltation, Freedome, and
Aduancement: Redemption and freedome to be
exempted from the Law; and Exaltation and
Aduancement to haue the adoption to bee Gods
ſonnes. The Law, before Chriſt came, did dominari,
as S. Paul ſaith: playing the Tyrant amongſt
men, as Pharao did among the Iſraelites; it ſtil cried
out, keep the Commandement; with infinite curſes
to thoſe that eyther would not, or could not
keep euery jot of it. It impoſed, vpon men an inſupportable
burden, it aggrauated ſinne, it terrified
the conſcience,2. Cor. 2. and as it is 2. Cor. 2. it was the
adminiſtration of death and damnation. Now then
Chriſt made vnder the Law, did free men from this
Law; and how but by his fulfilling of it for vs?
His humilitie ſatisfied the Law for our pride, his
faſting for our gluttonie, his Chaſtitie for our
wantonneſſe, his mildneſſe for our wrath, his
kindneſſe for our enuie, his obedience for our
negligence, his excellencies for our infirmities:
that when the Law gaping ſo for righteouſneſſe,

as a Lyon for his prey, hauing the morſell of
Chriſt, perfection and holineſſe, throwne into her
mouth, ſhe was preſently ſatiſfied and appeaſed,
and vpon that doth feed yet at this houre, which
otherwiſe could not not be contented with anie
thing which poore man could yeeld vnto her. Againe,
as before Chriſt came, wee were bondſlaues
vnder the Law: So were we Baſtards in nature, degenerated
from that Holineſſe and righteouſnes
wherein we were created, aud thereby depirued
of our Heauenly inheritance. And now our Sauiour
by being made of a Woman, doth make vs
to be true ſonnes againe; for hee by clothing himſelfe
with our nature becomming our brother, as
Paul termes him primogenitꝰ inter multoſfratres,
               Rom. 8. by
a conſequent drawes vs in to be the ſonnes of his
father; ſo giuing vs of his ſpirit to be the children
of God, as hee tooke of our fleſh to bee the
ſonne of man: he by our fleſh counted the Virgin
his Mother, and we by his ſpirit (as the Apoſtle
ſayth) crie Abba Father. Thus not onely to make
vs freemen, but alſo ſonnes; the ſonne of God
came. The ſumme of this point is briefly this,
Chriſt came as Manna from Heauen to feede vs
being hungrie, as the cluſter of Grapes out of the
Vineyard, to ſatiſfie vs being thirſtie, as Oyle
powred out to cure vs being wounded. Hee came
as our head, that giues vs ſpiritual ſenſe and motion;
as our Mediatour, that being God and man
beſt reconciles God and man; as our foundation

which we build our faith; as our doore giuing
paſſage to Paradiſe; as our Shepheard feeding vs;
our ſacrifice expiating vs; our Prieſt praying for
vs; as our way in example, life in reward. Hee
came as a man to make vs gods, as a ſeruant to
make vs Lords, to earth to lift vs vp to Heauen.
He came mortall to make vs immortall, poore
to make vs rich, and baſe to make vs glorious. In
a word, He that was the bread was hungrie that we
might be fed: he that was the fountaine was dry,
that wee might be ſatisfied. Hee that was joy
was ſad, that we might be comforted; and he that
was the way, was wearied, that we might be directed
to heauen. And thus haue yee heard the circumſtances
of Chriſt his comming: the Time,
Cauſes, Manner, End. The Doctrine wherof, for
a concluſion; let vs put to theſe vſes. Firſt, Sith in
the fulneſſe of time came he that was full of grace
and truth, let vs alſo fulfill our times that wee
ſpend in godly labours: In time of prayer, deuout;
in time of preaching, attentiue; in time of
proſperitie bountifull; in time of pouertie, patient;
in time of feaſting, temperate; in all times
vertuous and honeſt, and then no time ſhal paſſe
emptie of dutie. Next, ſith God ſent his Sonne,
Let vs acknowledge the benefit hereof, how
much we are bound to the Lord, that ſo great a
perſon as hee would beſtow ſo great a gift on vs
moſt vnworthie Creatures, and withall prouide

our hearts to haue ſuch roomes in them, as may
be fit to enteraine ſo honourable a gueſt thus ſent
vnto vs: let our repentance ſweep cleane the
chambers of our ſoules, let a good conſcience be
his bedding, and let graces and vertues be the ornaments
of his lodging. Next ſith he was made
of a Woman, and vnder the Law, let vs learne that
ſith he hath ſo dignified our nature, as with it to
cloth himſelfe, to haue a care that wee ſpot it not
or defile it with ſinne. A poore maide married to
a King, ought to forget her baſe bringing vp, and
to forgoe her clowniſh qualities: and our Nature
married to God muſt vnlooſe the filthie actions
of her corrupt generation, and put on the new man,
to be like to Chriſt. Further ſith vnder the Law,
let vs remember what a heauie burden hee tooke
on him to eaſe our ſhoulders, and ſo be the more
willing to beare any croſſe that he ſhall lay vpon
vs. Finally, ſith hee hath redeemed vs from the
Law, and makes vs adopted ſonnes: let vs carrie our
ſelues as men that haue Chriſtian libertie, ſcourging
Sinne, Death, Hell, and the Deuill; that with
the chaines of ſlauiſh feare would ſtil keep vs captiue.
Laſt of all, ſith we are his ſonnes by adoption,
let vs doe our dutie to our Heauenly Father: Let
vs loue, feare, and ſerue him with all our hearts
ſoules and ſtrength: let vs bee taught with his
precepts, let vs be guided with his counſailes, allured
with his promiſes, terrified with his threatnings,

but eſpecially be wonne with his mercies.
Then as gracious ſonnes will hee reward vs with
the glorious inheritance of his Heauenly
Kingdome. To the which place hee
that was borne for
vs, bring vs.
Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   