
      
         
            
            
            Soli Deo Gloria.
            
               KNow all men by theſe preſent, that I Richard Kellicke Profeſſor
of Phyſicke and Chyrurgery, borne in England, and
am now lately come from beyond the ſeas, hauing beene
Trauellor for the ſpace of eig
                  •
               t yeares, where I haue continu
                  •
               lly
for the ſayd terme, practi
                  •
               ed and ſtudied with my
beſt indeauors to find out the nature and property of many
or moſt kind of Minerals, and other things vſefull for medicine,
by the which practiſe I haue, and through the helpe of God, and my
poore induſtry, done many great Cures, as by good Certificate from diuers
Cities and Townes, and from the Lords Grace of Canterbury liſoned to practiſe
in this prof
                  •
               ſſion for the good of the Common-wealth, as vnder his
hand and ſeale, may and doth appeare, as namely the Falling ſickneſſe, Palſies,
Goutes, Dropſies, Lameneſſe in any of the limbs, Agues and Conſumptions,
with a miraculous kind of curing of the diſeaſe called the French diſeaſe,
neuer cured by any that way. Alſo he draweth teeth with ſuch facilitie,
that he putteth the patient to little or no paine. He h
                  •
               lpeth the paine
of the teeth without drawing, he maketh blacke teeth white i
                  •
               ſtantly: Likewiſe
he cureth the ſtone, and fetcheth away the Grauell without any paine,
or any other kind of diſeaſe whatſoeuer.
            Alſo hee cureth blind in the ſpace of halfe an hower, although they haue
beene blind ten yeares.
            Alſo he cureth dimneſſe of ſight, and ſore eyes.
            He cureth thickneſſe or dulneſſe of hearing in halfe an hower.
            Hee cureth the haire or cloven lip.
            Hee cureth the ruptors or broken people in a ſhort time.
            Hee taketh of VVeanes or warts.
            Hee cureth mad people, or thoſe that are melancholly in a ſhort ſpace.
            Hee ſetteth wrie or crooked neckes ſtraight in a quarter of an hower.
            Hee ſetteth bones broken or out of joynt.
            Alſo hee cureth Cankers, Fiſtulaes, or any old ſoare.
            Hee cureth Pollipos Ozana, and Noli me tangeri.
            Alſo hee cureth the red or 
                  •
               aſflen face.
            He cureth the wormes in Children, in a ſhort ſpace.
            Theſe are many other diſeaſes, which are not heere ſpoken of, the Profeſſor
hereof cureth by the helpe of God.
            The Profeſſor hereof lodgeth
            God ſaue the King.
         
         
            
            
            
               AS Alſo I haue brought with me to ſell to any that ſhall neede
them, divers Balſums and Medicines ready made, which will
doe and performe many ſtrange cures. More eſpeciall, one
Venice Balſum, which will cure all diſeaſes comming of
coldneſſe, eyther paines or aches in the head, deafneſſe in the
eares. The ſame Balſum being warmed, and annointing the
place grieued, and a warme cloath applyed thereunto. And for the eares, to
dip a little blacke woole in the ſayd Balſum, and ſtop them therewith. This
is alſo good for the grauell and paine in making Vrine, and the Collicke,) to
take the ſame in a little mutton broth, to the quantity of a great beane, and
drinke it euery morning faſting, and annoint the place aggrieued. Moreover,
for all cold Agues, drinke but halfe an ounce before the fi
                  •
                commeth, in
broath. Agayne, for paine in the Milt, and or the Mother, annoint the left
ſide therewith well warmed: It cureth all aches in what place of the body ſoeuer
with a cloath firſt well warmed, and then annoint it with the ſayd Balſum
being made 
                  ••
               me, and binde the place with a warme cloth afterwards.
It cureth alſo all lameneſſe and ſhrinking of ſinewes, and all greene wounds
ſudainly whatſoever.
         
         
            The Wonderfull and extraordinary force and power of the
green Salue, of Maſter Richard Kellicke.
            
            FIrſt, it hath pleaſed God to giue ſuch powerfull operation to this Balſum for all
manner of Burnings, whether it be by naturall fire, or any other caſualty, or by
Gun-powder Oyle, Water, or any other whereby men by miſchiefe may burne
themſelues: tha
                  •…
                a plaſter of this my ſalue ſpread vpon a peece of browne paper,
or a linnen cloath, and layd preſently to it, you ſhall ſee and feele a wonderfull
force of this operation and curing.
            Secondly, it is maruaillous good for the Wild-fire, a playſter 
                  〈◊〉
                made, and
ſpread vpon a linnen cloath, or a peece of browne paper and ſayd thereto, he
                  •
               peth and
cureth it in ſhort ſpace.
            Thirdly, for the Scu
                  •
               ffe wherewith children are commonly troubled in their heads,
they being rubbed with this my ſalue vpon the ſore, you ſhall ſee or 
                  •
               oure daies
his vertue. And if there be any poore are troubled herewith, I will helpe them for Gods
ſake; and take no money of the rich till I haue cured them.
            Fourthly, for the paine in Womens breſts, there cannot be found a more ſoveraigne
medicine, being ſpread vpon a cabbage lea
                  •
               e, or linnen cloath, and ſaid thereo
                  •
                
               
                  •…
               ureth
immediately.
            Fiftly, for ſore or kyb'd heeles which commeth of cold and froſt, and to make that
they come no more, rub them with this my Balſum or Oyle when you go
                  •
                to bed.
            Sixtly, for hands which are in winter ſwolne, chopt or c
                  •
               ackt, it aſſwadeth the ſwelling▪
cureth the wounds, and makes the hands ſupple and ſoft in ſhort ſpace.
            Seventhly, for the hot gout or Flericy, a plaſter made and ſpreap vpon a c
                  •
               bbage leafe
or linnen cloath, and layd to the place affected. It is wonderfull good for the emro
                  •
               ds in
men or women, annointing the fundament therewith morning and evening, it cureth
them without faile in ſhort time.
            Eightly, it is very precious ſalue for all burnings, ſcurffe, and all itchings in what
part of the body ſoeuer: for it cureth and taketh them away in ſo ſhort time, that the
patient ſhall haue cauſe to prayſe God for the wonderfull vertue which it hath pleaſed
him to giue thereunto.
            God Saue the King.
         
      
   