
      
         
            
            
            A DEFENSATIVE against the Plague: Contayning two partes or treatises: the first, shewing the meanes how to preserue vs from the dangerous contagion thereof: the second, how to cure those that are infected therewith.
            Whereunto is annexed a short treatise of the small Poxe: Shewing how to gouerne and helpe those that are infected therewith.
            Published for the loue and benefit of his Countrie by Simon Kellwaye Gentleman.
            
               
                  Ecclesiasticus. cap. 38.
               God hath created meddesens of the earth, and he that is wise will not contemne them.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Iohn Windet, dwelling neere Powles Wharfe at the Signe of the Crossekeyes, and are there to be soulde. 1593.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ To the right Honorable, Robert Deuorax, Earle of Essex and Ewe, Vicount of Hereforde, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Borcher, and Louayne, Master of the Queenes Maiesties Horse, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of her Maiesties Honorable priuie Counsell, your Honors dutifull and louing seruaunt Simon Kellwaye, wisheth a long and happie life, with encrease of honor and vertue.
            
               
                  PLato (Right Honorable) learnedly, (I might say Deuinely) wrote, that men were not borne (only) for them selues, but for their Countrie, their parents, and friendes. The Stoikes in his time held, that all thinges that were created, had their being for mans vse. Men (alone) were begotten, to be mutuall helps each to other. The Romanes when their estate most florished, accompted him amongst the number of the infortunate, that during his life did not manifest (in some one publique benefite or other) his affection and thankefull hea
                  •
               t, to the place wherein he first breathed, insomuch as Marcus Otho the Emperour, and Marcus Curtius a Romane Knight, aswell to free

them selues from the mallconceiued opinion of the people, as to make knowne to the world, that they were their countries deuoted friends and welwillers, willingly and voluntarily thrust them selues into ineuitable dangers, in which they offred the sacrifice of their liues for the safetie of their Countrie, and finished their sorowfull tragedies with the generall applause and admiration of all men. If these Heathens (hauing none but nature for their guide) proceeded so farre in such exceeding loue and zeale towards their Countrie, as they preferred the tranquillitie and peace thereof, before their priuat commodities, liberties, and liues, how iustly may they condemne vs (that challenge the name of Christians) since our good actions and endeuors want waight to ballance downe theirs. But it is no maruell, for in this declining and dotage of the world, the most part of men are prone to follow their owne preferments, delighting in selfe-loue, and greedely snatching at the toppe of fickle fortunes wheele, (wherein the worlds summum bonum is fixt) which with the least touch ouerturnes, laying the heedles climer in the dust, as they haue greater regard and respect vnto their priuate proffit and aduancement (be it neuer so worthlesse) wherein they fondly distrust the prouidence of God, then to the good of their countrie (how necessarily soeuer it require their helpe) wherein they shewe their neglect of d
                  •
               tie, and stayne them selues with the filth of ingratitude, then which nothing (in a reasonable creature)

can be more faultie, for creatures vnreasonable naturally abhorre it. The consideration whereof, hath animated me (amongst many thousands the vnworthiest) in this dangerous time of sicknesse (not vnlikely to proue more dangerous, the worst season of the yeare approching) wherein God hath alreadie drawne his sword against vs, and stricken some fewe, and except we cause him by our speedie repentance to sheath it, he (no doubt) hath determined to strike vs at the quicke, how fearefully the wrath of God consumes, if his indignation be once kindled, we all know: but who shalbe able to abide it? let vs therefore that haue not yet felt his furie, become wise by the view of others miseries, the burnt child shuns the fire, but we (farre more foolish then children) cast our selues headlong into the flame, notwithstanding we see the ashes of our friendes burnt before vs. To publish for the benefit of al peopl that list to read it, and put it in practise, a treatise contayning a method to preserue vs from the Plague, as also how to order, gouerne, and cure those that are infected therewith: Collected out of the authorities of the most excellents, both former and later writers, and for the greatest part thereof obserued, and tried by mine owne experience: this being the first publicke bud that hath sprung of my labours, and the orphant of my studies, I present vnto your Lordship as a pledge of my zeale and humble dutie towards you, and your honorable and matchlesse vertues, de
                  •
               iued in part from your noble Father, but more plentifully

inriched with your inuincible minde, and peerelesse indeuors, wherein you manifest to the eye of the world, the true Idea of perfect nobilitie, leaue to succeeding posteritie, a memorable remembrance of your neuer dying fame, and giue encouragement to all noble mindes, to imitate (though vnable to match your honorable resolutions.) If your Lordship deigne to patronize my indeuors, (farre vnworthie so honorable a Patron) I shall be securely protected from the venemous teeth of all carpers, beare (with ease) the burden of their reproches, waieng as light as winde: and with a fauorable aspect from you, (as from the worlds bright eye) disperse all the foggie mistes of their false conceiued thoughts. My labours want not their reward, if they winne your good word, nor my mind his desire, if you vouchsafe to fauour. Thus wishing your Lordship as many happie yeares as vertues, and no fewer vertues then the firmament affords lightes, commending my labors to your honorable protection, I humblie take my leaue, this 25. of March. 1592.
            
               Your Honors most dutifull Seruant to commaunde, Simon Kellwaye.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the frendly Reader.
            
               WHen I considered with my selfe (gentle Reader) the great calamitie, miserie, and most distressed state of our Countrie, on which it hath pleased God to inflict the heauie scourge of his wrath, by imposing on them that poysonous infection the plague, I therefore (as one partaker of their griefe and sorrowe) seeing also the same contagion so generally dispersed throughout this land, and not finding anye english author that hath to my content written the meanes how to preserue and keepe vs from the contagion thereof, haue thought it good to publish this small treatise vnder the title and name of a defensatiue against the Plague. Which worke I haue collected and drawne from sundrie both auncient and later writers, the which being shaddowed vnder the calme shroude of auncient consent, and strengthned with the abundant sappe of late experience (as well mine owne, as others) I heere present the same, not so exquisitely plotted with so orderly a method, or so finely pollished with so filed an eloquence, thereby to breede a delight to the learned, which would be a loathing to the vnlearned, I haue therefore thought best to disclose it, euen in the playnest manner I could deuise, whereby the simpler sort might reape the commoditie thereof, whose safetie I tender, and for whose sakes I haue taken this paynes. I doubt not but that

some (Aristarchus or other) whose filthie stomackes being inflamde with malice, will attempt to nip off the crop of my future hope, obiecting the barrennes of my soyle wherein it first tooke roote, and my want of skill in trimming and proyning it as it would require to be such, as small hope of frute is to be loked for to proceede thereof, but high disdaine willeth no man good, I giue them leaue to glose as they list, knowing it most friuolous to afford vnto such an answere, seeing in stead of reason there commeth nothing from them but either a disdainefull smile, or a scornefull mocke (but it skilleth not) sith many of my ancients haue tasted of their mallice, whome I may iustly compare to Antiphilos, that peerelesse pickthancke. Only vppon this hope do I rest, that as in good will and loue I haue done it, so the well disposed will censure it in the best sort, and where defects are (as I doubt not of many) they will in friendly and charitable manner correct and amend the same, which may occasion me to take some further paynes heereafter. Farewell. From my house this 25. of March. 1593.
            
               
                  Thine in all friendly loue, S. K.
            
         
         
            
            
               George Baker, in commendation of the Author.
            
               AMongst all the heynous offences that euer were, none were in time past so sharply punished, nor more strayter lawes made, then for ingratitude: and in my iudgement nothing can more grieue an honest mind (especially where good is deserued) then to be recompenst with euill. I doo not thinke that this booke can passe cleane away with the good liking of euery one, but that it will drinke of the same enuious cup, that other famous workes heretofore haue done. I could rehearse a number that haue complayned thereof, whose eternall fame shall neuer be extinguished. The Author of this treatise, his good and zelous intent, and sufficiencie in his profession, I knowe to be such, as deserueth well. His willing and godly mind to do his countrie good, (not only this booke) but also many people both rich and poore that haue already receyued helpe at his hands, can and will testifie the same. This which he hath written is no new inuention, but the ground thereof allowed, both of auntient and later writers: and besides he hath considered that in euery place a good Phisition is not to be gotten at all times, so that the partie infected may be dead before any such helpe can be had, (yea) and the most part of the best of them will not hazard them selues in so dangerous an enterprise: he considering the same, hath heere taught the most easye and approued medicines, with

the whole order of the cure, not only for such as are infected, but also haue to preserue them that are sounde. What doth he deserue that thus hath done, let the better sort iudge: for the rest, I thinke if either they haue the feare of God, any sparke of honestie, or iudgement in any thing, they will for shame hold their peace, least their ignorance and hatred bewray their folly, and so deserue the same punishment which the wisest sort haue alreadie set downe, which I hope none will so wilfully hazard to incurre. Now, considering his zealous intent, it is the part of euery good minde, to encourage him in so godly, and good an enterprise, whereby others may be animated to do the like: and therefore considering the goodnes of the matter, and necessitie of the cause, the whole common wealth is to embrace him, who lookes but only for a thankefull acceptance in lewe of his trauell, which is the least may be yelded him. Farewell. From my chamber at the Court this 6. of Aprill. 1593.
            
               G. Baker.
            
         
         
            
            The Author to the Reader.
            FOr that there are diuers Receats in this booke which are written in Latin, because in some of them many things which enter therein can not be brought into an apt english phrase, neither are they to be had, but only at the Apottycaries, and because their quantities are written according to the Latin order, I haue heere set downe what the signification of euery waight and measure doth meane.
            
               A handfull is written thus
               M.j.
               Halfe a handfull thus
               M.ss.
               A little handfull thus
               P.j.
               A Scruple thus
               ℈.j.
               A Dramme thus
               
                  ʒ.j.
               An ounce thus
               ℥.j.
               Halfe an ounce, or halfe a dramme thus
               ℥.ss.— ʒ.ss.
               An ounce and halfe, thus
               ℥.j.ss.
               A Grayne thus
               G.j.
               The number of any thing, thus
               no. j. &c.
               A Pound, is thus
               l.j.
               So much as shall suffice, thus
               q. 5.
               (Ana) is
               of either of them.
               xx. Graynes 
               make a Scruple.
               iij. Scruples, 
               make a Dramme.
               viij. Drammes, 
               make an ounce.
               xij. Ounces,
                make a pound.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            ANd for such faultes as by the Printer are omitted, let me craue this fauour at thy handes, that before thou enter to reade this Booke, to bestow a little paines with thy pen to correct them, so shalt thou make the true meaning and sense of the matter the more playne vnto thee, and such faultes as by a scarborrowd ouer-reading I haue found, as also the correcting of the same, I haue here following specified.
            
               Farwell, from my house at Kingsmill in Deuon the 8. of Aprill 1593.
               
               Thine in all friendly loue, S. K.
               
            
         
         
            Faultes escaped in Printing.
            
               
                  
                     Fol.
                     line.
                     fault.
                     Cor.
                  
                  
                     4.
                     38.
                     forsyrrop
                     the syrrop
                  
                  
                     30.
                     7.
                     venimous matter
                     the venimous matter
                  
                  
                     39.
                     64.
                     pockes were fo
                           •
                        nd
                     pockes are found
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A defensatiue against the plague: The first treatise.
            
               Cap. 1. What the plague is.
               
                  THe auncient physitions in times past haue greatly doubted what the essential cause of this disease, which weé commonly call the plague, or pestilence should be: yet all do agree that it is a pernitious and contagious feauer, and reckned to be one of the number of those which are called Epidemia, chiefely proceéding of adusted and melancholike bloud, which may be easily perceiued by the extreame heate and inflammation which inwardly they doe feéle that are infected therewith, first assalting the harte, and astonishing the vitall spirites, as also by the exterior Carbunkles and botches which it produceth: whose malignitie is such, both in yong and olde, rich and poore, noble and ignoble, that vsing all the meanes which by art can, or may be deuised, yet in some it will in no sorte giue place, vntill it hath by death conquered the partie infected therewith.
            
            
               Cap. 2. Cause of the plague.
               
                  
                  THere are diuers causes whereof this disease may proceede, as sundrie writers do aledge, as by ouer great and vnnaturall heate and drieth, by great rayne and inundatyons of waters, or by great store or rotten and stincking bodies, both of men and beastes, lying vppon the face of the earth vnburied, as in the time of warres hath bene seene, which doth so corrupt the ayre, as that thereby our Corne, Fruites, Herbes, and waters which we dayly vse for our foode and sustenaunce, are infected: also it may come by some stincking doonghils, filthie and standing pooles of water, and vnsauery smelles which are neere the places where we dwell, or by thrusting a great companie of people into a close narrow, or straight roome, as most commonly we see in shippes, cōmon Gayles, and in narrow and close lanes and streetes, where many people doe dwell together, and the places not orderly kept cleane and sweete. But most commonly in this our time it is dispersed amongst vs, by accompaning our selues with such as either haue, or lately haue had the disease them selues; or at least haue beene conuersant with such as haue bene infected therewith. But for the most parte it doth come by receauing into 
                     •
                  ur custody some clothes, or such like things that haue bene vsed about some infected body, wherin the infection may lye hidden a long time: as hath bene too too oftē experimented with repentance too late in many places. It may also come by dogs, cats, pigs, and weasells which are prone and apt to receiue and carrie the infection from place to place. But howsoeuer it doth come, let vs assure our selues that it is a iust punishment of God 
                     •
                  ayde vpon vs, for our manyfold sinnes and transgressions against his diuine Maiestie: for as Seneca sayth, quicquid patimur ab alto venit, what crosses or afflictions soeuer wee suffer it commeth from the Lord, either for a triall of our fai
                     •
                  h, or a punishment for our sinnes. Wherefore; to distinguish any farther thereof, I thinke it needlesse: for my entent

is in briefe sort so exactly as I can; to shew the meanes how to preuent the same, as also how to cure it when we are infected. But before I enter to intreate thereof, I thinke it not a misse to shew what forewarninges and tokens are giuen vs before hand of the comming thereof, thereby the better to preuent the same by prayer and repentance.
            
            
               Cap. 3. Warninges of the plague to come.
               
                  
                     AVicen a noble Physition saith, that when wee see the naturall course of the ayre, and seasons of the yeere to be altered, as when the springe time is colde clowdie, and drie, the haruest time stormie and tempestuous, the morninges and euenings, to be very colde, and at noone extreame hote, these doe foreshew the plague to come. Also,
                     Firie impressions.
                   when wee see firie impressions in the firmament, specially in the ende of sommer, as commets and such like, and that in the beginning of haruest we see great store of little frogs,
                     Frogs and Toades.
                   red toades and myse on the earth abounding extraordinarily: or when in sommer we see great store of toades creeping on the earth hauing long tayles, of an asheye colour on their backes, and their bellies spotted and of diuers colours, and when we see great store of gnattes to swymme on the waters,
                     Gnattes.
                   or flying in great companyes together, or when our trees and Herbes doe abounde with caterpillers, spiders,
                     Trees and Herbes.
                   moathes and such like, which deuoure the leaues on the trées, and herbes on the earth, it sheweth the ayre to be corrupt, and the plague shortly after to follow. Also,
                     Beastes.
                   by the beastes of the fielde, we may perceiue it, (especially sheepe) which will goe mourning with their heades hanging downe towarde the ground, and dyuers of them dying without any manyfest cause knowne vnto vs.
                     Children.
                   Also when we see yonge Children

flocke them selues together in companyes, and then will faine some one of their company to be dead amongst them and so will solemnize the buriall in a mournefull sorte, this is a token which hath bene well obserued in our age, to foreshew great mortallitie at hand.
                     Ryuers.
                   Also, when wee see ryuers of water to ouerflow without any manyfest cause, or soddenly vanish away and become drie; and when cleare wellspringes doe sodenly become foule and trobled. Also, when the small Poxe doth generally abounde,
                     
                        
                           •
                        oxe.
                   both in yong and olde people, all these doe foreshew the plague to come.
            
            
               Cap 4. Sheweth how to preuent the plague.
               
                  THere are three principall meanes, how to preuent this contagious disease: the first and chiefest is to acknowledge our manifolde sinnes and wickednes vnto almightie God our heauenly father, with a hartie repentance and amendment of our former sinnes committed against his diuine maiestie.
               The second meanes is to flye far off from the place infected, and as Rondoletius sayth, not ouer hastely to returne there againe, for feare of an afterclap: which saying is confirmed by Valetius, in these wordes, non enim morietur in bello, qui non est in illo: and the farther from it, the safer shall we be, yet were it a very vncharitable course, that all which are of abillytie should so doe: for then howe should the poore be relieued, and good orders obserued: but for children it were best to send them far off from the place, because their bodyes are most apt to receiue the infection, as also for that they cannot so continually vse antidotes and preseruatiues, which by their great heate may indanger them almost so much as the disease it selfe.
               The third meanes consisteth chiefly in three poyntes,

which are these: Order, Diet, and Physicall helpes. For the first you must haue a care that your houses bee kept cleane and sweete, not suffering any foule & filthy clothes or stincking thinges to remaine in, nor about the same: and in sommer season to decke your windowes, and strawe you
                     •
                   floores with sweete and holsome herbes, floures and leaues as Mintes, Balme, Pennyriall, Lauender, Time, Mar
                     •
                  oram, red Roses, Carnations, Gellefloures and such like, for your windowes, your floores to be strawed with greene Rushes, and Mynts, Oken and willow leaues, Uine leaues and such like: your windowes which stand towarde the North and Easte, doe you alwaies keepe open in the daye time, (if the aire be cleare and that no infected and vnsauery smell be neere the same) as fogs, doonghils, and such like, and euery morning before you open either your doores or windowes, as also in the euening when you goe to bed, cause a good fire to be made in your chamber, and burn some Odoriferous or sweete perfume in the middest thereof, as hereafter I will shew you, or in steéde therof, some Iuniper,
                     Herbes good for a perfum
                           •
                        .
                   Frankincense, Baye leaues, Rosmary, Lauender, Marioram, or such like, which you must alwayes haue dried in a reddynes, and so in the fume or smoke thereof, to breath and perfume the clothes which you are to weare.
               
                  A good perfume in sommer season.
                  ℞



                         Rose water and vineger, of either sixe sponefulls.
                         
                           
                              Rindes of sowre
                              Citrons & lymons
                              Baye leaues
                           
of either: the waight of two pence which is j. ℈.
                        Camphire the waight of iij. pence which is halfe. ʒ.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The herbes and rindes must be dried, and put altogether in a perfuming panne, or in steede thereof a pewter dish set on a chafer of coles, will serue the turne.
                  
               
               
                  An other good perfume in winter.
                  ℞



                        Red roses Marioram & Myrtles of either a little handfull.
                        
                           
                              Callamint
                              Iuneper berries of either one ʒ. which is the waight of vij. pence.
                              Ladanum of either one ʒ. which is the waight of vij. pence.
                              Beniamin of either one ʒ. which is the waight of vij. pence.
                              Frankincense of either one ʒ. which is the waight of vij. pence.
                            of either one ʒ. which is the waight of vij. pence.
 
                     
                  
                  
                     The herbes, berries, and roses, being dried, must beé made in grose pouder, as also the gummes, and so mixed together, and when yeé lyst, cast some parte thereof on a chafer of coles, and receaue the fume thereof.
                  
               
            
            
               Cap. 5.
               
                  NOw hauing receiued the fume as aforesayde
                     •
                   before you goe foorth of your chamber, eate some Cordiall electuary or preseruatiue, as hereafter you shall finde choyse, which I haue alwaies vsed with good and happie succes, after taking of the Cordiall, wash your face and handes with cleane water, wherein you must put a little vineger, and then if you liste, you may breake your fast with some good bread and butter, and in winter season a poycht Egge is good eaten with some vinegar: and for plethoricke and melancholicke bodies, it

were good to drinke a drafte of wormewood wine,
                     Wormwood wine commended.
                   in the morning fas
                     •
                  ing, because it resisteth putrefaction in the pletho
                  
                     •
                  icke, and purgeth bilous matter in the melancholike.
               
                  An excellent good preseruatiue; which I haue alwayes vsed with good successe.
                  ℞



                        
                           Conserue of Roses and borrage flowres of either two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Minardus, Mitridat, Andromachus triacle of either halfe an ounce.
                        
                        
                           Dioscordium, two drammes.
                        
                        
                           Dialkermes, one dramme.
                        
                        
                           Pouder of the seede of Citrons pilled one dramme.
                        
                        
                           Syrop of lymons and sower Citrons of either halfe an ounce.
                        
                     
                  
                  Compounde all these together, in the forme of an opiat you may eate hereof euery morning, the quantitie of three beanes, and drinke a drafte of Rennish wine, beére or ale, after it: but for Children and such as are of tender yeéres, so much as a beane thereof is sufficient, and giue them only beére or ale after it: the taking hereof euery seconde or third day will suffice, if you goe not into any suspected company.
               
               
                  An other excellent good preseruatiue.
                  ℞ 

                        
                           Kernels of walenuts and figs, of either foure ounces.
                        
                        
                           
                           Leaues of rue one ounce and halfe.
                        
                        
                           Tormentill rootes iiij. drammes.
                        
                        
                           Rinde of sowre Citrons one dramme.
                        
                        
                           Right Bolarmoniake vj. drammes.
                        
                        
                           Fine Mirre ij. scruples.
                        
                        
                           Saffron one scruple.
                        
                        
                           Salte halfe a dramme.
                        
                        
                           Syrop of Citrons and Lymons, iiij. ounces.
                        
                     
                  
                  The herbes, rootes, and rindes must be dried, the nuttes must be blanched, and the bolarmonyake must beé made in fine pouder, and then washt in the water of scabios, and dried againe, you must pound the figges and walenuts in a stone morter seuerally by them selues very small, all the rest must be made in fine pouder, and so mixe them altogether in the morter, and then adde therto Syrop by little and little, and so incorporat them all together: you may giue this in the same quantytie, and in like sorte as the other before.
               
               
                  An other very good
                  ℞ 

                        
                           Of the confection a foresaid made with Nuttes, iiij. ounces.
                        
                        
                           Minardus mitridat, iiij. drammes.
                        
                        
                           Andromachus triacle, ij. drammes.
                        
                        
                           Fine terrae Sigillatae, iiij. scruples.
                        
                        
                           Syrop of Lymons, one ounce.
                        
                     
                  
                  Compounde all these together in the morter, as the other before, you may giue hereof the waight of a groate or vipence, euery second or third day, & drinke a draft of Rennish

or White wine after it in winter season, but in the heate of the yeére, Sorrel water is best, and in the spring Scabios or Cardus benedictus water.
                  Also, so much Triacle of Andromachus discription eaten euery morning as a beane, with a little conserue of Roses, is a very excellent good preseruatiue.
                  
                     Valetius, doth greatly commend the taking of threé or foure graines of the Bezoar stone euery morning, in a sponefull of Scabios water.
                  I cānot here sufficiently commend the electuary called Dioscordium, which is not onely good to resist the infection but doth also expell the venimous matter of those which are infected, being taken euery morning and euening, the quantitie of a beane, and drinke a draft of Rennish or White wine after it, in winter season, but in sommer a draft of beére or ale is best.
                  In strong and rusticall bodies,
                        Garlicke good in rusticall bodies.
                      and such as are daylie labourers, Garlike onely eaten in the morning with some Butter and Salt at breakfast, drinking a cup of beére or ale after it, hath bene found to beé very good: which is greatly commended by Gallen, who calleth it the poore mans Triacle: but in the sanguin, daintie, and idle bodies, it may not be vsed because it ouer heateth the bloud, causeth headach, and vniuersally inflameth the whole body.
               
            
            
               Cap. 6.
               
                  NOw when you haue taken any of the foresaide preseruatiues, it were good and necessary to weare vpon the region of the harte, some sweéte bag or quilt that hath power to resist venem, and also to carry in your hand some sweéte Pomander, Nodule, or Nosegaie, that will comforte the hart, resist venem, and recreate the vitall spirites, as here following is specified and set downe.
               
                  
                  An excellent quilt or bag.
                  ℞ 

                        
                           Arsenike cristaline, one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Diamargaritum frigidum, ij. scruples.
                        
                        
                           Diambrae, one scruple.
                        
                     
                  
                  You must grinde the Arsenike in smal pouder, and then with some of the infusion of Gum Draggagant in Rose water, you must make a paste, then spread it on a cloth which must be sixe ynches long, and fiue ynches broad, and spread it thicke: then couer it with an other cloth and so quilt it together, which being done, fasten it in an other bag of Crimson taffetie or Sarsnet, and so weare it against the harte al the day time, but at night leaue it off: and here you must take heéd, that when you sweat, you doe take it away, for otherwise it will cause the skinne to amper a little. There are some writers which doe vtterly forbid the wearing of Arsenike: but thus much I can say; that I haue giuen this bag vnto diuers to weare, with most happie and good successe, for neuer did I yet know any one that hath worne this bag, and vsed any of the electuaries aforesaid, that hath bene infected with the plague, but for any inconuenience or accident that hath hapned thereby, I neuer found any hetherto, other then the ampring of the skinne as aforesayd.
               
               
                  An other bag.
                  ℞ 

                        Ir
                              •
                           ios, halfe an ounce.
                        Calamus aromat Ciperus, of either one dramme and halfe.
                        Storax, Calam, roote of Angelica of either three drammes.
                        
                           Cloues, Mace, of either one dramme.
                        Red roses dried, iij. drammes.
                        Pellemountaine, Peniriall, Callamint, Elder floures, of either one dramme and halfe.
                        Nutmegs, Cinamon, Yellow sanders,  of either one dramme.
                        Nardi Italicae, one dramme.
                        Amber greece, and muske, of either sixe graines.
                     
                  
                  
                     You must pound all these in pouder and then quilt them in a bag of Crymson taffatie as aforesaide.
                  
               
               
                  A Pomander good in the sommer time.
                  ℞ 

                        The rind of Citrons, Red Roses, Nenuphare roses, Yellow sanders, of either halfe a dramme.
                        ℞ Storax liquid, Beniamin, of either one dramme.
                        ℞ Myrre, two scruples.
                        ℞ Ladanum, one dramme and halfe.
                        ℞ Muske and amber, of either sixe graines.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Pouder all that is to be poudred, and then worke them together in a whote morter, with a whote pestell, adding vnto it in the working some of the Musselage of draggagant dissolued in sweéte rose Water, or rose Uinegar, and so make your Pomander.
                  
               
               
                  An other good one for the winter time.
                  ℞ 

                        Storax liquid, Beniamin, Storax calamint, Ladanum, and Myrre of either halfe a dramme.
                        Cloues, one scruple.
                        Nutmegs, Cinamon, of either halfe a scruple.
                        Red roses, Yellow sanders, Lignum alloes and Irrios. of either halfe a dramme.
                        Calamus aromaticus, rind of a Citron. of either foure graines.
                        Amber greece, Muske, and siuet, of either sixe graines.
                     
                  
                  
                     You may make vp this, as the other before, with some Musselage of the infusion of Gum draggagant, infused in Rose water.
                  
               
               
                  
                  A good Nodule for the sommer season.
                  
                     
                        ℞ Floures of Violets red Roses and Nenuphare. of either one dramme.
                     
                     
                        ℞ Red, White, and Yellow sanders of either halfe a dramme.
                     
                     
                        ℞ Camphire, xij. graines,
                     
                  
                  Cause all these to be beaten in grose pouder, then knit them all together in a peéce of Taffetie and when you will vse it, then wet it in rose Water and a little Uinegar, and so smell to it.
               
               
                  Another Nodule for the winter season.
                  ℞ 

                        
                           
                              The dried leaues of Mintes,
                              Marioram,
                              Tyme,
                              Peniriall,
                              Lauender,
                              Pellemountaine, and Balme,
                            of either a little handfull.
                        
                           
                              Nutmegs,
                              Cloues,
                              Cinamon,
                              Angelica rootes,
                              Lignum alloes,
                            of either one dramme.
                        Saffron, two scruples.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Cause all these to 
                           •
                        e infused in rose Water and Uinegar, one whole night, then wet a spunge in the liquor thereof and knit it in a peéce of Taffatie, or your handcarchiefe, whereunto you must smell often times.
                  
               
               
                  A Nosgaie for the same purpose.
                  ℞ 

                        
                           Herbe grace, three branches.
                        
                        
                           Rosmarie, Marioram, Myntes, and Time, of either one branch.
                        
                        
                           Red rose buddes and Carnations, of either three or foure.
                        
                     
                  
                  Make your Nosegay herewith, then sprinkle him ouer with rose Water, and some rose Uinegar, and smell often vnto it. Also, when you suspecte to goe into any dangerous or infected company doe you alwaies carry in your mouth a peéce of the roote of Angelica, the rinde of a Citron dried, or a great Cloue, which must beé first infused or 
                        ••
                     eéped one whole night in rose Water and Uinegar.
               
            
            
               Cap. 7.
               
                  FOr that there is not a greater enimie to the health of our bodies then costiunes, both in the time of the plague and otherwise, I haue here set downe howe and by what meanes you may keépe your selfe solyble, which you must vse once in foure and twentie houres, if otherwise you haue not the bennefit of nature by custome.
               
                  
                  A suppositorie.
                  Take two sponefuls of Hony and one sponefull of Baye salte, small pounded, boyle them together vntill it grow thicke, alwaies stirring it in the boyling, then take it from the fire, & if you liste you may ad one dramme of (Ihera picra simplex) vnto it: and so stirre them wel together, and when it is almost colde, make vp your suppositories, of what length and bignes you list: and when you minister any you must first annoynt it with butter or Sallet oyle: you may keepe these a whole yeére if you put them in Barrowes morte or grease, and so couer them vp close therein.
               
               
                  A good Glister.
                  ℞ 

                        
                           
                              
                                 Mallowes,
                              
                              
                                 Mercurie,
                              
                              
                                 Beets,
                              
                              
                                 Violets,
                              
                              
                                 Red Fennell,
                              
                            of either one handfull.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Seedes of fennel,
                              
                              
                                 Annis,
                              
                              
                                 Coriander,
                              
                            of either one dramme.
                     
                  
                  Boyle all these in a sufficient quantitie of Water, vntil halfe the water be consumed, then straine it, and keépe it in a glasse close stopt, vntill you neede, for it will keépe a whole weéke. Take of the same decoction, a pinte.
                  
                     
                        Mel rosarum, or common Honie, one sponefull.
                     
                     
                        Oyle of Violets or oyle of Oliues, three ounces,
                     
                     
                        S
                              •
                           lte, one dramme,
                     
                     
                        
                        The yolke of an Egge or two.
                     
                  
                  Mixe all these together in a morter and so giue it warme in the morning, or two houres before supper: and if yeé adde vnto this one ounce of Diacatholicon it will beé the better.
               
               
                  Raysins laxatiue how to make them.
                  
                     
                        ℞ White wine, three pintes and halfe.
                     
                     
                        ℞ Senuae, halfe a pound.
                     
                     
                        ℞ Fine white sugar one pound.
                     
                     
                        ℞ Currantes, two poundes.
                     
                  
                  You must infuse the Senue in the wine, in a pot close stopt, and let it stand in a warme place, foure and twentie houres, then straine it, and adde to the strayning the Currants being cleane pickt and washt, and lastly the Sugar, boyle all together on an easie fire, vntill the wine be consumed, hauing care that you doe alwaies stirre it about in the boyling for feare of burning, then take them from the fire, and put them vp into a cleane galley pot, you may eate one sponefull or two of them a little before dinner, at any time.
               
               
                  A good Oyntment to keepe on Sollible.
                  
                     
                        The gaule of an Oxe, Oyle of violets, of either one ounce.
                     
                     
                        Sheepes tallow, sixe drammes.
                     
                  
                  Boyle them together on a soft fire vntill they be incorporated,

then take it from the fire, and adde there to.
                  
                     
                        Alloes cicatrine, one ounce.
                     
                     
                        Baye salt, halfe an ounce.
                     
                  
                  The Alloes and Salte must be both made in fine pouder, before you put them into the Oyle, then stirre them together vntill it be colde, and when you are disposed to haue a stoole, then annoynt your fundment therewith, both within side and without, and if you annoynt your nauell therewith, it will worke the better.
               
               
                  Good pils to keepe one Sollible and doe also resist the pestilence.
                  ℞



                        
                            Alloes, Cicatrine, one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Chosen Myrre, three drammes.
                        
                        
                           Saffron, one dramme and halfe.
                        
                        
                           Amber greece, sixe graines.
                        
                        
                           Syrop of limons or Citrons, so much as shalbe sufficient, to make the masse.
                        
                     
                  
                  You must grinde the Alloes, Myrre, and Saffron into small pouder, seuerally by them selues, then incorporat them altogether, with the syrope: you may giue halfe a dramme or two scrupls therof, in the euening halfe an houre before supper twise or thrise in a weéke: Rases, would haue you to take halfe a dramme or two scruples of these Pilles euery day, without vsing any other preseruatiue at all, and he hath great reason so to esteéme of them, for Galen, Auicen, and all auncient writers in Physicke, doe holde opinion that Alloes doth not only comfort but purge the stomake from all rawe and chollericke humors, and doth also purge and open the vaynes cal
                        •
                     ed Miserayice, and resisteth putrefaction:

Myrre doth altogether resist, neither will it suffer putrefaction in the stomacke: Saffron, doth comfort the hart, and hath also a proprietie in it to carry any medicine that is giuen there with vnto the hart, but to conclude, these Pilles will purge all superfluous humors in the stomacke, and principall members: and preserueth the bloud from corruption.
               
            
            
               Cap. 8.
               
                  I Must here giue you to vnderstand that the infection doth often times lye hidden with in vs, with out any manifest signe or knowledge thereof at the first, and therefore were it good for sanguine bodies and such as doe abound with bloud, in the sommer season to drawe sixe or eight ounces of bloud out of the basillica vaine in the right arme, which is a good meanes to preuent a further danger, (as Auicen witnesseth) but for full and plethoricke bodies, it were best to purge them selues once in seuen or eight daies with some easie and gentle purgation, as hereafter I will shewe you: but for leane and spare bodies; once in fourtene dayes wilbe enough at most: for wisely sayth Rondoletius, yt it is not only the vēnemous and contagious ayre which we receiue that doth kill vs, but it is the present communicating of that contagion, with some superfluous humors in our bodies, as in his treatise De peste appeareth: therefore now will I shew you how to purge the body.
               
                  Pilles good to purge.
                  ℞ 
                        
                           Alloes Cicatrine, tenne drammes.
                        
                        
                           Aggaricke, of the whitest, foure drammes.
                        
                        
                           Myrre, Masticke, of either two drammes.
                        
                        
                           
                           Saffron, two scruples.
                        
                     
                  
                  Make these in fine pouder,
                        Flegme.
                      then compound them together in a morter, with so much Oximell simplex, syrrop of Lymons, or of Sticados, as shalbe sufficient, you may giue one dramme, or a dramme and halfe of these Pilles, halfe an houre before supper: but for a chollericke bodie,
                        Choller.
                      you must leaue out two drammes of the Aggaricke in making of the receipt, and in place thereof adde two drammes of Rubarbe, and for the melancholike,
                        Mellancholye.
                      two drammes of Epithimum and giue the same quantitie in waight.
               
               
                  A good purging potion.
                  ℞ 

                        
                           Raysins, the stones pickt out and washt, of either one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Polipode of the oke: Elecampane roote dried rootes of wilde small sorell Succorie rootes cleansed. of either halfe an ounce.
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 Leaues of Borrage,
                              
                              
                                 Buglos,
                              
                              
                                 Burnet,
                              
                              
                                 Scabios,
                              
                              
                                 Morsus diaboli,
                              
                              
                                 Floures of Borrage,
                              
                              
                                 Buglos,
                              
                              
                                 Rosmarie,
                              
                              
                                 Violets,
                              
                              
                                 Broome,
                              
                            of either a little handfull.
                        
                           
                           Seedes of fennell, sowre Citrons. of either two scruples,
                        
                        
                           Shauing of a harts horne, halfe a dramme.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle all these in a sufficient quantity of faire water vntill halfe be consumed, then straine it. Take of the decocti
                     
                        •
                     n aforesaide, threé ounces.
                  
                     
                        Rubarbe, two drammes and halfe,
                     
                     
                        Cinamon, halfe a dramme,
                     
                  
                  Slice them both, and put them with the liquor in a close cup, and so let it stand to infuse in a warme place, twelue houres, then straine it out strongly, & adde therto one ounce of the Syrrop of mayden heare, and so drinke it warme, in the morning about sixe of the clocke, and refraine from meate, drinke and sleépe two houres after it, this is good in leane and spare bodies: you may, for a phlegmaticke body adde in the infusion one dramme of Aggaricke Trosciskated.
               
               
                  A purging pouder for such as cannot take Pilles.
                  
                     ℞ Alloes cicatrine, one ounce,
                     ℞ Myrre, Cinamon, of either two drammes.
                     ℞ Saffron, one scruple.
                  
                  
                     Make them all in fine pouder, and giue one dramme, in a draft of white wine.
                  
               
               
                  Floures stopt, how to prouoke them.
                  
                     For that weemen which haue not their naturall course on them, are most proue to receiue and take the infection, I haue here set downe good Pilles, which I haue alwaies found excellent, not onely for that purpose, but will also resist the danger of infection.
                  ℞ 

                        
                           Alloes cicatrine, one ounce.
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 Rootes of Gentian
                              
                              
                                 Aristolochia rotunda
                              
                              
                                 Dittander,
                              
                              
                                 Saffron,
                              
                           , of either halfe a dramme.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Rootes of garden madther,
                              
                              
                                 Mitridat,
                              
                            of either one dramme.
                     
                  
                  Cause them all to be ground in small pouder, then mixe it with the Mitridate and some syrrop of Artemesia, or mugworte, giue one dramme of these Pilles euery morning twelue dayes together, or vntill her tearmes breake.
               
               
                  Issues commended against the plague.
                  IN plethoricke and ful bodies, I haue found nothing more safer in the time of the plague, then to make them an artificiall issue, either in the legge or arme: for neuer hetherto haue I knowne any one which hath had an Issue, or Ulcer running on him, that hath bene infected with the plague. Palmarius, and Forestus; doe both affirme i
                        •
                      to be true and certaine, but here some ignorant people doe holde opinion, that hauing once an Issue, hee must be constrained to keépe it alwaies, which 
                        〈◊〉
                      most erronious for then those which haue had Ulcers running vpon them, some sixe, ten, yea sixetene yeéres, may not be cured without some Issue to be made in some other place, but therein they deceiue thē
                     
selues, for my selfe by good proofe haue often found the contrary in diuers people which I haue cured, some sixe, some ten, yea sixtene yeéres past, and yet to this day doe remaine in perfect good health without any Issues.
               
            
            
               Cap 9. What diet we ought to keepe.
               
                  FOr our diet as Hipocrates teacheth vs, weé must haue a care not to exceéde in eating and drinking, but to keépe a meane therein, and in any case to beware of surfeting and drunkennesse, which are enimies both to the body and soule, but as we may not exceéde in eating and drinking, so to endure great hunger and thirst is most dangerous, our meate ought to be of a facile and easie digestion: partly tending to a drying qualitie: as Cockes, Capons, Hennes, Pullets, Partridge, Feasants, Quayles, Pigeons, Rabbets, Kydde, Ueale, Mutton, Birdes of the mountaines, and such like, but Beéfe, Porcke, Uenison, Hare, and Goates fleshe is to be refused, and so are all water foules as Ducke, Swanne, Goose, Widgen, Teale, and such like, because they are hard to digest, and do encrease ill bloud and naghtie Iuyce in the body: Lambs flesh, because of his exceéding moysture,
                     F
                           •
                        sh.
                   is also to bee refused, Egges in the sommer not good, but in winter tollerable: all fishes which are of a hard flesh, whether they be of the sea or fresh ryuers, are to be allowed. In fresh ryuers the Perche, Barble, Gudgin Loche, Coole, Troute, and Pyke, are good, and for sea fish, the Gilthed, Turbet, Sole, Rochet, Gurnard, Lapster, Crabbe, Praunes, Shrimpes, Whiting, and such like eaten with vinegar. There are some authors which holde opynion that fish is more better to bee eaten then flesh in the great feruent heate of the yeére, because they doe make a

more colde bloud in the body then flesh: another reason is because they doe liue vnder the water, they are not infected with any contagion of the ayre, as beastes and 
                     •
                  yrdes may be, and therfore more wholsome, but in my iudgement flesh is more wholsome, because it doth breéde a more pure and fine Iuyce in the body, then any fish whatsoeuer: your bread ought to be made of pure wheate, not too new, nor 
                     〈◊〉
                   olde, but of one dayes baking, or two at most is best, rye bread is to be eschewed, because of his great moysture: y
                     •
                  ur drinke is best, beére, or ale, not too strong or newe, but the staller and clearer it is, the better: at your meales a draft or two of Clarret wine is tollerable, but in who
                     •
                  e weather it were good to delay it with a little water, for 
                     〈◊〉
                   doth warm the stomacke, helpe digestion, and comforte the hart
               
                  For your pottage you may take in the sommer.
                  
                     Parsly,
                  
                  
                     Lettis,
                  
                  
                     Sorrell,
                  
                  
                     Endiue,
                  
                  
                     Succorie.
                  
                  
                     Sperage,
                  
                  
                     Hop-buds,
                  
                  
                     Burnet,
                  
                  
                     Borrage,
                  
                  
                     Buglos,
                  
                  
                     Time,
                  
                  
                     Myntes,
                  
                  
                     Ysop,
                  
               
               
                  But in winter.
                  
                     Balme,
                  
                  
                     Bi
                           •
                        taine,
                  
                  
                     Time,
                  
                  
                     Marigolde,
                  
                  
                     Isoppe,
                  
                  
                     Marioram,
                  
                  
                     Mynts and rue are good,
                  
               
               
                  For your sallets, take
                  
                     Pimpernell,
                  
                  
                     Purslane,
                  
                  
                     Myntes,
                  
                  
                     Sorrell,
                  
                  
                     Horehounde,
                  
                  
                     Yong cole,
                  
                  
                     Hop-buds,
                  
                  
                     Sperage,
                  
                  
                     Time,
                  
                  
                     Tops of fennell
                  
                  
                     Tarregon,
                  
                  
                     Lettis,
                  
                  
                     
                     And watercresses are good.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Capers.
                  Capers are greatly commended being preserued in Uinegar, and eaten with a little Oyle and Uinegar, and so are Oliues very good also.
               For your sauce, the Iuice of a Lymon Citron or Orrenge is best,
                     Sauce.
                   the Iuice of Sorrell and Uineger is also good.
               All rawe fruites are to be refused, except those which tend to a sowre tast,
                     Fruites.
                   as Pomgarnards, dammaske Prunes Pippins, red and sowre Cherries, and Walenuts, Quinches and Peares, preserued are verye good eaten after meales.
               
                  
                     Pulse.
                  All kinde of pulse is to be refused, as Beanes, Pease, and such like, because they encrease winde and make rawe humors and ill Iuice in the body.
               Refraine from Garlike, Onyons, Leékes, Pepper, Musterd, and Rocket, because they doe ouer heate the body, make adustion of the bloud, and cause fumes to ascend into the head.
               Cheése is not good because it doth engender grosse & thick humors.
                     Milke and Cheese.
                   Mylke is also to be refused because it doth quickly corrupt in the stomacke.
            
            
               Cap. 10. Sheweth what exercise and order is to be kept.
               
                  YOu must beware of all vehement and immoderate exercise, which doth prouoke sweate, as is tennis, dancing, leaping, running, footeball, hurling, and such like: because they doe ouermuch heate the body, and open the pores of respiration, whereby the enfected ayre hath the more scope to enter our bodyes, but moderate exercise is very conuenient,
                     Whote houses
                   the vse of whote houses at this time, I thinke very

dangerous because it doth too much open the pores.
               Walke not into the open ayre in the morning, before the sonne hath had some power to cleanse and cleare the same, and in any case goe not abroad when great fogs and mystes are vpon the earth for it is dangerous: but if vrgent occasions moue you:
                     Walking.
                   then before you goe forth of your doores beé sure to eate some preseruatiue first, & then take some good and Odoriferous pomander, Nodule, or Nosegaye in your hand, as before is shewed you. The extreame heate of the daye is likewise to be refused to walke in, because it chafeth the bloud: as also in the euening after the sunne is set, for then vnsauery and vnwholesome Fogs arise out of the earth: and in any case if you can auoyde it come not neére any place infected, but vse to walke in the open ayre and drie grounde.
               Use Venus combates moderatly, but none at all were better the best time to vse them is threé or foure houres after supper, before you sleépe, and then rest vpon them.
               Beware of anger, feare, and pensiuenes of the minde, for by their meanes the body is made more apt to receiue the infection.
               Use pleasant and merry recreations, either with musicke, pleasant company to talke with all, or reading some good bookes.
               Beware of sleéping at noone, but specially in the winter season, but in sommer, to take after dinner a nappe of halfe an houre, or an houre is tollerable in elderly bodies.
               Watch not long in the euenings but two or threé houres after supper is a good time to take your rest.
            
            
               Cap. 11. Teacheth what orders magistrates and rulers of Citties and townes shoulde cause to be obserued.
               
                  
                  
                  FIrst, to command that no stincking doongh
                     ••
                  s be suffered neere the Cittie.
               
                   Euery euening and morning in whot weather to cause colde water to be cast in the streétes, especially where the infection is, and euery day to cause the streets to be kept cleane and sweete, and clensed from all filthie thinges which lye in the same.
               
                   And whereas the infection is entred, there to cause fires to be made in the streetes euery morning and euening, and if some frankincense, pitche, or some other sweete thing be burnt therein, it wilbe much the better.
               
                   Suffer not any dogs, cattes, or pigs, to runne about the streetes, for they are very dangerous, and apt to carry the infection from place to place.
               
                   Command that the excrements and filthy things which are voyded from the infected places, be not cast into the streetes or ryuers which are dayly in vse to make drinke, or dresse meate,
               
                   That no Chirurgions, or barbers, which vse to let bloud, doe cast the same into the streétes or ryuers.
               
                   That no vautes or preuies, be then empted, for it is a most dangerous thing.
               
                   That all Inholders, doe euery day make cleane their stables, and cause the doong and filth therein to be carryed away out of the Cittie: for by suffering it in their houses as some doe vse to doe, a whole weeke or fortnight, it doth so putrifie, that when it is remoued, there is such a stincking sauour and vnwholsome smel, as is able to enfect the whole streete where it is,
               
                   To commande that no hempe or flare be kept in water neere the Cittie or towne, for that will cause a very dangerous and infectious sauour.
               
                   To haue a speciall care that good and wholsome victuals and Corne, be solde in the markets, and so to prouide that no want thereof be in the Cittie, and for such as haue not

wherewithall to buy necessary foode, that there to extende their charitable and godly deuotion: for there is nothing that will more encrease the plague, then want & scarsitie of necessary foode.
               To commande that all those which doe visit and attende  the sicke, as also all those which haue the sicknes on them, and doe walke abroad: that they doe carry some thing in their handes, thereby to be knowne from other people. And here I must aduertise you of one thing more which I had almost forgotten (which is) that when the infection is but in fewe places, there to keépe all the people in their houses, not suffering any one of them to goe abroad, and so to prouide, that all such necessaries as they shall neéde may beé brought vnto them during the time of their visitation:
                     A good cau
                           •
                        at.
                   and when it is staide, then to cause all the clothes, bedding, and other such thinges as were vsed about the sicke, to be all burnt, although at the charge of the rest of the inhabitants, you buy them all newe, for feare least the danger which may ensue thereby, doe put you to a farre greater charge and griefe: all these foresaide thinges are most dangerous, and may cause a generall infection, to the distroying of a whole Cittie, and therefore doe wish that great care be had therof.
            
            
               Cap. 12. Doth shewe what you must doe when you goe to visit the sicke.
               
                  FIrst before you enter into the house, commande that a great fire be made in the chamber where the sicke lieth, and that some Odoriferous perfume be burnt in the middest of the chamber, and before you go to him, eate some Cordiall preseruatiue, and smother your clothes with some sweéte perfume, then wet your temples, eares, nose, and mouth, with Rose water

& Ui
                     •
                  egar, mixt together, then 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  e in your mouth a p
                     ••
                  ce of the roote of Angelica, the rynde of a sowre Citron, or a Cloue, prepared as before is shewed, and haue some Nosegaye, Nodule, or Pomander, appropriat, in your hand, which you must alwaies smell vnto, so may you the more boldlier performe your entent: but herewithall you must haue a speciall care, that during the time you are with the sicke, you stande not betwixt the sicke body and the fire, for that is dangerous, because that the fire of his nature draweth all vapors vnto it selfe,
                     A good caueat for Chirurgions and Barber.
                   but keépe you alwaies on the contrary side, so as the sicke may be betwixt you and the fire and for such as are to let any sicke infected body to bleéde, yt were good they did cause the keper of the sicke bodye, to laye open that arme or legge which is to be let bloud before he approch neére? the reason is, for that most commonly al that are sicke in this contagious disease, are for the moste part in a sweat, and therefore soddenly to receiue the breath thereof woulde be very dangerous.
               Now when you haue bene with any one so infected. Before you goe into the company of any whole and sounde people,
                     VVhat we must do when we haue bene with the sicke.
                   it were necessary you doe stande by a good fire hauing all the clothes about you which you did weare when you were with the sicke, and then turne and ayre your selfe well thereby, so shall you be sure the lesse to endanger others by your company. Thus haue I as briefly as I can deuise set downe all the ordinary meanes which my selfe haue vsed, and by others knowne to be vsed, for preseruing you from this contagious and dangerous disease, which in the most part of people will suffice, but for such as dwell whereas they may haue the counsell of a learned Physition, I do wish them to take his aduise, specially for purging and letting bloud, because none can so exactly set downe in writing the perfect course thereof (which may be vnderstoode rightly of the common sorte) so well as he which hath the sight of the body: for that many bodyes are often times troubled with

some one humor abounding more then another, which here to treat of would bee too tedious, neither can it proffit the common people, for whose sakes I haue taken this paynes: and nowe wil I shew the signes to know when one is infected therewith, as also which are the laudable signes and which are the contrary, and lastly the meanes (by God his assistance) how for to cure the same.
            
            
               Cap. 13. Sheweth the signes of infection.
               
                  THe signes and tokens hereof are diuers, as first it is perceiued by the soddaine weakenes, loosing, & ouerthrowing of our natural strength without any manyfest cause therof going before and sometimes it doth begin with a gnawing and byting in the mouth of the stomacke, the pulse will grow weake, feble, and vnequall, with a great straightnes and heauines about the harte, as if some heauie burthen or waight were layde thereon, with shortnes of breathing, vomiting, or at least a great desire to vomit, great paine in the head: insatiable thirst, proceéding of their great interior heat: sluggishnes, and vniuersall fayntnes of all the body, with a great desire to sleépe, and an astonishment of the minde and vitall spirites: and for the most parte, they complaine of a great payne which is felte in some one place or places of their bodies, where the botch or blaine is by nature intended to be thrust forth, yet some at the first haue them appearing: and for the most part, they are taken at the first with a sharp and rigorous feauer.
               
                  Good signes.
                  When the botch or carbunkle commeth out in the beginning of the sicknes, with a red colour, and yellowish round

about it, and that it doth quickly come to maturation, the feauer to cease, and the partie findeth himselfe eased of his griefe, and quickned in his spirites, these are good and laudable signes of recouer.
               
               
                  Euill signes.
                  When the botch at the first commeth out blackish, or blacke in colour, also when the botch is opened, the flesh within doth looke blewe, and that then there appeare not any matter or quitture in the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , but as it were a spume or froth issuing out thereof, are ill and deadly signes.
                  When the botch waxeth so hard that by no meanes it will come to suppuration, but resisteth whatsoeuer is done vnto it for the farthering thereof, and so returneth in againe into the inwarde partes soddenly, is a token of soddaine death at hand, and so is it yf either before or after it is broken it looke of a blewish colour, or of diuers colours like the raynbow round about it.
                  
                     
                        Carbunckle.
                     When the carbunckle or blaine doth soddenly drye vp, as if it were scorcht with the fire, and that the place rounde about it doth shew to be of a wannish blew colour, is a deadly signe, if in the skinne appeare greéne or blacke spottes, the excrements of dyuers colours with wormes in it, either dead or liuing, hauing a vile stincking sauour, and spitteth stinking and bloudy matter, doth betoken death.
                  When the sicke complaines of great and extreame heat in the inward partes, and yet colde outwardly, the eyes staring or weéping, the face terrible, the sayde excrements, or vrin passing awaye and the partie not knowing thereof, are euill signes.
                  When in the fourth or seuenth day, they are taken with a frensie or doe fall into an extreame bleéding at the nose, or haue a great flyre, with a continuall vomitting, or a desire to vomit and doe it not, extreame paine at the hart, watchfulnes,

and the strength cleane gone, are deadly signes.
                  When the partie being very sicke,
                        Infallible signes of death
                      yet saith he feéleth him selfe well, his eyes sunke deépe into his head, and full of teares, when he seémes all thinges doth stincke, his nayles looking blew the nose sharpe, & growing as it were crooked the breath thick and short, with a colde sweat in the brest and face, and turning and playing with the clothes, the pulse creéping or s
                        •
                     arsly to bee felte, and greéuous vnto him to speake, these are infallible signes of death at hand.
                  Some before any of these signes are perceiued doe dye,
                        The vncertinty of the plague.
                      and some likewise which haue diuers of them appearing, and yet doe escape, such is the vncertentie of this disease: there are many other symptomes which doe happen in this contagious disease, which would be too tedious to declare them all, but these as the cheifest haue I made choyse of, which may suffise you.
               
            
            The ende of the first Treatise.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND TREAtise shewing the meanes how to Cure the plague.
            
               Cap. 1.
               
                  WHen we perceiue any to bee infected with this cōtagious disease, we must with all possible speéde seéke all the meanes we can how to preuent the malignitie thereof, whose propertie is at the first, to assalte the principall parte which is the hart, and therfore requires present helpe:
                     Seeke for helpe in time.
                   for vnlesse some thing bee doone within eight, or foure and twentie houres, little will it then preuaile to attempt it, for by that time nature is either subdued and cleane ouerthrowne, or els hath thrust the same to the exterior partes, or otherwise digested it: yet may we not neglect at any time to vse all the meanes we can in helping and farthering of nature to the vttermost of our endeuour, because we doe often times seé nature so wearied and weakned in expelling of this venemous matter, that vnlesse some helpe be added to assist and comfort her, the partie for lacke thereof dyeth, which otherwise might be saued, for I haue oftē times seéne by dilligent helping of nature, that to be effected and brought to good

passe which I haue iudged most desperate. There are foure intentions required for the curing thereof: that is by bloud letting, Cordials, sweat and purging: but the manner how to excecute the same great contention hath beene both amongst the olde and later writers,4. Intentions to cure the plague.
                   which here to treate of were too tedious, for vnto the learned it were needlesse, and for the communaltie, little would it preuaile them, therfore in breéfe sorte will I shew you, what I haue obserued touching the cure.
               First if it be in a plethoricke, sanguine,
                     VVho is to be
                           •
                         let bloud.
                   and strong body and hath paine in the head, great heat at the hart, thirstie, the pulse strong and labouring or beating strongly, and hath great and large vaines appearing: these ought presently to be let bloud, in that side where yeé perceiue the griefe doth proffer it selfe to come forth and not visibly appearing, tending to maturation. For then we may not drawe bloud but vse all other meanes we can deuise in helping nature to expell it, neither may you draw bloud,
                     VVhere a flixe is▪ drawe not bloud.
                   if the partie haue a flixe or laske (which is an euill signe) in the beginning of the disease, for by that meanes you shall hinder nature greatly, but onely giue the partie Cordials; neither may you stop the flixe, in the beginning, but if it be extreame and that it stay not the second day, then must you giue some purgatiō which may leaue an asstringencie behinde it, as hereafter in the cure of the flixe shalbe shewed. For as Hypocrates in his first booke, and one and twentie aphorisme doth admonish vs, we must consider and marke how nature doth encline her selfe, for that will teach vs what we are to doe.
               Now if you perceiue the botch or carbunkle to appeare vnderneth the chinne about the throte,
                     Botch in the throte to cure it.
                   then presently drawe bloud in both vaines vnder the tongue, and immediatly after that apply a cupping glasse with scarification i
                     •
                   one side of the necke next vnto the sore,
                     Chickens how to apply them.
                   thereby to draw it from the throte, for feare least soddenly it chooke him vp, and then apply Chickens rumps, or Hens rumps to the botch, the feathers

being f
                     •
                  rst pluckt away from the rump, and a grayne of Salte p
                     ••
                   
                  
                     ••
                  to the 
                     ••
                  well, and so ho
                     •
                  de the bare place to the greife 
                     〈◊〉
                   the chicken d
                     •
                  ie, which wilbe within halfe an houre and then apply another, & so continue in changing them so long as they do d
                     •
                  ye, and lastly apply a mollificatiue cataplasme or plaster to the same place: as in the fift chapter following is shewed, which is made with Unguentum basillicon,
                     Botch in the necke.
                   and to the botch apply the Epithemation and cataplasme in the seuenth chapter following. But if it be in the neck
                     •
                   he doth cōplaine, then let him bloud in ye Cephallica vaine in the arme, of the same side where he complayneth
               
                  
                     Botch in the stomacke.
                  If in the greynd or f
                     •
                  ancke he doe complaine, then let him bloud in the foote on the same side, and open the vaine called Maleola, or Saphena, the quantitie must be according as the age and strength of the partie requireth, but at most draw not aboue sixe or eight ounces. For Auicen willeth vs to preserue bloud as the treasure of nature:
               
                  
                     VVeake and spare bodies may not bleed.
                  But in a weake, spare, and cachochimious body, (as Galen teacheth vs) we may not draw bloud at all, for thereby should you greatly endanger the patience, but helpe such by cordials and sweate.
               And here you shall vnderstand that vnlesse Phlebetomy be done at the first,
                     VVhen bloud is to be drawn.
                   that is with in sixe or eight houres at most, it wilbe too late to attempt it, neither may you doe it, if the sore doe appeare vp in 
                     •
                  ight ten
                     •
                  ing to suppuration, for th
                     •
                  n shoulde you hinder na
                     ••
                  re, which like a diligent workeman ha
                     •
                  h discharged and thru
                     ••
                   forth that venimous matter which otherwise woulde haue kilde vs.
               
                  
                     A good caueat.
                  And here touching Phlebetomy or bloud letting, you must haue this speciall care, that you drawe not bloud on the opposit side, as if it b
                     •
                   on the le
                     ••
                   side the sore appeare, then draw not 
                     •
                  loud on the right side, if it appeare in the flancke then drawe not bloud in the arme but in the foote: for otherwise you shal draw t
                     •
                  at venimous matter from the ignoble

vnto the noble partes, and so kill the body.
               And although the partie complaine not more in the one side then the other,
                     A good obse
                           •
                        
                        uation.
                   yet by the pulse shall you perceiue on which side the venem lyeth hidden: for on that side where nature is opprest, there shall you finde the pulse more weake feéble, and vneuen, greatly differing from the other side.
               And here you shall vnderstand that in some it hath bene seéne that nature of it selfe at the first,
                     Note.
                   hath thru
                     ••
                   out that venimous matter in some place of ye body, with a botch appearing high and tending to suppuration, or a carbunckle, or spots called purples. Now here, if you draw bloud, you do then greatly endanger the body: but in this case you must only giue Cordials, and vse all the meanes you can to bring it outwarde, either by maturation or euaporation, as hereafter shalbe shewed you.
               And here you shall farther vnderstand, that where the age, constitution, nor strength of the partie will permit that Phlebetomy be done, yet for the better helpe of nature you must apply Uentoses, with resonable deepe scarification, vnto the next place adioyning,
                     Ventoses whe
                           •
                         and where to applie them.
                   where the partie complayneth therby the more speédily to draw the venimous matter vnto the super
                     ••
                  ciall partes, and there to applie the rumps of Chickens as before is taught you, and so applie to the place some strong maturatiue and attractiue plaster or Cataplasme as hereafter shalbe shewed you. If the greife be in the head or throte then applie Uentoses to the necke, if it be in the emunctuaries of the harte, then applie them to the shoulders: if in the emunctuaries of the liuer, then applie them, to the buttockes or thies, now when this is done, either by Phlebetomy or Uentoses, then within an houre or two at the most after it, yo
                     •
                   must giue the sicke some good Cordiall medicine, which hath power to comfort the harte, resist the venimous matter, and also procure sweat, which here following you maye make choyse, as you list.
               
                  
                  An excellent good pouder to expell the plague and prouoketh sweat.
                  Take.

                        Rootes of Gentian, Bittaine, Petasitis, of either one dramme.
                        Roots of Tormentil Dittander, of either three drammes.
                        Red sanders, halfe a dramme,
                        Fine Pearle, and been of both sor
                              •
                           es, of either one scruple.
                        Fine Bolarmoniack prepard. fine Terra sigillata, of either sixe drammes.
                        Rindes of Citrons, Red Correll, Roots of Zedoiar, Shauing of Ebory, bone of a Stagges harte. of either sixtene graines.
                        Fragments of the 5. pretious stones, of either halfe a scruple.
                        Shauing of a Vnicorns horne, Succini, of either halfe a scruple.
                        Leaues of Golde and Siluer. of either one and halfe in number.
                     
                  
                  
                     Make all these in fine pouder, euery one seuerall by him selfe, and then mixe them all together, and giue thereof one

dramme, or foure scruples, more or lesse as occasion requi
                           •
                        reth, either in Sorrell, Scabios, or Cardus benedictus water, two or threé ounces,
                     Bolarmoniake how for to prepare it. 
                     whereunto you must adde a little syrrop of Lymons, or sowre Citrons, & giue it warme, the Bolarmoniake must bee pounded small, then washt in Scabios water and so dried.
                  
               
               
                  An other good pouder.
                  Take. 

                        
                           
                              Leaues of Dittander called dictami cretici,
                              Roots of Tormentil,
                              Bittaine,
                              Pimpernell,
                              Gentian,
                              Zedoair,
                              Terra lemnia,
                              Alloes Cicatrin,
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 ine Myrre,
                              Rindes of sowre Citrons,
                            of either one dramme
                        
                           
                              Masticke,
                              Saffron,
                            of either halfe a dramme.
                        Bolarmoniacke prepared as beforesaide. two drammes.
                     
                  
                  
                     All these must be made in fine pouder, and so mixt together, you may giue two scruples or one dramme thereof with any of the foresaide waters.
                  
               
               
                  A good Opiat to expell venem and prouoke sweat.
                  Take. 
                        
                        Cōserue of the flowers of Borrage, Buglos, Violets, Bittaine, of either two ounces.
                        Vennes Triacle, two ounces.
                        Red Terra sigillata, Terra lemnia, Mitridat, of either one ounce.
                        Shauing of Eburni, And hartes horne, Orient Perles, Roots of Tormentill, of either one dramme.
                        Shauing of vnicorns horne, Roote of Angelica, of either halfe a dramme.
                        Syrop, of the Iuice of small Sorell and Buglos, of either so much as shall suffice.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mixe all these together, in the forme of an Opiat, then take of the same Opiat, one dramme and halfe.
                  
                  
                     Scabios water, Balme water, of either two ounces.
                  
                  
                     Dissolue the Opiat in the waters, and drinke it warme, then walke a little vpon it, and then goe to bed and sweate,
                  
               
               
                  An other excellent good meanes to expell the venem, and procure. sweate.
                  
                     Take a great white Onion, and picke out the coare or myddell of him, then fill the hole with good Uennes triacle or Andromachus triacle, and Aqua vite, then stop or couer the hole of the Onyon againe, and rost him in the whote ashes vntill he be soft, then straine it strongly, thorow a cloth and giue it the sicke to drinke and the rest that remaines pounde it small, and applie it to the soare, and sweate vpon it.
                  Now when he hath tak
                        •
                     n any of the foresaid Cordials if he chaunce to vomit it vp againe,
                        In vomiting what is to be done.
                      then wash his mouth with Rose water and Uinegar, and then giue him more of the same againe, which must be proportioned according to the quantitie vomited, for if all were vomited, then giue so much more: (if lesse) then according to the quantitie vomyted, and if he vomit that also, then giue him more, and so continue it to the third or fourth time if cause so require, but if at no time he doe retaine it, then is there small hope of recouer: I haue knowne dyuers which haue vomyted their Cordials threé or foure times, and at laste, giuing the Iuice of the Onyon as aforesaide hath kept that, and sweate vpon it and so couer their sicknes.
                  Also Minardus triacle, or Andromachus triacle being taken two scruples with one scruple of Dioscordium, and dissolued in threé or two ounces of this water following or Cardus benedictus, Sorrell, and Scabios water, hath bene found excellent good and auailable, both to procure sweat and expell the venimous matter.
               
               
                  An excellent good water against the plague, and diuers other diseases, which is to be made in May or Iune.
                  Take. 
                        
                           
                              
                                 Angelica,
                              
                              
                                 Dragons,
                              
                              
                                 Scabios,
                              
                            of either three handfuls.
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                 Wormwoode,
                              
                              
                                 Sage,
                              
                              
                                 Sallendine,
                              
                              
                                 Mugworte,
                              
                              
                                 Rue,
                              
                              
                                 Rosmarie,
                              
                              
                                 Varueyne,
                              
                              
                                 Endiue,
                              
                              
                                 Myntes,
                              
                            of either one handfull.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Tormentill,
                              
                              
                                 Pimpernell,
                              
                              
                                 Agremonie,
                              
                              
                                 Bittayne,
                              
                            of either two handfuls.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Sen Iohns worte
                              
                              
                                 Fetherfewe,
                              
                              
                                 and Pionie,
                              
                            of either a little handfull.
                     
                  
                  You must mixe al these herbes together, then bruse them in a stone morter grosly, then put them into a cleane vessel of glase or earth, and adde thereto a pottle of White wine, or threé quartes, a pinte of Rose water, and a pinte of Uinegar: then mixe them well together and presse downe the herbes close together with your handes, then stop the pot close, and so let it stande to infuse two dayes and two nights then distill it in a stillytorie, this water hath bene found excellent good, both to preserue one from the plague being dronke threé or foure sponefuls of it in the morning fasting, as also to expell the disease, being dronke with any of the Cordials aforesaide.
               
            
            
               Cap 2. Sheweth what is to be done after taking of the Cordial.
               
                  
                  NOw so soone as the partie hath taken his Cordiall, (if he be able) cause him to walke vpon it in his chamber a pretie while, then laye him into his naked bed, being first warmed, if it be in colde weather: and so procure him to sweate, but in any case haue a speciall care to keépe him from sleépe all that day, because thereby the bloud and vitall spirites are drawne to the inward partes, and there doth holde in the venemous matter about the harte, but if the sore appeare, or be perceiued to present it selfe in any place neére the harte: then to defend the malignitie thereof, before he sweate it were good to annoynt the place betwixt the region of the hart and the sore with triacle, or with this vnguent following.
               
                  A good defensatiue vnguent.
                  
                     
                        Take. Triacle, halfe an ounce.
                     
                     
                        Take. Terra lemnia, Red Sanders, of either one dramme.
                     
                  
                  Mixe them together with a little Rose water and Uinegar in a morter, to the forme of an vnguent and so vse it as aforesaide.
                  And vnto the sore place applie Chickens rumpes, as before hath bene tolde you, and then annoynt the place grieued with Oyle of lillyes: and then Epithemat the hart with any one of these Epithemations following.
               
               
                  Epithemation.
                  Take. 

                        
                           The pouder of Diamargaritu ̄Frigidum one scruple,
                        
                        
                           
                           Triasandalum, sixe drammes▪
                           
                        
                        
                           Ebeni, two drammes.
                        
                        
                           Saffron, halfe a scruple.
                        
                        
                           Lettis seede, one dramme.
                        
                        
                           Waters of roses, Buglos, and Sorrell, of either sixe ounces.
                        
                        
                           Vinegar, two ounces.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle them all together a little.
               
               
                  An other
                  Take. 

                        
                           The waters of Roses, Balme, Buglos, Cardus benedictus and White wine, of either foure ounces.
                        
                        
                           Vinegar of roses two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Pouder of red roses, Cinamon, Triasandalum, Diamargaritum, Frigidum, of either halfe a dramme.
                        
                        
                           Mitridatum, one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Triacle, halfe an ounce.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle them together a little, and being bloud warme, Epithemat the hart therewith, which being done then procure him to sweate, and after sw
                        •
                     ate, and the body dried

then applie this quickly to the harte.
               
               
                  A quilte for the harte.
                  Take. 

                        
                           The floures of Nenuphare Borrage, Buglos, of either a little handfull
                        
                        
                           Flowres of Balme, Rosmary, of either three drammes.
                        
                        
                           Red sanders, Red Corrall, Lignum alloes, Rinde of a Citron, Seedes of Basil, Citrons, of either one dramme.
                        
                        
                           Leaues of dittāder, Berries of Iuniper, of either one scruple.
                        
                        
                           Bone of a stags hart, halfe a scruple.
                        
                        
                           Saffron, foure graines.
                        
                     
                  
                  Make all these in grose pouder and put them in a bagge of Crimson taffatie, or Lincloth, and lay it to the hart,
                        VVhen you must procur
                              •
                            sweate.
                      and there let it remaine. All these thinges being done then procure him to sweate, hauing a good fire in the chamber and windowes close shut, and so let him sweate threé or foure houres, more or lesse or according as the strength of the sicke body can endure, and then drie the body well with warme clothes, taking great care that the sicke catch not colde in the doing thereof▪ and then giue him some of this 
                        •
                     ulep following, and applie the foresaide quilte or bagge to the harte.
               
               
                  
                  A cordiall Iulep.
                  Take. 

                        
                           Waters of Endiue, Purslane, and Roses, of either two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Sorrell water, halfe a pinte,
                        
                        
                           Iuyce of Pomgarnards, and for lacke thereof Vinegar, foure ounces.
                        
                        
                           Camphire, three drammes.
                        
                        
                           Sugar, one pounde.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle all these together in the forme of a Iulep▪ and giue threé or foure sponefuls thereof, at a time.
               
               
                  An other Iulep.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Syrrop of Ribes Sorrell, Nenuphare, of either one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Iuice of limons, one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Sorrell water, eight ounces.
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe all these together, and take two or threé sponefuls thereof often times, which will both comforte the hart and quench thirst.
                  And if in the time of his sweate he be very thirstie, then may you giue him to drinke a Tysane made with water,
                        Thirst to quench it.
                      cleane Barly, and Lycoris scrapt cleane and brused, boyle them together, then straine it, and vnto a quarte of the licquor ad threé ounces of syrrop of Lymons, and giue thereof at any time, small beére or ale is also tollerable, or you may giue a sponefull of this Iulep following at any time.
               
               
                  
                  A Iulep to quench thirst.
                  
                     
                        Take. Sorrell water, foure ounces.
                     
                     
                        Take. Borrage water, Scabios water, Sirrop of lymons, and sowre Citrons, of either one ounce.
                     
                  
                  Mixe all these together and so vse it as occasion requireth at any time:
                        Fainting o
                              •
                            sounding to helpe it.
                      and giue often times a cake of Manus christi, made with Perles, for him to eate. But if in the time of his sweate, you seé the sicke to fainte or sowne, then apply to his temples, and the region of the harte, this mixture following.
                  
                     
                        Take. Conserue of Roses. Borrage, Buglos, Broome floures, of either one ounce.
                     
                     
                        Take. Mitridatum, foure ounces.
                     
                     
                        Take. Triacle, one ounce.
                     
                     
                        Take. Floures of violets Pellamountaine, Red roses, of either one dramme,
                     
                     
                        Take. Roots of Irrios, one dramme.
                     
                     
                        Take. Muske, Siuet, of either eight graines.
                     
                  
                  Mixe all these together with a quantitie of rose Uinegar in the forme of an Opiat, this must be spread on playsters, and applied, to the harte and temples, and to the soules of

the feéte applie this playster following.
                  Take of the foresaide Opiat two ounces, vnto the which you must put so much more of an Onyon,
                        Playster for the feete.
                      which must haue the middle parte thereof taken out, and the hole filde with Mitridat, and Aqua vite, and so rosted in the ashes, and then mixe it with the Opiat, and applie it to both soales of the feéte.
                  Now when all this is done, and that one houre is past after his sweate and body dried as aforesaide: it were good you did giue the sicke some good cōfortable broth, although he vomit it vp againe, then let him rest two houres, and then offer him more, which you must doe often times, and but little at a time.
                  And if after all this done hee continue still weake and fainte, without any amendment, then giue him an other Cordiall, as yeé did at the first and so cause him to sweate againe so long as his strength can well endure it, and after sweate, giue more of the Iulep aforesaide, for by this meanes you shall often times seé the sore which did offer it selfe to come forth will be cleane discussed and consumed away: but if it doe not by this meanes goe away, then vse al the meanes you can to bring it vnto Suppuration and then open it with some causticke, or insition, as hereafter shalbe shewed you at large.
                  
                     
                        Sleepe when it is tollerable.
                     The next day after his sweate, you may tollerate him to sleépe one houre or two in the forenoone, whereby to preuent payne, or lightnes of the head which may chaunce through want thereof: and if after his sleépe, the partie be sicke and faynte, then immediatly giue him some good Cordiall, according as the state of his body requireth,
                        Faintnes after sleepe.
                      either in temporat or extreame heate, as before is shewed: and in one houre after that giue some comfortable broth made with Ueale, Mutton, Chicken, or such like: wherein some borrage Buglos, Pimper
                        •
                     ell, and a little Isop, with some Parsley

rootes the inner pith taken out, must be boylde, whereof hee must take a little at a time, threé or foure times a day, and betwixt times in taking of his broth, giue him threé or foure sponefuls of this Iulep following, which doth resist vennenositie from the harte, and also quench thirst.
               
               
                  A Iulep to quench thirst and resist vennenositie.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Water of Scabios, Borrage, Sorrell, of either two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Sirrop of Limons Sowre Citrons, and the Iuice of Sorrell, of either one ounce.
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe all these together, and giue thereof, as cause requireth.
                  Then at night he may sleépe threé or foure houres more,
                        You may not Purge till the third or fourth day.
                      and the next day, being the third or fourth day of his accubet, you may purge him with one of the purgations here following, but in any case you must take heéde that you do not purge with any strong, or Scamniat medicine, because it may bring an extreame flixe which wilbe most dangerous because it will ouermuch weaken the body and hinder concoction, for most commonly in this disease the body of it self is subiecte to flixes.
               
               
                  A good Purgation in a strong bodie
                  ℞ 
                        
                        Rad, Cichoriae, ʒ.iiij.
                        Rad, petasitis, ʒ.ss.
                         
                           
                              Fol. Scabiosae.
                              Card. b.
                              Pimpinellae,
                              Acetosae,
                            ana. M. j.
                        Florum, Cord. P. j.
                        Prunorum dāmas no. x.
                        Sem. Coriandri. ʒ. ss.
                        Aqua font. ℥. ix.
                     
                  
                  
                     Boyle them vntill a third parte be consumed, then strayne it.
                  
                  ℞ 

                        Decoct. col. ℥. iiij.
                        Fol. Senuae. ʒ. iij.
                        Rhab. elect. ʒ. iiij.
                        Spikj. G. iij.
                     
                  
                  
                     Infuse them together twelue houres then straine it strongly, and adde thereto these thinges.
                  
                  
                     Syr. de Cichoria. cum Rhab. ʒ.vj.
                     Oxisacchari. Simp. ʒ. ij.
                  
                  
                     Mixe them altogether and drinke it in the morning refraining from meate, drinke, and sleépe, threé houres after and then eate some good broth.
                  
               
               
                  An other in a plethoricke and full body.
                  ℞ 

                          
                           
                              Fol. Scabiosae.
                               Buglossae.
                               Card. b.
                            ana. M. j.
                        
                            Florum Cord. P. j.
                        Rad. Tormentillae, ʒ. iij.
                        Rad. Fenic, ana. ʒ. iiij.
                        Cichonae, ana. ʒ. iiij.
                        Passularum enucleat. ℥. j.
                        Prunorum dammas, no. vj.
                        
                           
                              Sem. anisi,
                              Coriandri,
                              Oxialidis.
                            ana. ℈. j.
                        
                           
                              Sennae,
                              Polipod. q.
                            ana. ℥. j.
                     
                  
                  
                     Boyle all these in a sufficient quantitie of water, vntill halfe the water be consumed, then straine it, and keépe it.
                  
                  ℞ 
                        Rhab. elect. ʒ. ij.
                        Agarici, tros. ʒ. j.
                        Croci. ℈. ss.
                        
                           
                              Aquarum scabiosae,
                              Borraginis,
                              Card. b.
                            ana. ʒ. iiij.
                     
                  
                  
                     Infuse these together twelue houres in a warme place, then straine them strongly: and adde thereto.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Syr. ros. lax.
                           Mannae Calabriae,
                         ana. ℥. j.
                     Decoct. col. ℥. ij. vel. ℥. iij.
                  
                  
                     Mixe all these together, and take it as the other before.
                  
               
               
                  A good Purgation for a weake body.
                  
                     
                     
                        ℞ Fol. sennae, ʒ. iij.
                     
                     
                        ℞ Rhab elect, ʒ. j.
                     
                     
                        ℞ Sem, anisi, ʒ. ss.
                     
                     
                        ℞ Schenanthi, ℈. ss.
                     
                     
                        ℞ Aqua Acetosae, ℥. v.
                     
                  
                  Boyle them a little, then take it from the fire, and let them stand infused together twelue houres then straine it out strongly, and adde thereto.
                  
                     
                        Syr. ros. lax. ℥. j,
                     
                  
                  And then drinke it as the other before.
               
               
                  An other gentle Purgation.
                  ℞ 
                        
                           
                              
                                 Aquarum scabiosae,
                              
                              
                                 Card. b.
                              
                              
                                 Aqua ad pestem,
                              
                            ana. ℥. j.
                        
                           Rhab elect, ʒ. ij. ss.
                        
                        
                           Cinamomi, ʒ. ss.
                        
                     
                  
                  Infuse them together twelue houres, and straine the
                        •
                      strongly, then adde to the strayning.
                  
                     
                        Syr, ros, lax, ℥. j.
                     
                     
                        Syr, de limonibus, ʒ. iiij.
                     
                  
                  Mixe them together and so drinke it as the other before, you may either adde, or diminish of the Rubarbe vnto any of these potions as you 
                        ••
                     st.
                  
                     
                        After purgi
                              •
                           g giue a Co
                              •
                           dial.
                     Now when you seé the Purgation hath done working, then giue the sicke some Cordiall thing, as hereafter followeth, which hee must also take the next morning following.
               
               
                  
                  A good Cordiall to be taken after Purging.
                  ℞ 
                        Conserua Borrag, Buglos, Mali Citri, ana. ʒ. iiij.
                        Confect Alkermis, ʒ. j.
                        Boli, Veri, ʒ. ss.
                        Specierū diarhod abb, ℈. ij.
                        Diamarga, frigid, ʒ. j.
                        Manus ch
                              •
                           isti perlati, ℥. j.
                        Syr, de lymon, ʒ. iiij.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mixe all these together, and giue the sicke thereof so much as a chestnut at a time, you must often times eate thereof, if the sicke be in no great heate.
                  
               
               
                  An other good Cordiall to be giuen where great heate is.
                  
                     ℞ Conseruae Borag, ʒ. iiij.
                     ℞ Conseruae fol, acetosae, ℥. j.
                     ℞ Bolarm, veri, ʒ. j.
                     ℞ Manus christi cum perlis, ℥. j,
                     ℞ Syr, de limonibus, q. 5. misse.
                  
                  
                     You must often times giue of this, where great heate is, so much as th
                           •
                        eé beanes at a time.
                  
               
               
                  A good Cordiall potion.
                  
                     ℞ Aquarum buglossae, Acetosae, ana. ℥. j.
                     ℞ Pul, diamarga, frigi, ʒ. ss.
                     
                        Take. Confectio alkermis, G. ij.
                     Take. Syr, de aceto, Citri, ℥. j. misse.
                     Take. Vel de limon, ℥. j. misse.
                  
                  
                     All this you may take after purging, as aforesaide, at any time.
                  
                  
                     Note.
                     And here you must vnderstand, that if it be in a plethoricke body full of ill humors, it were good that you purge him againe the next day.
                  
               
            
            
               Cap 3. Sheweth what Simptoms often chaunce and how to help them.
               
                  
                     FOr that in this contagious disease there are diuers dāgerous simptoms which doe oftimes chance I will here shew you good meanes, how to helpe the same.
               
               
                  For lightnes of the head through want of sleepe.
                  ℞ 
                        Hordei mund, P. j.
                        Amigd, dul, depilatum, ℥. j. ss.
                        Sem. 4. Frigid, ma, mund, ana. ℈. j.
                        Aqua font, q. 5. fiat decoctio.
                        Decoct col. l. j.
                        Syr de limombus, de Papa. ana. ℥. j. ss.
                        Sacchari perlati, ℥. j.
                     
                  
                  
                     Boyle them together a little, and then keépe it to your vse, you must often times giue two or threé sponefuls therof

to drinke, and annoynt his temples with this oyntment.
                  
               
               
                  Oyntment to prouoke sleepe.
                  ℞ 
                        
                           Vnguent, popillionis, ʒ. iiij.
                        
                        
                           Vnguent, Alabastrini, Ol, Nenuphariae misse, ana. ʒ. ij.
                        
                     
                  
                  This oyntment is not onely good to prouoke sleépe, but will also ease the payne of the head, if the place greéued beé annoynted therewith.
               
               
                  For rauing and raging.
                  Yf the partie raue, then giue him one scruple of the pouder of a hartes horne burnt, with halfe an ounce of the sirrop of Uiolets, and Lymons, and applie this sacculus following to the heade.
               
               
                  A good Sacculus for rauing and raging.
                  ℞ 
                        Florum Nenupharij, P. j.
                        Cort: Pap, ʒ. ij.
                        Santali, Rub, Citri, albi, ana. ʒ. j.
                        Florum ros. rub, P. j.
                        Florum Viol. P. ss.
                        Florum chamomil, Betonicae, ana. ʒ. j.
                     
                  
                  
                     Shread them all small, then pounde them grosly, and

quilt them in a bagge, and applie it to the head, and it will helpe you.
                  
               
               
                  Aphtham to helpe it.
                  In this contagious disease, there doth chance an vlceration of the mouth which is called Aphtham, it commeth by meanes of the great interior heate which the sicke is oppressed with, in the time of his sicknes, which if it bee not well looked vnto in time, it will greatly endanger the body, for remedy whereof vse this Gargaris.
                  
                     A good Gargaris for the mouth.
                     Take. 
                           Cleane Barley, one handfull.
                            
                              
                                 Wilde daysie leaues,
                                 Planten leaues,
                                 Strauberie leaues,
                                 Violet leaues,
                               of either one handfull.
                           Purslan seede, one scruple.
                           Quinche seede, one scruple and halfe.
                           Licqueris brused, foure drammes.
                        
                     
                     
                        Boyle all these in a sufficient quantitie of water vntill the water be halfe consumed, then straine it, and take one pinte and halfe thereof and adde thereto.
                     
                     
                        Syrrop of roses by infusion And Syrrop of dried roses, of either foure drams.
                        Diamoron, two ounces,
                     
                     
                        Mixe these together, and Gargaris and wash the mouth therewith often times, being warme, and it helpeth.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Vomitting extreamly how to helpe it.
                  If it come in the beginning of the disease, as most commonly it doth, ther is no better meanes to stay it then by giuing of Cordials and by sweating, by which meanes that Uennemous matter which is the cause thereof, is expelled and breathed out, but if after Cordials giuen, and sweate, it doth not stay, it is a very il and daugerous signe: yet what meanes I haue vsed to stay the same, I will here shew you.
                  
                     A good bagge for the stomacke.
                     Take. 
                            
                              
                                 Dried leaues of Mints,
                                 Elder,
                                 Orgaine,
                                 Wormwoode,
                                 Calaminte,
                                 Mugworte
                                 Time,
                                 Balme,
                                 Pellemountaine,
                                 Toppes of Dill,
                               of either a little handfull.
                            
                              
                                 Seeds of Cardus benedictus,
                                 Fennell,
                                 Annis,
                                 Rootes of Ciperus,
                                 Calamus aromaticus,
                               of either foure drammes.
                            
                              
                                 Nutmegs,
                                 Cloues,
                                 Mace,
                               of either halfe a dramme.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Make all these in grose pouder, then put it into a linnen bagge, wich must be made so broad and long as will couer the stomacke: then take Rose water, and strong Uinegar, of either ten sponefuls, wherein doe you dissolue one ounce of Mitridat, then must you first wet the saide bagge in two partes of cleane water and a third parte of White or Claret wine, and let him sooke therein a little while, the lyquor being first warmd on a chafer and coles, and then wet him in the Rose water and Uinegar being warme, and so applie it to the stomacke, and when he waxeth colde, warme him therein againe, and let him remaine halfe an houre in all, and then take him away, and drie the stomacke with a warme cloth, and then annoynt it with this ointment following.
                     
                     Take. 
                           Kimicall oyles of Rosmarie,
                           Take. Sage,
                           Take. Vinegar,
                           Take. Mitridat,
                         of either one dramme.
                     
                        Mixe all these together, and so vse it, and if the partie be costiue, then were it good to giue him a glister wherein dissolue two drammes of Mitridat, it is also good to applie Uentoses vnto the buttockes and thighes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Yoxe, or yexing to stay it
                  R. 
                        
                           Dill seede, two scruples and halfe.
                        
                        
                           White poppie seede Purslan seede, of either one scruple and halfe.
                        
                     
                  
                  Bruse them a little then knit them in a fine Linnen cloth and let it sooke in the drinke which he vseth, and when you

giue him drinke, wring out the bagge therein, and let him drinke it and that will stay it, also the order aforesaide to helpe vomitting, is good to stay the yoxe or yexing, but if nether of them preuaile, then wil the sicke hardly escape death.
               
               
                  Flyxe how to stop it.
                  You must first giue the patient this purgation following, which doth not onely purge away those flymie humors which is the cause thereof, but doth also leaue an astringencie behinde it.
                  ℞ 
                        
                           Rhab, elect, ʒ. iij.
                        
                        
                           Cinamomi, ℈. ij.
                        
                        
                           Aquarum, Endiuae, Borraginis, ana. ℥.ij.
                        
                     
                  
                  Infuse them together twelue houres then straine it out strongly, and adde thereto one ounce of syrrop of roses Laxatiue, and so drinke it warme refraining from meate, drink and sleépe threé houres after it: and at night when it hath done working, giue this confection following.
                  ℞ 
                        
                           Conseruae, ros, ʒ.iiij.
                        
                        
                           Dioscordij, ℈. j. ss.
                        
                        
                           Pul, diatragag, frigid, ℈. j.
                        
                        
                           Dialkermes, G.x.
                        
                        
                           Syr, de limon, ʒ. ij, misse.
                        
                     
                  
                  When you haue giuen this confection then doe you 
                        •
                     
                     pithemat the regio
                        •
                      of the harte with this Epithematiue following.
               
               
                  Epithemation for the harte
                  ℞ 
                        
                        
                           Aquarum, Buglossae, Borrag, Rosarum, Oxialidis, ana. ℥. iiij.
                        
                        
                           Troschiscorū de camphera, ℈. j.
                        
                        
                           Pul, diamargarit, frigid, ʒ. j.
                        
                        
                           Aceti alb, ℥. j.
                        
                        
                           Ossa de corde cerui, ℈. ss.
                        
                        
                           Santal, rub, Coral, rub, misse, ana. ℈. j.
                        
                     
                  
                  With this you must Epithemat the region of the harte warme, a quarter of an houre, and if by this meanes it stay not then the next day giue some of this confection following, which I haue founde excellent good for the stopping of any flixe whatsoeuer.
                  ℞ 
                        
                           Conseruae ros, sicca, ℥. i.
                        
                        
                           Pul, Rhab, troschiscat, ℈, j.
                        
                        
                           Terrae lemniae, ʒ. ss.
                        
                        
                           Lap, Hemattitis, Saug, Draco, Bolarmoni, ana. ℈. ij.
                        
                        
                           Mitridati, misse, ʒ. j.
                        
                     
                  
                  You must euery morning and euening giue two drammes hereof, and drinke some Planten water after it.
                  
                     
                        A good cauiat
                     Now here you must vnderstand, that if the flixe come in the beginning of the sicknes, and that no botch, carbunckle, nor spots appeare in the body: then in any case you maye not goe about to stop it, but suffer nature to discharge it selfe and onely helpe nature with Cordials, and Epithemations

applied to the hart, but if by the continuance thereof the patient grow very weake and faint therewith, then is it to be repressed as before is shewed, but it must be the third daye before you attempt to do it.
                  But if this flixe come,
                        VVhen aflixe is dangerous
                      when the botch or carbunkle doth appeare and tending to maturation, then is it very dangerous, for by that meanes, vennemous matter is drawne backe againe into the principall partes, and so killeth the patient.
               
            
            
               Cap. 4. Sheweth the generall cure of a botch when he appeares outwardly.
               
                  FIrst giue Cordials, and vse the defensiue before taught you in the second chapter, thereby to keépe it from the hart, and then bring it to maturation as followeth.
               
                  A good maturatiue.
                  Take a great Onyon and roast him in the ashes, then pounde him with some pouder of white Mustard seéde, and for lacke thereof some triacle, and pounde them together, and so apply it to the griefe warme, and renue it twise a day, which within threé or foure dayes at most will bring it to Suppuration.
               
               
                  An other.
                  Take. 
                        
                           White lillie rootes,
                        
                        
                           Enulacompane roots,
                        
                        
                           Scabios, & Onyons,
                        
                      of either two ounces.
                  Roast all these together in a cole leafe, or a wet paper, then pound them with some sweéte butter and a little Uennes

triacle, wherevnto doe you adde some Galbanum, and Ammoniacum dissolued in Uinegar, and straine from the fesses and dregges, and so mixe them altogether and applie it, renuing it twise a day.
               
               
                  An other, where no inflammation is.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Vnguentum basillicon, foure ounces.
                        
                        
                           Sowre Leauen, two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Oyle of lyllies Sweete Butter, of either foure drams.
                        
                        
                           Triacle, one dramme and halfe.
                        
                        
                           Yolckes of two Egges.
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe them together, and so applie it and when it is come to Suppuration then open it in the lowest part either with a potentiall causticke, or by insition, but the causticke is best, and when you haue opened it, if no matter flowe out, then applie the rumpes of Chickens to the sore as before hath bene shewed: after that put into the wounde a digestiue as followeth.
               
               
                  A digestiue.
                  Take. 
                        
                           The yolcke of an Egge,
                        
                        
                           Cleare Turpentine, foure drammes.
                        
                        
                           Clarefied Honny, two drammes.
                        
                        
                           Mitridat, or Triacle, halfe a dramme.
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe all these together, and vse it in the wound, vntill it be well digested, which you may perceiue by the great quantitie of white and thick matter that wil flow out of it▪ &

vpon the sore laye this Cataplasme vntill it be digested.
               
               
                  A digestiue Cataplasme.
                  ℞ 
                        
                           Fat Figges and raysins the stones pickt out, of either two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Sal, nitrum, foure drammes.
                        
                        
                           Sowre Leauen, three ounces.
                        
                        
                           Honny, one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Oyle of chamomill one ounce and halfe.
                        
                     
                  
                  You must shread and pound the Figges and Raisins very small, then commixe it with the rest in a morter in forme of a pultis, and vse it.
                  And when it is digested then you must mundif
                        •
                     e it,
                        Mundif
                              •
                           cati
                              ••
                           
                        
                      with a mundificatiue, to which purpose, Unguentum viridum, or Apostolorum mixte with Unguentum basillicon wil serue and when it is cleane mundified, then to encarne and heale it vp, doe you only annoynt or stricke it ouer with a feather,
                        Emplestrum Kellebackeron you shall finde made with ma
                              •
                           
                           ster Bakerone of her Maiesties chirurgiōs.
                      wet in Arceus linament, which must be molten in a saucer, and ouer all, lay a playster of Diacculum, or a playster of Kellebackeron, which is excellent good in all appostomes and tumors, and in this order doe you proceéde, vntill the griefe be whole.
               
            
            
               Cap. 5. Sheweth how to bring the botch out, that lieth deepe within the body or fleshe.
               
                  FIrst you must cōsider, that often times the botch or carbunkle, doth offer it selfe to come forth in some place of the body, and yet no apparant signe thereof, but lieth deepe hidden within, because nature is not of sufficient strength to thrust it forth:

which is easily perceiued by the great and almost intollerable paine, that by some is felte in the place where nature entends to expell it: which in the most parte of people, is by bloudletting, Cordials, and sweate, is cleane taken away and euacuated: but if after al this done it goe not away, then vnto these you must vse all the meanes you can to bring it to the outwarde partes. First by giuing to the sicke often times some Cordiall electuary to keépe it from the harte, then, (if no great paine in the outwarde parte) you must applie a cupping glasse, with Scarryfication, directly against the place where the griefe is felte, and let it remaine thereon a quarter or halfe an houre, then take it away, and presently applie the rumpe of Chickens, Hens, or Pigeons to the place (as before hath beene shewed) that being done, then lay some Attractiue and Maturatiue playster or Cattaplasme to the place which here following is shewed, and euery sixth houre you must applie the cupping glasse, as also the rest, vntill such time as you haue brought the venimous matter to the outward partes, there to be visiblie seéne, or at least by feéling to be perceiued, which commonly is effected at the second time, then vse no more cupping, but onely applie a maturatiue to the place.
               
                  A good Maturatiue cataplasme.
                  ℞ 
                         
                           
                              
                                 Rad simphyti,
                              
                              
                                 Liliorum,
                              
                              
                                 Ceparum,
                              
                              
                                 Allium,
                              
                            ana. ℥.j.
                        
                           Fol, Oxialidis, M.j.
                        
                     
                  
                  You must pounde all the
                        •
                     e together a lyttle, then wrap them in a cole leafe, and so roast them in the whot embers, then pound them in a morter, whereunto adde.
                  
                     
                     
                        Ol, liliorum, Auxungiae porc, ana. ℥. j.
                     
                     
                        Fermenti acris, ʒ. vj.
                     
                     
                        Mitridatij, ʒ. j.
                     
                  
                  Mixe them altogether in forme of a Pultisse, and so applie it warme, and renue it twise a day.
               
               
                  An other.
                  ℞ 

                        
                           Galbani
                        
                        
                           Apopanacis,
                        
                        
                           Ammoniaci,
                        
                      ana. ʒ. iiij.
                  Dissolue these in Uinegar, if the botch be whote and inflamde (but if it be not) then dissolue them in Aqua vite, and being dissolued then strayne it from the dregges, and adde thereto.

                        
                           Vnguent, basilici,
                        
                        
                           Mitridat,
                        
                        
                           Fermenti acris,
                        
                      ana. ʒ. iiij.
                  Mixe all these together, and applie it.
               
               
                  An other which is soner made.
                  Take a great Onyon, make a hole in the myddle of him then 
                        •
                     ill the place with Mitridat or Triacle, and some leaues of Rue, then roast him in the whote embers, and when it is soft, then pound it with some Barrowes grease, and applie it to the sore, and that will rypen it in short time then open and 
                        •
                     ure it as in the Chapter before.
                  But if the paine & inflammation in the place be so great

that the partie cannot endure cupping glasses to be vsed, th
                        •
                      must you applie a Uessicatorie to the place, in the lowest parte of the griefe.
               
               
                  A Vessicatorie.
                  Take Cantarrides brused in grosse pouder halfe a dramme, sowre Leauen two drammes, mixe them together in a morter with a little Uinegar, and applie it, which within twelue houres will rayse a blister, which you must open and then lay an Iuie or coleleafe to the place, and vpon all, applie any of the Cattaplasmes aforesaide, and dresse it twise a day, and once a day at least giue the patient some Cordiall, and when it is come to a softnes and that you perceiue it is impostimated, then open, it and so proceéde to the cure as before is shewed.
               
               
                  When the botch will not come to Matur
                        •
                     tion, but continueth alwaies hard.
                  Somtime it is seéne that the botch although it appeare outwardly, yet will it not come to maturation, which commonly is accomplished with in threé or foure dayes, but will resist whatsoeuer you applie to it, and remaine and continue alwaies hard, now here you must presently open it either with a Causticke, or by insition, for feare least it strike in againe, or at least growe to gangrena, but before you open it you must Epithemat the griefe with this Epithemation following, and euery morning and euening giue the sicke some Cordiall, and betwixt the sore and the harte annoynt it with the defensiue before in the second chapter▪
                  
               
               
                  An Epithemation.
                  Take. 
                        
                        
                           Leaues of Mallowes, Violets, Chammomell, of either one handfull.
                        
                        
                           Floures of Dill, Mellilot, of either one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Hollehock roots, foure ounces.
                        
                        
                           Linseede, two ounces.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle all these in a sufficient quantitie of water vntill halfe the water be consumed, and then wet some wooll, or flaxe therein being first well beaten and pickt cleane, and warme laye it vpon the sore, and as it cooleth do you take it away, & lay on another warme stewse, & so continue it halfe an houre together, and then open it as before saide, and immediatly applie to the wound Chickens, or Hens, as before in the first chapter hath bene shewed you. And if you cannot get Chickens, nor Hens, then a Whelpe, or a Pigeon clouen a sunder by the backe and so applyed warme,
                        Pigeons or whelpes insteede of Chickens.
                      wil suffice which must be renued so oftē times as cause requireth, and when that is done, then applie vnto the wound a digestiue, made as followeth.
               
               
                  A digestiue
                  Take. 
                        
                           Terpentine, halfe an ounce,
                        
                        
                           Take. Honny two drammes.
                        
                        
                           Take. Mitridat, or Triacle, halfe a dramme.
                        
                        
                           Take. The yolcke of a new layde Egge,
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe all these together and vse it in the wound and vpon all lay the digestiue cattaplasme beforesaid, which is made

of Figges, or a playster of Kellebackeron, or of Diaculum magnum, and dresse it twise a day and euery dressing, Epithemat the griefe as before saide, when it is digested, then mundyfie, encarne and sigillate it as in the chapter before is shewed you.
               
            
            
               Cap. 6. Sheweth what is to be done, when the botch strikes in againe.
               
                  SOmetimes you shall see the sore will appeare outwardly, and sodenly vanish away againe, which is a very dangerous and deadly signe, now when this doth chaunce, then presently giue some good Cordiall that hath power to expell the venem, as in the first chapter of this treatise you maye finde choyse of, and immediatly applie this pultis to both the soales of his feéte, which must be made with Culuer doong and Uinegar mixt togeather,
                     A good pultis.
                   and spread on a cole lea
                     •
                  e, and so applied, you must giue the Cordiall euery third houre, and immediatly after the first giuing of the Cordiall, you must Epithemat the hart with the Epithemation before expressed in the second chapter of this treatise, and when that is done then cause the sicke to sweat if you may, and after his sweate, and the body well dried, then giue him an easie Glister, the ne
                     •
                  t day purge him with some gentle purgation as before is shewed you. And if by these meanes you preuaile not, then small hope of life is to be expected, yet Petru
                        •
                      Forestus, willeth you first to giue a Glister, and then within two houres after it to draw some bloud in the same side where the griefe is, and to annoynt the place grieued with Unguentum resumpt
                     ••
                  um mixt with some Oyle of chammomell, and then two houres after it to giue a Cordiall and procure sweate vpon it, and so following the

rest of the orders aforesaide, did recouer dyuers.
            
            
               Cap. 7. Sheweth how to drawe a botch from one place to another, and so to discusse him without breaking.
               
                  FIrst you must applie a cupping glasse next adioyning to the lower parte of the sore, on that side where you would haue him to be brought, and next vnto that glasse applie another so nere the first as you can, and if that be not so farre as you would haue the sore to be brought, then applie the third glasse, and let them all remaine a quarter of an houre, then take away, the last glasse, but suffer the first to remaine, then presently applie him againe and let it remaine a quarter of an houre more, and doe so threé or foure times together, but alwaies suffer the first glasse next the sore, for to remaine, now when you haue thus donne, then take all the glasses away, and presently applie 
                     •
                   vessicatory to the place where the last and vttermost glasse did stand, suffring it to remaine there twelue houres, then open the blister and lay an Iuie or cole leafe to the place, and vpon all lay a playster of Kellebackeron, or Diacculum magnum, and dresse it twise a day, the longer you keépe it running the better it will be, and at length, heale it vp as other vlcers are cured.
               Now so soone as you haue applied the Uessicatorie you must presently epithemat the botch with this epithemation.
               
                  Epithemation.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Mallowes, Violets, Chammomill, Dill and Mellilot, of either one handfull.
                        
                        
                           
                           Hollehocke rootes, three ounces.
                        
                        
                           Linseede, one ounce and halfe.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle all these in a sufficient quantitie of water vntill halfe the water be consumed, in this decoction you must wet some vnwasht wooll, or flaxe made cleane and well beaten, then being wrong out a little applie it warme to the place, and renue it euery houre during the time that the Uessicatorie is in working, and when you haue opened the blister which is made thereby, then onely applie this Cataplasme to the botch it selfe.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Mallowes,
                        
                        
                           Take. Violets and Chammomell
                        
                        
                           Take. floures,
                        
                      of either one handfull.
                  Boyle them in water vntil they be tender, then cut them very small with a shreading knife, and adde thereto.
                  
                     
                        Oyle of chammomel and Lillies, of either two ounces.
                     
                     
                        Barrowes morte, two ounces.
                     
                     
                        Wax, one ounce.
                     
                  
                  Melt the waxe in the Oyles, and then put it to the herbes and boyle them together a little, then take it from the fire, and adde thereto Barly, and Beane floure a handfull of either of them, and so mixe them all together, and applie it to the griefe, renuing it twice a day, which within threé or foure dayes wil resolue and discusse the botch, but if it doe it not by that time, then vse all the meanes you can to bring it to suppuration as before is sufficiently shewed you.
               
            
            
               
               Cap. 8. Sheweth howe to knowe a carbunkle or blayne as also the cure of the same.
               
                  THe carbunkle or blaine, doth first begin with a little Pustule or wheale: and some times with diuers Pustules or wheales together, with a great burning and pricking paine in the place which Pustules are like a scalding bladder, seming to be ful of water or matter, yet when you open it, little or nothing will come out of it, and when they are broken will growe to a hard crust or a scarre, as if it had bene burnt with a whote yron or causticke, with a great ponderositie or heauines in the place. In some it comes in the beginning without any Pustule at all to be perceiued, but with a hard blacke crust or a scarre, sometimes it lieth hidden in the inwarde partes without any outward appearance at all,
                     Carbunkle in the Lungs.
                   as if it be in the lungs, then there is a difficultie of breathing, with a cough and foule spitting.
               If it be in the liuer or spleéne,
                     Carbunkle in the liuer or spleene. Carbunkle in the bladder or Kidneyes. Carbunkle in the braine.
                   then the partie feéleth a great paine and pricking in the same side, if in the kidneyes or bladder it doth chance, thē is ther suppression or stopping of the vrine, or great paine in ye making of water, if it be in the brayne, then a delirium followeth, but howsoeuer it chance to come the partie infected therewith hath a feauer, with other accidents as before in the 13. chapter of the first treatise is declared: if it begin with a greéne, blacke, or blewe, colour, or of dyuers colours like the raynbowe,
                     Ill signes.
                   then is it a deadly signe, and so is it, if once it appeare and then sodenly vanish away: but if it be red or yellowish, so it be not in any of the principall partes,
                     Good signes.
                   or eniunctuaries of the body, as ye hart, stomack armpit, flanck, Iawes or throte, thē is it laudable, otherwise in any of these places very desperat

and dangerous to be cured, but wheresoeuer it doth chance, vnlesse it may be brought to suppuration it is deadly,
               
                  The cure of the carbunkle.
                  First the vniuersall meanes must not be neglected, as bloudletting, Cordials, Epithemations, sweéte, and gentle euacuation by purging, as the time and cause requireth, which before in the beginning of this treatise hath bene shewed at large, and the same order which is vsed for the cure of a botch, is also to be kept in the cure of a carbunkle, also to rectyfie the ayre of the house by straining it with vine and willow leaues, red Roses and such like, as also to sprinckle the floore with Rose water and Uinegar, and cause the sicke often times to smell vnto a cloth wet in rose water and Uinegar is very good: these thinges being done, then vse all the meanes you can to bring it to Suppuration, for which purpose this Cataplasme following is very good.
               
               
                  A maturatiue Cataplasme.
                  Take. 

                        
                           Fat Figges, foure ounces.
                        
                        
                           Musterd seede, one ounce and halfe.
                        
                     
                  
                  Pound the seéde small by it selfe, the Figges must first be cut very small, and then pounded likewise, and then adde thereto so much Oyle of lyllies as will suffice to make it in the forme of a stiffe pultis, and applie it warme, renuing it twise a day, this must be continued vntill the scarre begin to growe loose and moueable, and then applie this following to remoue the scarre.
                  Take vnsalted butter, the yolcke of an Egge▪ and wheat floure, mixe them together, and applie it vntill the scarre doe fall away, then doe you mundifie it with this mundificatiue.
               
               
                  
                  Mundificatiue annodine.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Clere Terpentine, foure ounces.
                        
                        
                           Syrrop of red Roses, one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Honnie of roses, foure drammes,
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle them altogether a little then take it from the fire and adde thereto Barlie and wheate floure of either sixe drammes, the yolke of a new layde egge, and mixe them all together and applie it threé dayes, and then vse this following.
               
               
                  Another Mundificatiue.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Cleare Terpentine, three ounces.
                        
                        
                           Honny of roses, two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Iuice of smalege, two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Barlie floure, one ounce and halfe.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle them all together sauing the Barley, vntill the Iuice be consumed, then take it from the fire, and when it is almost colde, adde the Barly thereto and mixe them together, and vse thereof to the griefe vntill it be cleane mundified, and thē incarne it with Unguentum basillicon, and lastly sigilate it with Unguentum de cerusae decocted.
                  
                  Some time you shall finde a little pustule to appeare, without any elleuation of the parts adioyning, or outward hardnes. Now here to bring it outwardly, you must applie this Cattaplasme.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Lillie rootes,
                        
                        
                           Onyons
                        
                        
                           and sowre Leauen,
                        
                      of either one ounce.
                  Boyle them in water vntill the water be consumed, then

bruse them in a morter and adde thereto.
                  
                     
                        Musterd seede, Culuer doong, White Sope, of either one drāme and halfe.
                     
                     
                        Snayles without shelles, vi. in number.
                     
                     
                        Mitridat Triacle, of either halfe a dramme.
                     
                     
                        Yolckes of foure Egges.
                     
                  
                  Mixe all these together and applie it warme to the griefe renuing it thrise a day: this order must be continued vntill you seé the place elleuated tending to suppuration, then applie a maturatiue, and so proceéde as next before this is shewed you, and during the whole time of the cure, I holde it better to vse rather Pultises then playsters, because they do not so much stop the pores, but giue more scope for the venimous matter to breath out.
               
               
                  When the carbunkle doth come with great paine and inflammation, how to helpe it.
                  You must first bath and soke the place well with this bagge following, and then presently applie the Cattaplasme ensuing, for by this meanes you shall not onely ease the paine and abate the inflammation and feauer, but also preuent the danger of gangrena which may chance thereby.
                  
                     The botch.
                     Take. 
                           
                              Mallowes, Violets Plantine. Liblong, of either one handfull.
                           
                           
                              
                              Fat Figges, one ounce.
                           
                           
                              Holliehock rootes, Lillie rootes, of either one ounce.
                           
                           
                              Linne seede, one ounce.
                           
                        
                     
                     You must shread the herbes grosly, and cut the Figges, and rootes small, then bruise them in a morter, and mingle them altogether, then put them into two little bagges, of Lincloth, and boyle them in a sufficient quantitie of cleane water, vntill the water be halfe consumed, then take out one of the bagges and wringe out the water a little and applie it to the griefe warme, and when it is colde take it away and lay on the other, and doe so halfe an houre together euery dressing, which must be twise a day, at least.
                  
                  
                     The Cataplasme.
                     Take. 
                           
                              Mallowes, Violets, Sorrell Liblong. of either two handfuls.
                           
                           
                              Henbane, a little handful.
                           
                        
                     
                     Wrap them all in a ball together and roaste them in the ashes, then bruse them in a morter and adde thereto.
                     
                        
                           Mel rosarum foure ounces.
                        
                        
                           Triacle, one dramme and halfe.
                        
                        
                           Saffron in pouder, halfe a dramme.
                        
                        
                           Yolckes of fiue Egges.
                        
                     
                     Mixe them together with the rest, adding some Barlye floure thereto to thicken it, and applie it warme, renuing it alwaies before it growe drie and stiffe, and euery dressing you must Epithemat the griefe first with the bagges aforesaide,

and this order must be continued vntill the paine and inflammation be gone, then to bring it vnto Suppuration, if you adde to the foresaid Cataplasme some Oyle of lillies and sweéte butter vnsalted, it will be verie good or you maye make this Cataplasme following.
                     Take. 
                           
                              Soote of the chimny, three ounces.
                           
                           
                              Baye salte, one ounce and halfe.
                           
                           
                              Yolckes of two or three Egges.
                           
                        
                     
                     Mixe all these together in a morter, and applie it to the griefe warme, which must be alwaies renued and changed before it growe drie and stiffe, this order must be continued vntill the sore come to suppuration, thē to remoue the scarre and finish the cure, doe you follow the order prescribed in the beginning of this chapter.
                     There are other dangerous accidents which doe sometimes chance in the botch or carbunkle, which here to treate of woulde little preuaile the vnexpe
                           •
                        t people, because they knowe not the meanes how to execute the same, but if any such thing chance, then doe I wish you to seéke the helpe of some learned Phisitian, or expert Chirurgion, whose counsell I do wish you to follow.
                  
               
            
            The ende of the second Treatise.
         
         
            
            A Short treatise of the small pockes, shewing the means how for to gouerne and cure those which are infected therewith.
            
               CAP. 1. Sheweth what the small pockes and measels are, and whereof it proceedeth.
               
                  FOR that oftentimes those that are infected with the plague, are in the ende of the disease sometime troubled with the small pockes or measels, as also by good obseruation it hath béene séene that they are forerunners or warnings of the plague to come, as Salius and diuers other writers doe testifie: I haue thought it good and as a matter pertinent to my former treatise, to shew the aydes and helpes which are required for the same.
               I néede not greatly to stande vpon the description of this disease, because it is a thing well knowen vnto most people, procéeding of adusted bloud mi
                     •
                  e with fleagme, as Auicen witnesseth, which according to both antient and later writers doth alwaies beginne with a feauer, then shortly after there arise small redde pustules vppon the skinne throughout all the body, which doe not sodainely come forth, but by intermission in some more or lesse, according to the state and quality of the bodie infected therewith for in some there arise

many little▪ pustules with elleuation of the skinne, which in one day doe encrease and grow bigger, and after haue a thick matter growing in them, which the Gréekes call exanthemata or exthymata: and after the Latines variola, in our English tongue the small pockes: and here some writers doe make a difference betwixt variola and exanthemata: for say they, that is called variola when manie of those pustules doe sodainely runne into a cleare bladder as if it had bene scalled, but the other doth not so: yet are they both one in the cure, they doe most commonly appeare the fourth day, or before the eight day, as Auicen witnesseth
               
                  What the measels or males are.
                  
                     Auicen saith, that the measels or males is that which first commeth with a great swelling in the flesh, with many little pimples, which are not to be séene, but onely by féeling with the hand are to be perceiued, they haue little elleuation of the skinne, neither doe they growe to maturation or ende with vlceration as the pocks doth doe, neither doe they assault the eyes or leaue any deformity behinde them as the pockes doth doe, neither are they so swift in comming forth, but doe grow more slowely: they require the same cure which the pockes haue: they procéede of cholericke and melancholicke bloud.
               
               
                  The cause of the pockes and measels.
                  The primitiue cause as Valetius saith, is by alteration of the ayre,
                        Primatiue.
                      in drawing some putrified and corrupt quality vnto it, which doth cause an ebulition of our bloud.
                  The cause antecedent, is repleasion of meates which doe easily corrupt in the stomacke,
                        Antecedent.
                      as when we eate milke and fish together at one time, or by neglecting to drawe bloud, in such as ha
                        •
                     e accustomed 
                        •
                     o doe it euery yeare, whereby the bloud doth abounde.
                  
                     The coniunct cause, is the menstruall bloud which from the beginning in our Mothers wombes wee receaued,
                        Coniunc
                              •
                           .
                      the which mixing it selfe with the rest of our bloud, doth cause an ebulition of the whole.
                  The efficient cause, is nature or naturall heate, which by that menstruall matter mi
                        •
                     ing it selfe with the rest of ou
                        •
                      bloud, doth cause a continuall ve
                        •
                     ing and disquieting thereof,
                        E
                              •
                           fic
                              •
                           ent.
                      whereby an vnnaturall heate is encreased in all the body, causing an ebulition of bloud, by the which this filthy menstruall matter is separated from our naturall bloud, & the nature being offended and ouerwhelmed therewith, doth thrust it to the outward pores of the skinne as the excrementes of bloud: which matter if it be hoate and slimy, then it produceth the pocks, but if dry & subtill, then the measels or males.
                  But Mercuriales an excellent writer in Phisicke, in his first booke de morbis puerorum, cap. 2. agreeing with Fernelius in his 2. de abditis rerum causis, cap. 12. doth holde opinion that the immediate cause of this disease doth not proceede of menstruall bloud, but of some secret and vnknowen corruption or defiled quality of the ayre, causing an ebulition of bloud, which is also verified by Valetius, and nowe dooth reckon it to be one of the heredytable diseases, because fewe or none doe escape it, but that either in their youth, ripe age, or olde age, they are infected therewith. The contention hereabout is great, & mighty reasons are oppugned on both sides, therefore will I leaue the iudgement thereof vnto the better learned to define: but mine opinion is, that nowe it procéedeth of the excrements of all the foure humors in our bodies, which striuing with the purest, doth cause a supernaturall heat & ebulition of our bloud, alwaies beginning with a feauer, in the most part: and may well bee reckoned in the number of those diseases which are called Epidemia: as Fracastorius in his first booke, de morbis contag. cap. 13. witnesseth this disease is very contagious and infectious, as experience teacheth vs: there are two speciall causes why this

disease is infectious:
                        Why the pocks is infectious.
                      the first is, because it procéedeth by ebulition of bloud, whose vapour being entred into another bodie, doth soone defile and infect the same: the second reason is, because it is a disease hereditable: for we sée when one is infected therewith, that so manie as come néere him, (especially those which are allyed in the same bloud) doe assuredly for the most part receaue the in
                        •
                     ection also.
               
            
            
               Cap. 2. Sheweth to know the signes when one is infected, as also the good and ill signes in the disease.
               
                  THE signes when one is infected are these, first hee is taken with a hoate feauer, and sometime with a delirium▪ great paine in the back, furring and stopping of the nose, beating of the heart, hoarsenesse, rednesse of the eies and full of teares, with heauinesse and payne in the head, great beating in the foreheade and temples, heauines and pricking in all the body, drynes in the mouth, the face verie red, paine in the throate and breast: difficulty in breathing, and shaking of the handes and feete, with spitting thicke matter.
               When they doe soone or in short time appeare, and that in their comming out they doe looke red,
                     Good signes.
                   and that after they are come forth they doe looke white and spéedily grow to maturation, that he draweth his breath easily, and doth find himselfe eased of his paine, and that his feauer doeth leaue him, these are good and laudable signes of recouery.
               When the pockes lye hidden within and not appearing outwardly:
                     Ill si
                           ••
                        es.
                   or if after they are come forth they doe sodainely strike in againe and vanish awaie, or that they doe looke of a black▪ blewish and gréene colour, with a difficulty and straitnesse of drawing breath, and that hee doe often sowne, if the sicke haue a flixe or laske, when the pockes were found double,

that is one growing within another, or when they runne together in blisters like scalding bladders, and then on the sodaine doe sincke downe and growe drie with a harde blacke scarre or crust as if it had béene burnt with an hoate iron, all these are ill signes.
               
                  Auicen saieth there are two speciall causes which produce death vnto those that haue this disease:
                     Two speciall causes of death
                   either for that they are choked with great inflammation and swelling in the throate called Angina, or hauing a flixe or laske which doeth so weaken and ouerthrow the vitall spirits, that thereby the disease is encreased, and so death followeth.
               
                  How to know of what humors this disease commeth.
                  If it come of bloud, then they appeare redde,
                        Bloude.
                      with generall payne and great heate in all the body.
                  If they come of choler, thē wil they appear of a yellowish,
                        Choller.
                      red and cleare colour, with a pricking payne in all the body.
                  If they come of fleagme,
                        Fleagme.
                      then will they appeare of a whitish colour and scaly, or with scales.
                  If they come of melancholy thē wil they appeare blackish with a pricking payne.
                        Melancholy.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Cap. 3. Sheweth the meanes to cure the pockes or measels.
               
                  THere are two speciall meanes required for curing this disease: the first is to helpe nature to expell the same from the interior and principall parts vnto the e
                     •
                  terior: the second is to preserue both the interior and exterior partes, that they may not be hurt thereby.
               For the first intention, if the age and strength of the sicke will permit, and that the pockes or measels appeare not, it

were then good in the first, second, or third day, to draw blou
                     •
                   out of the Basillica vaine in the right arme, if he be not vnder the age of fourtéene years, but the quantity must bée at the discretion of him that draweth it, eyther more or lesse as occasion is offered: but for children and such as are of tender yéeres,
                     C
                           •
                        ildren may not bleede in the arme▪
                     
                   and weake bodies, it were not best to draw bloud out of the arme, but in the inferiour parts, as the thighes, hams, buttockes, and the hemeroydall veynes, specially if the partie bée melancholy: or else to applie ventoses to the loynes, buttockes, or hams, which may boldly bée vsed both before and after they doe appeare, either with scarification, or without; as cause requireth, which is a speciall good meanes to draw that Ichorus matter from the interior to the exterior partes, but for sucking children it were best to apply bloudsuckers vnto any of the foresaide places, which is a thing that may be vsed with more ease then ventoses, neither doe I wish eyther of thē to be vsed vnles necessity require it, which is when the matter lyeth lurking in the interior partes, not offering it selfe to appeare outwardly: otherwise I hold it better to leaue the whole worke vnto nature, specially in sucking children: for when wée sée that nature is ready or dooth endeuour to expell the malignity which is in the interior partes, to the exterior, which may be perceyued by reuiuing of the spirits and mitigating of the feauer: here we ought not to vse any meanes at all, but leaue the whole operation vnto nature,
                     Giue nature leaue to work.
                   which we must only help by kéeping the sicke body in a reasonable heate, being wrapte in a scarlet, stammell, or red cloth, which may not touch the skinne, but to haue a soft lynnen cloth betwixt them both, and then couer him with clothes in reasonable sort, and keepe him from the open ayre and the lighte, (excepte a little) and also from anger, vsing all the meanes you can to kéepe the sicke in quietnesse, and if the body bée verye costyue, then to giue an easie Glister.
               
                  
                  Glister.
                  Take 
                        
                           Barley, two handfuls.
                        
                        
                           Violet leaues, one handfull.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle these in thrée pintes of water, vntill halfe be consumed: & straine it, then take

                        of ye same decoctiō twelue ounces.
                        
                           Oyle of Violets, iij. ounces.
                        
                        
                           Redde Sugar, and Butter, of either one ounce.
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe them together and giue it to the sicke warme, you may encrease or diminish the decoction or engredience according as the age of the party requireth: but if the sicke haue great heate, then may you 
                        •
                     dde one ounce or foure drams of Cassia newly drawen vnto it: and when he hath expelled the glister, then rub the armes, hands, legs, and féete, softly with a warme cloth, which is also a very good meanes to drawe that I chorus matter from the interior to the exterior parts, when all this is done, then if the body be enclined to sweate, you must further the same, by couering him with warme clothes, hauing a care that you lay not more on him then hée can well endure, for otherwise you may cause faintnesse and sownding, which are ill in this case, yet must you alwayes kéepe the sicke warme and suffer him not to sléepe, or permit very little vntill the pockes or measels doe appeare: and here you must haue a speciall care to preserue the eyes, eares,
                        A good caueat
                      nostrels, throate and lungs, that they bée not hurt or offended therewith, as hereafter shall be shewed you, which you must vse before he sweate, and also in the sweate if néede be.
               
               
                  Eyes how to preserue them.
                  Take 
                        
                           Rose water, Plantine water, of either two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Sumacke, two drammes.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Let them boyle together a little, or stand infused a night, then mixe therwith halfe a sponefull of the oyle made of the white of an egge, then wette two clothes fiue or sixe double therein, and then lay them vppon either eye one colde which must bée alwaies kept vppon the eyes vntill the pocks bée all come forth, and as they growe dry wette them in the same licoure againe and apply them,
                        Pai
                              •
                           e burning in the eye, to helpe it.
                      but if there bée greate paine and burning within the eye, then must you also put a droppe of this musselage ollowing into the eye: take quench séede halfe a dramme, bruse it a little, then let it stande infused in three ounces of Rose water a whole night, then straine it, and put one drop thereof into the eie thrée or foure times a day at least: or take of this water.
                  Take 
                        
                           Rose water, two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Womans milke, one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Myrre finely poudered, vj. graynes.
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe them together, and vse it into the eye as before is shewed: this doth ease the paine, resisteth putrification and preserueth the sight.
                  For the eares, you must put a drop of oyle of Roses warm into them before he sweate.
                        Eares to preserue them.
                     
                  
                  For the nostrels, cause him oftentimes to smell to the vapour of Rose vineger,
                        Nostrels to preserue them.
                      or else vineger, redde roses and sanders boyled together.
                  For the throate, let him alwaies holde a péece of white sugar candy in the mouth,
                        Throate to preserue it.
                      and as it melteth, swallow it downe.
                  For the lunges, giue the sicke oftentimes some syrrope of quinches, or conserue of Roses a little at a time.
                  
                     
                        Lungs to preserue them.
                     And for his drinke the decocted water of barley boyled with a little l
                        •
                     coures is best▪ béeing mi
                        •
                     ed with the Iuyce of a Limon, citron, pom
                        ••
                     a
                        •
                     nard, or rybes: which the sicke best l
                        •
                     keth▪ for either of them is ve
                        •
                     y good.
                  
                     
                        D
                              •
                           ete.
                     And for his d
                        ••
                     te he must re
                        •
                     ray
                        •
                     e from all sa
                        •
                     t, fat, thicke

and sharpe meates: and from all swéete thinges eyther in meate or drinke, his meate must be of a facile and easie digestion, and that hath a cooling property in it, as broth wherin borrage, buglos, sorrell and such like are boyled, and for ordinary drinke, small b
                        •
                     ere or ale is best.
               
            
            
               Cap. 4. Teacheth what is to be done when the pocks or measels are slowe in comming forth.
               
                  NOw when you perceiue the pockes or measelles are slowe and slack
                     •
                  n comming forth, then must you helpe nature, with cordials and by sweate to thrust it out from the interior and principall parts, vnto which purpose I haue alwaies founde this drink to be excellent good, here following.
               R. 
                     
                        Hordei mund. M. j.
                     
                     
                        Lentium. excort. P. j.
                     
                     
                        Ficuum. No. x.
                     
                     
                        Fol. capil. v. Ana. M. ss
                     
                     
                        Lactucae. Ana. M. ss
                     
                     
                        Fol. acetosae. M. j.
                     
                     
                        Florum cord. P. j.
                     
                     
                        Semen fenic. ʒ. ij.
                     
                     
                        Semen. 4. frigid. ma. ana. ʒ. ss.
                     
                     
                        Aqua font. ll.iiij.
                     
                  
               
               Boile all these together vntill a third part of the water bée consumed, and then strayne it.
               ℞ 

                     
                        Decoct. col. ll.j.
                     
                     
                        Succus granatorum vel ribes· ℥. iiij.
                     
                  
               
               Myxe all these together, and giue the sicke foure or sixe ounces thereof to drincke euerye Morninge and

euening, which will prouoke sweate and expell the disease, and if you cānot get the iuyce of Pomegarnards, nor rybes, then you maie take so much of the syrrope of either of them.
               
                  Another good drinke to expell the pockes or measels.
                  Take a quarte of posset-ale, a handefull of sennell séede, boyle them together till a thirde parte bée▪ consumed, then strayne it, and adde thereto one dramme of Triacle, and one scruple of Saffron in pouder: mixe them together, and giue two, thrée or foure ounces thereof to drinke euery morning and euening as cause requireth.
                  But if it bée for a strong and elderly body, you may giue anye of the expelling electuaries which are vsed to expell the plague, as in the first Chapter for the curing of the plague doth appeare.
                  But if the sicke bée so weake that hée cannot expell the disease in conuenient time, then were it good to epithemate the hart with this epithemation following.
               
               
                  Epjthemation for the heart.
                  ℞ 

                        
                           
                              
                                 Aquarum ros.
                              
                              
                                 Melissae
                              
                              
                                 Card. b.
                              
                              
                                 Buglos.
                              
                              
                                 Morsus diaboli,
                              
                              
                                 Vini alb.
                              
                            Ana. ℥. iiij.
                        
                           Aceti Ros. ℥. ij. ss.
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 Pul. Ros. rub.
                              
                              
                                 Trium santal.
                              
                              
                                 Cinamon. i.
                              
                              
                                 Elect. diamarg. frig.
                              
                            Ana. ʒ. ss.
                        
                           
                           Mitridati, ℥. j.
                        
                        
                           Theriackae, ʒ. iiij.
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe all these together and let them boyle a little, and so warme Epithemat the harte: and when you haue done it then giue some expulsiue drinke or electuary as cause requireth, & then cause him to sweate vpon it, for by this meanes you shall obtaine your desire, by Gods permission.
               
               
                  Thirste how to quench it
                  Now if in the expelling of the poxe, the sicke be very thirstie and drie, then giue this Iulep to drinke, morning and euening, which I haue founde verie good.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Syrrop of Iuiubes, Nenuphare, and Borrage of either foure drammes
                        
                        
                           Take. Waters of borrage, Cichore, and Buglos, of either two ounces.
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe them together and giue the sicke one halfe thereof in the morning, and the rest at night, and cause him often times to lick of this mixture following.
                  Take. 
                        
                           The conserues of Nenuphare Violets, and Borrage, of either sixe drammes.
                        
                        
                           Manus christi made with Perles, foure drams
                        
                        
                           Syrrop of Nenuphare, and Ribes, of either one ounce and halfe.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Mixe them together: and with a Licores sticke cleane scrapte and a little brused in the end let the sicke licke thereof.
               
            
            
               Cap. 5. Sheweth what is to bee done when the pockes are all come out in the skinne.
               
                  FOr that often times the face and handes which is the beautie and delight of our bodies are often times disfigured thereby I will shew you what meanes I haue vsed with good and happie successe for preuenting therof: which is, you may not doe any thinge vnto them vntill they growe white, and that they are come to maturation, which when you perceiue, then with a Golden pinne or neédle, or for lacke therof a Copper pinne will serue, doe you open euery Pustule in the top, and so thrust out the matter therein very softly and gently, with a softe linnen cloth, and if you perceiue the places doe fil againe, then open them againe as you did first, for if you doe suffer the matter which is in them to remaine ouer long, then will it fret and corrode the flesh which is the cause of those pittes which remaine after the pockes are gone, as Auicen witnesseth: now when you haue thus done then annoynt the places with this oyntment following.
               Take. 

                     
                        Elder leaues, one handfull.
                     
                     
                        Maregoldes, two handfuls.
                     
                     
                        French Mallowes, one handfull.
                     
                     
                        Barrowes morte or grease, sixe ounces.
                     
                  
               
               First bruse the herbe in a morter and then boyle them with the grease in a pewter dish on a chafer and coles vntill the Iuice of the herbes be consumed, th
                     •
                  n straine it, and

keépe it to your vse, the best time to make it is in the middle or later ende of May.
               You must with a feather annoynt the places grieued, and as it drieth in, annoynt it againe, and so continue it often times, for this will soone drie them vp and keépe the place from pitting and holes, which remaine after the pockes are gone.
               Also if you annoynt the pockes onely with Oyle of sweéte Almons newly drawen, threé or foure times a day, which you must begin to doe so soone as the pockes are growne white and come to maturation, it will cure them without pittes or spottes, and easeth the payne and burning and helpeth excoriation.
               Some doe onely often times wet the places with the Iuice of Marigoldes in the sommer season, and in winter the Iuice of the rootes will serue: and by that onely haue done well.
               
                  Mercuriales, doth greatly commend this decoction following, to be vsed, after the Pustules are opened.
               Take. 
                     
                        Barley, one little handfull,
                     
                     
                        Red roses, a handfull.
                     
                     
                        Red sanders, White sanders, of either one ounce.
                     
                     
                        of either one ounce.
                     
                     
                        Saffron, two scruples.
                     
                     
                        Salte, foure drammes.
                     
                     
                        Cleane water, three pounde.
                     
                  
               
               Boyle all together vntill a third parte be consumed, you must often times touch the sores therewith, with a fine cloth wet therein, and as it drieth in, wet it againe, this in a short time will drie them vp.
               I haue heard of some, which hauing not vsed any thinge at all, but suffering them to drie vp and fall of them selues,

without picking or scratching, haue done very well, and not any pittes remayned after it.
               
                  When the pockes after they come out, doe not growe to maturation, how you shall helpe it.
                  Sometimes you shall finde that it will be a long time before those Pustules will come to maturation, or grow white: now here you must helpe nature to bring it to passe, which you may well doe with this decoction.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Mallowes, one handfull,
                        
                        
                           Figges, twelue in number.
                        
                        
                           Water, a quarte.
                        
                     
                  
                  Cut the Figges small and boyle it altogether, vntill halfe and more be consumed, and then wet a fine softe linnen cloth therein, and touch the place therewith often times, which will soone bring them to maturation, and also ease the payne (if any be).
               
               
                  Vlceration to helpe it.
                  If in the declining of the pocks they chance to grow vnto Ulcerations, which is often times seéne: then for the curing thereof vse this order here following.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Tamarinds,
                        
                        
                           Leaues of lentils 
                        
                        
                           Mirtils,
                        
                        
                           Buddes of okē leaues,
                        
                        
                           Red roses dried,
                        
                      of either a little handfull.
                  Boyle all these in a pottle of cleane water vntill halfe be consumed thē straine it, and with a fine cloth wet therein do

you wash and soke the place well, then wipe it dry with a soft and fine linnen cloth, and then cast into the place some of this pouder following.
                  Take 
                        
                           Frankencense,
                        
                        
                           Masticke,
                        
                        
                           Sarcocoll,
                        
                        
                           and red roses,
                        
                      of eyther two drams.
                  Make al these in fine pouder seuerally by themselues, then myxe them together, and so reserue it to thy vse.
               
               
                  A very good vnguent for the same purpose.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Oyle of Roses, vj. ounces.
                        
                        
                           White waxe, one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Ceruse washt in rose and planten water, one ounce and halfe.
                        
                        
                           Cleere turpentine, iij. drams.
                        
                        
                           Camphire, halfe a dram.
                        
                     
                  
                  You must first melte the waxe in the oyle, then put in the ceruse by little and little, alwaies stirring it with one iron spalter, and let it boyle in a gentle fire of charcoles vntill it grow blacke, but stir it continually in the boyling for feare least it burne: then take it from the fire and adde thereto the camphire, and lastly the terpentine: this vnguent is good both to mundifie, encarne, and sigillate.
               
               
                  For extreame heate and burning in the soles of the feet, and palmes of the hands.
                  
                     Petrus Forestus, willeth to holde the handes and féete in warme water, and that will ease the paine and burning and may boldly be vsed without any danger.
               
               
                  For to help the sorenes and vlceration of the mouth.
                  Sometime it chanceth in this 
                        •
                     isease, that there is a great

v
                        •
                     ceration or excoriation in the mouth and ia
                        ••
                     s called Aptham, which if it bée not well looked vnto in time, will grow to be cankers: now to cure and preuent the same this gargaris is excellent good.
                  Take 
                        
                           Barley water, a quarte.
                        
                        
                           Red Roses dried, a little handfull.
                        
                        
                           Sumach and rybes, of either two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Iuyce of pomegarnards. iii. ounces.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle thē altogether sauing the iuyce of pomegarnards, vntill a thirde parte be consumed, then strayne it, & ad therto the iuyce of pomegarnards, with this you must often wash and gargarise, as also hold some thereof in the mouth a prety while.
                  
                     
                        To preuent sorenes of the mouth.
                     Also to preuēt the same, the kernel of a pomegarnard held in the mouth is very good, and so is it excellent good to lyck oftentimes some diamoron, or iuyce of a pomegarnard.
               
               
                  For inflammation and paine in the tonsiles and throate.
                  Take 
                        
                           Planten water, a pinte.
                        
                        
                           Syrrope of pomegarnards. ij. ounces.
                        
                     
                  
                  Mixe them together, and gargarise therewith oftentimes b
                        •
                     eing warme.
               
               
                  An other.
                  Take 
                        
                           Nightshade water, a pinte,
                        
                        
                           Seedes of quenches, iiii. scruples.
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle them together a little, then strayne it, and adde thereto two ounces of the syrrope of pomegarnards, and garg
                        •
                     rise therewith oftentimes.
               
               
                  
                  Howe to open the eye-lids that are fastened together with the pockes.
                  Sometime the ey-lids are so 
                        •
                     ast ioyned together that you cannot open them without great paine & danger: thē to open thē, you must foment or 
                        •
                     ath thē wel with a decoction made of quench séed, mallows & water boiled together, wherin wet some fine linnen clothes 
                        •
                     iue or sixe double & apply thē warm & continue it vntil you may easily open them, and then if you perceiue any web or filme to be growen ouer the sight, then thrise a day do you put some pouder of white sugar candy into the eie, or if you list you may dissolue the sugar in rose water, & so vse it in the eie, which wil fret it away & preserue the sight.
               
               
                  A good Collery for a web or vngula in the eye.
                  Take 
                        
                           The Iuyce of rew,
                        
                        
                           Fennell,
                        
                        
                           Salendine,
                        
                        
                           Mallowes,
                        
                      of eyther two ounces.
                  Boyle them together in a vessell of glasse, or pewter, ouer a chafer with coales, and skumme away the froth that doeth rise thereof, then adde thereto the gaule of an Eyle, one dram and let them boile together a little, then put thereto 4. scruples of white coppres, and one scruple of verdegreace in fine pouder, boyle al together a little, then let it runne thorough a fine linnen cloth, and kéepe it in a glasse, you must euerye morning and euening put one droppe thereof into the eye, prouided that first due euacuation be made so wel by phlebetomy as purging.
               
            
            
               
               Cap. 6 Teacheth how to helpe diuerse accidents which chance after the pockes are cured and gone.
               
                  For rednes of the face and hands after the p
                        •
                     cke
                        •
                      are 
                        〈◊〉
                      how to helpe 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  Take 

                        
                           Barley,
                        
                        
                           Beanes,
                        
                        
                           Lupins,
                        
                      of eyther one handfull.
                  Bruse them all in a morter grosly, and boyle them in thrée pintes of water vntill it grow thicke, like a ielly, then straine it and annointe the face and handes therewith thrée or foure times a day, for thrée or foure daies together, and then you must wet the face and hands so often times a day with this water following.
                  Take 
                        
                           Vine leaues, two handfuls.
                        
                        
                           Beane flowre, Dragons, Wilde-tansey, of eyther one handfull.
                        
                        
                           Camphire, three drams.
                        
                        
                           Two Calues feete.
                        
                        
                           The pulpe of three limons.
                        
                        
                           A pinte of rawe creame.
                        
                     
                  
                  You must shred the hearbes small, as also the limons, and break & cut the calues féet small, then mixe them altogether, and distill it in a glasse still, also the water of May deawe is excellent good for any high colour or rednes of the face.
               
               
                  
                  For spots in the face remayning when the pockes are gone.
                  Take the Iuice of Lymons and mixe it with a little bay Salte and touch the spots therewith often times in the daye for it is excellent good.
               
               
                  A good oyntment for the same purpose.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Oyle of sweete Almons Oyle of white Lillies, of either one ounce.
                        
                        
                           Capons grease, Goates tallowe, of either foure drammes.
                        
                        
                           Sarcocoll, halfe a dramme.
                        
                        
                           Floure of Ryce, and of Lupins, of either one dramme.
                        
                        
                           Litharge of golde one dramme and halfe.
                        
                        
                           Rootes of Brionie, and of yr
                                 •
                              ios, of either one scruple.
                        
                        
                           Sugar candie white, one dramme.
                        
                     
                  
                  Make pouder of all those that may be brought in pouder and searce it through a sarge, then put them all in a morter together and labour them with a pestle, and in the working doe you put the waters of Roses, beane floure, and of white Lillies, of either a great sponefull, which must be put in by little and little in the working of it, and so labour thē all together vntill it come to an vnguent.
                  You must euery euening annoynt the face therewith, or handes▪ and in the morning wash it away in the water wherin Barley, Wheate branne, and the seede of Mallowes hath béene boylde.
               
               
                  
                  For holes remayning when the small pockes are gone.
                  For helping of this accident, I haue vsed many things, yet neuer coulde finde any thing that did perfectly content me, but the best meanes that I haue tried, is one day to wash the place with the distilled water of strong Uinegar, and the next day with the water wherein Branne and Mallowes haue bene boylde, and continue this order twentie dayes, or a month together.
               
               
                  Running of the eares how to helpe it.
                  Somtimes the eares do runne very much in this disease, which in any wise you may not go about to stop in 
                        •
                     he beginning, but suffer it so to runne, and the eares to remaine open: but if there be great payne in them,
                        Payne in the eares.
                      then wet a spunge in warme water and Oyle of roses mixte together, and laye it vpon the eares.
               
               
                  For stopping of the nostrels, to helpe it.
                  Sometimes the Nostrels are greatly pestred by stopping them with the pockes growing in them, which doth oftentimes cause vlceration in them, therefore to preuent the same take.
                  
                     
                        Red rose, and planten, of either one handfull.
                     
                     
                        Mirre in pouder, halfe an ounce.
                     
                  
                  Boyle all these in a quarte of water vntill halfe be consumed, and so being warme cause the sicke to drawe the fume thereof into his Nostrels often times.
                  Also if the sicke doth often times smell vnto Uinegar, it is good.
               
               
                  
                  For horsenes, remayning when the pockes are gone.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Licores, Sebesten, Iuiubes, of either two ounces.
                        
                        
                           Fat Figges, foure ounces.
                        
                        
                           Cleane water, foure pintes,
                        
                     
                  
                  Boyle all these together vntill halfe be consumed, then strayne it, and giue one sponefull thereof to the sicke often times, and it helpeth.
               
               
                  For filthie and moyste scabbes, after the pockes are gone.
                  Take. 
                        
                           Lapis calaminaris, Litharge of golde, and of siluer. of either two drammes.
                        
                        
                           Quicke brimstone and Ceruse, of either two drammes.
                        
                     
                  
                  Bring all these in fine pouder, and then labour them in a morter with so much Barrowes mort or grease as shalbe sufficient to make vp an vnguentum and annoynt the place therewith euery morning and euening.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Table or Index.
            
               
                  A.
                  ANgelica roote, to prepare it,
                  fol. 7.
                  Aptham, how to helpe it,
                  fol. 26.
               
            
            
               
                  B.
                  BLoud when and where it is to be drawn,
                  fol. 17, 18.40
                  Bolarmoniake, how to prepare it,
                  fol. 19.
                  Botch, in the throte, to cure it,
                  fol. 17.
                  Botch, how to know where it will be, although no signe appeare,
                  fol. 18.
                  Botch, the generall cure thereof,
                  fol. 30.
                  Botch, that is hard, and will not come to maturation, how to helpe it,
                  fol. 32,
                  Botch, how to draw it, from one place to another,
                  fol. 34
                  Botch, when hee strickes in againe, how to bring him out.
                  fol. 33.
                  Botch, how to draw him frō one place to another,
                  fol. 34.
               
            
            
               
                  C.
                  Carbunkle or blayne how to know him, as also to cure it.
                  fol. 35.
                  Carbunkle with paine and inflammation to helpe it,
                  f. 36
                  Chickens, how to applie them,
                  fol. 17.
                  Cordiall preseruatiues,
                  fol. 4.
                  Cordiall, to be taken after purging,
                  fol. 26.
                  Costiuenes, how to helpe it,
                  fol. 8.9.
               
            
            
               
                  D.
                  Digestiue for a botch, how to make it,
                  fol. 30.31.33.
                  Dyet to be kept in time of the plague,
                  fol. 11.
                  Dyet, for them that haue the small pockes,
                  fol. 41.
               
            
            
               
                  F.
                  EAres, how to preserue them from the pockes,
                  fol. 41:
                  Eares running of them, what you must do to it,
                  fol. 47,
                  Epithemation, to comforte the harte,
                  fol. 2.42.
                  Epithemation, for a botch,
                  fol. 34.
                  Exercise and orders to be kept in the plague,
                  fol. 12.
                  
                     Eyes, how to preserue them from the pockes,
                  fol 41:
                  Eye, paine, and burning therein to ease it,
                  fol. 41
                  Eye, perle or web therein to helpe it,
                  fol· 46
                  Eyes, fastered and clong together, to helpe it,
                  fol. 46.
               
            
            
               
                  F.
                  Faynting and pounding, to helpe it,
                  fol. 23.
                  Face, how to preserue it from deformiting, in the small pockes,
                  fol. 43.
                  Face, spotes therein and rednes, after the pockes are gone, to helpe it,
                  fol▪ 46:
                  Feete, extreame heate in them, with the smal pockes, to helpe it,
                  fol. 45.
                  Floures of wemen stopt to prouoke them,
                  fol. 10.11
                  Flixe, how to stop it,
                  fol· 25.
               
            
            
               
                  H.
                  HAndes and feete, extreame heate in them with the small pockes, to helpe it,
                  fol. 45:
                  Head lightnes and paine therein for want of sleepe,
                  f. 25
                  Holes in the face, with the small pockes, what is to bee done to it,
                  fol. 47:
                  Hoarsnes, remayning after the pockes are gone, to helpe it.
                  fol. 48:
               
            
            
               
                  I.
                  Issues, commended against the plague,
                  fol. 11.
                  Iuleps, Cordiall, to make them,
                  fol. 22.
                  Iulep, to quench thirst,
                  fol▪ 23.24.
               
            
            
               
                  L.
                  LAske, or 
                        ••
                     ixe, how to stop it,
                  fol. 25.
                  Longs, how to preserue them from the pockes,
                  f. 41.
               
            
            
               
                  M.
                  MAturatiue, to ripe and rot a botch,
                  fol. 31.32.35.
                  Mouth, vlceration therin, called Aptham, to helpe it,
                  fol. 26.
                  Mouth sorenes and vlceration therein, with the small pockes how to preuent, and cure the same,
                  fol. 45.
                  Mundificatiue, for a carbunkle or blayne,
                  fol. 36.
               
            
            
               
               
                  N.
                  Nodule, against the plague,
                  fol. 7.
                  Nosgaye, against the plague,
                  fol. 7.
                  Nostrels how to preserue them from the pockes,
                  fol. 41.
                  Nostrels, stopt and vlcerated with the small pockes, to helpe it,
                  foll. 47.
               
            
            
               
                  O.
                  Opiat, good to expell the plague,
                  fol. 19.
                  Oyntment, to keepe on sollible,
                  fol. 8.
                  Oyntment to prouoke sleepe, and ease paine of the head,
                  fol. 26.
                  Oyntment, to keepe the face from pitting, in the small pockes,
                  fol. 43.
               
            
            
               
                  P.
                  Parfumes against the plague,
                  fol. 3
                  Pilles, to keepe one sollible,
                  fol, 9.
                  Pilles, to purge the body,
                  fol· 9.
                  Plague what it is,
                  fol. 1.
                  Plague, cause thereof,
                  fol. 1.
                  Plague, forewarnings thereof,
                  fol. 2.
                  Plague, how to preuent it,
                  fol. 2:
                  Plague, how to cure it,
                  fol. 16.
                  Plague, how to expell it,
                  fol. 18. vnto. 21▪
                  
                  Pomanders, against the plague,
                  fol. 6.
                  Potion, to purge the body,
                  fol. 10.
                  Potion, to expell the plague,
                  fol. 20.
                  Preseruatiue, against the plague,
                  fol. 4.
                  Pouder, to purge the body,
                  fol. 10.
                  Pouders, to expell the plague,
                  fol. 18.19
                  Po
                        •
                     kes, and measels, whereof they proceede,
                  fol. 38:
                  Pockes, and measels how to cure them,
                  fol. 40:
                  Pockes, why they are infectious,
                  fol. 39:
                  Pockes, how to maturate them,
                  fol. 44.
                  Pockes, or measels, that are slowe in comming forth to helpe it,
                  fol. 42.
                  Pocks and measels, how to vse them when they are come forth,
                  fol. 43.
                  Pockes vlcerated how to cure it,
                  fol. 44.
                  Purgation for a strong body:
                  fol. 24
                  
                     Purgation for a plethoricke body,
                  fol. 24.
                  Purgation for a weake body,
                  fol. 25.
                  Purging, when it is tollerable,
                  fol. 24
               
            
            
               
                  Q
                  Quilte, against the plague,
                  fol. 5.
                  Quilte, for the harte after sweate,
                  fol. 22.
               
            
            
               
                  R
                  Rauing and raging, to helpe it,
                  fol. 26.
                  Raysins laxatiue how to make them,
                  fol. 8▪
                  
               
            
            
               
                  S
                  Signs to know whē one is infected with the plague,
                  f, 15
                  Signes of recouerie in the plague,
                  fol. 15
                  Signes of death in the plague,
                  fol. 15▪
                  
                  Signes to know whē one is infected wt the smal pox,
                  f. 39.
                  Signes laudable, and ill signes in the small pockes,
                  f. 39.
                  Scabes which chance to come after the pockes are gone to helpe them,
                  fol. 48.
                  Sleepe when it is tollerable,
                  fol. 23.
                  Sleepe, an oyntment to prouoke it,
                  fol. 26.
                  Sounding how to helpe it,
                  fol. 23.
                  Suppository, how to make it,
                  fol. 8.
               
            
            
               
                  T
                  Thirst, a Iulep to quench it,
                  fol. 23.24.43.
                  Throte botch therein, to helpe it,
                  fol. 17,
                  Throte how to preserue it from the pockes,
                  fol, 41.
                  Throte vlceration therein to helpe it,
                  fol. 45.
               
            
            
               
                  V
                  Ventoses, when and where to applie them,
                  fol. 18.
                  Vessicatorie, how to make it,
                  fol. 
                        •
                     2.
                  Ves
                        •
                     catorie of the sicke,
                  fol. 
                        •
                     4.
                  Vnguent, defensatiue against the plague
                  fol. 2
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  Vlceration of the small pockes, to helpe it,
                  fol. 44.
                  Vnguent, fo
                        •
                      spots, and rednes of the face,
                  fol. 47.
                  Vomiting extreamely, to helpe it,
                  fol. 28.
               
            
            
               
                  W
                  Water, good against the plague,
                  fol. 20
                  Water, for spots and rednes of the face, after the small pockes are gone,
                  fol. 46.
               
            
            
               
                  Y
                  Yexing, or yoxe, how to helpe it,
                  fol. 28,
               
            
            
         
      
   