
      
         
            
            
            THE
LAST WILL
AND TESTAMENT
OF Mr. IOHN KENDRICKE
late Citizen and Draper of
LONDON:
            
            Who departed this life the 30. day of
December, anno, 1624.
            Full of notable workes of charity, worthy of lasting
memory and imitation.
            
            
               LONDON
Printed for NATHANIEL BVTTER
and Nicholas Bourne. 1625.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE LAST WILL
and Testament of Master Iohn
Kendricke, of London
Draper, &c.
            
               IN the name of God,
Amen.
               
                  The nine and twentieth of December,
Anno Domini 1624. and
in the two and twentieth yeare
of the Reigne of our Soueraigne
Lord King lames, &c.
                  
               
            
            I Iohn Kendricke of the City
of London, Draper, being sicke in Body, but of good
and perfect mind and memory, (for which I giue most
humble and hearty thanks to Almighty God) do make,
ordaine, and declare this my last Will and Testament,
in manner and forme following: (that is to say)
            First and before all things, I commend and commit
my Soule to Almighty God my Creator, trusting most
assuredly to be saued by the death, passion, and onely
merits of Iesus Christ my Sauiour and Redeemer.
            
               And I will that my body bee decently interred in
Christian Buriall in the Parish of Saint Christopher,
where I dwell, as mine Executor hereafter named shall
order and appoint.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to 60 poore men to euery
of them a Gowne of broad-cloath, to weare on the
day of my buriall, and twelue pence a piece in money
to pay for their dinners; the same poore men to be such
as my Executor shall appoint.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath blacke gowns and cloaks
to be worne at my buriall by my Kindred, Friends, and
Seruants, as my Executor shall thinke meet, not exceeding
the summ of six hundred pounds in the said gowns
and cloakes, and the rest of the charges of my Funerall.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath the summe of three score
pounds to be bestowed vpon a dinner to bee prouided
for my friends, and the Inhabitants of the Parish of S.
Christopher, where I now dwell, vpon the day of my buriall,
and in such place as my Executor shall think meet
and conuenient.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Maior, and Burgesses
of the Town of Reading, in the County of Berks,
(I meane to the body corporate, or Corporation of the
said Towne of Reading, by whatsoeuer name or addition
the same is made or knowne) the Summe of seuen
thousand and fiue hundred pounds, vpon speciall trust
and confidence that they shall therewith perform these
vses following: (that is to say)
            The said Maior and Burgesses shall buy and purchase

vnto them and their Successors for euer, I say, to the
Body Corporate of the said Towne of Reading, by
whatsoeuer name or addition the same is made or
knowne, Lands and Hereditaments of the cleare value
of fifty pounds by the year, ouer and aboue all charges
and reprises: which summe of fifty pounds a yeare, my
will and meaning is, shall bee paid by the said Mayor
and Burgesses, and their Successors, vnto my sister Anna
Newman yearly during her naturall life. And after her
decease the same yearly summe of fifty pounds shall
be paid by the said Maior and Burgesses, and their Successors,
to the Ouerseers for the poore of the said towne
of Reading for the time being yearly for euer. And by
them the said Ouerseers for the time being, shall be bestowed
and distributed to and among the poore people
of the said Towne for euer: to wit, the moietie thereof
euery halfe yeare, in such summes, and to such persons
as the said Ouerseers for the time being, shall thinke
meet, according to the necessity and desert of the same
seuerall persons.
            
               Prouided alwayes, and my meaning is, that this my
yearly gift shall not any way abridge the said poore of
the ordinary allowances vsually assessed and collected
of the wealthier sort of the Inhabitants of the said town
towards the reliefe of the said poore people: but shall
be vnto them an additament and cleare encrease of reliefe
yearly for euer.
            And if this my gift and prouision shall happen (which
I trust it shal not) to be by the said Maior and Burgesses,
or by the said Ouerseers for the time being, ordered

and disposed contrary to my meaning thus declared,
or that my will and desire aboue expressed, touching
the bestowing and distribution of the said summe of
fifty pounds yearly be omitted, neglected, or left vnperformed
by the space of one whole yeare after it is
by this my Will appointed to be distributed and bestowed
as aforesaid: Then my will and meaning is, that
the said summe and reuennue of fiftie pounds a yeare
shall be by the said Maior and Burgesses, and their Successors
for the time being for euer, paid vnto the Treasurer
of Christs Hospitall in London, and by the Gouernours
of the same Hospitall employed and bestowed
in the reliefe and education of the poore children of
the said Hospitall: Or else that the said Mayor and Burgesses
for the time being, shall by their sufficient Deed
in Law conuey, and make ouer the lands and Hereditaments
of the said yearly value of fiftie pounds vnto
the Maior and Communaltie, and Citizens of the City
of London, and their Successors for euer, vnto the vse of
the said Hospitall, to be employed as aforesaid.
            
               Prouided alwayes, that the said fiftie pounds a yeare
be yearly paid vnto my said sister Anna Newman during
her naturall life: and after her decease to the charitable
vses aforesaid.
            Moreouer, my will and meaning, as also my trust
and confidence in the said Maior and Burgesses of the
Towne of Reading, is, that with another competent
part of the said summe of seuen thousand fiue hundred
pounds, so by mee deuised as aforesaid, they the said
Maior and Burgesses shall buy and purchase vnto them

and their successours for euer, a faire plot of ground
within the said towne of Reading, or the liberties thereof:
and thereupon shall erect and builde a strong house
of Bricke fit and commodious for setting of the poore
on worke therein; or else shall buy and purchase such
an house, beeing already built, if they can find one already
fitting, or that may with a reasonable summe bee
made fit for the sayd vse; the same house to haue a faire
garden adioyning, and to bee from time to time kept in
good and sufficient reparations by the sayd Maior and
Burgesses for the time beeing, for euer. Which House
and garden my wil is, shal be vsed and occupied by such
as the said Maior and Burgesses and their successours
from time to time for euer shal appoint and ordaine for
the employing and handling of the stocke of money by
me hereby left and deuised to that purpose.
            And my will and meaning is, that the sayd lands and
hereditaments of the yearly value of fifty pounds; and
also the said house and garden beeing bought and purchased,
as afore sayd, with parcell of the said summe of
seuen thousand fiue hundred pounds; then the whole
residue and remainder of the same seuen thousand and
fiue hundred pounds shal make and be a common stock
to be emploied and bestowed in trade of clothing, eyther
in making of coloured cloathes, or whites, as the
time shall require; and also in working of Wooll,
Hemp, Flax, Iron, grinding of brasill woods, and other
stuffes for Dying or otherwise; as to the saide Maior
and Burgesses afore-saide, and their Successors for euer
shall seeme conuenient for the employment of poore

people, and for the preseruation and encrease of the said
common stocke.
            And the said Maior and Burgesses, and their Successors
for euer, shall haue the election, placing, and ordering,
as also the displacing (if cause bee) of all and
euery person and persons to be employed in the handling
and husbanding of the sayd common stocke in the
house aforesaid, according to their th
                  •
                sayd Maior and
Burgesses good discretion, from time to time for
euer.
            Wherein yet my desire is, that they shall preferre
the poore of the said towne to the sayd worke and employment
before others of other places.
            And for the performance of these premisses, my will
is, that the summe of seuen thousand and fiue hundred
pounds before for this end by mee bequeathed to the
sayd Maior and Burgesses, shall bee paid vnto them or
their Successors, in mann
                  •
               r and forme following, (that
is to say) two thousand pounds thereof at the end of
one yeare next after my decease: O her two thousand
pounds thereof at the end of two yeares next after the
day of my decease: And the residue of the sayde whole
Summe, being three thousand and fiue hundred pounds
at the end of three yeares next ensuing, after and from
the day of such my decease.
            But if it shall happen (as my trust is it will not) that
the sayd Maior and Burgesses or their Successors, shall
neglect, omit, or faile to performe the premisses according
to my will and meaning aboue declared, or shall
mis-employ the said Stocke, contrary to the true intent

and meaning of this my deuice and disposition for the
good of the poore, and their honest imployment and
maintenance as aforesaid; and that such their neglect,
omission, or misimployment, shall continue at any time
by the space of one whole yeare together: Then my
will and meaning is, that my said whole Legacy of seuen
thousand and fiue hundred pounds, and euery part and
parcell thereof, shall bee thence vtterly voyd, frustrate,
and of none effect; as to, for, and concerning the said
Mayor, and Burgesses, and their Successors; and as to,
for, and concerning the vses thereof before limited and
expressed: And that the said whole common stocke
shall bee by them the said Mayor and Burgesses, and
their successors for the time being, forthwith payd vnto
the Mayor and Communalty and Citizens of the City
of London, to the vse of Christs Hospitall in London, according
as I haue aboue deuised and disposed touching
the reuennue of fifty pounds a yeare for euer, first
bequeathed to the vse and releefe of the peore poople of
the Towne of Reading.
            
            As also my will and meaning is, that in this case of
non-performance by the sayd Mayor and Burgesses, the
house and garden to be purchased in Reading, as aforesayd,
shall be by the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their
Successors, conueyed and made ouer by their Deede sufficient
in Law, vnto the sayd Mayor and Communalty
and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors
for euer, to the like vse of Christs Hospital in London,
as aforesaid.

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               Item. I giue and bequeath to the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Burgesses of the towne of Newbury in the County
of Berks, (I meane the Body corporate of the same
Towne) the summe of foure thousand pounds to buy
and purchase therewith a commodious house and garden,
within the same towne, or the liberties thereof, to
set the poore on worke: and with the resi
                  •
               ue of the
same Summe to make a common stocke for the imployment
of t
                  •
               e poore in the said house, according to the
good discretion of the said Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses,
from time to time for euer? And according to
my meaning before declared in the deuising of the sum
of seauen thousand and fiue hundred to Mayor,
and Burgesses of the Towte of Reading to the like
Vse.
            But my will and meaning is, that if it shall happen
(which I trust will not) that the sayd Mayor,
Aldermen and Burgesses, of the towne of Nuburie, or
their successors, shall neglect, or faile to performe my
trust and m
                  •
               aning hereby committed vnto them, or
shall misimploy the said stocke contrary vnto my
good intent to the poore before declared, by the
space of one whole yeare at any time after my said
Legacy shall bee payd vnto them; Then my Will
and meaning is, that my said whole Legacy of
foure thousand pounds, and euery part and parcell
thereof shall thenceforth bee vtterly voyde and of
none effect, as to, for, and concerning the sayd
Maior, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the towne of
Newbury, and their successors for euer: And that

the saide whole common stocke shall bee by them the
sayde Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of Newbery,
and their Successours for the time being, foorthwith
paide ouer vnto the Maior and Burgesses of the Towne
of Reading in the same County, to bee by them and
their Successours for euer employed, bestowed and vsed
in like manner as I haue by this my Will deuised and
appointed another common stocke for the poore in the
same Towne of Reading, as by my sayd deuice and disposition
before herein more at large expressed doth and
may appeare.
            In like manner also my will and meaning is, that in
case of such non-performance of my will and intent
by the saide Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the
Towne of Newbery, the house and garden by them so
to bee purchased and built, as aforesayd, shall bee by
the sayde Maior, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the
Towne of Newbery, and their Successours, conueyed
and made ouer by their Deede sufficient in Law, vnto
the Maior, and Burgesses of the saide Towne of Reading
and their Successors for euer, to bee by them
sold and conuerted into money, and the same money
to bee vsed and employed in their Common
stocke for the poore in the saide Towne of Reading
aforesayd, in such sort as I haue formerly hereby expressed.
            And for the performance of the sayd trust and vses by
the said Maior, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the towne of
Newbery aforesaid, my wil & meaning is, that the said sum

of foure thousand pounds so to them bequeathed and
deuised as aforesaid, shall bee payd vnto them or their
Successors in manner as followeth (that is to say)
One thousand pounds thereof at the end of one yeare
next ensuing after the day of my decease: One other
thousand pounds thereof at the end of two
yeares from and after my sayd decease: And the residue
beeing two thousand pounds, shall bee payed
them at the end of three yeares next after my said
decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Company of Drapers
of the City of London (of which Company I am
free) the summe of two thousand and foure hundred
pounds, to purchase lands and hereditaments to the
cleere yearely value of one hundred pounds for euer,
ouer and aboue all charges and reprises: and with the
same to performe these good vses heereafter mentioned,
(that is to say)
            The summe of twenty foure pounds thereof yearly
for euer, to bee bestowed in the moneth of December
for the releasing of sixe poore Prisoners out of these
Prisons in London, to wit, the two Compters, Ludgate,
Newgate, and the Fleete, by foure pounds for
each Prisoner.
            Or if such cannot bee found in the said Prisons or
some of them to bee released for these summes: Then
the same or the residue thereof to bee bestowed in like
releasing of other Prisoners out of some of the Prisons
neere London, and out of the liberties thereof, as to

the Wardens of the said Company for the time being
shall seeme meet.
            More, Twenty pounds yearely for euer to the Curate
of the Parish of Saint Christopher wherein I
now dwell, to reade Diuine Service in the said Parish
Church at sixe of the Clocke in the morning euery day
of the weeke for euer, in like manner as is now vsed in
the Chappell at the great North gate of Saint Pauls
Church in London.
            
            More, To t
                  •
               e Clarke and Sexton of the said Parish
of Saint Christopher, to each of them fifty shillings
yearely for euer, to doe their seuerall attendance and assistance
at the same diuine Seruice euery morning.
            More, To the Churchwardens of the same Parish of
Saint Christopher, fiue pounds yearely for euer for the
manitenance of lights in the winter time.
            More, Three pounds yearely for euer to the poore
of the said Parish of Saint Christopher.
            
            More, To the poore Prisoners in London ten pounds
yearely for euer: namely, to the Prisoners of the Compters
in the Poultry and in Wood-streete, and in Newgate,
to each of these Prisons forty shillings yearly for
euer.
            To the poore Prisoners in Ludgate, and in the Fleet,
to each house thirty shillings yearly for euer.
            And to the poor prisoners in Bedlem twenty shillings
yearly for euer.
            
               More, To the Clarke of the Company of Drapers
aforesaid for the time being, for his paines herein forty
shillings yearely for euer.
            More, To the Beadle of the said Company thirty
shillings yearely for euer.
            More, to the Beadle of the Yeomanry of the same
Company ten shillings yearely for euer.
            More, Fiue and twenty pounds yearely for euer to be
distributed by the said Wardens among poore religious
men and women in the Citie of London, to some more
and to some lesse, as the said VVardens shall find
                  •
                their
necessity and desert to bee; wherein my desi
                  〈…〉
               
poore Cloth-workers and their widowes shall 
                  〈…〉
               t
preferred; and next, the poore of the Drapers Company:
The residue of the saide summe of one hundred
pounds a yeare, being foure pounds yearely for euer; I
entreate the foure Wardens of the sayd Company to
accept for their paines, to be equally diuided betweene
them by twentie shillings to each of them for the time
being yearely for euer.
            
               And if the said Company of Drapers doe either of
purpose or negligence, omit, and not performe the premisses,
but shall leaue the same vnperformed one whole
yeare after they shall haue receiued this my Legacy of
two thousand and foure hundred pounds (which I will
shall be paid them at the end of one yeare next after my
decease) Then my mind and will is, that the Gouernors
of Christs Hospitall in London shall recouer the whole
two thousand and foure hundred pounds before specified,
or the lands and hereditaments that the said Companie
sh
                  •
               ll haue bought with the same money; and
keepe twentie pounds yearly for euer of the same Rent,
for the maintenance of the poore Children in the said
Hospitall, as if the same had beene first giuen to them;
and the Drapers Companie to haue nothing to doe
with it, or the rest of the said hundred pounds yearly
for euer.
            And that in this, case the yearly payment of eight
pounds vnto the Clarke, Beadles, and Wardens of the
said Companie, as also 12 pound parcell of the said fiue
and twentie pounds a yeare before deuised, to be paid
and distributed by the said Company among poore religious
men and women in the Citie of London, vtterly
and for euer to cease.
            But this twentie pounds a yeare being so conuerted
as aforesaid, to the vse of the Hospitall, the residue of
the said yearly Rent of one hundred pounds a yeare I
will that the Gouernors of the said Hospitall shall pay
and distribute yearly for euer in manner and forme as
the said Company of Drapers should haue done.
            
               
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the said Company of
Drapers, one hundred pounds to be paid within a yeare
after my decease, and by the Wardens of the said Company
to be bestowed in plate, such as they shall thinke
good for the vse of their Common Hall in London at
their meetings and dinners there.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the poore of Christs
Hospitall in London fiue hundred pounds, to bee by the
Goue
                  •
               nours thereof bestowed in Lands and hereditaments▪
for and towards the yearely maintenance of the
children of the said Hospitall for euer; this summe to
be paid to the said Gouernours or the Treasurer of the
said Hospitall▪ as soone as they shall haue found out
a fit purchase to bestow it, and agreed of price for the
same.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath towards the curing of sick,
sore, and diseased persons in S. Bartholmews Hospitall in
London, the summe of fifty pounds.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath towards the curing of sick,
sore, and diseased persons in Saint Thomas Hospitall in
in Southwarke neere London, the summe of fiftie
pounds.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath towards the repairing of
the Parish Church of Saint Christopher where I now
dwell, the summe of forty pounds, to bee paid to the
Churchwardens of the same Parish, within one yeare
after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath towards the repairing of
the Cathedrall Church of Saint Pauls in London, the
summe of one thousand pounds, to bee paid to the

Chamberlaine of London, at such time as that worke of
repairing of the same Church shall be ready to proceed
with effect, and to be disposed by the direction and appointment
of the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the
said Citie.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to be giuen at the Mariages
of poore maids within the City of London two hundred
pounds, to be distributed by forty shillings apeece
vpon the daies of their mariage, to such as haue serued
one Master or Mistris by the space of fiue years together.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to be giuen & distributed
to poore maids in the town of Reading in the County of
Berks, at their seuerall mariages, by 40 shillings apeece,
at the discretion of the Mayor and Burgesses of that
towne, the Summe of one hundred pounds: Prouided,
none enioy the benefit thereof, but such as haue serued
one Master or Mistris, or Dame, by the space of seuen
yeares together. This hundred pounds to bee paid to
the said Mayor and Burgesses for the vse aforesaid within
one yeare next after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Burgesses of the towne of Newbery in Barshire, the
summe of fiftie pounds, to bee by them bestowed and
distributed to twenty fiue Maides of the same towne at
the seuerall daies of their mariages, none to enioy this
gift but such as haue well and honestly serued with one
Master, Mistris, or Dame, by the space of seuen yeares
at least: And this fifty pounds to bee paid to the said
Maior, Aldermen, and Burgesses within one yeare next
after my decease.
            
               
               Item, I giue and bequeath towards the setting on
worke of fortie idle vagrant boyes, such as goe vp and
downe the streets in the City of London, begging and
pilfering, the summe of two hundred pounds, to bee
paid to the Treasurer for the time being of the house
of correction, called Bridewell in London, in manner
and forme following: (that is to say) When any such
Boy is taken vp by my Executor or his Assignes in any
place within the liberties of this Citie of London, and
by the Treasurer of the same house of correction and
Gouernours there for the time being, placed and bound
Apprentice with a Master for the terme of seuen years
at the least, with Artmasters, as Glouers, Pinners, Shoomakers,
or any other occupation or art which they shall
bee thought most fit for, to learne in the said house,
whereby in time they may proue good Members, and
liue like honest men in the Common-wealth: I say,
with euery one of these boyes shall bee paid to the
Treasurer and Gouernour for the time being, for the
apparelling and placing of them in that order, the sum
of fiue pounds, vntill the said summe of two hundred
pounds be fully paid for that vse.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath towards the finishing of
the pinacles of the S
                  •
               eeple of the Parish of Saint Maries
in Reading in Barkshire, fifty pounds to be paid to the
Churchwardens of the same Parish within one moneth
after the said Pinacles shall be finished.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Maior and Burgesses
of the towne of Reading aforesaid, the summe of

fiue hundred pounds, to bee first lent to these parties,
and in the summes hereafter named, for seuen yeares
gratis: that is, to Iames Winch two hundred pounds,
and to Walter Rye, Richard Stampe, and William Blacknal
Clothiers, one hundred pound a piece, each of them
giuing bond with two sufficient Sureties for repayment
there of to the said Maior and Burgesses at the end of the
said seuen yeares. And afterwards the same fiue hundred
pounds shall be lent to tenne seuerall honest industrious
poore Clothiers, Freemen of the same Towne,
by fifty pounds a peece gratis for three yeeres vpon like
good securitie: And after that in like manner from
three yeeres to three yeeres for euer: And no man to
haue the vse of any of this money twice.
            But if there shall not be Clothiers enough found in
the said Towne to enjoy this loane in manner aforesaid,
That then the said money shall be lent also vnto other
tradesmen free of the said Towne, by the summes and
termes of yeares before last appointed, to such as set
most poore people on worke, according to the discretion
of the said Maior and Burgesses. And this said
summe of fiue hundred pounds shall be paid to the said
Maior and Burgesses to the vse aforesaid, at the and of
one yeare next after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Maior, Aldermen,
and Burgesses of the Towne of Newbery, in the County
of Berkes, the summe of fiue hundred pounds, to be lent
first for the terme of seuen yeares gratis vnto these seuerall
Clothiers here named, (that is to lay) to Thomas
Newman one hundred pounds, to Richard Avery one

hundred pounds, to Martin Broaker fifty pounds, to William
Goodwyn the elder, fifty pounds; & to his son Williā
goodwyn fiftie pounds; to Timothy Avery fifty pounds:
to Robert Bacon fifty pounds, and to Griffin Forster fifty
pounds; euery of the said seuerall parties entring bond
with two sufficient sureties for repaiment of the said seuerall
sums to the said Maior & Aldermen, & Burgesses
at the end of 7 yeares. And afterwards the same 500
pounds shall bee lent to ten seuerall honest industrious
poore Clothiers, free of the said Towne of Newbery, by
fifty pounds apiece gratis for three yeares: And after
that in l
                  •
               ke manner from three yeares to three years for
euer: And no man to haue the vse of this money twice.
But if there shall not bee Clothiers enough found in the
same town of Newbery to enjoy this loane in manner as
aforesaid, then the same money shall bee lent also vnto
other Trades-men free of the same towne, by the sums
and termes of yeares last before appointed, to such as
set most poore people on worke, according to the discretion
of the said Maior, Aldermen, and Burgesses, to
whom this said fiue hundred pounds shall be paid to the
vse aforesaid, at the end of one yeare after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Gouernour, Assistants,
and fellowship of Merchant-Aduenturers of
England, the sum of 900 pounds to be lent by 300 poūds
in a parcell for three years gratis, vnto three seuerall honest,
industrions, and frugall yong men free of that company,
none of them being Partners with each others,
and euerie of them giuing bond with two sufficient
Sureties, to bee tryed and allowed by ballating and 
                  •
               ot

otherwise, for repaiment of the same money to the said
Company: And so the same money to bee lent out by
the said Company in this manner from three yeares to
three yeares for euer.
            And my Will and desire is, that these my fiue present
Seruants shal be vpon security as aforesaid first preferred
to the enjoying of this loane, to wit, William
Powle, Thomas Newman, and Simon Gundy, the first
three yeares; and Andrew Kendrick, & Christopher Pack,
the next two parcels that shall come in and be receiued
in after they shall be freemen of that company. And for
performance hereof the said nine hundred pounds shall
be paid vnto the Trea
                  •
               rer of the said Company in London
for the time being, at the end of one yeare next
after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my brother William
Kendricke of Reading in the Country of Berkes Clothier,
and to his children now borne and liuing the summe of
two thousand pounds, whereof one third part for himselfe,
and the other two third parts for his said children.
The same two third parts of the said sum of two thousand
pounds to be equally diuided to and amongst his
said Children, share and share like.
            And my will is, that the said two thousand pounds
be paid to my said brother at the end of three yeare
next after my decease: And that hee shall pay his said
children their seuerall shares thereof afore limited, (that
is to s
                  •
               y) to his Sonne his share and part when he commeth
to the age of twenty foure yeares: and to his
Daughter her share and part when she commeth to the

age of one and twentie yeares, or at the day of her mariage;
which shall first happen.
            And if it fortune either of my said brothers children
to die or decease before their respectiue Legacies aforesaid
shall grow due, as aboue; That then the part of such
Child so deceasing shall accrew and be paid to the Surviuor
of the said children at the day and time before
appointed.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my said brother William
Kendricke my Gold Ring which was my Fathers, with
the Letters T. K. therein engrauen, and a knot between
the same Letters.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my Sister Anna Newman
of Reading in the Countie of Berkes, the summe of
one thousand Markes to be paid vnto her at the end of
one yeere next after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue vnto the children of my said Sister Anna
Newman the summe of two thousand Markes, to bee
equally diuided amongst them share and share like: and
the shares of such as are alreadie maried (if they bee
daughters;) or are foure and twentie yeares of age (if
they be Sonnes) to be paid them at the end of one yeare
after my decease: and the shares of the rest to be paid to
such as be Sonnes, when they shall be foure and twenty
yeares of age: and to the Daughters at their day of mariage,
or when they shall come to one and twentie
yeares of age respectiuely which of these shall happen
to be first.
            And if it shall happen any of the said Children
of my said Sister to die before the age and time

so prfixed for payment as afore-said (I meane those
that bee yet vnder that age and vnmarried) then my will
is, that the share and part of such as shall so dye, shall
accrew and bee payd vnto the rest of the same children
then surviuing, share and share like: And at the dayes
and times of payment before appointed, for their owne
seuerall shares and parts.
            But my will and meaning is, that Thomas Newman
Son of my said Sister, shall not haue any part of share
of this said legacy of two thousand Markes; because I
giue him a large legacy apart by this my will: therefore
the sayd two thousand Markes is to be deuided and shared
amongst the rest of the children of my sayd sister as
aforesaid.
            
               Item, I do hereby absolutely acquit and forgiue my
Brother in Law Thomas Newman of Reading afore-said,
husband to my sister Anna Newman, the summe of one
hundred Markes: which he oweth me by his bond, due
the second day of Nouember Anno dom. 1623. being all
that hee oweth me at the date of this my Will.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my Sister Alice Vigures
of Exeter, the the Country of Deuon, the summe of fiue
hundred pounds, to be paid her at the end of two yeares
next after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the children of my sayd
Sister Alice Vigures, the summe of one thousand pounds
to be deuided equally among them share and share like:
and if any of them being Sonnes, be of the age of foure
and twenty yeares: of any of them being daughters, bee
of the age of one and twenty yeares, or married, then the

share and parts of such respectiuelie, shal be payed at the
end of two yeares, next after my decease; and the shares
and parts of the rest shall be paid to such as bee Sonnes
at their age of foure and twenty yeares; and to such as
be daughters, at their age of one and twenty yeares: or
at the daies of their marriage, which of them shall first
happen to come respectiuely.
            But my will and meaning is, that Symon Gandy Sonne
of my sayd Sister Alice Vigures, shall not haue any part
or share of this said legacy of one thousand pounds, because
I giue him a large legacy apart by this my wil: but
my meaning is, that this said legacy of one thousand
pounds so giuen as aforesayd, to the children of my said
Sister Alice Vigures, shall be equally deuided among the
rest of the children of my said Sister, excluding the said
Simon Gandy from all part and share of the same: and if
it shall happen any of the said children of my said sister
Alice Gandy to Die, before the age and time of payments
appointed as aforesaid (I meane when they be vnder
that age and vnmarried) then my will and meaning
is, that the share and part of such as shall so die, shal be
paid and accrew vnto the rest of the same Children so
suruiuing, to each of them equally, and share and share
like; and at the daies and times of paiment before appointed,
for their owne seuerall shares, and parts.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my brother Iames Winch
of Purley in the County of Berks, and to his children the
summe of one thousand pounds, whereof one third part
for himselfe, and the other two third parts for his
saide children: the same two third parts to be deuided equally

amongst the said children, of my sayd brother,
share and share like.
            And my will is, that this said summe of one thousand
pounds, shall be payd to my said brother Iames Winch,
at the end of one yeare next after my decease, and that
hee shall pay forthwith vnto such of his children as being
sonnes, and of the age of fower and twenty yeares,
and being daughters, are of the age of one and twenty
yeares, or married, their seuerall shares and proportions,
of the said two third parts of this summe of one
thousaud pounds: the shares and parts of the rest of his
children he shal retayne in his owne hands vntil his sayd
children being sonnes, shalbee of the age of Fower
and twenty yeares, and being daughters shall be of the
age of one and twenty yeares or bee married, and then
shall pay euery of them their seuerall shares and parts
respectiuely.
            And if it shall happen any of the sayd younger children
to dye before the time of payment so limited as
aforesaid, then my will is, that the part and share of such
as shall so decease, shall accrew vnto the rest of the said
children of my said Brother that shall then suruiue, to be
equally deuided amongst them share and share like, and
to be payed at the daies and times before appoynted.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to thirty of my poorest
kindred in the towne of Reading in Bark-shire, the
summe of three hundreth pounds, to be payd vnto my
brother William Kenricke within three moneths after
my decease, and by him to bee destributed by ten pounds
in euery parcell, as he in his discretion shall thinke good,

wherein I pray him to bee very carefull to bestow the
same where there is most neede and best desert.
            
               Item, I giue and be queath to old Elizabeth Kenrick
of Reading, daughter to my fathers brother William
Kenrick (as I take it) the summe of fifty pounds, to bee
payed her within three moneths after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my kins-man Thomas
Newman now residing at Delft in Holland, the summe
of one thousand pounds, to be payd him vpon the fiue
and twenty day of October, which shalbe in the yeare of
our Lord God 1626. when his time of seruice expireth.
Prouided that he remaine with my partner M. Laurence
Halstead and serue, him his said full time.
            
               Item, I giue and bedueath to my kins-man and late
seruant Simon Gandy, the summe of one thousand
pounds to bee payd him within one yeare next after my
decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath vnto Arthur Aynscombe
Marchant now residing at Antwerp, who hath a share
with me in trade, the summe of fiue hundred pounds, to
bee paied him within two yeares after my decease. Prouided
that he go forward in trade with M. Laurence Halstead
(if he the said M. Halstead shall desire it) vnto the
end of our contract, which will be the fiue and twenty
of October, Anno Domini 1626.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Barney Reymes Marchant
now residing at Delft who also hath a share with
me in trade, the summe of fiue hundred pounds, to be
paied him within two yeares next after my decease. Prouided
that hee goe forward in trade with M. Laurence

Halstead (if hee the said M. Halstead shall desire it) vnto
the end of our contract, which will be the fiue and twentie
of October, Anno Domini 1626. as is abouesaid.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to M. Iohn Quarles who
was my Maister, the summe of fiue hundred pounds, to
to be paid him within a yeare next after my decease. And
my earnest desire and request vnto M. Laurence Halstead
is, that vnto the ende of our contract of Partner-ship,
which will be the fiue and twenty day of October, Anno
Domini 1626. The same M. Quarles may haue his
Diet, Lodging, and washing, in his the said M. Halsteads
house free and without paying any thing therefore, as he
now hath it with me. And my desire also is, that he may
continue to keepe the bookes of our partable accompt
vntill the aforesaid twenty fiue day of October, Anno
1626. And bee paied his wonted yearely allowance of
fifty pounds for the same. And I do hereby freely and
absolutely forgiue the said M. Iohn Quarles, the summe
of three hundred pounds, which he oweth me payable
at pleasure, being lent him the last of March, Anno 1615
and being all that hee oweth me at the Date of this my
will.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to M. George Lowe Marchant,
heeretofore my partner, the summe of three hundred
pounds, to bee payed him within one yeare next after
my decease. And I doe hereby absolutely forgiue
him all that is due vnto me for his Lodging, Dyet, Fyring,
and washing, which hee hath had of me now sixe
yeares together.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Thomas Billingsly sonne

of Sir Henery Billingsly Knight, and Alderman of London
deceased, the summe of two hundred pounds, to be
paied him within one yeare next after my decease. And
I doe absolutely forgiue him the summe of two hundred
pounds which he oweth me, by his bond due the twenty
of December Anno 1625. lent him the twenty of this present
moneth for a yeare.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Executors of Thomas
Iackson of London Marchant Deceased (whome I
take to be Miles Iackson the sonne of the said Thomas)
the summe of three hundred pounds to bee payd at the
end of one yeare next after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Lucas van peenen of
Middleburgh in Zealand, sonne of Roger van Peenen of
that towne Deceased, the summe of fifty pounds sterling,
to be made ouer by exchange within two moneths
after my Decease, payable at Vsance to Iohn Mount-Stephen
now residing in that towne, to bee by him payd ouer
to the said Lucas van Peenen forthwith after he hath
receiued it, in the full Flemish summe which the same
shall produce.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Ieremias Poets of the
said Towne of Middleburgh in Zealand (if hee bee the
Executor of his brother Hance Poets Deceased) the sum
of twenty pounds Sterling to bee made ouer by exchange,
within two moneths after my decease, payable
at Vsance to Iohn Mount. Stephen afore-named, and by
him forthwith after his receipt thereof, to be paied ouer
to the said Ieremias Poets, in the full Flemish summe
which the same shall produce.
            
               
               Item, I giue and bequeath to William Powle my couenant
seruant the summe of two hundred pounds, to
be paid him within six moneths after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Andrew Kenricke my
apprentice the summe of three hundred pounds, to be
paied him when he shall haue serued seuen yeares from
the commencement of the terme of his Indenture.
            More, I giue and bequeath to the saide Andrew Kenricke
the summe of one hundred pounds, in Lieu of so
much giuen me with him by his Father Iohn Kenricke
to bee paied him within three moneths next after my
Decease vpon acquittance to be giuen by his said Father
therefore.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath vnto Christopher Packe
mine apprentice, the summe of one hundred poundes,
to bee paied him within three moneths next after my
Decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Thomas Mayle my horse
keeper, the summe of twenty pounds, to be paied him
within two moneths after my Decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my maide Margaret,
twenty poundes, to bee paied her within two moneths
next after my Decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my maide Dorothy,
twentie pounds, to be paied her within two moneths after
my Decease.
            
               Item, I giue vnto Iohn Hutwith my drawer, the sum
of fiftie pounds, to be paied him within three moneths
after my Decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Walter Bird my Drawer

fiue and twenty pounds, to bee payd him within three
moneths after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the present men-seruants
of Iohn Hutwith my drawer, the summe of fiue and
twenty pounds, whereof ten pounds to Charles, and the
other fiueteene pounds to be equally deuided amongst
the rest, as well Prentices as Iourny-men, to bee payd
within two moneths after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my twelue Cloath-workers
that vsually rowe and sheere my cloaths, the summe
of one hundred and thirtie pounds, whereof twenty
pounds to Owen Dobbins, and ten pounds a peece to the
rest, to bee payd within three moneths next after my
decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to William Bigge and William
Salisbury, that vsually presse and fold my Cloaths,
the summe of fiue and twenty pounds, whereof fiuetene
pounds to William Bigge, and ten pounds to William
Salisbury, to be payd them within three moneths next
after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my Porters at the Water
side ten pounds, to be equally deuided among them,
and ten pounds to my Porters that vsually packe in my
house: to be paid within two months next after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my Water-bearer three
pounds, and to my washer Anthony fiue pounds, to bee
payd them forth with after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to William Beadle of Reading
Clothier, the summe of fifty pounds, if hee be yet

aliue: and if hee be dead, then to his Executors, to be
payd within three moneths, next after my decease: and
I do hereby also forgiue the said William Beadle, the ten
pounds hee now oweth me.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Executors of Mark
Slye of Reading Clothier deceased, the summe of fifty
pounds, to be payd within three moneths next after my
decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Thomas Newman of Newbury
Cloathier, the summe of one hundred pounds, to
be payd him within three moneths after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Iohn Skinner, secretary
to the Merchants Aduenturers, the summe of one
hundred pounds, to be payd within three moneths next
after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the widdow Harrison
and her daughter dwelling in the Aley next my dweling
house, fiue pounds to be payd within one moneth next
after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Mr. Richard Bennet who
was heretofore my Partner, the summe of three hundred
pounds: to bee payd at the end of one yeare next after
my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to Mr. William Towerson
Skynner, Deaputy of the Merchant Aduenturers, fiue
pounds, to make him a Ring; and to Mr. Thomas Smyth
Skynner, fiue pounds to make him a Ring, to be payd
them, forthwith after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath vnto Ralfe Burnet, William
Ellets, and Iohn Southerne Officers of the Merchant

Aduenturers fiue pounds a peece, to be payd them forthwith
after my decease.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Maior and Burgesses
of the Towne of Reading in the County of Berks,
the summe of two hundred and fifty pound
                  •
               , to be payd
them at the end of one yeare next after my decease, therewith
to purchase Lands & Hereditaments to the cleere
yearely vallew of ten pounds for euer, to maintaine diuine
seruice to bee sayd in the Parish Church of Saint
Mary in that Towne, by the Parson or his Curat euery
morning of the weeke, at six of the clocke for euer.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to the Maior, Alderman,
and Burgesses, of the Towne of Nuberry in the County
of Berks, the summe of two hundred and fifty pounds, to
bee payd them at the end of one yeare next after my decease,
therewith to purchase Lands, or Heredaments, of
the cleare yearely vallew of ten pound for euer, to maintaine
Diuine Seruice to bee sayd in the Church of that
Towne, by the Parson or his curate euery morning of the
weeke, at six of the clocke to continue for euer.
            
               Item, I giue and bequeath to my kinsman Wiliam Bye,
dwelling neere the Allum Mines in York-shire the sum
of one hundred pounds, to be payd him within three moneths
after my decease: and I hereby forgiue him the ten
pounds he oweth me by bond due long since.
            
               Item, I giue and b
                  •
               queath the Companie of Drapers
in London the summe of fortie pounds to bee bestowed
vpon a dinner for the Liuerie of that Company,
to be at their Hall vpon the day of my buriall, this to be
payed forthwith after my decease.
            
               And my will and meaning is, that in case any of the
persons afore-named to whom I haue bequeathed Legacies
as aforesayd, and not specially disposed for case of
their decease, shall happen to die before the same Legacies
grow due: Then the Legacy, or Legacies so by me
giuen vnto them as afore-sayd, shalbe payd vnto their
Executors or Administrators, at such time as I haue before
seuerally appointed vnto them my Legataries. And
I doe make and ordaine my louing friend and Partner
M. Lawrence Halstead, my sole Executor of this my last
Will and Testament: Charging him as he will answer it
before Almighty God at the last day of iudgement, that
he truely and punctually in euery particular, performe
this my said last Wil and Testament; as I nothing doubt
but he will be very carefull to doe. Hereby giuing and
bequeathing vnto him my sayd Executor, all the residue
and Remainder of my Estate, my Legacies before bequeathed
being first paied and discharged. In witnes of
the premisses, I haue vnto this my last Will and Testament,
contained in eighteene seuerall sheetes of paper
put my hand and seale: That is, my seale once at the top,
and my name vnder euery seuerall sheere, the day and
yeare first aboue written, Iohn Kenricke, Sealed, Pronounced
and deliuered by the said Iohn Kenricke, as his
last Will and Testament, in the presence of vs, Iohn
Skinner, Andrew Kenricke, Thomas Singleton.
            
            
               Probatum coram Magistro Arthuro Ducke, Legum
Doctore Surrogato, &c.vltimo die mensis Decembris,
Anno Domini 1624. Iuramento Laurentij
Halstead Executoris, &c. Cui &c. de bene, &c. Iurat.
            
         
      
   